Sir Solomon; OR, THE Cautious Coxcomb: A COMEDY.

As it is ACTED at His Royal Highness the Duke of York's THEATER.

LONDON: Printed for H. Herringman, at the Blew Anchor, in the Lower Walk of
the New Exchange, 1671.

The Prologue.
YOu, that frequent the Stage, must needs allow
The Sect of Poets their Fanatics too:
How could so many else their Gifts impart
In spite of Nature, and in scorn of Art?
All tedious Methods we cut short, and grow
Poets and Saints, by thinking, we are so:
A strong Faith does the business, and the place
Of Wit supplies in those, in these of Grace.
Their Muse, and Spirit differ but in Name;
With equal Rage, all, but themselves they damn:
When either carries on the Work oth' Day,
It Is a Stage-Sermon, or a Pulpet-Play:
Both Trade in Lofty-Sounds, and can Dispense
With the Formalities of Wit and Sense.
The Stars at their Nativity did Reign
With a Malignant Influence over the Brain,
Leaving it dry and shrunck, as Marrow-Bone,
Or Shellfish dwindle in a waning-Moon:
And therefore our Forefathers wisely said,
A perfect Poet was born such, not made.
Nor is our Saint less Privileged by Birth;
For though some Virtuosi may hold forth,
That Eggs, when first they drop, are not laid addle,
Yet both our Twins came Gifted from the Cradle.
Their Brains are stumm'd, and in a constant Huffe;
And what works out, is Froth, and Humming- Stuff.
But, we allow, these Insects are not bred
Always from VVind, and Hollowness in the Head;
Sometimes an empty-stomach does infuse
The Canting-spirit, and the scribling-Muse:
And thus some sharply Write for a Third Day,
And some for Sundayes-Pudding Preach, and Pray.
But, when we Preachers name, those, who contemn
The Laws, we mean, and whom the Laws condemn:
And, when we talk of Poets, only they
Of his low Form are meant, who vamp'd this Play;
Which wants of Gyant-VVit the brawny-strength,
And is but Punchinello drawn at length.
The Persons.
SIr Solomon Single. Mr. Single, his Son. Mr. VVoodland. Mr. Peregreen, his
Son. Mr. Wary. Mr. Barter, an Indy-Merchant. Sir Arthur Addell. Mrs. Iulia,
Daughter to Wary. Mrs. Betty, Daughter to Barter. Timothy, Sir Salomon's
Steward. Ralph, Allice, Servants of Sir Solomon, and Attendants on Mrs. Betty.
2 Foot boys, Constable and VVatch* Roger, Wary's Man. Harry, Woodland 's Man.
A Nurse.
The SCENE LONDON. Sir Solomon; OR, THE CAUTIOUS COXCOMB:
A COMEDY.
The First Act.
Enter Sir Solomon Single, and Timothy his Servant. Sir Salom. TImothy.


Timot. Sir.


Sir Salo. Are the Writings ingrost, and ready for Sealing?


Timot. Yes Sir; just now I saw the Wax clapped on.


Sir Salo. It Is well. But prithee tell me, What said my Lawyer to this
settlement of my Estate?


Timot. In troth I fear your Worship will be displeased, should I tell you his
sense of it.


Sir Salo. No, no: I love to hear Fools spend their Grave Fopperies: It Is the
divertisement of my life to laugh at their Folly.


Timot. Truly, Sir, he seems to be of opinion, that your settlement is not good
in Law.


Sir Salo. How? not good in Law? That Is pleasant; when he himself drew up the
Writings.


Timot. The defect lies not in them (I only speak his words) but in your
Worship: For (says he) it will be strongly presumed, that whenever you Seal
such a Conveyance, you are not Compos Mentis (you understand me, Sir:) It being
impossible, that any man in his right Senses should throw away his whole
Fortune upon an unknown Woman; who, by all signs and tokens will be deemed no
better then your Concubine; and at the same time disinherit an only Son, who
has so fair an esteem in the World.


Sir Salo. Let the Fool please himself with his Scrupulous Fancies. Timothy,
there was a necessity of this Fellows Suspicion, and Wonder: For, had I named
her in the Deed, as my Wife, and expressed a consideration of Marriage, my whole
Design might have taken vent, and so miscarried: For 'twere unreasonable to
expect, that a Lawyer, whose Trade is Talking, should keep silence: And should
my cast-off Son have smelt the design, his Wants and Despair would have left no
stone unmoved to disappoint it. Besides, in settling my Estate on her, I run no
hazard of prejudicing my self; For when I Seal the Writings, I Will Seal her too
for my Wife; And then, if we have Children --


Timot. That is; when your Worship has Sealed, and she is delivered --


Sir Salo. No quibling, good Timothy -- Then, I say, who but they, should
inherit my Estate: If we have none; at least my Rebel Son is out of doors, and
she, who has my Heart, has my Estate.


Timot. I must confess, the secret Conduct of this Design is very admirable;
For, Sir, I think, she her self, who to morrow must be your Lady, is hitherto
no less kept in ignorance both of your Name and Quality, then all the rest of
your nearest Servants, and Relations are of her Person, and your resolution to
Marry her.


Sir Salo. O Timothy: The Art of Secrecy is the Secret of the World. It Is the
Rudder, that silently governs the whole Bulk of Human affairs. A Secret well
kept, like Powder close ramm'd, does certain execution, when ever you give Fire
with a just aim. Therefore have I kept and educated this tender Virgin in so
private and remote a Quarter of the Town; Therefore have I disguised my Person
under a borrowed name to her, and those Servants I placed about her, that it
should not be in the power of any body to acquaint the World with my Design.


Timot. But (with your Worships leave) I am afraid the World will judge hardly
of you, for abandoning thus your only Son, and making him an utter stranger to
your Blood and Estate.


Sir Salo. The World's an Ass, and so is doubly he
Who incommodes himself to humor fools.

Timot. But, Nature, Sir --


Sir Salo. Nature! What Is that? It Is the blind side of our Reason; the soft
place in our Souls. Children owe all to Parents, but there lies no Obligation
on the Parents side: on, if there did, when Sons Rebellious prove, those Bonds
are Cancelled.


Timot. I must not doubt your Justice; But, Sir, it is your misfortune, to treat
him ill, of whom the World speaks well.


Sir Salom. Who Courts Opinion, is a Slave to Slaves;
And gives up Liberty and Happiness
To be controld by every idle Breath.
Let my young Master cramm himself, and swell
With the Worlds empty Praise;
'Twill do him just as much good, as the vain Reproaches of
loose Tongues will do me hurt.
Timothy, call in all my Servants; for now
I intend to publish my Wedding, that they
[Timothy whisles. may accordingly know their duty.

Enter Servants. 1 Servant. Sir, my young Master came this morning --

Sir Salom. laying his Man over the pate. Slave! your young Master? Am I grown
old?
Or have you any Master but my self?
All you that eat my Bread, this warning take,
That he, who was my Son, is no more so:
And, Who dares own the Person I discard?
In place of him I will a Virgin bring,
Virtuous, and young, under my Roof to morrow,
To be your Mistress, and my Wife:
For whose Reception you must all prepare,
Each in his Office -- Now you may withdraw.
[Exeunt Servants. Enter Mr. Wary, and his Man Roger. My Friend, and Neighbor,
Mr. Wary!

Wary. Sir Solomon Single; most happily met!

Sir Salo. You are the very Person I wished for; for I have a business of
Consequence, which I long to communicate with you.


Wary. Then, Sir, we meet upon even terms; for it is a matter of no small
moment, which brought me hither to find you out.


Sir Salo, Mutual satisfaction is a double Joy -- Timothy, follow your Orders,
and prepare every thing, as I directed.


Timo. But, Sir, as to the --


[He offers to whisper. Sir Salo. Mr. Wary, I beg your leave to give a short
dispatch in a word or two to my Steward.


Wary. Pray use your freedom. [Sir Salo. and Timothy whisper. Roger, you may
now go about your business; for, (as I told you) I have discovered a secret
traffic of Love between my Daughter and this Knights Son: And now must I take
my kew from him; and by feeling his Pulse and Temper, fashion my Countenance
accordingly on the Proceeding of our young Lovers. If the Father will own his
Son in the Match, I have my wishes in having so rich an Heir for my Son in Law.
But, if he, who has the Means, and Power in his Hands, prove Resty, my young
Gallant must be shuck off --


Sir Salo. Now, Mr. Wary, I am at your service.


[ Exeunt Timothy and Roger. Wary. Faith, Sir, my Business with you is the old
Business of Mankind; Love, and Matrimony. For, to tell you truly, though the
matter has been closely carried, yet I have smelt out the Rat.


Sir Salo. I protest, Sir, you are a man of quick sense, and rare intelligence:
For, I thought it impossible, that you, or any man living could have known it
so soon.


Wary. We have all quick Eyes in things that concern us. Well, Sir; since you
need not my instruction in this business, pray deal freely with me: How does it
relish with you?


Sir Salo. A pleasant question! Sure I am not so much a fool, as to make that
my choice, which IN disrelish.


Wary. Was it then your Choice* Let me embrace my dear Sir Solomon.


[He embraces him. Sir Salo. You amaze me (Sir) with this excess of kindness:
Pray, is she any kin to you?


Wary. I Am foully deceived, if she be not. I see you are merry (Sir) to ask such
questions.


Sir Salo. Sure the Man is frantic!


[Apart. Wary. But Sir, (Drollery a part) lets come seriously to the business.
First, I assure you, she shall not want a Fortune answerable to your Estate and
Family; Provided, that you make Settlements for Jointure, Maintenance, and
other matters proportionably.


Sir Salo. What is it you say? Shall she not want a Portion equal to my
Condition, and Fortune? This is an Extravagance of Kindness too mighty for my
Faith! she only wanted a Fortune: For in all other Attractives she answers my
expectation (which is no common one.) But, pray Sir, satisfy me a little, how
long you have known her, and how near she is related to you.


Wary. Can any man in his right Wits seriously ask such questions? Is she not
my Daughter?


Sir Salo. Ha? Your Daughter? -- Have I all this while reared up a Bastard-Slip
of his to graft upon?


[Apart. Wary. Sir Solomon! What Is the matter? Have I said any thing to give
you disturbance?


Sir Salo. Pray, Sir, Was she begot in lawful Wedlock?


Wary. Hai! What time of the Moon is this? --


Sir Salo. I knew her to be poor, and I thought her Fatherless; And I liked her
the better: But with all this, to Marry a Bastard, is too much.


[Apart. Wary. The Man is certainly Distracted. -- Sir, I perceive you are not
well; Shall I call some of your People to you?


[Apart. Sir Salo. Pray, Sir, only satisfy me in these two short Questions;
Where does this Daughter of yours live? And when did you see her last?


Wary. Where should she live but in my House? And I saw her within this half
hour.


Sir Salo. Say you so? Then, Sir, let me advise you to go home, and the first
thing you do, call a Doctor; for, take it from me, your condition is desperate.
This is the last degree of Madness! For, to my certain knowledge, you have not
seen this Woman, whom you call Daughter, these two years.


Wary. In troth, Sir Solomon, it grieves my heart, that you are not in a
condition to be discoursed withal; if you were, I could bring your Son, your
own Flesh and Blood to convince you, that this very morning he saw her in my
House, spoke to her there, and, what is more, (I think) made Love to her.


Sir Salo. My Son? -- In what a Labrinth of Mistakes have we wandered all this
while? And was it his, and your Daughters blind Bargains, that you came to
break my head withal?


[apart. Wary. Had it not been cracked before, 'twould never have been broken
now. -- Pray do me the Favor to give me some private Mark, whereby I may know
when I am to believe you: For did you not tell me just now, that you relished
this Match as your own Choice?


Sir Salo. Still run Counter? Pray take up; and (if it be possible) lets both
fall upon the right Sent. You talk of your Daughter, and her Gallant, don't
you?


Wary. What else, Sir?


Sir Salo. And all this while my Discourse has been of my own Affections: For,
to morrow I resolve to be a Married Man.


Wary. You a Married Man! Was this the Mystery? Well, Sir, you have removed my
mistake; but, you have planted wonder in the room on it, much greater then it.


Sir Salo. Why should you wonder? I see you are of your Daughters, and her
Lovers Party; and sorry, their Sport is disappointed.


Wary. Alas, Sir, you misapprehend me every way. I only came to inform you of
it; and to take my own measures from your liking, or disliking of it; both
which are indifferent to me.


Sir Salo. I thought the World had not been ignorant of my resolutions
concerning that Prodigal and Rebel of my House, whom you call my Son: He shall
have no more share in my Estate, then he has in my affections; and those he has
utterly forfeited. But, if you think it expedient to take the outcast of my
Family into yours, you may use your discretion.


Wary. Fear it not, Sir; I shall not purchase your ill will so much to loss.
But, (pray) are you resolved so suddenly to thrust your Reverend head into the
old Noose of Wedlock?


Sir Salom. To morrow's the day. Iacta est alea.


Wary. Faith, Sir, I think your undertaking as bold as his, who first said so;
but, (I fear,) not so fortunate. You Have a dangerous Rubicon to pass over. Have
you thought well upon it? For, in my judgment, To morrow is both too soon, and
too late for you to accomplish such a resolution.


Sir Salo. You perhaps (like the rest of the World) Judging others by their
own scantling) may have reason for this Caution: But (thanks to the bounty of
Nature) under these Ashes there wants no Fire; Nor is the Oil half spent in
the Lamp.


Wary. You say very well: But, I have found by experience, there are two sorts
of People in the World mightily given in their several ways to boast of their
Valor, and both with cause alike; Cowards, and Old Men. We two, (you know)
started into the World almost together; and, our eight and Fifty years a piece
are now run off: For my own part, I should think it an excess of rashness in my
self, if, after so long a Race, I should still presume so much upon my
strength, as to venture at the dangerous Leap of Matrimony.


Sir Salo. I grant ye, that some Men may be old at Thirty, and others young at
Threescore; and what is my Physic, may be your Poison: and there is an end of
this Dispute.


Wary. But have you forgot, how severe a Critic you have always been upon the
Disasters of poor Husbands? Now should the person you Marry, not think you so
young, as you think your self, are you not afraid of Circular Justice, of
scurvy Ballats and Lampons?


Sir Salo. Had I been guilty of the Folly of other Husbands, in the Choice of
their Wives, I might then have feared, and deserved their Fate;

But I grown wise at the expense of others.
Have chose a piece of Native Innocence,
Unsullied by the Worlds corrupting Air;
Whose Beauty, and whose Virtues void of Art:
Her have I reared, and fitted for my use,
And taught her all the Duties of a Wife:
Like Virgin-wax, she wears no other Stamp,
But what my own Instructions have impressed.
Then judge, how happy, and secure I am.

Wary. Pray, Sir, what lucky Star directed you to the discovery of this
Treasure?


Sir Salo. That (Sir) I owe to Fortune: For in a Country-Farme I first saw her,
and read it in her looks, that Heaven had not designed her for that place: And
being informed she was a Merchants Daughter, who had miscarried at Sea, and
before his Voyage had put her to Nurse there, I easily prevailed with the Old
Woman of the House, who was my Tenant, to resign her Charge to me. I took her,
as a Present sent from Heaven to make the rest of my days comfortable, and
happy. For two years together I have trained her up my self, making it my
business to preserve her in her primitive innocence, and simplicity: And, lest
the contagion of ill company should infect the original candor of her nature
with the least tincture of malice, I have placed two Servants about her, the
honestest and simplest, I could find out.


Wary. But how will so much simplicity be a Match for the wisdom of Sir
Solomon? Can such extremes meet with delight?


Sir Sal. I pity your ignorance; search the Records of Time, and by all
Examples, old, and modern, you shall still find it true, that wit in woman is
the Bawd of Vice:

Who of the Sex had ever fame of wit,
That was not famous to the other way?

Wary. Fie, Sir Solomon; you are too Satirical; and too singular in your Judgment.
For my part, were I to choose a Wife (be she honest, or be she otherwise) I say,
let her have Wit; for that will either protect her Honesty, or conceal her
Frailty.


Sir Salo. Well, Sir; I have no time at present to prosecute this argument, and
make you sensible of the folly, and danger of your Principles; Only, as a
friend, I must advise you to have a care of your Daughter; for she (I hear) is
a Wit.


Wary. I thank you, Sir: And (to return your kindness) let me counsel you to
look well to your Wife; for, by your own confession, she wants wit to look to
her self.


Sir Salo. It Is my Maxim so to do; and should be yours: In order to your
Conversion, pray come to morrow to my Wedding: Perhaps, Example may be more
prevalent with you, than Precept. However I have done a Friends part; And after
all, if a mischance should happen in your Family, there is a Saying, that the
Disaster of Fools does reward the Circumspection of the Wise.


Wary. I Will not fail you at your Wedding Dinner; And to requite your Proverb,
take heed, lest to morrow it prove true, That Fools make Feasts, and Wisemen
eat 'em. Farewell.


Sir Salo. Farewell.


Exeunt severally. Enter Mr. Single and Julia. Single. Ah, Madam! How can I
hope, that you should be constant in your love to him, to whom Fortune is so
constant in her hatred?


Iulia. I shall not make the Injustice of Fortune my President: But what I have
often told you, I now repeat; nothing but your jealous humor has the power to
make me inconstant.


Single. It Is of my Stars and of my Destiny,
That I am jealous (Madam) not of you.
When with a Father all the world conspires
To cast me down; what Virtue is so firm,
As to support a Man so weakly built,
So potently assaulted?

Iulia. This very Doubt is more unjust to me,
Than all your Fathers Cruelty to you.
Your want of Means, and Friends
My love can pardon, and (perhaps) supply;
But your Mistrusts I never will forgive.
These early mists upon our morning love
Show, that a stormy day will follow.

Single. Madam, these little mists before my eyes
Are, but the smoke, which from Lov's fire does rise:
Nor can your Reason that calm Lover choose,
Who, what he loves, is not concerned to loose.

Iulia. Rather, than him with furious doubts possessed,
Who (still allarum'd) gives, and takes no rest.

Single. Unjealous Love is a degenerate thing,
A feeble, lazy Drone without a sting:
Nor is it glorious such tame Herds to sway;
The generous Lion must your will obey.

Iulia. Brave Subjects! Prostrate at my feet they lie
To day, to morrow in my face they fly.

Single. Love, and Rebellion inconsistent are,
But, Madam, let us compose this amorous war;
Which swells the number of your Victories,
Making your Wit as conquering, as your Eyes.

Enter Mr. Wary. Wary. Mr. Single; well met. -- Nay, be not startled. I am now
glad to see you; and to see you in the company of my Daughter.


Single. Sir, you surprise me with a happiness unlook't for in this unusual
kindness of your expressions --


Wary. Hold, Sir; I would not have you disappointed in your expectation by
promising your self too much. My desire of seeing you now was to let you know
in her hearing, that I have taken notice of your late frequent resort to my
house: And, though according to my inclination, my doors should never be shut
to a person of your merit, yet (as matters stand) you must excuse me, if I
prefer the Interest of a Child before the Concern of an Acquaintance. Sir, to
be short; I know your constant Visits imply your Addresses to my Daughter: And,
since your Father is resolved to make you a stranger to his Estate, I must
entreat you henceforth to be a stranger to my House; for (to deal freely with
you) no Deserts (though never so great) attended with poverty, can satisfy the
care of a Parent in the disposal of his Daughter.


Single. Ah Sir! will you be my Father's Second in his unjust cruelties toward
me? --


Wary. Sir, I will have no Argument in this case; nor put a Father's Right into
dispute. Farewell. Daughter, I desire your company.


Exeunt Wary and Julia. Single. Fortune! thy malice is so spent on me,
That thou have now disarmed thy cruelty:
But I forgive thee; thou (alas!) art blind;
Since Nature, that has eyes, proves more unkind:
Of foreign wrongs can I resent the smart,
Destroyed by him, of whom I am a part?
If he, that made, and should preserve me too,
His work undoes, what may not strangers do?

Enter Sir Arthur Addel. Sir Art. Add. Dear Mr. Single! have I met you at last?
I vow, it has cost me five good shillings in Coach-hire to find you out.


Single. Pray, leave me; I am not at leisure.


Sir Art. Add. Leave my dear Single? Not for a world.


Single. Pray, Sir, forbear: I tell you, I am busy.


Sir Art. Add. Busy? so much the better: Of all men living I love business,
and hate idle fellows.


Single. Sir, if you will not release me, I shall be forced to make my escape.


Sir Art. Add. What? fly from thy Friend? sure, some melancholy Devil does
possess thee.


Single. No, Sir; I am not possessed, but I find, I am haunted. Pray, let me beg
it of you, as a kindness. or an Alms, that you will leave me to my self, and my
occasions, which at this present cannot possibly admit of your company.


Sir A. Add. No, Sir, no: I see, you are in trouble; and I must not forsake my
friend in Adversity.


Sing. apart. My Stars have condemned me to all sorts of Persecution!


Sir A. Ad. Besides, I must propose to you a business of weighty consequence,
in which you must needs do me a kindness -- I see, you don't mind me. What are
you thinking on? Unbosome your self to a Friend.


Single. 'Faith, I am thinking, that the greatest Plague of Egypt was that of
Flies, and Gnatts buzzing about their Ears.


Sir A. Ad. Egypt! Good Lord! How your thoughts ramble? Well; I must put you
out of this Fit of the Spleen. Come, prithee, let us go dine at Chateline's;
and there I Will tell you my whole business.


Single. O, no Sir; I Will rather compound with you, and hear it now; provided, I
may be quickly released.


Sir A. Ad. Nay, as for brevity, and quickness of dispatch, there is no man upon
the face of the Earth that loves it like me: It Is my Mistress. I hate your
prolixe Fellows: Long speeches are death to me: And that is the reason why I
never hear a Sermon; nor a Presbyterian-Grace; nor a French Tragedy; nor a --


Single. Hold, hold: Pray make your words good; and he not so long in the
commendation of Brevity.


Sir A. Ad. Why, then to the Point. There is a certain Lady in this Town, with
whom I am desperately and damnably in Love; And I want a good opportunity to
tell her so. For (look ye) I take a business of this nature to be half done,
when it is well proposed. You (Mr. Single) are the only proper Person for me to
employ in this Treaty; And, if you succeed in it, Sir Arthur Addel is yours for
ever.


Single. Well, What Is her Name?


Sir A. Ad. Iulia; the fair Daughter of old Wary.


Single apart. Ha! Iulia? What a storm he has raised in my blood?
But the Fool is below my Jealousy, and resentment.

Sir A. Ad. Nay, prithee, dear Single, don't relapse into thy Melancholy Fit.


Single. No, Sir; I am only studying your Case: For (to deal friendly with
you) there is much for you to consider in the business, which you take in hand;
To my certain knowledge, there are at least a dozen Pretenders (all men of the
Sword) to that Ladies favor: And, before you can have admittance to the place
of a Suitor, you must dispute your entrance with every one of these; And that
(you know) will be a long, and hazardous work.


Sir A. Ad. Are there so many of 'em (say you?) Why then they may have fighting
work enough amongst themselves, and let others alone: 'Pox take 'em all, my
business is not with them, but with the Woman.


Single. But Lovers, Sir Arthur, are (like Argus) all Eyes: And you can no more
conceal your self to 'em, then walk invisible at noon day.


Sir A. Ad. Now, Is not this a damnable Custom, that a Man can no sooner love
a pretty Woman, but he must presently be quarrelling and fighting with all that
come near him. I wonder, how the Devil they can do it; For I cannot be in Love
and in Wroth too, all at once, for the heart of me.


Single. Were all the World of your benign temper, I confess we should enjoy
the Blessings of Peace. But, Sir Arthur, as the case now stands, What is it
you would have done?


Sir A. Ad. Hai?


Single. Consider, consider -- This Fool well managed may prove useful to me.


Sir. A. Ad. 'Faith, e'n let her go. What shall a man be the better for a
Mistress, when his Throat is cut?


Single. How? Let her go, by no means, Sir. It shall never be read in
Chronicle, that Sir Arthur Addel (my renowned friend) bawk'd a Mistress for
fear of Rivals. Come (Sir;) you shall trust your Love and your Reputation in my
hands; And all my Rhetoric shall serve you with your Mistress, and my Sword
against your Rivals.


Sir A. Ad. Dear Single, let me hugg thee, and kiss thee. I vow now, I could be
as kind to thee, as to my Mistress.


[ Embracing Single. Single. O, pray, Sir, reserve your tenderness for her.


Sir Art. Ran, tan, tan. You, and I, (Mr. Single) will fight the proudest of
'em all: Nay, when I have a good second of my side, I can be as valliant as my
betters.


Single. Why now, Sir Arthur, you speak like a VVight, that wears not his
Knighthood in vain. What a blemish had you cast upon the whole Order, if you
had tamely suffered your Mistress to be snatched from you by Rivals.


Sir Art. They snatch her from me? They shall eat her as soon. O! that I had
but one of those Rivals here now! First would I make him beg his Life, and
then kill him.


Single. Brave Sir Arthur! Now your Courage, like a Lion roused from sleep,
stretches out, and begins to roar: But you must have a great care to moderate
this excess of Rage in the presence of your Mistress: For before her you must
be a Lamb.


Sir A. Ad. Why there is the Devil on it again: I tell you, I shall never make
both at once, a good Lion, and a good Lamb too.


Single. I warrant you; It Is but giving your mind to it -- And, to lose no time
(for Lovers, I know, are in have) you shall presently go about the Work; and,
in the first place ask her Fathers consent, who can never refuse a Man of your
Parts, and Estate. When this is done, I Will deliver you a Letter of Commendation
for the young Lady, which you must put into her hands with all privacy, and
circumspection: For, secrecy in Love is as necessary as in Cabinet Counsels.


Sir A. Ad. I know that as well you --


Enter Peregreen Woodland. Sir A. Ad. Pox of this troublesome Fellow, that comes
to disturb us now. Methinks he has the Countenance of a Rival. My fingers itch
to be at him.


Single. No, no.


Pereg. Dear Single!


Single. Peregreen Woodland! You Are the most unlookt for Person, and the most
welcome to me in the World. I firmly believed that you had been now in Italy.


Pereg. Two Months ago I was there; And, it is much against my inclination, that
I am not there now: But, Fathers must be obeyed.


Single. How long have you been in England?


Pereg. Some ten days; All which time I have made it my business to find you
out; and now I owe that to Fortune, which I could not compass by my Industry.


Single. Assure your self, that nothing, but my ignorance of your being come
over, could have deprived me so long of your Company.


Pereg. I have a Letter here for your Father from mine; it contains business of
importance, at least, to me: For, it gives me credit for some Money, which my
occasions at present stand in need of.


Single. Though I cannot introduce you to him for some reasons, which I shall
tell you hereafter, yet I Will direct you to a speedy sight of him: But first I
must of necessity have an hours discourse with you.


Pereg. With all my heart; and let it be over a Glass of Wine.


Single. Agreed. But before we go, I must needs make you happy in the knowledge
of the incomparable Sir Arthur Addel. I can assure you, he is a Rarity, which
perhaps all your Travels cannot Match.


Pereg. I know, so fair a Superscription must needs be extraordinary in the
Contents.


Sir Arth. Sir, for Mr. Single's sake you may command me.


Single. Well, Sir Arthur; you must not neglect your business. When you have dealt
with the Father, give me notice of it; and let me alone with the Daughter: You
may reckon her your own.


Sir A. Ad. As sure, as Chick in Pouche, or Lowse in Bosom.
My Flames are raging; and who dares oppose 'em?
They soon shall thaw her Heart, though never so Icy;
Like Julius Caesar, veni, vidi, vici.

[Exeunt omnes. The Second Act.
Enter Sir Solomon and Timothy. Sir Salo. NOw Timothy, I have fully instructed
you in all particulars. You may therefore go back to my own Lodgings: Be sure
you forget not the Lisence, and the Parson.


Timo. I warrant you, Sir, but may I not have the happiness now to see my young
Lady that must be to morrow.


Sir Salo. No, Timothy; It Is enough for the first time, that I acquaint you
with the Lodging where she lies. Time is precious, and not to be spent in
seeing sights: Away, make have.


[ Exit Timothy. Sir Saloman knocks at Mrs. Bettys Lodging. Alice from within.
Who Is at Door there?


Ralph looking out from the Belcony. Gods so, it is Master.


Allice. What? our new Master, that gave us Money?


Ralph. No, no, our old Master Evans, that never gave us a Farthing. Why don't
you open the door?


Allice. An't be he, Even open it your self: I am busy,


Ralph. Are you so? why then so am I too.


Sir Salo. Sure they must needs hear me knock, for I can hear them gabbel: Ho;
Whose within there?


Ralph speaks at the Belcony. Ralph. Sir, this Slut Alice will not open the door.


Alice. Sir, this lazy Rogue Ralph will not let you in.


Sir Salo. Precious Coxcombes; Open the Door quickly, or I Will make you both
fast this se'night from Beef and Pudding.


They hoth tumble down the stairs to the Door. Alice. Stand off; I Will open it;


Ralph. You open it? You shall be hanged first.


They break out at the door together. Alice. It Is I (Sir) that let you in.


Ralph lifts up his hand to strike Alice, and in so doing hits off his Masters
Hat. Ralph. You lie: were it not in respect to Master Evan's Worship --


Sir Salo. Unmannerly Whelp!


Ralph. Cry you mercy (Sir) 'twas she was the cause on it.


Allice. Was it so? because I opened the door first.


Sir Salo. Peace, both of you; Will you never arrive to Common sense? Let no
body speak till I bid them -- Ralph, come hither: What has your Mistress done,
since I saw her last?


Ralph claps on his Hat three times, And his Master pulls it off as often.
Ralph. Why, Sir, my Mistress -- my Mistress -- God be thanked --


Sir Salo. Rude Raskal! Who taught you to speak to me with your Hat on?


Ralph. Indeed your Worship has Reason; I had forgot my self.


Sir Salo. Go, call her down presently. [ Exit Ralph. Well, Allice; and was my
Betty much troubled for my absence?


Allice. Troubled? No.


Sir Salo. No?


Allice. O, yes Sir; Now I think on it; she was troubled.


Enter Mrs. Betty with her Work in her hand, and Ralph. Sir Salo. Why, this is
now, as it should be; with thy work in thy hand: Pretty Rogue; What ar't thou
making there?


Mrs. Betty. A Coefe, and a Pinner, Sir. I have made an end of your Shirts, and
your Night-caps.


Sir Salo. That Is very well: For Idleness, Betty, is the Mother of all Evil;
Come, give thy work to Alice; for thou and I must talk together. Ralph, fetch
me out a Chair, And, Art thou grown perfect in thy Catechism?


Mrs. Betty. Yes (Sir) I can say it all without Book.


Ralph brings in a Chair, and he and Alice go forth. Sir Salo. You two go in,
and leave us alone -- But, Betty, it is not enough to say it by Rote; you must
print it in your heart; and make it your daily study and exercise; thereby to
govern all the actions of your Life. Sir Solomon sits down in the Chair. Betty,
come nearer me -- hold up thy head a little more -- So -- Turn your Body a
little this way -- That Is well: And whilst I talk to thee, look up in my face
-- That Is very well: Now, Betty, I must examine you a little, to see how you
have profited in your Catechism; First tell me, What you were made for?


Mrs. Betty. To be your Wife, forsooth.


Sir Salo. And what is the Duty of a Wife?


Mrs. Betty. To honor, and obey her Husband; and love no man but him.


Sir Salo. Now, What are the particular duties; which I expect from her, who is
to be my Wife?


Mrs. Betty. First, to watch and observe all the motions of your Eyes, and
Countenance, and accordingly to stand, go, run, sit still, speak, or be silent:
Secondly, To detest and abhor going to Court, Hide-Park, Mulberry-Garden, or
the Play Houses. Thirdly, To Visit, and be visited by none of a remoter degree,
then an Uncle, or an Aunt; Fourthly, To write and receive no Letters, to accept
and give no Presents, but such as you see, and allow of: Lastly, To warm
Napkins, make Cawdles, dress Issues, give Glisters, and the like; still
remembering, that the office of a Nurse inseperably belongs to the duty of your
Wife.


Sir Salo. Incomparable Girl? Thou have answered to admiration in all things
concerning the virtues of a Wife; Now tell me, What, and how many are the
deadly sins, which she ought carefully to avoid?


Mrs. Betty. They are seven.


Sir Salo. Which is the First?


Mrs. Betty. Pride: For, a woman, that thinks too well of her self, is apt to
think better of another man, then she does of her Husband.


Sir Salo. Very well. What Is the Second?


Mrs. Betty. Covetousness: For she that Loves Money overmuch, will first pick
her Husbands pockets, and at last be bought and sold her self.


Sir Salo. That Is right: Now the Third.


Mrs. Betty. Letchery, -- Pray (Sir) What Is that? For you have no Annotations
upon it in all your Catechism.


Sir Salo. Pretty Simplicity! O, Betty, That Is a very Pawthing, and must not so
much as be thought on, proceed to the Fourth.


Mrs. Betty. Anger: For Anger breeds Revenge; and a Wifes Revenge commonly
lights upon the Husband's Head, and leaves dreadful marks behind.


Sir Salo. The Fifth?


Mrs. Betty. Gluttony: For the Woman, that feeds high, requires more exercise,
then is to be had within doors: And modest Wives should seldom rainge abroad.


Sir Salo. Admirable well: I see, thou art so perfect in thy Lesson, that I may
spare my self, and thee the Labor of a farther examination. Well, Betty, thou
art my Masterpiece; And shortly I intend to set thee forth as an Exact Model,
and Pattern to the World (which too much needs it) of a perfect, obedient Wife;
In the mean time, we must repair to our several taskes, and prepare our selves,
Thou to be happy, I to make thee so.


[Exeunt severally. Enter Mr. Wary, and Julia, and Roger. Mr. Wary. Daughter, I
had rather your own Reason, then my Justice in punishing you, should make you
sensible, how heinous the Crime of Rebellion is in a Child to a Parent; Have
you not a fresh Example before your Eyes, in your Beggarly Gallant, turned out
of Doors, and ejected from all Title, and Claim, which Nature gave him to a
Fair Inheritance? and now become a mere Vagabond in the wide World? you know,
it lies in my power to do, what his Father has done; I can marry again, and
bring a second Brood into the World to possess that Fortune, which you
undeserve: And, if you persist in your obstinate passion for this
Indigent-Lover, I am resolved, You shall even meet him upon equal terms.


Iulia. Sir, I confess, all is in your power; And, as I need not be bribed by
the hopes of a plentiful fortune to do my duty; so it is in vain by frights and
terrors to exact that from me, which liess not in my power to perform; the
example in Sir Salomons Family is so odious a President of tyranny in the eyes
of the whole world, that I am sure you can never make it your Pattern. And,
Sir, give me leave, for your satisfaction and mine, to make you this solemn
protestation, that I never will marry him, whom you like not, nor him, whom I
love not.


Wary. Gossip, your love should follow my liking, not ramp before it.

It casts a blemish on a Virgin's name,
To own a voluntary, unbid flame.
By your dead Mother you have often been told,
That Maiden Breasts, like snow, are white, when cold:
But, when the sultrie breath of Love does blow,
All that is Dirt, which formerly was Snow.

Iulia. Such passion I abhor no less, than you,
As honor does not to our Sex allow;
But (Sir) unless by Love made soft, and light,
The yoke of Marriage all the world would fright:
And, if my Love in Wedlock-bands be forced,
Alas! I am not married, but divorced.

Wary. Begone, my reasons are but lost on thee:
For no dispute can cure Love's Heresy.

[ Exit Julia. Roger. These young wenches, when the toy of love once takes them
in the head, are like wild ungoverned Colts, no Curb can hold them, no Fence
can stop 'em. This obstinate affection is so wedged into her mind, that there
is no way to loosen it, but by driving in another.


Roger. That (Sir) may do it.


Wary. Could I but find a Fortune and a man according to my expectation, I
would then make trial, what a Fathers power can do.


Enter Sir Arthur Addel with a Paper. Sir Arthur. It Is he -- By your leave, Sir:
I have a Paper here in my pocket, which I must beg you to peruse.


Wary. With all my heart (Sir) provided there be no thing of Petition, nor of
Poetry in it.


Sir Arthur. No Fiction, I Will assure you: all the contents are true.


Wary reads. A true Particular of the Estate of Sir Arthur Addel Knight -- What
do you mean by this Sir? I am not prepared for a purchase.


Sir Arthur apart. What a dull old fool this is? -- Why (Sir) having a business
of importance to negotiate with you, this is my Letter of Recommendation.


Wary apart. It must be so: Heaven has sent him in the nick of time to woo my
Daughter -- Summa totalis 1432 l. per annum, truly, Sir, your Letter has a very
fair Subscription: but still the meaning of the Contents is so mystical, that I
know not how to answer it: Pray Sir explain.


Sir Arth. Thus it is (Sir) in short: your Daughter (do you conceive me) wants a
Husband; and I want a Wife (do you conceive me;) Now what are we born for in this
world, but to supply one another wants? Do You conceive me?


Wary. I marry (Sir) now you speak plain, and to the purpose: But this is a
matter, which requires deliberation.


Sir Arth. Pox on deliberation: I am in haste, and so perhaps is she too.


Wary. Not so fast. How do I know, that this is a true particular? And how do
you know what Portion I shall give with my Daughter? and how do we both know,
whether she will consent to the bargain;


Sir Arth. Hang Portion, and Particulars: let our Lawyers wrangle about them; I
am a known man of land, and so are you of money. Your business is to give me
your consent, and then let me alone with your Daughter.


Wary. You speak very home: sure (Sir Arthur) the world has done you a great
deal of wrong in representing you, as a man of Parts, much inferior to those,
which I discover in you.


Sir Arth. And have you lived so long in the world, and do not know that it is
the arrant'st liar in nature?


Wary. Well Sir; to let you see, how little I believe it, I here give you my
consent (provided this be a true particular) to marry my Daughter; win her, and
wear her.


Sir Arth. Thank you heartily, good Father Wary; for I reckon my self now as
good, as married: I know she can no more refuse me for a Husband, than you for
a Son-in-law.


Wary. So (Sir;) I perceive you speak the language of our young men of these
times, who exceed all their Ancestors in their good opinion of themselves: The
business is done, if my Daughter can think but half so well of your person, as
you do.


Sir Arth. I vow (Sir) I am afraid of nothing, but that she will be too fond of
me: And I take it to be the worst surfeit, that is, to be cloyed with kindness.


Wary. If that be all your apprehension, fear nothing: I dare answer for her.


Sir Arth. See you be as good as your word: And (to lose no more time) you may
presently let her know, how happy she is in my affection: but let her know it
gently, and by degrees, lest too sudden joy suffocate her spirits.


Wary. The danger is not great: however she is beholding to you for your care;
But (Sir Arthur) pray let me advise you, as a friend, to touch as little as you
can upon this string, when you make your addresses to her: For (perhaps) she is
as much infected with this self opinion, as her neighbors; and she will be apt to
tell you, that Pride is a Vice in men, but Virtue in a woman.


Sir Arth. You need not tell me, what I am to say, or do; but, if you will
needs be tutoring, go teach your Daughter, how to behave her self; for I shall
return immediately in a pretenders equipage with Drums beating, and Colors
flying, and then let her expect a Charge.

Exit Sir Arthur.
Wary. Roger, To say the truth, this Sir Arthur's a very shallow Knight: But
it is no matter; he will prove the kinder Husband.

And better it is (your Modern Authors say)
To rule a Fool, then a Wise Man obey.

[ Exit Wary and Roger. Enter Peregrine and Single. Pereg. It Is not possible
for me to express how deeply I resent your Father's unnatural rigor: But can
it be true, that he will be married to morrow, and that no body should know to
whom?


Single. My intelligence comes from such hands, that I am sure it is authentic:
But, neither by my own industry, nor the help of spies, can I possibly learn
out the person of the Bride.


Pereg. Well, Sir, I am resolved to serve you in that office my self: for I can
do it with less suspicion, than any body; because your Father dreams so little
of our Communication together, that he is yet ignorant of my being in England;
and I Will use all my art to win so far upon his favor, and confidence, as that
I may put my self in a capacity of serving you.


Single. Sir, my case is desperate; yet my obligation to you will be as great,
as if your endeavors were attended with success. However your own business (I
know) requires a quick dispatch with my Father: There Is his Lodging; and fare
you well; for I must go hunt out my simple Knight.


Pereg. But where shall we meet two hours hence?


Single. Where we last met, and then we'll confer notes together.


[ Exit Single. Peregrine knocks at Sir Salomons Lodging, and Timothy comes
forth. Pereg. Is Sir Solomon Single at home?


Timot. Pray what is your business with him?


Pereg. That Is no answer to my question: my business (friend) is with him, not
with you: Is he within, or no?


Timot. Why, Sir, unless I may know your business, or your name, he is not
within.


Pereg. apart. This fellow has the right huff, and grimace of a Coxcomb in
office -- But, Sir, when I have told you my name, Will he then be at home?


Timot. Perhaps he may.


Pereg. Why then (grave Sir) be pleased to tell your Master, that my name is
Peregreen Woodland; and that I desire to know of him, whether he be within, or
no.


Timot. You shall have your answer presently.

[ Exit Timot.
Pereg. Very well Sir, This stiff piece of formality deserves to be cudgelled,
were it only to make him more limber: but it is the nature of fools in
employment to think such solemn rudeness to be the badge of their Office.


Enter Sir Solomon. Sir Salom. Mr. Peregreen? had I known it was you, I would
have left all business, and a Mistress too, to fly into your embraces: your
Father is the oldest acquaintance, and best friend I have in England: Lord! how
time runs away? I knew you no higher, than this. I protest, you make me an old
man.


Pereg, Not so, Sir, I hope; since I hear, you are to be married to morrow.


Sir Salom. How is it possible you should hear it, unless my Steward told you.
But (Mr. Peregreen) I have nothing that I shall make a secret of to you. It Is
even so; and you are returned from your Travels most opportunely, to grace my
Wedding. O! how glad should I be, that your Father were here too. Pray, when
did you hear from him? how does he do? He is so wedded to his estate in the
Country, that his friends in Town are quite forgot.


Pereg. I lately recived a Letter from him with this enclosed; which will give
you as good an account of his health, as I can.


Sir. Salom. I joy to see any thing that comes from him -- Sir Solomon reads
the Letter. Lord! what does he mean? -- such ceremonious expressions are
injurious to friendship -- Timothy.


Timot. Sir.


Sir Salom. Bring me fifty pieces in gold presently.


Pereg. I have reason to believe, that my Father may be in town sooner. than
these Letters mention: for I have one from him of a fresher date, which tells
me, that an extraordinary occasion calls him hither in company of a Merchant,
lately arrived in England: but what his business is, the Letter mentions not.


Sir Salom. Were it not possible, that we might see him here to day, or to
morrow? Nothing could heighten more my Nuptial Joys, then the presence of such
a Friend?


Pereg. For the precise time of his coming, I can answer nothing: But, Sir;
Might I not be so happy, as to kiss the hands of your fair Bride before the
Ceremony of Marriage?


Sir Salom. In that (Sir) you must excuse me: This Jewel is not to be taken out
of the Case, till I wear her.


Enter Timothy. Timot. Here is the Sum you commanded me to bring.


Sir Salom. Pray (Sir) take it; and, if you have occasion for more, you may as
freely Command My purse, as your Fathers.


Pereg. I humbly thank you: I have no present necessity of more -- But, Mr.
Steward, if you please to draw a Note of so much received --


Sir Salom. What do you mean, Sir? Timothy, Let it alone. I hope you do not
imagine, that you deal with a Scrivener.


[ Exit Timothy. Pereg. Sir, you are too generous.


Sir Salom. No Complements, good Mr. Peregreen: Well, and, How long have you
been in England?


Pereg. Some ten days; in all which time I could not till yesterday, find out
your Habitation.


Sir Salom. And how does your own Country relish with you, since your
experience of Foraign Parts?


Pereg. Better, then before.


Sir Salom. I rejoice to see you make such good use of your Travels; For, the
best thing which a man can bring from abroad, is the love of home. And, How
have you spent your time, since your coming over? methinks a young man of your
Complexion should be engaged, ere this, in some Love-adventure: What? Are the
Ladies kind to you?


Pereg. Considering the shortness of the time, I have no reason to Complain.


Sir Salom. Pray, make me your Confident; I am Secret, and true to Love. What
Exploit? What Success have you had?


Pereg. Sure (Sir) you want Leisure for such frivolous Narrations.


Sir Salom. You mistake me; I have Youth enough left to relish affairs of Love.


Pereg. I shall with less reluctance obey you, because there is something very
extraordinary in my adventure, which may afford you Divertisement: And (to tell
you truly) the Money, which you favored me with, I chiefly want to prosecute
this design,


Sir Salom. I long to hear it.


Pereg. I confess, here is a young Beauty here in Town, which has already
gained very much upon my heart: She is one, who has received no improvement
from Education; Nor does she want it: For, Nature has left her so well
finished, that Art has little to do. Perhaps her Ignorance is greater then
ordinary; but that is abundantly recompensed by her Innocence: An Air so
taking, so free, so modest, I never yet beheld in any Face.


Sir Salom. Had you studied to hit my fancy, you could not have drawn a Copy
more like the Original.


Pereg. It adds much to my satisfaction, that her Caracter is agreeable to your
Fancy; I think I may without vanity tell you, that my pretensions and hopes
stands very fair, for I am admitted, and received by her with such expressions
of kindness, as ought to content any reasonable Lover in his first Essays.


Sir Salom. Pray, What is her name? and Where does she lodge?


Pereg. By those about her she is called Mrs. Betty; and I enquired no farther
of her name; she is lodged in a House on the backside of Holborn, toward the
Fields.


Sir Salom. Hell, and Devils, What is it I hear?


[Apart. Pereg. But, the pleasant part of this Story is, that all this while
she is maintained, and educated in a private cunning way by an old Gentlemen
they call Mr. Evans --


Sir Salom. I have trod upon a Snake, which stings me to death!


[Apart. Pereg. Sure, he is a person so very remarkable in his kind, that you
must needs know him; Has he not the reputation of a Formal Coxcomb?


Sir Salom. I have heard of the name, -- I burst I die.


[Apart. Pereg. It Is much, you should not know him: Though I never saw the Man,
yet the extravagant economy of his Family, and his exottick way of training up
this Lovely Creature sufficiently discovers to me the politic worm in his
Pate -- But, to my thinking (Sir) you don't relish this Narrative, as I
expected.


Sir Salom. O! yes, Sir.


Pereg. I am afraid, you are of too scrupulous a Conscience for such Relations.


Sir Salom. Not at all, Sir.


Pereg. For my own part, I must acknowledge, that I never embarked in a
Love-Adventure more to my satisfaction in my life: For, though my Passion for
her be very great, yet the pleasure of disappointing the ridiculous Policy of
this old jealous Guardian, is very near as great as that which I receive in the
enjoyment of her affection -- But (Sir) I perceive my Story grows tedious to
you; Nor can I blame your want of Patience, having Love-Concernes of your own,
more pressing and urgent; I shall therefore only Conjure you to be a faithful
preserver of my secret; since the rendering of it public, would ruin my
happiness so well begun: Especcially should it come to the Politic Ears of
that Mr. Evans. Farewell.

[ Exit Peregren.
Sir Salom. Is there a Torment? --


Pereg. enters again. As you are my Friend, and a Person of Honor, let nothing
of this be discovered to my Father, when he comes to Town; For I know not, how
far such a business, as this, may work upon him to my prejudice.

[ Exit Peregreen.
Sir Salom. So: so, -- Oh? let me breath a little: was ever Man so tortured, as
I am, and yet constrained to dissemble his pain, and put a smiling Countenance
upon his Torment? False Woman! thy whole Sex is a mere Quicksand, false, and
treacherous ground for any Man to build his happiness upon! Thy whole Sex is a
Generation of Vipers, that gnaw and eat into the hearts that give them
reception: They are born with all their poison about them, which no Art, or
Industry, no Education can remove -- Unjust Stars? That a vain young Fellow, not
knowing what he does, but conducted by the hand of blind chance, should thus
baffle me in my Love, my Reputation; and in one moment disappoint the whole
design of my happiness, which with long study and labor, has been managed, by
the most exact Rules of Policy. That I should furnish him with Money, to cut my
own throat? and he, out of Kindness and Confidence, be the Informer of his own
Treason against me? -- Yet in all this misfortune I were unjust, not to
acknowledge some favor from my Stars, in the miraculous discovery of this
Mine, before the fatal Fire was put to it: And now, having warning, and time to
repair, fortify, and countermine, if I fail to blow up, and scatter the Enemy,
and to maintain my ground, let me become the scorn of the Wise, and the
Laughter of Fools.

[Exit Sir Solomon.
Enter Sir Arthur, Peregreen, and Single. Sir Arth. You, Mr. Single; and you
Mr. Peregreen; are the two dearest Friends I have in the World, And I bespeak
you both to my Wedding.


Pereg. Against what time, Sir Arthur?


Sir Arth. Let me see -- About some four days hence; For by that time the
Lawyers, the Taylers, the Semstresses, and riming Poets, with the rest of the
Wedding-Mongers, will have all things in readiness.


Pereg. But will the Lady be ready so soon?


Sir Arth. Will she tarry so long?


Pereg. You Are a great Conqueror Sir Arthur, that can make such Forts surrender
at first summons: But, Did she ever come to a Parley with you?


Sir Arth. Hang Parlyes; I never spoke to her in my Life; But her Father beggs
me to take her; and I hope, she has more need of me, then he has. Can she
resist a man of Estate, and Title, with my Parts?


Single apart. I must take down the confidence of this Fool a Story lower; else
he will cast me off, as needless to him -- Hark you, Sir Arthur, you make me stark
mad, to see how foolishly you destroy your own designs, by talking at this
rate, before Mr. Peregreen there: To my certain knowledge he is newly entered
into the List of the Rivals; And is a dangerous one too; for he is a Landed Man,
and will fight.


Sir Arth. God's so, What an unlucky Fellow am I; Why could not you tell me
on it?


Single. I wincked, and wincked upon you, and did all that I could; But, you
run on so madly in your Career, that the Devil cannot stop you, when once you are
going.


Sir Arth. Dear Mr. Single, What must I do then?


Single. Nay, you must first know what he will do: But your only way for the
present will be to address your self to the Lady with all secrecy and speed;
And if you can but get her of your side, that will be some protection to you.


Sir Arth. Well; I Will go immediately and put my self in equipage; and then have
at her; but, let not him know it; I have your Letter of Recommendation in my
Pocket; And, if the old man be but at home, I warrant you I shall do well
enough with the Daugter -- 'Faith, Gentlemen, for some reasons, which I have
since thought on, I shall not be Married so soon as I said: For, this Wedlock is
such a damnable Clogg, that I vow, I don't know what to think on it. God be'wy.

[Exit Sir Arthur.
Pereg. This is a pleasant Knight.


Single. O! let him go: The Fool began to grow troublesome, And I sent him on
an Arrand. But, as Blunt as you see him, he is a most admirable Tool for the
Work which I have in hand. Now, since we are rid of him, pray let me hear what
past between my Father and you.


Pereg. 'Faith, were he not your Father, I should think him as extravagant in
his way, as this good Sir Arthur is. For upon our first interview, he was all
sweetness, and kindness; He paid me his money with the best grace that ever I
saw. He owned his Marriage to me; but, when I asked him to wait upon his
Mistress before the Marriage, there he stuck, and absolutely refused me: yet
still his gracious aspects were the same; and Ilabouring to improve his Favor,
and gain farther upon his Confidence, told him the Story (he putting me upon
it) of Mrs. Betty), which (you know) is pleasant enough in the Relation: And
all on the sudden, when his kindness and good humor were at highest, he sunck
in a moment to so flat an ebb of coldness, and dryness, that he scarce minded
what I said, turned his head on one side, stood making of Faces, and was so
like a man distracted, that I cannot attribute this inequallity, in his temper,
to any thing else, but some inward disorder in his Brain, which must
necessarily in time grow to a direct Frenzy.


Single. I have too much cause to believe, what you apprehend. But, Sir, much
against my Will, I must leave your Company: For my several designs of
disappointing my Fathers Marriage, and securing my own Love, so hurry me too
and fro, that I cannot enjoy a moment of rest.


Pereg. Farewell, may you prosper in both: To tell you truly, this little Betty
is so much in my head, and (I Am afraid) in my heart too, that I am very near as
restless as you.


[ Exit Single and Peregreen. Enter Sir Arthur, and two Foot-Boyes. Sir Arth.
My brace of Monkys, advance, and stand before me, that you may receive in
Charge, how to behave your selves in my Service; First, because I am a Martial
Man, I will assign you employments accordingly: You, Sirrah, shall be my
Trumpeter; and you my Scout. Your Office, Trumpeter, is, wherever you go, and
especially in my Mistress quarters, to sound forth the Praises of me, your
Commander in Chief -- Rogue! Do You Laugh? Know, Sirrah, it is the fashion of us
Great Ones to keep Men in pay for no other end, but to Commend us in all places
right or wrong -- You, Scout, are a necessary Officer in my Service; and I
shall put you upon Duty presently: You are to watch the motions of the Enemy;
and when he draws near, to give me intelligence.


S. Footboy. Pray, Sir, Who is the Enemy?


Sir Arth. I see. (Boy) you are a Blockhead. I go a Wooing Sirrah, and all that
pretend to my Mistress are the Enemy. Go, Sirrah; scout abroad to Mr. Wary's
House, and if thou see any body in the way, that has the Countenance of a
Rival, instantly retreat to your headquarters here.


S. Footboy. A Rival, Sir? What Is that?


Sir Arth. Well; there is no such misery in the World, as to be served by
Fools; Do not know a Rival, when thou see him? Why, What art thou good for?


S. Footboy. If your Worship will give me any Marks to know him by, I Will do
my best to find him out.


Sir Arth. Find him out? I tell thee (Sirrah) I would not find him out; nor
have him find me out: Ignorant Puppy! not know a Rival?


S. Footboy. Rival? Sure your Worship means a Sergeant; I know them well
enough by the Dirt o'their Clothes, and the slits o'their noses.


Sir Arth. What Rascal? Do think that I am afraid of a Sergeant? No, I defy
all the Justice of England: For, I have Fifteen Hundred a year, and owe never a
Groat. Come hither, Boy; I see I must take pains to instruct thee: A Rival
(Sirrah) is a thing compounded of Collar, and Love: One of his Eyes, and half
his Face, that looks t'ords his Mistress, is so mild and sweet, that you would
Swear, the Creature had no Gall in it: whilst the other side of his Countenance
looks on all about him, as if he could eat 'em up. When he speaks, the Clapper
in his Mouth strikes double; To his Mistress Ears it sounds, Sweet Madam, let
me kiss your fair hands; and, to the rest it Rings out, Damm Me, What make you
here? -- Now (Blockhead) I hope, you will know a Rival, when you see him: Abroad
then, quickly, as I bid you, and bring me word if the Coast be clear.


Sc. Footboy. I Will do my best to serve your Worship: And, if I discover any
such strange thing, as you talk of, I Will bring you notice instantly.

[ Exit Scout-Foot-boy.
Sir Arth. Now (Sirrah) let me examine you a little, and see, if you have any
more wit then your Companion. How long have you been of the Running-Trade?


T. Footboy. Ever since I could go.


Sir Arth. Why, that is very strange!


T. Footboy. Not at all, Sir: I come of a Running Generation. My Father (as
they tell me) was an overgrown Link-boy; and my Mother was a Woman employed in
Errands; who, when she went of me, out of Modesty, and Shamfac'dness, fairly
run the Country; so that I was born to my Trade, and have it by kind, as well
as by Education.


Sir Arth. But, Do thou know what belongs to Service?


T. Footboy. Sir, there is not a Boy in all this Town of my Age, that has my
experience: For, I have served above a dozen Masters, besides Mistrisses, and
am able to do your Worship good Offices in all kinds.


Sir Arth. Thou art a Boy worth having.


T. Footboy. I am none of those heavy Lobcocks, that are good for nothing, but
to hang at the tail of a Coach; I am for all Service, as well by night as by
day: If your Worship be a Gamester, I can furnish you with Cards of the newest
Mark; Dice, High, or Low; I can --


Sir Arth. Well, Boy: These qualities may be useful hereafter: But, for the
present, I have appointed thee thy Office already.


T. Footboy. For that (Sir) I can Swear and Lie for the Credit of my Master,
as well as any Boy, or Man of them all.


Enter Scout Footboy out of breath. S. Footboy. O Sir, Sir, -- they come,
they come!


Sir Arth. Who, Boy? Who? -- The Rivals?


S. Footboy. I Sir, I.


The Sc. Footboy runs off the Stage, Sir Arthur follows, the Music strike,
and Timothy ushers in his Masters servants, who come to practice a Dance
against Sir Salomons Wedding. Enter Timothy and Servants in Mascarade, and
after them the Music. Timothy makes a Sign to the Music to hold; and they
give over. T. Footboy. What a Valiant Knight have I for my Master?


Timothy. Well, my Masters; to morrow's the Wedding day, and this is your
last time of Trial; I need not tell you, how much our Credit's engaged in the
exact performance of this piece of Ingenuity: As for the Speeches in the
Masque, those I take upon my self; and as for this Masking Dance, pray take
notice, that although the Performance be yours, the Contrivance was mine -- Now
Music, strike up again.


They Dance. Timothy. Bravely performed! This will do: And let me tell you,
There is more Wit in this Dance, then in a dozen of your best Modern Plays:
They with their gingle of Rhyme, and playing with Words, go just like the
Chimes of St. Bart'elmy: and please the Ladies ears, but effect not the
understanding at all. This does gratefully Ravish our noblest Sense, the Eye,
with an exact contrivance of Figure and Motion, which are the Elements of
Beauty:

This Entertainment worthily may Greet
Our Solomon, and Sheba, when they meet.

[Exeunt omnes. The Third Act.
Enter Ralph and Alice. Ralph. ALlice; Shall you and I talk a little wisely
together?


Allice. I, come; just like our Master Evans.


Ralph. Our Master Evans? hang him, dry-bones: No, we will talk just as our Fine
new Master talks with Mrs. Betty.


Allice. O, I: come, do you begin.


Ralph. O Rogue; now would thou have me make Love to thee, and Kiss thy hands
over, and over, and squeeze them, and cast Sheeps eyes on thee, just, as the
Fine Gentleman does upon Mrs. Betty.


Allice. O pray be quiet; you are not half so Fine a Man, as he; an you were --


Ralph. Mary come up, Gillen Flurt, is that a Bitt for your greasy Chops? A'n
you be so dainty, you may e'n fast long enough.


Allice. Why so I will for all you, if I have a mind to it.


Ralph. Nay, but Allice; consider a little; Since the Fine Gentleman came
amongst us, we have got Fortunes of our own: and Folk, that have means, should
think with themselves, how to set up in the World; If I ioyn my Twenty
Shillings, with thy Twenty Shillings, and thou join thy self with my self, we
should begin the World curiously together.


Allice. There are other-guess Men, then you, to begin withal: I Will have
neither beginning, nor ending with you --


Enter Sir Solomon. Ralph. Peace, peace; here is Master Evans.


Allice. O! How he Looks.


Sir Salom. Slaves, dispatch quickly: make ready to die.


Both. O pray Sir.


Allice. Indeed I shall not be ready a great while.


Sir Salom. Peace, Traitors; examine your Conscience; think what you have done.


Ralph. I did nothing; 'twas she opened the door, and let him in.


Allice. But 'twas you, that told him first; he might come in.


Ralph. I told him no more, then Mrs. Betty bid me.


Sir Salom. Still worse, and worse! quickly Villains, confess, confess: When
came he first? How often has he been here? How long did he stay? Did he come by
day or by night? What did he say? What did he do? No body speak?


Allice. O Sir, I have got the Palsy in my Tongue, I cannot speak.


Sir Salom. Rascal! Are you stealing away? if you stir an inch, I Will flea you
alive.


Ralph. No, no; Sir: when I have recovered my Senses, I Will tell you all.


Sir Salom. Base, and ungrateful Vermin! that would have starved, and stunck
in a Ditch long e're this, had I not taken them under my Roof, nourisht them
with my Bread, and raised them from the extremity of want, and impotent folly,
to a comfortable subsistence, and state of living: And after all this
(treacherous Wretches!) Could you betray such a Master? let a Man into my House
to rifle my happiness, rob me of all my Treasure? --


Allice. No, indeed Sir; he was very honest; we have mist nothing out of the
House never since he came.


Sir Salom. Hush, brute beast! Come, confess quickly, How came he in? What did
he do to Mrs. Betty?


Ralph. Why Sir, about a week ago --


Allice. But it is not a week though; nor will not be, till to morrow night.


Sir Salom. It Is no matter.


Ralph. There came a man to the door --.


Allice. No, no; he is out: there came a woman first.


Ralph. But she did not come in, Did she?


Allice. But I say, she did come first.


Ralph. Why then tell the Story your self: I can never begin to speak, but she
puts me out still.


Sir Salom. What patience can overcome all this?


Allice. This blockhead will always be prating, and knows not what he says.


Sir Salom. Peace both: Call down your Mistress: I Will see if she can speak
sense -- Stay: come back again; Should they give her notice of the business,
and my resentment, she will have time to frame a Story, and disguise the truth:
I had better moderate my anger, and by gentle means draw a plain confession out
of her; wait both here till I come out again.

[Exit Sir Solomon.
Allice. What a dickens is come to our Master?


Ralph. I always thought the coming of this young Man would make a foul house
at last.


Allice. As sure as can be some mad Dog has bit him.


Ralph. No, no: it is a what-dee-call thing, like a Fly under a Horse-tayl, that
makes him wince, and fling about so: I think they call it Jealousy.


Alice. Jealousy? What Is that?


Ralph. Why, that is a Disease, which Folk in Love are troubled with. It Is
Physic, that works the wrong way; in stead of going downwards, it flies up
into the head.


Enter Sir Solomon and Mrs. Betty. Sir Salom. Come, Betty, it is fine VValking.
Go, get you within doors -- And a sweet day.


[ Exit Ralph and Allice. Mrs. Betty. Yes indeed.


Sir Salom. What news do you hear?


Betty. O Sir, my little Bird died last night.


Sir Salom. I Am sorry for it -- Betty, the World is grown very Malicious. Would
you think, that some of the spiteful Neighbors hereabouts should report, that
a certain young Man (a stranger) has several times been seen going in, and out
of your Lodging, and that you have received, and entertained him in discourse
whole hours together? But, I am none of those, that are apt to credit the
Slanders of bad Tongues: For, I offered to lay all I am worth, there was no
such thing.


Betty. Indeed but you must not; for as sure as can be you would lose all that you
lay.


Sir Salom. Why? Was there such a Man then? --


Betty. O Lord, I; he was here this very day: Had you but come two hours
sooner, you might have seen him here.


Sir Salom. apart. At least this confession with so little concern, shows,
she is not quite fallen from the state of Innocence -- But Betty, as I remember,
I did forewarne, and command you to speak with no man, especially with no young
man.


Betty. I remember that too; But had you been here, when I spoke first to him,
I knew you would have done as I did.


Sir Salom. It may be so: But pray, let me hear how 'twas.


Betty. With all my heart; I was sitting in the Balcony one evening at work,
when this handsome proper young man came by; and just, as I looked on him, he
chan't to look up to me: He presently makes me a low reverence, and I, in
civility, rose up and did the like; By and by he turns back again, and salutes
me, as before; and I, as in good manners I ought, did the same: thus he
continued a great many times together: About two hours after, when 'twas
almost dark, there came an Orange-woman to the door, who sent me up word, That
she had the finest China-Oranges that ever were seen; and, that if I would not
buy them with Money, I should have 'em for Love: I presently came down to see
her Oranges (for I love 'em mightily:) And whilst I was looking upon 'em, she
whispered in my Ear, God bless those sweet eyes of yours; but, if you knew how
you have wounded a brave Gentleman, who is ready to die for you, your heart
could not be so hard to deny him some relief.


Sir Salom. Cursed Engine of the Devil?


[apart. Betty. Good Woman (said I) you're mistaken; I never wounded any body
in my Life: The Man, that you lately saw under the Belcony, I am sure (said
she) is so hurt by you, that he is not like to live two days to an end, unless
you take pity of him: Sure I did not let fall any thing* (said I) down upon
his head: No, Madam (said she) It Is from your Eyes alone, that he has received
his wound; They have a secret poison in them, which you are ignorant of, that
has seized on his heart, and reduced him to this Languishing Condition: I view
(said I) I would not for a World, that the poor Man should miscarry, and I be
the cause on it; What would he have me do to help him? Nothing (answered she)
but give him leave to look upon you again; for, your Eyes, that hurt him, can
only cure him: With all my heart, if that will do him good (said I) he may come
hither, and see me as much as he pleases. And (Would you believe it?) as soon
as ever he came, and saw me, he was as well, as ever he was in his life: Now
(judge you) could I Am Conscience do less, then relieve a dying Man, when it
cost so little the doing?


Sir Salom. apart. I fear, we have paid too dearly for the Cure -- No; 'twas
charitably done. But, when he came in, What did he do? What past between you?
Was he not very kind to you?


Betty. Beyond all measure. He presented me the finest Box that ever you saw (I
can show it you above;) besides, he gave whole handfulls of Money to Ralph and
Alice; and he said the sweetest things that did so please me --


Sir Salom. Well; but when you were alone together, What did he do then? Now
must I search for that, which if I find I die.


[apart. Betty. Then he was kindest of all: He took me by the hands, and held
them so fast, and kissed them a hundred times over.


Sir Salom. And what else? -- I am in a cold Sweat!


[apart. Betty. What else? Why do you ask?


Sir Salom. Come, it is a good Girl, speak freely.


Betty. But you will be angry.


Sir Salom. No, no.


Betty. Sure you will.


Sir Salom. I tell you no -- With what a lingering death she torments me?


[apart. Betty. I vow I Am ashamed to tell you.


Sir Salom. Come, come; you may tell me any thing.


Betty. He took --


Sir Salom. What did he take?


Betty. He took my --


Sir Salom. Out with it.


Betty. Scarlet Ribband, which you gave me, and said, He would wear it for my
sake.


Sir Salom. apart. It Is well he took no more -- If that be all, let the Ribband
go: But, Did he ask no other Remedy of you, to Cure the Wound, which he so
complained of?


Betty. No: Was there any thing else for him to ask? For sure at that time I
should have denied him nothing.


Sir Salo. Well, Betty; what is past, is past: and you shall hear no more of it
from me: but, little think you what a danger you have escaped. Thou have too much
simplicity to understand the malice of these Frizled heads, who with their
Flattery and fine words, seek only to dishonor and ruin thee.


Betty. O, it is impossible, that he should mean me any hurt, for he loves me.


Sir Salom. He love thee? he deceives thee; and is kind to thee only for his
own wicked ends, which having compast, he will scorn and hate thee.


Betty. Sure that cannot be; for he Swore to me above a dozen times that he
would always love me.


Sir Salom. You Are undone, should thou trust to the Promises and Oaths of
this Seducer; they are mere Cobwebs to catch silly Flies: Besides, Betty, to
admit such Visits, and take Presents, and to delight in the Amorous
Conversation, and dalliance of these Periwig-men, is a Sin (Betty) and a great
one.


Betty. No sure; A Sin is a black ugly thing: but this is so pleasing, and
sweet; And when one means no hurt --


Sir Salom. I tell you, it is a Sin, unless Marriage take away the offense.


Betty. Say you so? Then pray, Sir, Marry me out of hand.


Sir Salom. Yes, Betty, I intend to Marry thee; and I have put all things in
readiness for it.


Betty. But, When will you do it?


Sir Salom. To morrow morning.


Betty. To morrow morning?


She Laughs. Sir Salom. Without fail: I see you are mightily pleased.


Betty. Yes indeed: I shall be extremely obliged to you, and hugely satisfied
in him.


Sir Salom. Him? What him?


Betty. Why, him, we spoke of.


Sir Salom. Very fine; you are mighty forward to choose your Husband: But, for
that him, trouble not your head any further; let him die of his wounds a-Gods
name. I am resolved, when he comes next, you shall give him such a welcome,
that the importunate Ghest shall no longer hant you.


Betty. Why; What must I do?


Sir Salom. You shall shut the door on the Face of him, and then if he knocks,
you shall send that after him out of the Window, which shall cool the heat of
his Passion.


Betty. How shall I be able to do that? He is so kind and so handsome --


Sir Salom. What? Do You make a difficulty of it, when I command it? Betty, no
more words; before I stir from hence I Will see you do it my self. I know we
shall have him quickly here. Come along with me, I find you want Instruction
yet.


[Exeunt. Enter Sir Arthur, and his two Foot-boys. Sir Arth. Nay, Sarrah; by
Martial-Law I Will have thee hanged for giving a false Allarum, and putting me in
such a disorder, as I have hardly yet recovered.


S. Footboy. Truly (Sir) I took 'em to be the Monsters you spoke of.


Sir Arthur. Did you so? And where were your Eyes (Puppy? a Pox o'your fears,
that made 'em see double: Of all Men living, I hate these Cowardly Rogues.


T. Footboy apart. Then I Will be sworn, my Masters no self-lover.


Sir Arth. This is the time too of Old Waryes Assignation. And I Vow, it is all
I can do, to rally my Forces against my Onsett on Mrs. Iulia.


T. Footboy. This, Sir, was the hour by him appointed to meet you in these
walks.


Sir Arth. Go tell him, Boy, that I am here, and stay for him.


T. Footboy. Here they are, Sir.


Enter Wary and Julia. Iulia. Have you no body, Sir, to offer me, but the most
notorious Fool of the Town?


Wary. Peace: Thou art a greater Fool then he, to refuse a man, that has a
great deal of Money, and little Wit; and so lose the opportunity of being sole
Mistress of a large Fortune. See, in what a submissive posture the Amorous
Knight begs his admittance into your Favor? Nay, come up to him -- Sir Arthur,
here is my Daughter, and God send you good luck with her. Perhaps you will find her
a Coy Mistress; but, let not that dishearten you; farewell; I Will leave you to
your selves.


[ Exit Wary and Servants. Sir Arth. Come, Madam; now we are alone, you need
not be ashamed to speak your mind freely to me: Be of good Courage; I am
kind-hearted, and can deny you nothing that you ask.


Iulia. Sure, the Fool expects that I should Court him. [apart. Truly, Sir
Arthur, I would fain ask you something; but, I am afraid, you are not
Good-natured, nor a Man of your Word.


Sir Arth. As I am a Gentleman, and a Knight -- She Is coming already --


[apart. Iulia. But, What if you should deny me? you know, for a Woman to be
refused, is the last misery that can befall her.


Sir Arth. Alas, poor heart; I vow I take such pity o'thee, that there is no
kindness, I would not do instantly for thee.


Iulia. Well (Sir) remember your promise: I ask you to forbear all manner of
Courtship, or pretention to Marry me.


Sir Arth. This is very pretty I faith: I know well enough, you say this now
only to try me; I cannot but laugh to think, how damnably you would be mump'd, if I
should take you now at your word.


Iulia. Do it, pray Sir; and take it which way you will; either grant my real
desires, according to your promise, or punish my Dissimulation (if so you will
have it.)


Sir Arth. So, so; you are very pleasant: But, pray Madam, for a while give over
Fooling, and be serious; Alas, I know you are bashful (as all young women are,
or should be) and loath to come out with it: Therefore I Will take pity o'you, and
speak your mind for you; You Would fain have a Husband (Would you not? and you would
be married to a man of Fortune, and good Parts, and be a Lady, (I know you
would:) Then say no more, trouble your self no farther, you shall have all
this, here is your Man, take him, and be thankful.


Iulia. Is there any persecution like that of a [apart. Confident Fool. Sir
Arthur, I confess you are a Man of Fortune; but, I am not of Fortunes mind to
dote upon you, as she has done: As for your good Parts, they are past my
understanding; and for the Ladyship you talk of, pray keep it for those, who
are disposed to wear it for your sake, which I am resolved never to do.


Sir Arth. What a perverse Woman is this? -- [apart. Well, well, Madam; for all
this, I Will not despair, but that you may come to your wits yet; In order
whereunto I have this Letter to deliver you: Perhaps good Counsel may do much,
pray pursue it well; and afterward let me know your Mind.


Iulia. I know the Hand: But; I cannot possibly imagine, how he should come to
be the bearer of it -- [apart. Julia reads the Letter apart from Sir Arthur.
Madam, if your Fathers severity has stirred in you the same Melancholy humor,
as in me, this Fool, whom I send for your Divertisement, may prove no
unseasonable Present: But, there is another use to be made of him, much more
important to me, and (I hope) to you; For, he is very proper to amuse your
Fathers unquiet Suspicions of our Love, and to fill the Room of a Suitor, which
might otherwise be taken up by some body of more danger: There can be no fitter
Person, then he, to be deceived himself, and to deceive others. I therefore
leave him to your discreet management; for, in your Conduct and Affection, lie
all the hopes and happiness of your humble Adorer Single.

Well, Single, since thou have put me upon it, I Will act the part thou gav'st me,
so to the Life, that thou shall tremble at thine own disguise; and so by a
wholesome severity I will at once punish thy jealous humor, and secure thy Love
-- Sir Arthur, come hither; What do you think this Letter Contains?


Sir Arth. A great deal of Truth, I warrant you.


Iulia. Be you the Judge of that; take it, and read it.


Sir Arth. Truly I am a modest man, and don't love to read my own
Commendations: but, since you Command it -- Hai, What Is here? -- This Fool --
for your Divertisement -- to be made use on -- to amuse your Fathers --
discreet Management: -- O Traitor! there is not a true word in it. Judge you,
(Madam;) Am I a Fool? Am I a fit Person to deceive, or be deceived?


Iulia. No, Sir Arthur: And, to let you see what part I take in the injury done
you, this is the Answer, which (She tears it. I give to so malicious a Libel.
It Is true, I am none of those, who can fall in love with a Man at first sight
(which perhaps you may take unkindly at my hands) --


Sir Arth. No indeed, not I.


Iulia. But I am so much concerned to see plain-dealing and honest simplicity
abused, under the color of Friendship, that I shall always side with the
well-meaning-Party against the false underminings of Dissemblers.


Sir Arth. What a happy man am I?


Iulia. You are to know, that this Mr. Single has been a Pretender to me
himself; and now he makes you his stalking-horse to drive the Game into his own
Nets: But, go you immediately to him, and relate what you have seen me do, and
heard me say; and tell him from me, that I have now taken a better man into his
Room.


Sir Arth. Let me alone; I Will tell him his own to some tune.

[Exit Sir Arthur.
Iulia. Since thou art doomed to Poverty
By a Mad-fathers harsh Decree,
And since my Sentence is the same
From mine, if I admit thy Flame;
Single, 'twill just in me appear
To try well, what must cost so dear:
No Common test is fit to prove
The truth, and firmness of thy Love;
Since thou with nothing come to me,
And I leave all to follow thee.
[ Exit Julia.
Enter Peregreen and Single. Pereg. Some way or other I am resolved to find out
this woman, before your Father is Married to her: I must break, or delay the
Match.


Single. Your Labor will be fruitless. What can you do in so short a time? his
Wedding is to Morrow.


Pereg. I have all to day for it: And I Will do nothing, but watch him, and dog
him from place to place, till I find out his hant.


Single. Should you compass the seeing her, What will it avail? you may as soon
Convert a Jew, as make him alter his Resolution.


Pereg. But she may be Converted: For if she have Honor or Reason in her,
'twill be enough to tell her only the plain story of your Fathers Humor, and
Injustice toward you. If she be void of both, I Will get some Wench or other to
swear a Promise of Marriage with your Father: Rather then fail I Will pretend a
Contract my self with his Mistress; and so forbid the Banes. For, What is it I
would not do to serve my Friend in such an Exigence?


Single. In all your designs I see much of your kindness, but very little
probability of success.


Enter Sir Arthur. Sir Arthur? I suppose you come immediately from your
Mistress. Well? Have you delivered my Letter?


Sir Arth. Yes, Sir; I have delivered it.


Single. And, I hope, it produced those good effects, which you have cause to
thank me for.


Sir Arth. O yes, Sir; I thank you most abundantly.


Single. But, Have you not brought me an Answer?


Sir Arth. Yes, I have an answer for you, but, it is by word of mouth.


Single. How Is this? Sure you mistake your self.


Sir Arth. No, good Mr. Single; It Is you that mistake your self, and me too:
For, I am no Fool (do you see;) And Mrs. Iulia cares not this for you. What say
you now, Sir?


Single. Either the Fool's run mad, or I shall -- Sir Arthur, you are grown
very misterious: Pray, tell me plainly, What did she say?


Sir Arth. Then, to be plain, Sir, she said no better of you, then you Writ of
me.


Single apart. Was ever Man so cross-bit, and confounded by an Ass.


Sir Arthur. Alas, poor Mr. Single! I find you are exteamly troubled: But, I
scorn to be base; and, one good turn deserves another. Shall I write a Letter
of Commendation for you to Mrs. Iulia? Ha, ha!


Single. You Are too saucy: Give over fooling quickly, or I shall grow in
earnest. Come, tell me her Answer; and, if you swerve one tittle from the
Truth, I shall be worse to you, then a thousand Rivals.


Sir Arth. Lord! Why are you so angry now? If Mrs. Iulia will be kind to me,
Can I help it?


Single. That it should be in the power of such a Worm to sting me thus! --
Dispatch; What said she?


Sir Arth. Good Lord! in what haste you are to hear ill News? I vow now, I
cannot help it: she read your Letter, and then gave it me to read (I need not
tell you what was in it). When I had read it, she took it and tore it (without
my bidding her) And said, That was the Answer she made to it: Withal, she bid
me tell you, That she was now provided with a better Man to fill your room.


Single. It Is false, She did not; She could not say so.


Sir Arth. I thought what 'twould come too -- Why, look'ee now, if you will not
believe me, ask her.


Single. Sir Arthur, This business must not pass so: I must be farther
satisfied in the Truth of your relation, or I shall take a course, which I
suspect may not be agreeable to your temper. Go instantly back, and let her
know from me, that, when she sends such a Message by such an Ambassador, she
ought to send her Credentials too: And I shall also advise you, for your own
sake, to bring me a speedy account of this business.


Sir Arth. Methinks you might take my word for a greater matter then this; But,
you shall have your humor, and I Will go strait -- Would I were well rid of him.

[Exit Sir Arthur.
Single. Where can Faith be found, if Iulia be false? Must Virtue it self
degenerate to Treachery, and an Angel turn Devil to complete my unhappiness?


Pereg. Come, come; All this may be nothing but a Trial of your Constancy; or
some Stratagem of Love to amuse the froward suspicion of her old Father.


Single. She could not show that Fool my Letter, and tear it before his face,
with any other design, but to abandon, and destroy me.


Pereg. Be not so hasty to conclude her unfaithful, and your self unfortunate:
For my part, I hold it impossible, that a Woman of Wit, who has always been
constant to you, should on the sudden desert you for so despicable a Person, as
your pretended Rival.


Single. Ah, Peregreen! had but a nobler Object debauched her from me, it would
not have put such scorn upon my sufferings: But now I fall dishonourably by an
infamous hand, and am exposed at once to Ruin, and Contempt.


Enter Sir Arthur. Sir Arth. Now, Sir, I hope I have pleased you; I told her
all that you said: And, she bid me tell you again, that, since you are so hard
of belief, both she, and her Father will meet you in this place within this
hour, to give you full satisfaction in the point: And so God b'wy.


Single. Nay, but Sir Arthur; Pray, one word more with you. Come near.


Sir Arthur. By no means, Sir; I am in haste; And my Mistress will be angry, if
I stay from her so long. Farewell.

[Exit Sir Arthur.
Single. So; Now I think my business is completely done: Nature and Love have
both declared me their Enemy; whilst I am disinherited by my Father, and
forsaken by my Mistress. What have I left me, but to Court an honorable and
speedy Death?


Pereg. At least suspend your judgment, till you speak with Iulia. All this may
still be a blind to cover, and secure your Love. You must not expect at first
sight, to see the bottom of a Woman's Policy in matters of this Nature: They
manage such Affairs with a subtlety, and address beyond our reach.


Single. Your excess of kindness makes you flatter my Misery with vain hopes.


Pereg. You must not antedate your Misery by Despair; That will teach Fortune
the way to ruin you: First hear what Iulia says; examine well her words, and
her eyes; And then you may knowingly make a Judgment of your Case -- I shall
impatiently wait the success of this Assignation. In the mean time I must beg
your leave to dispatch a Visit here close by to my little Betty; That being
done, your Concerns shall be my whole Employment. Adieu.


Single. Dear Peregreen, Farewell.

[ Exit Single. Peregreen knocks at Mrs. Bettys Lodging,
Ralph looks out, and shuts the Door upon him.

Ralph. Stand off.


Pereg. Hai dai! What Is the meaning of this? I Will try a little farther; perhaps
he mistook me for another.


[Knocks again. Ralph and Alice both look out. Ralph. What would you have?


Alice. Here Is nothing for you.


They shut the Door upon him again. Pereg. They turn me away like a Beggar
from the door! Now I am sure they saw me -- Ralph, Alice -- my pretty Rogues,
Don't you know me? It Is I.


Mrs. Betty from the Belcony throws down a Brickbat, and with it a Letter. Mrs.
Betty. To all you have said, or have to say to me, this is my Answer.


[She withdrawes. Pereg. Does that hand persecute me too? she speaks in
Thunder, and vanishes like Lightning -- If this [He takes up the Brick. be your
Answer, it is a weighty one; had it come home to me, 'twould have Silenced me
for ever. It Is impossible that Betty should be so changed all of the sudden, as
to do this of her self; without dispute Old Evans has been allarum'd, and is
now himself upon the Guard: I must 'een draw off at present from the Enemies
Quarters -- What have we here? a Letter, For Mr Peregreen Woodland? good, or
bad, I Will take it; but, this is no place to read it in.

[ Exit Peregreen.
Ralph peeps out at the Door, and then looks back. Ralph. The Bird is flown.


Enter Sir Solomon, Mrs. Betty, Ralph, and Alice. Sir Salom. Most bravely
performed of all hands; you Ralph, and you Alice did so well execute my Orders,
that now I forgive you all your past-faults: And you, my dear Betty, are now
restored to the place you formerly held in my affections; For know, that I am
no less a Rewarder of Virtue, then a Punisher of Vice: I believe my Confident
Lover will brag no more of this Adventure; The Brick-bat has dashed in pieces
all his Designs. And now, Betty, learn from hence the necessity of a wise
Conducter even for Innocence it self: Thou had been quite lost, and undone,
had I not miraculously delivered thee from the Ambuscade, which was laid to
ruin thee; but, for the future I hope, all of you are sufficiently instructed,
how to behave your selves, should he renew his attempts again.


Ralph. We have our Lesson without book now; let him come when he will, and do
his worst, I defy him.


Sir Salom. But have a care you be not caught with his smooth Words, and fair
Promises; What would you say to him now, if he should come to you, and cry,
Ralph, honest Ralph, Will thou forget thy Friend? take a little pity of me.


Ralph. No; you are a Rogue.


Sir Salom. Good: But thou Alice at least art so pretty and sweet, thou can
not be so hard-hearted.


Allice. You Are a Iack-straw.


Sir Salom. Excellent! Alas, What hurt is there in the thing which I ask? I
intended nothing but Honor and Virtue.


Ralph. You Are a Cunning Catching Rascal.


Sir Salom. Rarely well; Nay then, if you no compassion of me, I must die.


Ralph. The sooner the better.


Sir Salom. Most incomparable? You know, I am none of those, who use to forget
the Courtesies done 'em: I never leave a Service unrewarded: And, to give you a
taste of my grateful nature, Ralph, here is for thee to Drink; and Alice,
here is to buy thee a laced Hancarcher; This is but a small earnest of what I
intend.


[They both take the Money. Ralph. Am I a Man to be bribed? stand off.


[He gives him a great thrust. Sir Salom. That Is right.


Allice. Get you out.


[Thrusts him too. Sir Salom. To the Life.


Ralph. Get you out.


[They both punch him. Sir Salom. As it should be.


Allice. But presently then.


Sir Salom. Mighty well? but now it is enough.


Ralph. Be gone then.


[They both thrust him about more then ever. Sir Salom. Hold I say.


Allice. We will not hold, you come to affront our Master Evans.


Sir Salom. I tell you I am in earnest.


Ralph. So are we too: we will do what our Master bid us.


Sir Salom. Give over, I say, or I Will break my Staff about your cares.


Allice. Must we give over so soon?


Sir Salom. How the Slaves have bruised me?


Ralph. What say you now, Sir? Have not we done as we should do?


Sir Salom. Extremely well; only you were a little too slow of understanding
to'rds the Last, and too quick in taking Money at First.


Ralph. I Swear, I had quite forgot that part of my Lesson concerning Money:
But, since we were out, Shall we do it over again?


Sir Salom. No: It Is enough.


Ralph. Speak but the word, and we are ready.


Sir Salom. You Have done very fairly: ye may now withdraw, whilst I talk a
little in private with Betty. [ Exit Ralph and Alice. Betty, methinks you are
very silent; And yet that is a thing I like very well in a Woman, I know, poor
heart, thy mind is troubled for the oversight thou did commit, not out of
Malice, but through too much Innocence: But, Betty, be not dismayed; thy Fault
is forgiven, and forgot: and, for a testimony of it, to morrow I Will Marry thee.


Betty. To Morrow, Sir? that is very soon.


Sir Salom. How comes it to pass, that now it is too soon, when two hours ago
you thought it hardly soon enough.


Betty. I am grown more knowing since that time; For, you have given me so many
Admonitions concerning the Duty of a Wife, that it is impossible for me to have
'em perfect so soon.


Sir Salom. Thou shall get them perfect by the practice of 'em: And, Betty, to
let thee see, how my kindness is enlarged to 'rds thee, and to Crown all my
other benefits heaped upon thee, take this Writing, and preserve it charily,
for in this I make thee Mistress of my whole Estate. Moreover, Betty, I Will tell
thee a Secret, which thou little dream'st on; To morrow thou shall be a Lady,
and shall have a place much above the Rank of the Modern ones. And now, Betty,
consider well, what gratitude you owe the Author of so much happiness -- Did
the rest of the World Marry at this prudent rate, we should not hear such loud
Complaints of Wedlock-Fetters.

Let foolish Men their Marriage-Fate deplore;
Whilst I to Cupid his lost Eyes restore:
And all the Poison from his Darts remove,
By teaching Wisdom in the School of Love.

[Exeunt Omnes. The Fourth Act.
Enter Sir Solomon, Single. Sir Salom. THis I must own to be the Fortunate
Moment of my Life: For now the Harvest is come of my long ripening Designs,
which call for the Sickle. I touch the very Center of Human Felicity, which
lies in that Point, where expectation ends, and fruition begins. I am now
beholding to the late Assaults and Dangers I have sustained, which add to the
fullness of my Joy the Pleasure of Victory. That I could but see the
Countenance of my defeated Rival since his Salutation with the Brickbat? What a
Change shall I find in the briskness of his Humor?


Enter Peregreen. Pereg. Sir Solomon; I have been to wait on you at your
Lodging; and have sought you far and near.


Sir Salom. Good Mr. Peregreen, y' are heartily welcome. Well; and how thrives
Love? I suppose by this y' are in a fair possibility of enjoyment.


Pereg. Faith, Sir, that is the very business I have to conferr with you: I know
not how it comes to pass, but (to tell you truly) I have had some Traverses in
my Affairs, since I last imparted them to you.


Sir Salom. I protest, I Am extremely sorry for it. Why What Is the matter?


Pereg. Without dispute, that watchful Dragon, old Evans, smells the Powder,
and stands upon his Guard to countermine all my Designs.


Sir Salom. What reason have you to think so?


Pereg. I know it must so: For, I had absolutely gained those two Animals, the
Man, and Maid of the Family; and made them as tame, and obedient to all my
purposes, as watch't-Hawkes; And now (all on the sudden) they are turned
Haggard again, know me not, and repulse me with such rudeness, as if they had
never seen my face, nor taken my Money.


Sir Salom. What ill luck's this? But how in the name of Wonder should this
Evans come to the knowledge of your Design?


Pereg. I know not what Devil of Jealousy has inspired him; But too sure I am,
that he has me in the wind; For (not many hours since) going to visit my
Betty, as I use to do, when I came to the House, and had one foot in, they shut
the Door with violence upon me; and both Man and Maid cried out, What make you
here? here is nothing for you --


Sir Salom. I vow, this was very hard usage; after they had taken your Money too.


Pereg. However, I venter'd to knock once more; and presently Betty her self
came to the Belcony, and threw a huge Brickbat at me, telling me, That was her
Answer to all I had to say.


Sir Salom. A Brick-bat, say you? That was an odd Favor for a Mistress to
bestow on her Gallant: But, Did it hit you?


Pereg. No; I had the good fortune to avoid the blow.


Sir Salom. What pity it is, so hopeful a Design should be knocked oth' head
with a Brick-bat?


Pereg. Hold, Sir; for all this, there is some life in it still: and, I believe,
old Evans, who was the Engineer, that raised this Battery against me, will have
no cause at last to brag of his Victory.


Sir Salom. If the young VVench be o'your side, you may easily out-wit the old
Man's Vigilance.


Pereg. I don't question it; And, it is no small part of my satisfaction, to
think, how this Jealous Coxcomb fools himself into a security upon this
imaginary Rout.


Sir Salom. Well, Sir; -- How he frights me?


Pereg. Now you shall see, that Love is an equal Conqueror of Art, and Nature;
First, in baffling all the subtlety, and stratagems of that old Fox; And next,
in making a cunning Pollititian of Innocent Betty.


Sir Salom. Where will this end?


[Apart. Pereg. For she, being constrained by her Tyrant to give me this
unwilling Repulse, at the same time under the shelter of that Brick-bat dropped a
Letter at my Feet so full of sweetness, and unsophisticated-love, expressed with
so much Innocence, and Modesty, that now I Am no less charmed with the beauty of
her Mind, then with the Loveliness of her Person.


Sir Salom. I am relapsed into Torment! --


[apart. Pereg. Don't you admire this miraculous effect of Love, and readiness
of wit in so ignorant, so unpracticed a Creature? Methinks, you are not so
affected with the strangeness of it, as the thing deserves.


Sir Salom. O, yes; I Am unspeakably surpised.


Pereg. When the Door was shut against me, and the bawling Servants houted at
me, and the hand-granado was flung out to route the poor Lover, Was not the
Pollitick Conducter of this Stratagem all this while in a dainty
Fooles-Paradice? Did he not act a pleasant Part in this Tragi-Comedy? Why
don't you Laugh heartily at it?


[Sir Salo. sq -- ueezes out a forced Laughter. Sir Salom. I protest, I Laugh
as heartily, as I can -- How I Am worried by him!


Pereg. But, as you are my Friend, I must needs show you her Letter; For, I
believe, you never saw a more admirable piece in the kind: Do but hear it.
[Peregrine Reads. What shall I do? I must write my Thoughts to you, and yet I
know not how to choose words to express them: For I have been bred in such
ignorance, that all the knowledge I have, is, that I want it. This makes me
fearful of saying any thing, least I should say, what I ought not. I know not
what it is y' ave done to me, but I find, it goes to my very heart to use you as
I am forced to do. Mr. Evans does often Preach to me, That all young men are
Deceivers; and, that it is their Trade by fair promises to cheat Women of their
Honor, and then forsake 'em. Pray tell me whether it be so or no. I have no
Malice my self; and, should you deceive me, 'twould be ill done, and I Am
confident 'twould kill me -- Was ever any thing so tender, and so ravishing?
How her Wit and her Love flow from the clear Fountain of Nature, without the
least tincture of Artifice? And, Is not this Evans a most unsufferable Beast to
drown in ignorance and stupidity (as much as in him lies) so perfect a Soul,
and so capable of the highest improvement?


Sir Salom. Oh!


Pereg. What ailes you, Sir?


Sir Salom. Nothing, but a Cold. Uh, uh, uh.


Pereg. I must needs beg your assistance a little in this business: For, I am a
stranger in Town, and you are the only person I confide in. Could you not
acquaint me with some of the Neighbors thereabouts, where I might have access,
to watch opportunities of speaking with my Mistress?


Sir Salom. No; I have not any acquaintance in that Quarter. Farewell.


Pereg. Pray Sir, stay a little longer: The kindness of friends should be
reciprocal. You have not told me any thing concerning the progress of your own
Affairs: I suppose the Wedding holds for to morrow. I am resolved
(notwithstanding the urgency of my own occasions) to prepare my self for it.
But, Sir, Will you not grant me the favor to kiss the fair hands of your Lady
before the Marriage?


Sir Salom. It cannot be: The time is short. God b'ye.

[Exit Sir Solomon.
Pereg. This good Sir Solomon has a strange Ague in his Nature: His Temper
never holds the same for half an hour together. How pleasant, and well humor'd
he was, when first we began our discourse; And after a while how sullen, and
ill at ease he seemed to be? Poor Single! I pity thy hard Fortune, in having
such a Father.

[ Exit Peregreen.
Enter Sir Solomon. Sir Salom. Is he gone at last? -- Could any Devil, but he,
be so skillful in the Art of tormenting? Could any Devil, but she, have so much
untaught Malice born in her Nature? My Patience and my Wits will forsake me! I
have published my Wedding, named the Day, invited my Friends, and, Am I not
finely provided with a Bride? I shall become the Discourse of every
Coffy-house, be Libelled, Lampon'd, Acted; and every Fool will think himself a
Wit, when he talks, and tells Stories of me --


Enter Timothy. Sir Solomon takes several turns upon the Stage, and takes no
notice of Timothy, who follows him from side to side. Timothy. Sir, according
to your appointment, all things are in readiness, as becomes your Quality, and
the Solemnity of such a Wedding. The Tailor, Milliner, Semstress, and
Periwig-Maker, for the setting forth your Person; And the Butcher, Polterer,
Vintner, Confectioner, and Fruiterer, for setting forth the Feast, have all
brought in their Provisions* But, there is such a tearing noise of Fidles*
Drums, and Trumpets at your Lodging, to give your Worship Joy, that your whole
Family are like Seamen in a Tempest, all bawling, and none hearing: They are
His Majesty's Trumpets, and His Grace the Lord Generall's Drums, What will your
Worship be pleased I shall give them? --


Sir Salom. A Halter -- How all Mankind conspires to torment me! Where shall I
hide my head, [Timothy starts back. and shelter my Person from the Scorn and
Mockery of the World? Have I made it my business all my life to separate my
self from the common heard of Fools, and to laugh at the Disasters, which grew
from their Principles of Folly? And, am I at last my self betrayed by a
Caprichiousness of Fate to a degree of Contempt, and ridiculousness below the
most noted Fops, and celebrated Fools of the Times? --


Timothy. What will your Worship be pleased I shall do?


Sir Salom. Hang your self -- [Tim. starts back again. Well; if it must be so,
at least the World shall see, that I am none of those tame Fools, that can be
the Bawds of their own Infamy, and fairly hold intelligence with those, who are
the Authors of their Shame and Dishonor. My revenge shall be as loud as my
disgrace; It shall be Writ in red Letters upon this insolent Robber, and
Ravisher of my Affections, and my Honor; and upon that ungrateful young Viper;
whom friendless, and indigent, cold, and naked, I took into my warm Bosom, nay
more, into my Heart --


Timothy. I beseech your Worship to dispatch me: Your House is so full of all
sorts of Tradesmen, and such a Rabble is got together about the Door (the Drums
and Trumpets having proclaimed a Wedding) that I fear your House and Goods are
not safe.


Sir Salom. There Is your dispatch, impertinent Varlet!


[He kicks him off the Stage. Timothy. Why, Sir! it is I: Who do you take me for?


Sir Salom. I am to blame. This extravagance of Passion serves only to make my
disgrace more visible: And my Resentment, making a noise in the World, will but
sound a Trumpet, to draw more Company in to see the Monster -- All things duly
weighed, Why should I lay the blame on others, when here within me lies my
worst Enemy? An obstinate Love has taken possession of my heart, which makes an
Ass of my Reason, and forces me, though I know the Treason, to dote still upon
the Traitor. Unjustly I condemn the amorous pursuit of a young Gallant, who is
so ignorant of the wrong and affront he does me, that he calls me to Counsel
in all his Plots and Contrivance against me! Why do I blame the seduced
Ignorance of an Innocent Girl, whose want of knowledge (which causes my
Disgrace) is the effect of that Education which I gave her? No: My designs of
Revenge are vain, and unjust. I must pull down my Sails to weather out this
storm. My only Course will be, to marry her out of hand: That may open her
eyes, to see her Duty; and his, to know the Injury he does me. Heaven! If it
may be, make her honest; if not,

At least that strength of Patience grant to me,
Which I in other Husbands daily see.
[Exit Sir Solomon.
Enter Sir Arthur, Wary, Julia, and Roger. Wary. What? No Mr. Single appears
yet.


Sir Arthur. Alas, Sir; he dares not show his Face, when I am here.


Wary. Roger, to tell thee truly, my understanding [Apart to Roger. is quite
posed, what judgment to frame of this unexpected compliance in my Daughter.
Methinks there is still a Mist before my Eyes; for I do not like these sudden
Conversions; they favor of Artifice and Design. [ Sir Arthur courts Julia.
However, I Am resolved to drive it as far as 'twill go: And therefore I Will
immediately give directions to my Lawyer for drawing up the Marriage-VVritings.
But, you must stay here, that in case Mr. Single comes, you may observe the
passages between them.


Roger. I warrant you, Sir; I Will give you an account to a tittle of what is
said, or done.


Wary. Sir Arthur, my business calls me away in order to your Service: But, I
leave you in good company. And, Daughter, I expect from you, that when Mr.
Single comes, you should give him such a Dismission, as that neither you, nor
I, may be any more importuned by him.

[ Exit Wary.
Iulia. Sir Arthur, I must confess, y' ave already given me abundant proof of
your Wit; but, in regard I would fain have a thorough Veneration for him, I am
to obey during life, Pray afford me some testimony of your Valor too: For that
(you know) is as necessary to protect, as Wit is to govern the Subject.


Sir Arthur. Valor, Madam? why that is the only fault I am guilty of: I Am too
rash. I vow, Madam, my courage is so fierce and outrageous, when I let it
loose, that I dare not stir abroad, nor meet any body, till I have first
chained it up, like a cursed Masty-dog, for fear of doing mischief.


Iulia. Good Sir, for my satisfaction unchain it now a little: Here Is no body
in the way, that can take any hurt, but Roger there; and, if you will venture your
Dog, I Will venture my Fathers Devil.


Sir Arth. O sweet Lady! for your own dear sake, I would not do it for a World.
Alas, Madam, it flies at all, when it is loose, without any distinction of
Persons; and where it lays hold, it worryes.


Enter Single. Iulia. O terrible! -- But look'ee; The Gentleman's come at last.
-- What? Am I grown so out of Credit with you, that when I send my mind by a
person so worthy of belief, as Sir Arthur Addel, both my Message, and Messenger
are to be slighted?


Single. Madam, in common Justice no man is allowed for good Evidence, when he
speaks in his own Cause.


Sir Arth. apart to Iulia. Take him up short: Don't let him show his Wit: He
has a smooth Tongue of his own, and will draw you in.


Iulia. I Am come to see, whether I at least may obtain the favor of your
belief.


Single. I hope, I shall have no cause given me to think you untrue; and then I
must believe you.


Sir Arthur. O Madam; you give him too much head --


[Apart to Julia. Iulia. Know then, that Sir Arthur was a person sent, and
authorized by me; and all that he told you, is true concerning your Better, and
his Admission.


Roger. O, well said, sweet young Lady! How my Master's heart will be
overjoyed at it!


Sir Arthur. Is it I that am to be blamed now? --


[Apart to Single. Single. Madam, I submit: For there is no Appeal for him, whom
you condemn.


Sir Arthur. I say still, Have a care of him --


[Apart to Julia. Iulia. Come, Sir; stand before me. What Woman can do less,
that looks upon Sir Arthur Addel, then yield her self up to so fair an Estate,
so comely a Person, such a graceful carriage, so excellent a Wit, such modesty
in using it, such invincible Courage --


Sir Arthur. O Madam, such truths are not to be spoke before my face.


Roger. I Am glad she likes him so well: But did she know all.


[apart. Iulia. Now, Sir; What have you to say in your own behalf, to
counter-ballance the perfections of such a Competitour?


Single. Madam, I am nothing, but what you please to make me.


Iulia. I would make you understand your self and me; and that I am a person
worthy of belief: nor shall all the perswasisions of the World ever seduce me
from a well taken resolution.


Roger. You say right, Madam; especially when your Father directs, and commands
it.


Iulia. Especially, when my Father provides a Person every way so qualified for
a Husband, as the famous Sir Arthur Addel.


Sir Arth. I vow, Madam, you ravish me. Shall we be Married to night?


[Apart to Julia. Single. How ambiguous she is? Was ever man so parted in two
between Happiness, and Misery? --


[Apart. Iulia. To hold you all no longer in suspense, know, that I have now
before my eyes the Objects both of my Scorn, and my Esteem: The one by a just
title of desert has possession of my Heart; The other by his bold and rude
Addresses, has raised a just Aversion in me, and contempt of his person. After
this Declaration let me see, which is that impudent Man, who dares continue in
my presence?


[ Exit Single. Sir Arth. I, let him go: His guilty Conscience makes him fly --
But Madam, you forgot your promise of binding him to the Peace: He Is a
troublesome unruly Fellow.


Iulia. O, call him again.


Sir Arth. Mr. Single, Mr. Single; The Lady has something more to say to you --
I protest, Sir, this is all her own doing; I had not the least hand in it: you
must not be angry with me.


[Apart to Single. Iulia. I have also this command for him of you too, whom I
love, that he shall not make the Pretensions of his Rival, any ground of a
difference or quarrel.


Sir Arth. Madam, your Commands shall bind my hands: Though Rivalship be a hard
thing to digest.


Iulia. Mr. Single, You Have now your liberty to retire.


Roger. And, pray Sir, let us see you here no more: It is my old Master's
express command as well as my young Mistresse's here.


[ Exit Single. Sir Arth. If he comes again, your Order, Madam, for a Cessation
of Arms must cease, become void, and of no effect.


Iulia. I hope, Sir Arthur, he will be so discreet, as not to put you upon
desperate courses: But, should the worst happen, it is but unchaining your Masty
Dog.


Sir Arthur. If he makes me do so, he shall even answer himself for all the
Mischief that is done.


Iulia. And so he may, without holding up his hand at the Bar. But, Sir
Arthur, the freshness of the Evening warnes me to retire: I know, you will Gallant
me to my Lodging.


Sir Arth. O yes, Madam -- Poor thing! she cannot live a moment without me.


[Exeunt omnes. Enter Peregreen, and Woodlands Man in riding apparel. Pereg.
But, Art thou sure my Father will be here to night?


Servant. Yes, Sir. He comes in company with one Mr. -- ('Faith, Sir, I Have
forgot his name) a rich Merchant, newly arrived from the Indies: And, he sent
me before to find you out, that he might not fail to speak with you about some
very earnest business, as soon as he came to Town.


Pereg. What should this business be?


Servant. I believe, Sir, I can tell you something of it, by what I have
overheard.


Pereg. Prethy what is it?


Servant. Your Worship then must promise to keep my Counsel: otherwise I shall
gain a great deal of ill will with my old Master, first for over-hearing, and
then revealing his private Discourses.


Pereg. Take my word for thy Security.


Servant. That I will for all I Am worth: And, to tell you truly, Sir, I did
even long to be the first, that should bring you this good News.


Pereg. Good News? Of what?


Servant. Of being Married out of hand to a young Lady, who, (they say) is
vastly rich, and hugely handsome.


Pereg. And do thou call this good News? I had rather thou had told me,
That to Morrow I must have gone to Goal, nay more, to Execution; For in one, a
man may hope to be releast from Misery, and the other is an end of it: But, to
be Married so soon, and having newly tasted Liberty, to have it snatched away
from me for ever, is more then I can suffer. No: My Father must excuse me; All
other things he may do of himself without me; but, Marriage is a Work, which I
must do, not he.


Servant. I hope, Sir, you are not in earnest; For, by all that I can perceive,
my Master's heart is so set upon this business --


Enter Single. Pereg. Well, well; You may go rest your self after your Journey.


Servant. But, Where shall I find you, Sir, when your Father's come?


Pereg. Either here, or under the Arches in Covent Garden. [ Exit Servant. Dear
Single, Fortune has at last decreed, as we are joined in Friendship, to join us
in Adversity.


Single. What Is the matter?


Pereg. I have told you many passages of Love between Betty and me; But, I
never fully confessed to you, how deep the impression was she has made upon my
heart. Ah Single! she is the very same thing in every respect to me, that the
fair Iulia is to you.


Single. If this declaration of Love be in earnest, I doubt you are past the Cure
of Reason: Otherwise, I should endeavor to dissuade my dear Peregreen from a
Passion (if it tend to Marriage) every way so unequal to him.


Pereg. Ar't thou a Lover thy self, and, Can thou talk of inequality in
Love.


Single. I Have done; You shall hear no more from me: But, pray, give me leave to
be sorry.


Pereg. You misplace your Sorrow; It Is not here that I want it: But, what I now
shall tell you, will too justly deserve the compassion of a Friend. Whilst my
Affections are thus unalterably preingag'd, just now my Father comes to Town
with a positive determination (as I Am informed) of matching me to one of his
own providing, whose Person, and Fortune (they say) are such, as to render my
disobedience to him unexcusable in the Eyes of the World. Judge then in what
condition I am: Uncertain of my Love; for, she is in the hands of my Enemy, her
Jailer Evans; And only certain of my Father's just indignation.


Single. Methinks, your Passion for Betty in so short a time should not have
taken such deep roots, but that another might be planted in the room on it,
when a Fortune is offered by your Father, so much above her in quality and
Estate, and perhaps not inferior in Beauty.


Pereg. Deal more justly with a Friend: Is it in your power not to love Iulia?
Nor is it more in mine to relinquish Betty. No; whatever befalls me; I Am
resolved this very night to get her into my possession, and then Marry her:
Which being done, I shall endeavor to obtain my Fathers Pardon, for what I
could not gain his Consent.


Single. Well, Sir; since I cannot serve you with my Counsel, at least I offer
you my Person, to assist you in the execution of your design.


Pereg. No (dear Single;) I know your own occasions of a like nature require
your whole attendance: Besides, I look upon your Father, as a more proper
Instrument for me in this Work. He Is already acquainted with it; and has
promised secrecy; and his Person (being a Man of years) appearing at Bettys
Lodging, will be less subject to the suspicion of old Evans. Moreover, by
employing him, I hope to get a sight of his intended Bride; For, in all my own
Distractions, I cannot be unmindfull of your Concerns.


Single. Your Generosity may teach the World new Lessons of Friendship, whilst
even in your own Distress you continue such care for me: Thanks to my Stars, my
heart is now at some ease concerning Iulia's constancy: I confess, she frighted
me at first with that very Vizard, which I bid her put on; But since, through
that Disguise, she has artificially cast such beams of Comfort on me, as have
revived my drooping Spirits.


Pereg. May Fortune continue her smiles upon you. Farewell; I must to your
Father about my business.


Single. And I must find out Sir Arthur, to renew a strict League of Amity with
him. May we both prosper!


[ Exeunt Peregreen and Single. Enter Sir Solomon, and Mrs. Betty. Sir Salom.
Betty, Have you said your Prayers to day?


Betty. O yes, Sir.


Sir Salom. And, Do You know what it is to die?


Betty. To die? I remember I saw one of my Nurses Daughters die in the Country.


Sir Salom. And, How did you like it?


Betty. O, very ill: She was a pretty Girl before; but, when she was dead, I
was afraid to look upon her.


Sir Salom. Betty, you must die; and die presently.


Betty. No sure, Sir; For I Am as well, as ever I was in my life.


Sir Salom. How unconcernedly she answers? -- apart. -- I say again, within
this quarter of an hour you must die.


Betty. Indeed, Sir, you fright me; and yet I cannot see any danger of death.


Sir Salom. Wicked Girl! Look upon thy Treason against thy Lord, and Master;
thy Ingratitude to thy Benefactor; thy falseness to him, that must be thy
Husband: Remember the Letter thou drop'st to day in the Street; and then look
upon me, and tell me, Do thou see no danger of death? -- What, Are you dumb?
-- Why don't you answer? you cannot speak to me; but you can write to your lewd
Gallant?


Betty. You put me in such a fright, that I am not able to speak.


Sir Salom. Hussee, you were not afraid to break my Commands, to betray me, to
be strumpeted by a wild young Fellow: In all Mischief you are bold enough; but,
when you are to hear your faults, and to answer for your Crimes, then your
Fears come upon you!


Betty. I cannot speak for my life, when you look so terribly upon me: look but
as you use to do, and I Will answer you any thing.


Sir Salom. How in spite of my teeth she breaks the force of my Anger, and
disarmes it with her softness! -- Tell me then, Why did you write that Letter,
after I had forbid you all Communication with him?


Betty. I writ it, because it goes against my Nature to hurt any body; And,
since you would needs have me throw that great Stone at him, I could not choose
but let him know, I did it against my will.


Sir Salom. O, how tender you are in hurting him! whilst at the same time you
make nothink of breaking my heart, destroying my happiness, ruining my
Reputation, who have been a Nurse, a Father, and would have been a Husband to
thee.


Betty. Indeed I Am beholding to you for your care of me; And, when I Am able,
I Will satisfy you for it.


Sir Salom. Satisfy me? How the Gipsy word's it! How can thou satisfy me
for all the good I have done to thee, and all the mischief thou have done to me?


Betty. God forbid I should do you any mischief: I know of none I have done you.


Sir Salom. What Devil has taught thee to sin thus without Remorse? Thy
Ignorance cannot excuse thee: For, Have I not daily instructed thee for two
years together in thy Obedience, and duty of a Wife? Have I not hourly
inculcated into thee, That thou ought not so much as to look upon a young
Man; and that thou were born and made to no other end, but to love me?


Betty. Truly, Sir, I love you as well as I can: And, if I love you no better,
it is not my fault; you should make your self more lovely.


Sir Salom. How innocently she stabb's me with her [apart. Answers! No, Gipsy;
you can love well enough when you have a mind to it, and where you should not: You
can Love an impudent Ravisher, who comes to defloure thee, and leave thee a
forlorn, prostituted thing, abandoned to Beggary, and Shame; Him thou can
love: But me, who have raised thee from nothing, bred thee as my Child, made
thee Mistress both of my Heart and Fortune; me thou can not love: I
(forsooth) must make my self more Lovely.


Betty. What would you have me do? I Will do any thing I can, to give you content.


Sir Salom. Then I command you to renounce all manner of kindness to this bold
Assaulter of your Honor, and mine, and never more to see him, nor so much as
think upon him.


Betty. That Is impossible for me to do: For, now I know him, I must love him,
and see him too, when I may.


Sir Salom. O impudence! to tell me this to my face? Had she been bred in the
most famous Schools of Iniquity? Had she been Prentice all her life to the
ablest She-Professors of the Trade? Could she have owned her Transgression with
a more daring Confidence? Since thou art so impenitent, and hardened in thy Sin,
expect no Mercy -- Behold this. [He draws his Sword. Art thou not afraid of my
Anger? I hope, now thou art to die, thou wilt repent thee of thy Sins; and (above
all) of thy abominable Love of this wicked Man who has so bewitched thee.


Betty. Sure you will not kill me: But, if you should, I must not leave the World
with a Lie in my Mouth, and say, I don't Love this young Man: For indeed I
cannot choose but love him. And, I think, it is no Sin, when I cannot help it.


Sir Salom. How she argues the Case! Where has she learned this Cunning, and
this undauntedness? Ah! she holds intelligence with my heart, and knows the
power she has there, which grows stronger and stronger upon me, in spite of
all her neglect to me, and Love to my Rival -- Here, Betty; Do you take this
Sword: Take it, and kill me. For all the care I have had of thee, for all that
I have done, and meant to do for thee (since thou will not love me) I ask thee
no other reward.


Betty. Indeed, Sir, I would not kill you, though 'twere to save my own life:
And I Will endeavor to love you as well as ever I can.


Sir Salom. Nay, unless you will love me better then that young Man, I must die.


Betty. No, pray don't: What are you the worse, because I love him? You shant
lose a Farthing by it. To content you, I should be glad with all my heart I had
never seen him, and did not love him: But, now it is done, who can help it?


Sir Salom. How immovable she is! Neither Threats, nor Kindness work upon her.
Well, Marry her I will; and take my venture -- Betty, notwithstanding all your
unkindness, I Will be as good as my word, and Marry you.


Betty. Marry me? To whom?


Sir Salom. Ah, cruel Girl! Why do thou stab me with such a question? Love
me, or love me not, I Will be your Husband to morrow.


Betty. Indeed, Sir, that is very short warning.


Sir Salom. No more words: I Will have it so. When thou see the Bravery, and
fine things I Have prepared for thee, thou wilt be of a better mind.


Betty. If it must be so, I cannot help it.


Sir Salom. Come, get you in; and pray to Heaven, that thou may be sensible
of the happiness I intend thee.


[ Exit Betty. Sir Solomon goes off the Stage the other way, and at the Door
meets Peregreen coming in. Enter Peregreen. Pereg. Sir Solomon, I have been in
despair for want of seeing you; For you are my good Angel --


Sir Salom. And you my Devil --


[Apart. Pereg. That must direct and assist me, and crown all your past favors
with the most important kindness that I am capable of receiving.


Sir Salom. What is it, Sir?


Pereg. Only to deliver this Letter safely to my Betty: On her receipt of it
depends no less, then the happiness of my life. I dare not approach the House
my self by daylight, because the Servants know me, who are now turned of old
Evans his Party: Nor can I put my concerns in such trusty hands as yours.


Sir Salom. Does it require haste in the delivery?


Pereg. O, by all means: The Lodging is close by; It Is a Corner House, with a
Belcony, that looks into the Fields here, next to Swan-Ally: You may see the
House from hence. Now, Sir, the way to deliver it, that neither old Evans, nor
his Houshold-Spies may see it, is to tie it to something, and then toss it up
into the Belcony: By the manner of the conveyance Betty will presently know
whence it comes, and how to behave her self: And, this is the proper time of
doing it; For, at this hour she always comes out in the Belcony, to take a
little fresh Air of the Evening; It being all the liberty allowed her by her
Jailer.


Sir Salom. Well, Sir; This is all.


Pereg. It imports me likewise, that you should know the business. My passion
for Betty is now come to that height, that I Am resolved instantly to Marry her.
But (most unfortunately to my Designs) my Father comes this night to Town; and
with a resolution (as I am certainly informed) to strike up a Bargain of
Marriage for me of his own driving. In these Streights I have no expedient left
to prevent his purpose, and execute my own, but to get possession of Betty, and
Marry her out of hand. Though my Fathers present dissatisfaction may be great,
yet, I hope, time will mollify him; And I doubt not but your good Offices will
much contribute toward it.


Sir Salom. You may be sure of me. But, when do you purpose to get possession of
your Mistress?


Pereg. This very Night, as soon as it is dark; for, by that time Evans always
retires to his own quarters.


Sir Salom. But, What place of security have you to lodge her in, when you have
brought her off?


Pereg. There lies my greatest difficulty; And, were it not too bold a
Petition, I should think no place so safe and honorable for her reception, as
your house, only for a day or two, till I Have made her my Wife: But, Sir, I have
trespassed already too far upon your generosity, and dare transgress no
farther.


Sir Salom. O Sir, your modesty does me wrong. To mistrust the kindness of a
Friend, is the greatest sin in Friendship. Bring her when you will, you shall
find, that my House is her Home.


Pereg. You surpass all Men living in the noble Art of obliging a Friend. But
upon reflection, since you are to be Married your self to morrow, I fear her
coming at such a time may prove unseasonable.


Sir Salom. So far from it, that I Am resolved not to be Married without her.


Pereg. You are generous to that excess, that you leave me not a possibility of
being grateful. And now, Sir, I have nothing more to beg of you, but the
Honor of kissing your Ladies hands before her Marriage; that I may obtain an
early place in her favor, by letting her know what my Obligations are to you.


Sir Salom. Matters of Complement and Curiosity require no haste: But, since
you so much desire it, I give you my word, That, when you bring Mrs. Betty to
me, you shall then see my Wife.


Pereg. You make me happy every way, except in this, that I owe you more then I
am worth; And am forced, like other Banckrupts, to compound my Debts, begging
you to accept those small Services I can pay, in lieu of the vast Sum that is
due.


Sir Salom. O, Sir, you mistake in the Account between us: I am yet in your
Arrears, which I shall endeavor to discharge out of hand, by serving you in
this business concerning Mrs. Betty, as I ought.


Pereg. Dear Sir Solomon, Farewell; And good luck attend you.

[ Exit Peregreen.
Sir Salom. Doubt not, young Man, I Will serve you as I ought;
As Men serve Vermin, that in Traps are caught.

[Exit Sir Solomon. The Fifth Act.
Enter Sir Solomon, and Timothy. Timothy. WHat? Kick your Steward? The Supreme
Head of the Family under your Worship? It Is such an Affront done to my Office,
as I cannot in honor put up: Therefore, as I said before, here are my Keys,
and here are my Accounts; and so I take my leave.


Sir Salom. Nay, prethy, Timothy, be pacified: Good-natured Men (thou know)
are subject to Passion.


Timot. But Stewards, Sir, are not subject to be kick't. Show me but one
President for it amongst all those of my Profession, and I Will be bound to be
your Worships Football as long as I live.


Sir Salom. Indeed the Case is extraordinary; And so was the Cause; and so
shall the Satisfaction be: For, Timothy, I Will give thee in amends a Childs
Life in thy Copyhold.


Timot. Well, Sir; since it is your seeking, I accept of the Reparation -- Sir,
I have two or three Children more yet unprovided for; if your Worship will be
pleased to kick them into Livings too, I stand ready to have their Fines laid
upon me.


Sir Salom. So, so; I Am glad wee're friends again. Now call in my Family; For,
I have something of consequence, which I must propound to you Tim. whistles,
and the Servants enter. all. Come forwards: If any body here thinks his Work
too much, or his Wages too little, or his Lodging and Fare too hard; Timothy, I
order you to give him all reasonable satisfaction.


All. God bless your Worship.


Sir Salom. And I doubt not on your parts, but you are all ready to serve my
Person, and vindicate my Honor, as occasion shall require.


All. Our Lives are at your Service.


Sir Salom. Know then, that this very moment I am actually assaulted by an
insolent young Fellow, who, to night Plots no less Mischief, then to Ravish my
Bride.


Timot. What manner of death would your Worship have him die?


Sir Salom. No; let not his Punishment be Capital, nor Sanguinary; but load
him with as many Blows, and as much Infamy, as you can.


Timot. Show us but the Man, and your Worship shall see, that we are as able to
serve you in chastising your Enemies, as entertaining your Friends.


Enter Mr. Woodland's Servant. W. Serve. Pray, Gentlemen, can you direct me to
the Lodging of Sir Solomon Single?


Timot. Friend, there is Sir Solomon himself.


W. Serve. Squire Woodland, my Master, commanded me to let you know, that he is
newly come to Town upon some business, in which your Worship is concerned; and
desires, he may speak with you before you go to bed.


Sir Salom. Friend, tell thy Master, that, if I can possibly, I Will wait upon
him: Where Is his Lodging?


W. Serve. At a Barbers, next door to the Fleece-Tavern in
Southampton-Buildings.


Sir Salom. Very well -- apart -- In what a seasonable hour this old Man's come
to Town, to see the Iniquity of his Son chastis'd? However, my person shall not
appear upon the Stage in this Tragedy; I Will only prompt behind the Curtain.


[Exeunt Sir Solomon and his Servants. W. Serve. Where shall I find my young
Master now, the Lord knows. This was one of the places he appointed --


Enter Single, and Peregreen looking upon his Watch. Pereg. The time draws
near; yet, did thou know (Single) with what panting expectation I long to be
possessed of my Treasure, thou would pity the Torment, which each Moment brings
me, by interposing it self between me and my Happiness.


W. Serve. O, Sir; well met! My old Master's newly come to Town, and by all
means must speak with you instantly.


Pereg. Peace, Screech-Owl! I think that Fellow was born to bring me ill News.


W. Serve. In troth, Sir, I think so too: For, if to Marry a rich handsome Lady,
and to see your Father after so long an absence, be ill News, I Am sure I can
bring you none that is good.


Pereg. Ah, Single! What shall I do? I must not disappoint Betty; and I should
not neglect my Father.


Single. None can tell you better, then I, what the danger is of disgusting a
Father, though innocently: And yet I Am too much a Lover my self to advise a
breach of promise with your Mistress. To satisfy both, you must deferr your
going to Betty for an hour, or thereabouts. Your Father must needs be weary
after his Journey; and cannot hold you long: And, that she may not think her
self disappointed by you, write a note to her, to let her know the occasion.


Pereg. But, Who shall deliver it?


Single. Had not I a private summons from Iulia to meet her just at this time,
I Would be your Man: But, you may send your Father's Servant there.


Pereg. Send him? He scarce knows the Town by day; much less by night.

Enter Sir Arthur Addell. What makes this Fool come to disturb us now?


Single. O, pray bear with him: By a special command from Iulia I am now
entered into a strict League of Amity with him. Faith, even send him with the
Note; and you will do me a particular kindness in it; for otherwise, he will stick
upon me like a Burr, and disappoint my meeting with Iulia.


Pereg. With all my heart.


Sir Arthur. Why, Gentleman, Where have you been? These two long hours I have
done nothing but hunt after you.


Single. Well, Sir, For what?


Sir Arth. Faith, I have made a discovery of the rarest Champaine-Wine in Town:
Prithee, let us go, and fill our Earthen Vessels with it;

For we are but brittle Clay,
Then let us he Merry whilst we may.

Single. O brave Arthur of Bradly! The Motion's good in it self, but not
seas'nable for us at this time; for, we have business, in which you must do a
Friends part.


Sir Arthur. Thou know (Man) I love Business: What is it? Quickly.


Single. Only to deliver a note for our Friend Peregreen here: But it is of high
Concern, for there is a Mistress in the Case; and therefore we choose a Man of
Ability for the Employment.


Sir Arthur. Come, give it me; I long to be in Action.


Pereg. You shall have it immediately.


[Peregreen writes. Sir Arthur. Faith. Single, never let us break good company*
Prethy, come along with me, when I deliver this Note.


Single. Could I have gone, you should not have had the trouble on it; But, I am
preingag'd.


Sir Arth. Prethy, Where?


Single. Why -- to tell you, as a Friend, I have an appointment just now to
receive a little Money; and, that is a business (you know) I must not neglect.


Sir Arthur. Hang Money: A Friends Company is better then it, at any time.


Single. Why, there is the difference between us two now: You have too much
Money, and want Company; and I have too much Company, and want Money.


Pereg. Well, Gentlemen, I have done. Sir Arthur, Have you a Watch about you?


Sir Arth. No, Sir, not I.


Pereg. Here, take mine; and precisely at half an hour past eight, deliver this
Note to a young Lady at the Corner house that has a Belcony, which looks into
Holborn-Fields, next to Swan-Ally.


Sir Arth. I know the place.


Pereg. But you must knock gently at the backdoor of the Garden, to'rds the
Fields; and, when she appears, give her the Note, and tell her, He who sent it,
will be with her about an hour hence, or sooner, if he can.


Sir Arth. Take no further care; your business shall be punctually done.


Pereg. You Are an obliging person, Sir Arthur -- Come, Harry; Now I am for my
Father.


[ Exit Pereg. and W. Servant. Sir Arth. But hark'ee, Mr. Single; Did not you
tell me, that this Peregreen was one of my Rivals? I vow now (upon better
consideration) Why should I do such a kindness for an Enemy? for ought that I
know, there may be some trick in it.


Single. It Is true, I did tell you, that he was then newly entered the List of
your Rivalls: But now (take my word for it) he is so far from it, that he is
engaged elsewhere: And this kindness which you are now to do for him, relates
to his new Amor.


Sir Arth. Nay, I Will take your word for it -- Enter Mr. Wary. O, Father-in-Law?


Single. Sir Arthur, farewell.


Sir Arth. God buy, Sir.


Wary. I Am glad I Have found you at last; for, I sent my Man all the Town over to
look you.


Sir Arth. And now you have me, What have you to say to me?


Wary. You must needs come away immediately with me to my Lawyers Chamber.


Sir Arth. Excuse me, Sir; I must not.


Wary. I have appointed a Meeting about the Marriage Writings, and both our
Counsel are already there.


Sir Arth. There let 'em wait; I Will pay 'em by the hour.


Wary. I thought, Sir, you had been more in haste, and more pressing in matters
that concern your affection to my Daughter.


Sir Arth. Nay, take it not ill, good Sir: your Daughter and I understand one
another very well; we don't stand upon such Punctillio's.


Wary. I am afraid, she understands you but too well.


[apart. Sir Arth. Let me see -- What a Clock is it now? Some half an hour
hence I can be there; till then Mr. Lawyer must have patience.


[He looks in the Watch. Wary. Well, Sir, if it must be so, then I Will go
before: But first, pray, Sir, let me give you a little good advice.


Sir Arth. You need not, Sir; we shall go to Counsel within this half hour.


Wary. It Is the Advice of a Friend, not of a Lawyer, that I would give you. I
perceive, that you are very much in the company of this Mr. Single, who, in my
judgment, is, for several respects, a person very unfit and dangerous for you
to converse with: First, he has a great deal of Wit, and no Means --


Sir Arth. Which is to say, I have a great deal of Means, and no Wit -- Go on,
Sir.


Wary. Not so neither. In the next place, he is, or has been your Rival to'rds
my Daughter: Now judge you, What Friendship you can expect from an indigent
Man, whom you have dispossessed of all hopes to raise his sunck Fortune?


Sir Arth. Hark'ee, Sir, You are Mrs. Iulia's Father, Are you not?


Wary. Yes, Sir. What makes you ask such a Question?


Sir Arth. It Is well you are: Otherwise I should be bold to tell you, That I Am
already provided of a wiser Governor then your Worship, by name, Sir Arthur
Addel. S'liddikins, I have lived to a fair Age, if every old Man must take upon
him to be my Tutour.


Wary. I Am sorry my good Will's lost upon you. However, pray fail not to come
according to your promise.

[ Exit Wary.
Sir Arth. No, no -- [He looks in the Watch. Gods so; whilst I have been
talking idely with this old Fellow, I have almost slipped the time of my business
-- Where shall I find this Lodging now? -- I was but an Ass (to say the truth)
for undertaking this Owle-light employment -- How dark it is grown all of a
sudden? -- Let me see; This must be the House. Sir Arthur knocks, and Sir
Salomon's Men rush forth, and lay hold of him. Enter Timothy and Servants. Oh!
oh!


Tim* Suffer patiently; you had best: If you make a Noise, you die for it.


Sir Arth. Quickly, quickly; pray take my Money and my Clothes, and use me
gently.


Tim. If he speaks one word more, cut his Throat -- No, Sir; your Punishment
must not be Pecuniary, but Corporal: your Crime is Letchery; and, the Body must
suffer for the Sins of the Flesh.


Sir Arth. Murder! murder! murder!


[They beat him. He sprawles like a dying Man, and then streches out as dead.
Tim. What? Is he dead?


1. Serve. Some unlucky blow has hit him under the Ear.


2. Serve. 'Pox take him for a Chicken-hearted Fellow, to die so soon.


Tim. Unfortunate men that we are! What will become of us?


3. Serve. The Gallows take the bindmost, I cry.


The Third Man runs away, and all the rest follow. Ralph peeps out of Mrs.
Bettys Lodgings twice, or thrice, Sir Solomon comes forth. Sir Salom. What Is
the Matter? -- The Rogues have undone me by thus over-doing their Work! This
will cover me with shame, and infamy, and bring in question my Life, and
Estate! What shall I do? Whither shall I fly -- I hear the noise of Justice --


[Sir Salom. flies away. Enter the Constable and Watch. 1. Watchman. I Am sure
I heard a cry of Murder -- Look Neighbor, here has been Mischief done. The Man
is dead.


2. Watchman. Come, let us carry him off.


Constable. No, no; let us first call the Coroner; It Is dangerous meddling, till
he has sat upon the dead Body; after that, he may be buried out of the way.


[ Exeunt Constable and Watch. Sir Arthur looks up. Sir Arth. How? Carry me
off, and Bury me, said they? I Will shew' em a trick worth two on it. He run's to
the end of the Stage, and then turus back. It Is better dying of ones own
accord, as I have done, then by compulsion of others, as I must have done.

[Exit Sir Arthur.
Ralph peeps first, and then enters. Ralph. What? all run away? And the dead
Man too? Then I Will 'een run too for Company.


[ Ralph runs away. Enter Betty, with a Basket in her hand, and Allice. Betty.
What was this Noise, and outcry, which we heard? Pray God there be no hurt
done.


Allice. Yes, but there is hurt done; For, I heard 'em say, he was killed?


Betty. Killed? Tell me quickly, Who Is killed?


Allice. As long as you are alive, What need you trouble your self?


Betty. Thou naughty Wench; I could find in my heart to beat thee: I'ell me, I
say, Who was killed?


Allice. I did not see him; but, I believe, it is the young Man that used to
come hither, by what I could over-hear.


Betty. Where are the Rogues that did it? I Will kill 'em with my own hands; or,
if I cannot, I Will kill my self. Help me, Allice, to find them out.


Allice. Nay, Pray Mistress, have patience.


Betty. I will not have patience: I Will either be revenged on them, or on her,
for whose sake he was killed.


Allice. Why Mistress; now I think on it, if any body had been killed, we
should have seen him lie here: but, here is no sign of any hurt done.


Enter Peregreen. Betty. Who's there?


Allice. O, Mistress, run away: here are more of the Rogues.


Betty. Thou Coward! I Will at 'em, and fly in their Faces.


Pereg. What? Betty?


Betty. Is It you?


Allice. I Mistress; it is 'een he, whom you thought to be dead.


Betty. O Lord! I was afraid, you had been killed.


Pereg. No, dear Betty; I was only hindered from coming at my hour; And I sent
thee word on it -- But this is no place for us to stand talking in. Come, Betty;
now I have thee in my possession, I Will put thee in a safe place, far enough
out of the reach of thy Jailer Evans.


Betty. But, Will you Marry me?


Pereg. Ah Betty! Why art thou so cruel, as to make a doubt on it? I Will rather
die, then not Marry thee -- What have thou in thy hand there? give me thy
Basket; it troubles thee to carry it.


Betty. Then (pray) have a great care on it, and let it not go out of your
hands; for, there is a VVriting in it, which I Am told, is worth me a great deal.


Pereg. I warrant you; I Will not part from't. Enter Sir Solomon Mufled up in his
Cloak. Whose that? -- Sir Solomon? -- Most fortunately met, to relieve me in
distress! Here, Sir, I have now my Jewel to consign into your hands; Pray have
a care of her, as of my Life. I broke away with violence from my Father to look
after this Treasure: But, I Am obliged to return immediately to him. Pray, lose
no time; but lodge her safely in your House: For, I apprehend the pursuit of
old Evans. Within this hour I hope to be with you. Dear Betty, for a little
while farewell.


Betty. What? Will you leave me so soon?


Pereg. I Will be with thee again immediately: In the mean time I leave thee in a
Friends hands, who will have the same care of thee that I have.

[ Exit Peregreen.
Sir Salom. Gipsy, Do You know me? [Betty skreeks. Keep in your shrill Notes; or
I shall stop your VVind-pipe for you. What? Did your Gallant lie stretched out
upon the floor like a Fox, to run away with the Poultry? Once more I have thee
in my hands: Let him snap thee again, and I Will forgive him, and thee too --
Come away, quickly, you had best.


[Exit Betty, and Sir Solomon into his own Lodging. Enter the Constable and
Watch with Sir Arthur in Custody. Constable. Hold your self contented; We Will
not part with you so: You Are a very suspicious Person; for immediately after the
Fact committed, we found you running away.


Sir Arth. Pray, Mr. Constable, believe me; Indeed I Am an honest Man.


Constable. Clear your self before the Justice, and I Am satisfied: But, thither
you must.


Sir Arth. Am not I finely served? Now shall I be hanged for killing my self.


2. Watchman. Neighbor, the Rogues, since we were here, have carried away the
Body.


Sir Arth. Friend, you are mistaken; The Body carried away it self.


2. Watchman. How the Man talks? Sure he is Mad.


3. Watchman. I, Neighbor, they that shed Man's Blood are commonly so: It Is a
Judgment upon Murderers.


1. Watchman. To what Justice shall we carry him, Mr. Constable?


Constable. To Justice Wary; He Is nighest at hand.


2. Watchman. I, he is as like to get him hanged, as any Justice upon the Bench.


Sir Arth. Why, Mr. Constable; What do you mean to do? Upon my reputation I am
the Man that was killed.


1. Watchman. Away, away with him; he is raving mad: Derick must be his Doctor.


2. Watchman. This is the Justice his House.


Constable. Knock then.


Enter a Servant of Mr. VVary's. Serve. What would you have?


Constable. We have apprehended a Man here upon suspicion of Murder; and we
have brought him to be Examined and Committed by his Worship.


Serve. That Is well: I Will call my Master instantly; He Is but a little way off,
at Grey's-Inn.


Constable. Pray make haste.


Sir Arth. Friend, friend; it is I: Don't you know me?


Serve. I know no body, when he is in the hands of Justice. My Master shall be
here strait.

[ Exit Servant.
Enter Single and Julia at the Corner of the Stage. Iulia. I did certainly hear
Sir Arthur Addell's voice. Look, where my Knight is in the Constables clutches!
Slip you away, whilst I go see, what the meaning is of this Tragy-Comedy. [
Exit Single. Well, Mr. Constable; Who is it, that you have brought hither to my
Father?


Constable. Madam, A very wicked Man, without doubt: For, here was Murder committed
close by; and, presently after we caught him flying away, with as guilty a
Countenance as ever I saw: and yet I have seen many in my time.


Iulia. A very shrewd presumption indeed.


Sir Arth. But, Madam, Don't you know me? All this while it is I, your Husband
that must be, whom these Rogues abuse thus.


Iulia. I Am the sorrier for it, Sir Arthur; that a Man of your Quality should
run himself into such Enormities: I thought, you had not been so bloody. And
yet, it is no more then what your self have confessed formerly to me; that, when
your Courage is let loose, like a fierce Mastiff-Dog, it falls upon all that
comes in it is way.


Sir Arth. Nay, but pray, Madam, hear me: Will you mistake the Matter too, like
these Clod-pated Rascals here? I am the very Man, on whose Person all this
Murder was committed; for I was set upon by Rogues, that would have killed me,
but that I prevented 'em --


Iulia. How? By killing 'em?


Sir Arth. No, no, Madam; by dying my self; or at least making them believe so:
At which the Rogues took such a fright for fear of hanging, that away run they;
and away went I: Then come the Clutches of the Parish here, and, according to
their usual Custom, seize me, who was the Person assaulted, and suffer the
Rogues to make their escape.


Constable. A very pretty story indeed! No, no; Mr. Justice, when he comes,
will not be fob'd off so.


Iulia. In troth, Sir Arthur, it is so intricate a Case, that I can determine
nothing in it, till my Fther comes.


Sir Arth. Good Madam, make the Slaves release me: I would not for a World be
seen in their Company by your Father.


Iulia. I vow, Sir, I dare not entrench upon my Fathers Authority: You Are now in
the hands of the Law; and that must either, quit you, or condemn you --
Neighbors, you had best bring your Prisoner within doors till my Father comes.


Constable. Yes, Madam. Jogge on, Sir.


Sir Arth. Ill-natur'd-woman! I Will pay all thy Scores, when once thou art my
Wife.


[Exit Sir, Arthur, Julia, and the Watch. Enter Peregreen and Single. Pereg. Ah
Single! What shall I do? Whilst I Am happy in the possession of my Mistress,
my Father is so violently bent upon this Match of his own providing, that to
oppose him openly in it, would certainly cause as wide a breach in our Family,
as is already (unfortunately) in yours. His impatience is such, that he will
needs have me see her to night; to which end he tells me, She will immediately
be brought to his Lodging. All, I can hope in this business, is, when I see
this young Lady, to let her know my former engagement; (that if she be
generous) the Treaty may seem to break of her side.


Enter Allice running in. Single. It Is your only expedient, as the Case stands.


Allice. O, Sir; my Mistress Betty is stark staring mad: If I had not hindered
her, she had thrown her self out at Window; Nor could I have held her hands
from doing her self a Mischief, but that I promised her to find you out, and
let you know, in what condition she is.


Pereg. For Heaven's sake, What Is the matter?


Allice. She says, you are the falsest Man living, to betray her thus, and quite
undo her for no other fault, but loving you too much.


Pereg. Thy words are so many Daggers to my heart! What cause can there be for
this?


Allice. O Sir, after she had put her self into your hands, why would you
deliver her up again to Mr. Evans? who now watches her, as a Cat does a Mouse:
Sometimes he threatens her, and sometimes he flatters her; and all will not do;
for, she is ready to fly in his Face, and bids him kill her; and says, that she
hates him for his own sake, and all Mankind for yours.


Pereg. I am all horror, and amazement! But, this cannot be; for, I put her
into the hands of your Father, Sir Solomon Single.


Allice. Why so our Master Evans is now called at the New House where we are.
He has changed his Name.


Pereg. Changed his Name? Are Sir Solomon and Mr. Evans the same Person?


Allice. Too sure.


Pereg. I Am lost, undone, ruined for ever! How fatally blind have I been? and
now my Eyes are opened to see nothing, but a vast Abisse of despair! --


Allice. But, What shall I say to her? for I dare not stay any longer: I
venter'd as much as my life is worth, in coming out now.


Pereg. Tell her, Allice, That I Will claim her, as my Wife; and that I will not
live a day to an end without being possessed of her.


Allice. See you be as good as your word.

[ Exit Allice.
Pereg. Now help me in this extremity! What shall I do? How shall I keep my
word?


Single. I confess, my reason at first was dazzled with the surprise of such a
mistake: But upon reflection, since your Mistress has the Courage of resist
Marrying my Father, the worst, that can happen in this matter, is Delay.


Pereg. That Is too much for a Lover. But alas! I row against Wind, and Tide,
and the double opposition of both our Fathers.


Single. There being a Promise of Marriage between you and Betty, you have the Law
of your side against my Father; and, with your own, I hope, Nature will be your
Friend. But, you told me of a certain Writing, which Mrs. Betty gave you to
keep: Have you looked upon it? Perhaps you may find something in it that may be
useful to you in this present conjuncture.


Pereg. Alas; I Have had no time to look upon it. Here it is.


[He takes it out. Enter Sir Solomon, and Mr. Woodland discoursing. Single.
Forbear. Both our Fathers are here.


Sir Salom. Whatever you do, Sir, maintain the Authority of a Father; And,
since you have provided so considerable a Match for him, make sure whilst you
may.


Woodl. How you much for your Friendly advice; which I intent to follow; And,
in order thereunto, I have now desired this conference with you.


Pereg. See, how he still labors to destroy me!


[To Single apart. Woodl. O Son; Are you there? It Is very well. Your Mistress
will be here presently.


Sir Salom. But Sir, have a care, that ill Company seduce him not from his
Obedience: They Will put a thousand Flams in his head.


[Sir Solomon whispers to Woodland. Single. Faith, Peregreen, I must take pity
of my Father, and remove: For, I Am too great an eyesore to him. I must needs
see what is become of Sir Arthur, whom I left in a pleasant posture, attended by
the Constable, and the Watch. But I Will be back immediately.

[ Exit Single.
Whilst Sir Solomon and Mr. Woodland conferr together, Peregreen reads the
Writing. Mr. Woodl. I protest, Sir, I Am sorry to hear you are so unfortunate in
your Son, of whom, in other respects, I Have heard a very good Character given.


Sir Salom. It Is as I tell you; Therefore have a care of yours --


[They whisper on. Enter Wary, Barter, and Servant. Wary. Go tell the
Constable, that, if he be in haste, he may bring his Prisoner hither; for I Am
engaged, and cannot come.


[ Exit Servant. Pereg. Ah Heaven! I did not want [Meaning the Writing. this
farther Evidence to let me see from what State of happiness I Am fallen into the
bottom of despair.


Wary. Mr. Barter, I must confess, that the health and prosperity of my Friend,
after so long a despair of his being alive, is the greatest joy of my life.


Barter. I owe much to Heaven in my preservation, and not a little to my
Friends for their concern in it: But, Sir, the favor I ask at present, is
this; I have a business of great importance with one Sir Solomon Single, a
person unknown to me: And, because you are my only acquaintance of Credit and
Note here in Town, I desire your presence and assistance in it.


Wary. You may command me -- Very fortunately there is the Party you wish for,
Sir Solomon Single.


Sir Salom. Therefore, Sir, be not delayed with Excuses, but dispatch it
instantly.


Woodl. Sir, I thank you; Your Counsel shall be followed.


Pereg. How he persecutes me to death!


[apart. Barter. Sir, though I Am a stranger to your Person, yet I suppose Mr.
Woodland may now have informed you of a match concluded between his Son and my
Daughter.


Sir Salom. Sir, he has informed me of a considerable Fortune, which his
Fatherly care has provided for his Son; for which I heartily give him joy; And
if your Daughter be the intended Bride, I give you the like; and shall take
this, as a happy rise to begin our acquaintance. Methinks, Gentlemen, matters
of so happy a Consequence can never be dispatched too soon: I see no reason why
the Wedding should not be to morrow.


Pereg. How implacable is his Rage!


Barter. Agreed.


Woodl. Agreed.


Barter. Then, Sir Solomon, there wants nothing to complete what you in so
friendly manner advise, and we so passionatly desire, but your concurrance: For
my Daughter, I understand, is in your Custody; who took her out of the Nurses
hands, with whom I left her before my Voyage into the Indies.


Sir Salom. Ha! What Is this?


[apart. Barter. When you received her, she might well appear to be an object
of your Charity; All my Friends at that time gave me for lost, in regard the
Ship, which transported me, foundred at Sea: And the several accidents of my
life since have hindered me from giving them an account of my safety. But, the
bounty of Heaven having now at last restored me to my Country, my Estate, and
my Child, I shall make you ample compensation for the charge of her Breeding,
with infinite thanks for your Care of her.


Pereg. Sir! let me fall down, and ask you the greatest blessing that Man can
receive! Is that Mrs. Betty, in the Custody of Sir Solomon; your Daughter? And
is it she, whom Heaven, and you have designed for my Wife?


Barter. The very same.


Sir Salom. Sir, the Story you tell, is no sufficient Evidence for me, to
relinquish that right of adoption, which I have in her.


Barter. For your fuller satisfaction here is the Nurse her self, who calls you
Landlord, from whose hands you received my Daughter -- Pray call her in.


[ Exit Servant. Sir Salom. However, she is already my Wife; And, as such, I Will
keep her.


Enter Timothy, and Ralph in haste. Timothy. The young Lady, Sir, in spite of
all our Vigilance, has made an escape in company of the Maid Servant that waits
on her: They leaped out at a lower window into the Street, and took their
flight this way.


Sir Salom. It Is in vain to struggle any longer against the Perverseness of
Fate!


[Apart. Enter Betty and Allice running. Betty to Peregreen. False, and
hard-hearted Man! Why would thou betray her, who did thee no hurt, and meant
thee so well? Here, satisfy thy Malice, and kill me thy self, rather then
deliver me over to be tormented by Mr. Evans.


Pereg. Ah, dear Betty! be not so cruel, to make a Crime of that Error which I
have smarted so deeply for. However, if by mistake I put thee into the hands of
thy Jailer (to make thee amends) I now (knowingly) restore thee to the embraces
of thy Father; That so by his gift I may confirm the Title of my love.


Betty. Is this my Father?


Enter Servant, and Nurse. Nurse. Pretty, sweet Mistress! How glad am I to see
you grown so proper a young Woman? God's blessing on my Landlords heart, Sir
Solomon there, for giving you such good keeping: And, Mistress, I hope, now
your Fathers Worship is come home again, he will provide a good Husband for you.


Betty. Art thou sure, Nurse, this my Father?


Nurse. I Am sure he told me so above a dozen years ago.


Betty. I do believe it; for methinks, at first sight I loved him better, then
ever I loved any old Man in my life. Pray, Sir, give me your Blessing.


Barter. Take it (my only Child) and with it this Gentleman for thy Husband;
who, I perceive, is no unwellcome Present to you.


Sir Salom. Heart, since thou needs must break, go, break alone, And rob'em of
the pleasure to look on.


Exit Sir Salom. and Tim. Ralph. Mistress, Mistress! As sure as can be, our
Master Evans is gone to die in a Corner, like a poisoned Rat behind the
Hangings.


Betty. Follow him, Ralph; and take care of him.


Ralph. No, I thank you, good Mistress. If he be gone to die, I Will 'een stay
with you: The living are better Company then the dead.


Enter Julia, Single, Sir Arthur, Constable and Watch. Constable. Gentlemen,
by'r leave; His Majesty's business must take place, and be first served. Is
Justice Wary here?


Wary. Well, Friend; What would you?


Constable. I Have brought a dangerous Person before your Worship upon suspicion
of Murder.


Wary. What? Sir Arthur? Is this the Equipage you Woo my Daughter in?


Sir Arth. If you don't punish these Rogues for abusing me thus, I Will have
nothing to do with the Daughter of a Justice as long as my name is Arthur.


Wary. I must punish no body for duly executing his Office. Let me hear the
Matter.


Constable. Upon an Outcry of Murder, we presently run to the place; where we
found a Man stretched all along, to our seeming dead: Presently after we met
this Sir Arthur (as he calls himself) running away at a very guilty rate.
Hereupon we seized him; and now your Worship may do with him as you think best.


Iulia. Pray, Sir, let me speak a good word for him: I dare swear, Sir Arthur
is not guilty of Murder.


Single. Meeting my Friend in distress, I could not choose but come, and offer
to be his Bail.


Wary. Not so fast -- This smells of a Trick -- What say you, Sir Arthur?


Sir Arthur. Why, I say, I was the Man, that was set upon, that cried Murder,
that lay dead, and now am apprehended for it.


Wary. And were you the Man that run away too after you were dead?


Sir Arthur. Yes, mary, was I; and so would you have done too, good Mr.
Justice, had you been in my place.


Wary. It may be so. Constable, you may release your Prisoner, and go home.


Sir Arthur. And, Is this all the satisfaction I shall have for the affront
done me?


Pereg. Pray, Sir, let me entreat you to do him all the right you can; for, by
some Circumstances in this matter, I have reason to fear, these sufferings have
befallen him upon my account.


Sir Arthur. Yes, marry, have they; a Pox oth' Employment you put me upon. If
ever I carry Love Letter more for you, or any man living, you shall write
Letters in my Forehead with a hot Iron.


Pereg. But, Did this Misfortune happen to you at the House, where I directed
you?


Sir Arthur. Just there, as if you had sent me for that very purpose. I had no
sooner knocked, but out fly four Men, or Devils (I cannot tell which) and having
told me, That my sin was Letchery, (which I vow now I did not know till then)
they tormented my Carcass at such a rate, as would have quickly mortified for
ever all concupiscence in me.


Pereg. Sir Arthur, I am bound in honor to be more then ordinary sensible of
your disaster; For I was not only the occasion of it (though innocently) but
all this Tempest, which fell upon you, was prepared and designed for me. And,
to show you my resentment of it, I have a Sister at home, a wholesome Country
Girl, whom, (with my Fathers leave) I here offer you for a Wife.


Sir Arth. Thank'ee heartily, Sir; No, I am very well provided already: Look'ee
here else.


[Pointing to Julia. Pereg. Pray, Sir, let me prevent your falling into farther
mistakes, which may prove dangerous to you; I can assure you, this Lady is no
Wife for you. She Is Town-bred, and after she is married must live in London,
which is a place in many respects very inconvenient for you. By the virtue of
strong Beer, and Fourteen hundred a year, you may do very well in the Country,
and pass for an honest substantial man amongst your Neighbors; and stand for
Burgess in the next Election.


Single. What can his meaning be in this?


[apart. Sir Arth. Pish, pish: Keep your good Counsel to your self, and your
Sister too. I cannot but wonder at the confidence of People; every body now a
days takes upon him to be my Governor.


Wary. Mr. Peregreen (methinks) you are very forward, and positive in ordering
matters, which concern you not. You Are to know, that a Treaty of Marriage is
already fixed between Sir Arthur and my Daughter; The Writings are actually
drawing: And will you, that are a Stranger, and not called to Counsel,
interpose in a Business of this Nature?


Pereg. Sir, when you know my reason for it, I hope I shall not deserve your
Censure. This Mr. Single, and your Daughter (to my certain knowledge) are
mutually engaged to one another; and there wants nothing but your consent to
make 'em both happy.


Wary. Yes, Faith, there wants an Estate too.


Pereg. It Is true; but, when that want's removed, your consent must follow.
Now, Sir, it has pleased Heaven to put the power in my hands of serving my
Friend on this important occasion. Behold an absolute Gift and Conveiance of
his Fathers Estate upon my Betty; Here, Sir, I give it you freely: And what in
Law shall be farther required for the Confirmation of it from Betty and me,
shall be done hereafter.


Single. I stand amazed at my own happiness! Nor can I determine, whether this
strange Revolution, or your Generosity, have more of Miracle in it.


Iulia to Wary. Now, Sir, give me leave to own an Engagement to this Gentleman,
which the fear of displeasing you has hitherto made me conceal.


Wary. I dare not resist the will of Heaven, which shows it self in the
wonderful turn of Affairs, which this day has produced. Daughter, enjoy your
Love; and my blessing go along with it.


Sir Arth. Now have I brought my Hogs to a fair Market: I take other men's
beatings upon my self, and they take my Mistress to themselves.


Pereg. Sir Arthur, you need not be unprovided, if you please, my Sister is
still at your service.


Sir Arthur. I vow I could find in my heart to Marry her out of spite: then
will I be revenged by Proxy; and make her bones feel, what mine have suffered
for you.


Pereg. For all this, I Will venture her Person, if you will venture yours.


Sir Arthur. Say you so? Faith if I like her when I see her (upon the foresaid
terms) have at her.


Pereg. Why so now; here is a Match begins in anger, and who knows but it may
end in love; since most of those that I have been acquainted with, begin in
Love, and end in War.


Wary. All our business being so happily concluded, it is time --


Allice. No indeed, Sir; My business is yet to do. Methinks, ere the Market
break up, some Provision should be made for me too.


Ralph. In troth, now she talks of Provision, I begin to grow hungry too.
Faith, Mistress, I see when your belly's full, you care not what becomes of the
Waiters.


Allice. We stuck close to you all the time of your Wooing; and sure they that
tend the Roste, deserve one warm bit off o'th Spit.


Ralph. I never turned the Spit in my Life, but I was allowed my Sop in the
Dripping-pan.


Pereg. I protest, Betty, thy old Servants here have just cause of Complaint
against thee. Come Allice; give me thy hand: And, Betty, do you take Ralph; and
let us join 'em together. These two were cut out (Bodies and Souls) for one an
other.


Allice. I shall never love that slobbering Fellow there: An he were but half
so handsome, as your Worship --


Ralph cringes, and looks amorously on Mrs. Betty, and Allice does the same to
Peregreen. Ralph. Pretty sweet Mistress (to confess the truth) when I look upon
you, that greasy Wench turns my Stomaek.


Single. This must needs be an happy Match; they meet with such equal
affection.


Pereg. At first hunting, like Whelps newly entered, they are apt to change; but,
when they are well flesht, they will grow stanch.


Betty. Honest Ralph, you must not be so squemish: I can assure you, Allice
there deserves every inch of you.


Pereg. Come Allice; of all thy kindness to me, I here make a Deed of Gift to
Ralph.


Ralph and Allice join hands together. Ralph. What must be, must be. Hunger
makes any thing go down.


Allice. For my part, I declare, it is a Match of my Friends making; and, if it
do otherwise then well, let them answer for it.


Wary. This being done, we must now consider these Gentlemen, who have been
Travelers to day. We Will execute to morrow, what this Night has concluded, to
the satisfaction of all Parties, except Sir Solomon in Single;

Whose disappointed Stratagems advise,
To shun the dangerous Sin of being too Wise:
For, as Extremes on Globes at last (...) touch,
So Wit in Folly centers, when too much.
Love Changes Natures order: in his School
The young are Wise; The old Man is the Fool.

[Exeunt omnes. THE EPILOGUE.
SInce Stealing's grown a pretty, thriving Trade;
Which many Rich, but few has Guilty made,
To needy Poets, Why should you deny
The Privilege to steal, as well as lie?
Their Theft (alas) swell's not the Nation's Debt*
Nor, makes Wine dear, nor will Land-taxe beget.
Money they always wanted; Now they grow
No less in Fancy, then in Fortune, low;
And are compelled to rook* as Gamesters are,
That can hold out no longer on the Square.
Faith, be good natured to this hungry Crew,
Who, what they filch abroad, bring home to you.
But still exclude those Men from all Relief,
Who steal themselves, yet boldly cry, Stop Thief?
Like taking Judges, these without remorse
Condemn all petty Thefts, and practice worse;
As if they robbed by Patent, and alone
Had right to call each Foreign Play their own.
What we have brought before you, was not meant
For a new Play, but a new President;
For we with Modesty our Theft avow,
(There is some Conscience shown in stealing too)
And openly declare, that if our Cheer
Does bit your Pallats, you must thank Molliere:
Molliere, the famous Shakspear of this Age,
Both when he Writes, and when he treads the Stage,
I hope this Stranger's Praise gives no pretense
To charge us with a National Offense;
Since, were it in my power, I would advance
French Wit in England, English Arms in France.
FINIS.

