Plain English, IN A FAMILIAR CONFERENCE Betwixt three Friends, RUSTICUS,
CIVIS, AND VERIDICUS, Concerning the Deadness OF OUR MARKETS.

Offered as an Expedient to serious Consideration, and for the general good of
Gentry and Commons.



LONDON, Printed by T. I. and are to be sold by Henry Million at the Bible in
Fleet street, 1673.

Plain English, In a Familiar CONFERENCE, etc.
C. VVElcome Gentlemen, In troath I have longed for another Meeting in
pursuance of our late Discourse, it has so run in my Mind ever since, I mean
the Reducing of Interest: Upon my Life, 'twilll send all our Widows and Orphans
a begging together,


R. Must our Policy then be wholly squared to the Advantage of those whom you
please to call Widows and Orphans? Or admitting only such concerned, Would you
not have them buy and sell by the same Measure that others do?


V. Indeed you might with the same Reason propose* That Widows Lands should be
Let for double it is worth; all Necessaries sold to Orphans at half the
Market-price; and that they might be liable to no public Charges.


C. You make a Jest of it, but it is a Case that deserves rather your Pity.


V. We read of Depopulations by Sheep more savage than Wolves, and which devour
whole Hamlets: Are not some of your Widows and Orphans akin to those innocent
Creatures?


C. How uncharitably you talk!


V. But consider it seriously; Are there veryer Drones, nay Cankers, in the
Commonwealth, than most of those that pass under that Character? They possess
goodly Revenues, clogged with no public Ch^^ge or Service, and brought to their
Hands without Trouble, or so much as Thought; which they commonly spend in
Foreign Superfluity; and so become the Ringleaders of that Excess and Sloth,
now so much complained of.


C. You do not, I hope, take all our Widows and Orphans for such as you here
describe.


V. God forbid: There are, I grant, many of them Exemplary for their Sobriety
and Virtue: But, as Rusticus said, twill not follow that the Commonwealth it
self must truckle to such a Handful in comparison.


C. Surely that Tribe is not so small as you fancy: And you will allow them
very deserving, at least of public Compassion.


V. If you would look upon Usury with both your Eyes at once, and count, as
well the real Widows and Orphans that now groan under it, you would find, that
perhaps it makes three Holes for one it mends: In plain English, to swell the
superfluous In-come of a few, many Orphans are daily cast up to the wide World;
Such inequality on all sides attending an inconvenient Rate of Interest.


C. I perceive all your Cry is against Usury, as if that were now our only
Grievance: But you may remember, at our last Meeting I offered to name diverse
common Abuses, which have possibly hurt us more than Usury, and would therefore
be principally reoress'd.


V. Well, I must lay Odds beforehand, they are but of the same nature with
those I then mentioned, viz. Effects and Symptoms, mistaken for Causes.


C. To me there is nothing clearer, than that the Lazyness of our Poor,
Insolence of Servants, and excessive Wages, are now our principal Grievances.


R. Our Gentry then, it seems, may hope at length to be quiet: But to say the
truth, it is high time; for they are in a fair way to reform themselves, as
Tradesmen may shortly feel.


V. For my part, I ever took it, that the Noise of our Excess was but like my
Ladies laying all the blame upon poor Button.


C. Nay I must still condemn many of our Gentry for squandring their Estates,
and Running in debt as they do.


R. I protest I can look ten miles round, and scarce spy a Prodigal amongst
them: But it seems, It Is the Art of scolding to cry Whore first.


V. In our most thriving times, to my knowledge, we had twice as may real
Unthrifts as now, and not half the good Husbands; It Is not with us then, to be
sure, that Luxury now keeps its Court. And therefore our Censors may do well,
if they please, to reflect a little homewards.


C. But diverse may formerly have transgrest in that kind, who would now Redeem
their Error, by making a Virtue of Necessity, when for them perhaps, its too
late.


V. To whom do we owe that sovereign Thrift of one Meal a day, but to Persons
of the highest Quality, especially Compounders?


R. What you call Luxury, Mr. Civis, I know not: sure I am, most of our Gentry
have long done, and still do their utmost, in the Fall of their Rents, to
preserve their Ranks; But find, that even their Thrift tends to their undoing.


C. How, in Gods name should that be?


R. Marry, in endeavoring to preserve themselves, they destroy their Tenants.


C. It Is great pity indeed, they will not live hospitably in the Country, as
their Ancestors did.


V. You would do them a singular Favor, if you would please to teach them your
knack of living in the same fashion with less then half the Revenue.


R. Most of them, no question, might again bouy up, if you of the City could
be persuaded to give them Credit at Conscionable Rates, for the stocking of
their Farms, Tax fairly with them, and purchase part of their Estates at
tolerable prices.


C. However, would to God, they were sensible, how they Ruin their Families
and the Country, by sculking here, as too many of them do: What they get in
the Hundred, I am confident, they loose in the Shire.


R. Troth, they are even too sensible of it, but it seems can find no better
Fence for your Flayls.


V. Soft, Mr. Civis, Do not at one breath condemn our Gentry for spending, and
sparing too.


C. What think you of the Lazyness of our Poor? Is It not a National Infelicity?


V. Find us steady Employment, say they, and then spare us not: But till then,
pardon us for driving our Bargains as we can afford it, or at least for not
working without Hire.


C. I look you should urge the Reducing of Money upon this Occasion.


V. You have Reason, for in Effect, the Poor of all Nations under Heaven are
more or less idle or industrious, according to the current Rate of their
Interest: And there is no such Antidote to expel that Venom of sloth, either in
Poor or Rich.


C. If Laws be not executed, What can we hope for?


V. Coercive Laws, I must tell you, without suitable Policies and
Encouragements, are but like the Contrivance of strict Discipline for unpaid
Armies: But in earnest, it is Pity you are not a Justice your self to try.


C. You would fain palliate it; But certainly, our greatest Plagues at this
time are, the incorrigible Ideness of our Poor, and excessive Rate of Wages.


V. Was the stinting of Wages ever successfully attempted in any
Trading-Countrey?


C. I marvel it should not, being of such Importance to Trade.


V. Surely, their varying every where, as they do, argues them to be of a
boundless Nature.


C. You still affect Singularity.


V. How can you herein tax me with it? there being as well a personal, as a
local difference in the Case: For as one Horse of the same size, will sooner
bring Ten Pounds, than another Five; one Farmers Corn is better worth five
Shillings, than his Neighbors four: So one Servant, Labourer, or Artificer,
may well deserve double the Wages that another does in the same Place.


C. Somewhat, I Am confident, might and would be done in it.


V. Truly, nothing at all, but regulate Interest, and let Nature work: For let
us reflect on our former Laws of this nature, What have they signified?: And
consider our late Act for the Militia, which assigns twelve Pence a day, as a
general and standing Hire for those that serve with other men's Arms: How has
it been observed?


C. The greater Fault somewhere.


V. It Is in the very nature of Wages, which are so variable, that perhaps the
same Rate, being but half Pay in Countries near London, proves double Hire in
the remoter Parts of England.


C. If there be no other Redress for Wages* A Fig for all other Expedients.


V. Wages are Money* And therefore in abating Money, you vertually abate Wages:
You reduce six, to Four Pounds a year of real Value; and consequently, eighteen
Pence to twelve Pence a day: But this is not all, it has a double Edge, for in
raising the Price of Land, it ipsa facto quickens and raises all other Markets;
and so subdues Idleness of course, without noise: Servants and Workmen being
ever noted to be tractable enough, when Provisions bear a Price.


C. Nay, If you have no better way to curb their Insolence and Exaction, we
must bid Adieu to Trade.


V. The corrupting of the People is a certain and genuine Effect of embasing
the Land; for it is one and the same Mischief which oppresses Masters, and
debauches Servants, viz Cheapness without Plenty.


C. Cheapness without Plenty! Troath I ever took them for the same thing.


V. 'Twas a plain Mistake; For I assure you, they are vastly different.


C. Do you not take our present Plenty for a singular Blessing?


V. Such Plenty is nothing else throughout, but the pampering of Sloth, by
starving of Industry.


C. Well, 'twere a strange Abuse, if Cheapness should highten Wages.


V. 'Twere a Miracle, if it should not here: For why should we suppose that any
subsisting with ease, and no way depending, will work or serve but on their own
terms?


C. But how can Wages rise, or indeed, hold in the Country, Tillage so much
declining?


R. 'Twere indeed as broad as it is long, could our Charges be apportioned to
our Prices: If you Artisans and men of Profession could but comply with our
Rents, we should never complain: No, it is their Encroachment, concurrent with
the failing of our Markets, which mortally wounds us.


V. To say the Truth, it is the Growth and Grandeur of London, which thus
imposes on our drooping Tillage and Manufacture, to their Undoing.


C. Are you bound to imitate our Follies?


V. The Contagion is unavoidable: For how should those, at least in the
adjacent Countries, expect to regulate their Wages, whilst you in the City are
continually raising yours, as you must, and indeed may well afford, though we
cannot without Ruin.


C. Cheapness without Plenty, with your Pardon, founds odly; Whence, I pray,
should it proceed?


V. From this capital Inconvenience. That in a necessitous time, the Measure of
selling is not the Worth or Cost of the Commodity sold, but the Sellers
Exigence.


C. A special Maxim! For how is the Value of any thing known but in the Sale?


V. Have you never observed, How one that is clouded sells a fair Jewel, or a
goodly Lordship?


C. You will not, I hope, frame a general Rule from a particular Case.


V. But by private Distresses, we may much more judge of public necessities:
Borrowers and Sellers, I assure you, now live under one unkind Planet, the
Seller being no less a Servant to the Buyer, than the Borrower is to the Lender.


R. Indeed, it is generally noted, That most men now adays, either borrow to
shun the Precipice of Selling, or sell, to avoid the Gulf of Borrowing; So that
all things follow the Measures of Land, and dance with it to the Usurers Pipe,
only the Fate of borrowing commonly lights heavier on the Landlords; that of
Selling, lights on poor Tenants and Artisans most.


V. To speak freely, What can we judge of our present Trafique (managed at such
an uneasy Rate of Interest) But that much of it is excessive Usury turned the
wrong side outward? Nay, the Trading Extortion, perhaps, bites hardest of any:
For Creditors seem confined by. Law, whilst Chapmen, methinks, know no bounds:
And Sellers, having generally less command of Credit than Borrowers, are
therefore more exposed to Extremities.


C. To me you talk Hebrew.


V. There is certainly an Evil (though secret) ferment in the oppressive Rate
of Usury, which in effect poisons all our Commerce, one Vein or Exigence and
Extortion running through out.


C. Do you take all Sellers to be Bankrupts?


V. The greatet part to be sure are now necessitous: And that is enough to mar
the Market.


C. To what Cause will you impute this state of necessity?


V. Alas, The Groundwork was laid in the Impoverishment of our Gentry by the
late War, though since notoriously amplified by a double grievance obvious
enough, viz. the unequal Rate of our Interest in respect of foreign Trade, and
that of Taxes among our selves, which, methinks, have fairly built upon that
Foundation.


V. 'Twould make a sick man smile to hear some fore-handed Gentlemen, as we
call them, how scornfully they defy borrowing, when already most of them pay
Interest and Brokage too with a Vengeance.


C. Can they pay Interest then without borrowing?


V. Whoever now has Rents to receive, Lands to let* Corn or Stock to vend,
must look to drink deep of that Cup* whilst Interest runs higher with us than
with our trading Neighbors and Land alone, undergoes in effect, all public
Burdens.


C. It Is a payment, God be thanked, they feel not.


R. Just thus, for all the world, do many of our wise Landlords slight our
Rates for the poor, and other Duties charged on Land, because forsooth, they
immediately light on the Tenant.


V. Faith, this is a melancholy subject: for as matters now go, I see not, how
any thing but extreme Scarcity can yield the Farmer a tolerable and saving
price for his Grain: And where, do you think, that must end?


R. In all likelihood, such a Discouragement and Disabling of our Tillage, must
produce a dangerous Dearth, whenever it pleases God to send ill Seasons or
Harvests, which after so many kindly years, we may now of course expect.


C. I wish that were our greatest Danger.


V. Flatter not your self: Cheapness and Dearth are nearer akin than you dream;
the Cheapness of Commodity proceeding mostly from the Dearth of current Money,
as that, again, does from the mean Value of Land: Our Chronicle tells us, That
in Queen Mary's Reign, Wheat the same year was sold for a Noble and six Pence
the Bushel: A vast Disproportion, parallel perhaps to four Nobles and two
shillings of ours.


C. That Story, I suppose, will hardly concern our Times.


V. God forbid it should; though it is a clear Case, our Cheapness now proceeds
from nothing less than Plenty of Commodity: For I Am confident, there has
scarce ever been less in the Granary: And surely the Prospect of our next
Harvest is not over-hopeful: Besides, we are told of great Dearths in foreign
Parts; so as, for ought appears, had we Grain, we might have vent enough: Thus
all things, one would think, should conspire to give Corn a considerable Price
at this time: And yet, he that would now sell any Quantity of Wheat, can scarce
get four Nobles the Quarter: Neither Stores, Crops not Prices: Ghess, Mr.
Civis, at the reason.


C. It Is quite out of my Element.


V. You must be blind not to see, how our Markets are enthralled by Necessity,
and the Benefit thereof wholly ravished from the poor Farmer, who as to avoid a
wretched Bartering and Retailing Trade with his indigent Neighbors, that now
live but from Hand to Mouth, falls a Prey to some usurious Interloper.


C. I should rather wish him to keep his Grain for better Prices, which Time
and Patience no doubt would bring him.


V. Have you not heard, That the Steed may starve whilst the Grass grows? Who,
I beseech you, in the mean time shall pay his two Rents and make good his
Seasons? You would do him a Courtesy either to bayl him for the present, or
secure him from Loss in the upshot: His Fruits being perishable, and our
Markets now adays seldom mending: For indeed, the first, how low soever, are
generally noted to be the best.


C. I never heard that to be observed before, nor can I devise any good Reason
for it.


V. Can it be, but forbearance of Sale must still further aggrevate the Sellers
necessity?


R. Pox on it, I Am sure 'twas not wont to be so: We had once a kind of Market in
every Parish, and could utter most of our Commodities at home: We were not then
forced to carry our Corn God knows whither, deal with God knows whom, sell for
God knows what, to be paid God knows when: But are we to marvel at this want of
Vent, when so many good Seats and Farms, every where, stand empty, the Crows
being Tenants, and the Rooks Landlords?


V. Never look to see things mend, but still further decline, whilst the Land
it self is so cheap, and the revenues of money and Land at so wide a distance;
for if the Springhead be brackish, how can the streams be wholesome?


R. Carry your compost still from the soil, say we in the Country, and see
what your Farms will come to.


C. Belike, you imagine low Interest will quicken your vent, and mend your
Prices.


V. It glories in nothing more than the due balancing and fixing of Markets:
For want of which in languishing Countries they float, and are bandyed from one
extreme to another, always either choked or pined; now shivering, as it were,
with treacherous cheapness, anon burning with grievous Dearth.


C. Quickness of Markets, no doubt, were a great Felicity to us at this time*
but will low Interest, think you, produce it?


R. Will you put us to prove* that by the fall of Money, all things bought with
Money must rise?


V. It Is a plain case, Land, like a Primum Mobile of Commerce, swayes the
lesser Orbs: So as by a natural Sympathy and Symmetry as it were of parts with
the whole: wheresoever Land is cheap or dear, all the native Commodities are
cheap or dear with it; and whatsoever depresses or exalts the Fund it self,
accordingly embases or ennobles it is Fruits, either affecting them with a mean
and contingent Price, as in Colonies, or with a considerable and constant
Value, as in flourishing Countries.


R. Indeed it is remarkable, that the Prices of our Corn and Cattle have all
along ebbed and flowed with that of Land: The same deadly Exigence, which has
driven the Freeholder to part with his Estate at half the Value, constraining
likewise the Farmer to expose his Fruits at a Rate, even beneath what they cost
him.


C. I perceive yoa are all for Land.


V. So would you be too, did you but consider, that Land is eminently all
things else: I have heard it notably aver'd, that two years Purchase gained or
lost in the Price of Land, does ipso facto augment or impair the Capital of
this Kingdom more than the Value of all our Cash, and other Goods together,
(Stock upon the Land excepted.)


C. Sure you expect a Fee from the Landlords.


V. Some others, perhaps, may soon be as sensible as the Landlords themselves,
what an immediate Character of decay the fall of Land stamps on the
Commonwealth, what a fatal and contagious Cheapness and Penury always attends
it!


R. Methinks it is of prime Importance to this Argument. That the whole burdens
of Excise or Impost, however designed, now certainly light on the Part already
grieved, viz. the Land, as Humors resort to a Bruise.


C I ever took it, that Excises and Imposts fell on the Consumer, I Am sure it
has been generally so received.


V. It Is then a vulgar Error, for the Merchant informs us, that high Duties are
an Embasement to any Commodity, amounting to a kind, of Prohibition.


C. Yet I have heard able Merchants wish, the Customs were taken off from
foreign Trade, either in whole, or at least in part, and a Recompense
otherwise charged, viz. by an easy Pound Rate upon Land, or moderate Excise.


R. The same Notion have I met with from Traders, and once from a worthy
Gentleman.


V. Were Interest roundly reduced, and Money brought into the Tax, it might do
rarely well, but what, indeed, almost could then miscarry?


R. So I answer them, yet still they affirm, that even as things now stand, the
Country would chiefly reap the Benefit of it.


V. Beshrow their Partiality: But in earnest, Can they think us such Fools to
be so imposed on? Let them go preach at Barbados, and Virginia, what a Lift it
would give to their Trade, if additional Duties were laid on Sugars and
Tobacco's, certainly Land-Taxes (besides the ruinous Clog of our Inheritances,
where continued) are dangerous Imposts upon all growth at the first hand, and
no way now to be born, without the regulating of Interest.


R. Nay, I ever disrelisht the Proposal, for indeed, common sense dictates,
that public Burdens are far more comfortably laid upon foreign
Superfluities, viz. Wine, Silk, Spice, etc. than upon our native Commodities,
viz, Corn, Wool, Flesh, etc. All which are evidently taxed in the Land: And
therefore so to transfer the Customs, what were it but like the rash Cure of a
sore Leg, by driving back the Humor, to the hazard of life?


V. Besides, it is supposed, the very maintenance of our Poor, alone considered,
is already, in point of Charge at least double to all the Burdens of foreign
Trade: That of the Church, by Tithes and other Duties, more than treble: And
yet, perhaps, these are not half the Encumbrances of Land.


C. Well, it is thought by knowing men to be a wholesome Expedient.


V. It may prove so in time, but never till Usury be tamed, without public
Ruin: For consider of what Consequence it must be for poor Farmers still to
encounter with bad Markets; Alas, It Is nothing but over-charging the Land has
already brought us to this pass.


C. I ever took you to be a zealous Advocate for Trade, but find you rather its
Adversary.


V. A fair and well-grounded Trade advances Land, and therefore cannot be
enough honored and encouraged: whereas our present Traders can subsist with no
less profit than must undo the Country.


R. It Is too manifest indeed, that without grinding the Farmer and Artificer,
our Merchant could scarce abide any foreign Market, but being, as he oftimes
is, sorely bitten, he licks himself whole with a Witness at their Cost, easily
trampling where the Hedge is low* So that there all our Miseries center, as
heavy things natuaally sink to the bottom*


V. This take for an infallible Rule: The immoderate Benefit of Traders has an
evil Aspect, and is inconsistent with good Trade; for light Gains, we say,
makes the Purse heavy, which Rule holds more currently in the national, than in
the personal Concernment.


C. Do you grudge the Merchants Gains, or would you have them limited?


V. I only wish them more regular, and doubtless had we a just Rate of
Interest, they would need no other limits; but now, to be sure, where the
Traders benefit is vast, the poor Country pays the Reckoning; since the Market
abroad affords it not, as our good Neighbors the Dutch will inform us.


C. These are but Notions.


V. Nay, there is nothing in proof more familiar, for to instance in our Vent of
Corn; Suppose good English Wheat now carry eight Shillings the Bushel in the
Mediterranean, where we read of so much scarcity in our weekly Gazettes: If the
Merchant here give five, his Profit is very competent, yet consistent with a
Livelihood to the Farmer: But if he lade, as I doubt he does, at three, nay,
oftimes under, he, indeed, may soon thrive, if his Stock be his own, but our
Tillage must certainly droop; the same Reason holds in our Manufactures.


C. Where all this while does the Sho^e wring?


R. As to the Sale either of our Lands or Goods, there is now one general
Complaint, viz. that of many Sellers to a few Chapmen; not to be redrest with
such a Retrenchment of Interest, as shall oblige our Usurers to purchase or
trade in good earnest.


V. In Holland, we know* Money being cheap and Land dear, mighty Stocks, even
the whole Estates of wealthy and wise men are generally poured into Commerce,
with profit suitable to low Interest, and great Thrift necessarily attending
it, but with certain and prodigious Vent: Whereas here the able Merchant
dallies with Trade, contenting himself with the Credit and outside of his
Profession, and dealing only with a small Stock to his private Ease and
Advantage, but to public decay: As for the Bulk of his Estate, it is managed at
Interest, or at best laid out on some easy purchase of Land: Were not for
these helps at Maw, to be sure, our Traders would long since have swallowed low
Interest, perhaps more greedily, than the very Farmer or Landlord.


R: We find it, indeed, to our Cost, scarce any Traffic comes amiss to the
Fleming; he under-sells his Neighbors, even in their own Commodities: Whilst
we, on the other side, are confined to a few Trades, being forced to take his
Leavings, and quit diverse of the greatest Bulk and Advantage to the public;
for such are commonly those that yield small Benefit to Traders.


V. Nay, for a clear Demonstration, what the cheapness of Money effects, he can
afford to furnish us with our own Corn hoarded diverse years; the Sale whereof,
few of our Farmers can at all forbear: To see such a Spot of Ground undergo
such Burdens, equip such Fleets, maintain such Wars, repair such Losses, one
would think it should make their Neighbors enamoured of low Interest.


C. It Is supposed, the Dutch have a world of other Arts and Advantages for
Trade beyond us.


V. Some they had need to have to carry it as they do, but this is their
Mother-policy, which gives them so much the start of us, nay, which gives life
to all the rest. This, no doubt, is the very Hinge upon which they all move:
They subsist by endeavor, we thrive by sloth; their Merchants are Merchants
indeed, Ours only in countenance.


C. Will you blame men for playing the best of their Game?


V. It Is pity, I Am sure, it should be so; yet I must neeeds partly acquit them;
for in Countries, where Interest runs higher than with their Trading
Neighbors, small Dealings are commonly gainful, whereas vast Stocks are scarce
to be employed in Trade without ruinous hazard; it being, indeed, in the nature
of high Interest, to make the Gains of Merchandise great, but altogether
contingent; in that of low, to render them moderate, but withal, certain.


R. What a par-boyl'd Traffic do we drive in the mean time! such a sickly and
languishing Trade may well prove Hectic to the Commonwealth.


C. You your self have often noted from the Advancement of the Customs, and
other the like Measures, that our Trade has long been, and still is upon
increase: How does this suit with the languishing Trade you complain of?


V* The late increase of Customs and of our Trade in bulk, we owe partly to the
Growth of our Plantations, but principally, I doubt, to the fatal cheapness of
our Land*and it is Fruits, it being in effect but a Web spun from our own
Bowels, and a Pyramide erected on the Farmers decay; though therewith it is slow
and scarce discernable, like the growth of Dwarfs and stunted Trees* whereas
the low Rate of Interest in Holland, and the late notable Abatement of it in
Sweden, renders their Advancement in Trade and Shipping as conspicuous as the
Sun in it is Noonday Brightness: Now if we stand still whilst our Neighbors
thus advance, the old Rule, Non progredi est regredi, may (all things
considered) prove our Case.


C. Is It possible, the odds of a little Interest Money should be of such moment?


V. Is It possible a Tradesman should ask that Question, who daily sees how a
Grane turns the Scales? And therefore cannot be to learn, wh^t a Change must
ensue from the difference of a third part in our R^te of Interest, since by it
all Contracts are weighed, measured, and finally governed: Surely high Interest
must dangerously affect all our Dealings, and especially the minds of men, who
acting rationally, and not being troubled with squeamishness of Conscience,
cannot but prefer Ease and Certainty before Pains and Hazards, though the
benefit were equal, which generally, I presume, it is not.


R. Nay, but in the matter if self, (as you said before) betwixt trading at a
Rate above or beneath the Market; be the difference never so little, the
general Disproportion is vast. The one rowing, as it were, with Wind and Tide;
the other, against both; the one being sure of current Vent for the greatest
Fraughts; the other running manifest hazard of bad Market for the smallest.


C. I Am sure, we celebrate those for flourishing and happy times, when less
than half the Trade served us that now we drive.


V. To advance in a small Estate, is far more hopeful and cheerful, than to
decline in a great.


C. Remember Interest was at 10 per Cent. in that which we reckon our Golden
Age.


V. And, forget not, if you please, how the Case is since altered with us, by
the late War athome, and the general Peace abroad, by the excessive growth of
Holland, and by the Necessity of several Impositions for the support of the
Government.


C. It was once your judgment, that Land and Trade could have no divided
Interest.


V* Land and Trade, to be sure, cannot: But Land and Traders* methinks, may.


C. What would you be at? All never did, nor could thrive; and if some now do,
what matter to the public, who the parties be?


V. With your favor, if a few, and those idle Persons only swagger, whilst
the many, and the industrious droop, where must it end? Let Us however stick to
our ancient Motto, God speed the Plough.


C. Have you never heard the proposal of a different Interest upon real and
Personal Contracts; methinks, it might now be seasonable.


V. It was of Old, my Lord Bacons: And truly, if you will warrant it
practicable, I dare pronounce it equitable, in respect of hazard and gain* For
visibly most Tradesmen might yet better afford to borrow at eight, then
Gentlemen at three per Cent.


C. Upon the whole matter; there is much I see to be said for low Interest: But
you will never convince me, that it is such an Elyxir, as you fancy.


V. Assure your self, want of good vent in an Island, blessed with so many
advantages as this above all, with Liberty, Safety, and Peace, does even
naturally guide us to that Expedient: Neither is blood letting a more specific
cure for the Pleurisy, as may appear by the Preamble of the Statute 21 Jacob
l, which you will find Instar omnium to my sense, if you please to consult it.


C. I hope, you do not, mean the Art, which first brought money from ten to
eight in the hundred: For how can that serve your present purpose?


V. Believe me, It Is a fair and perpetual Looking-glass, clearly representing,
how the price of all our native commodities waits on that of Land; how all
things then were, and must ever be embased, nay even prostituted to an
inconvenient Rate of Interest: For thereunto it imputes a very great Abatement
in the value of Land, and other the Merchandises, Wares, and Commodities of
this Kingdom, the disabling men to pay their debts, and continue the
maintenance of Trade; the enforcing them to sell their Lands and Stocks at very
low Rates, to forsake the use of Merchandise and Trade, and to give over their
Farms, and so become unprofitable Members of the Commonwealth.


C. I trust, you will not draw Arguments for four per Cent. from the Authority
which permitted eight.


V. By the resemblance of Symptoms, I leave you to judge of the Disease, and
consequently it is Cure: For is not our condition here described to the life?
Does it not speak our very Idiom? And if the same Reason, why not the same Law?


R. You may swear, it has long been our very case: Our Farms have proved meet
Plantations, our Freeholds sorry Cattels; and consequently all the fruits of
the Land as errand drugs, as any stale Mackerel cried about London-streets in
Iunc.


C. I could almost afford to wish, that Money were for a while abated by way of
Probation.


V. Your Proposal, indeed, is backed with the Authority of former Precedents;
though temporary Laws are seldom through paced: but what a change would it
make, if Money were but cheap with us, and Land dear, 'twould be a Salve for
every Sore, and of such general Advantage, as if our very Climate were altered,
and our Country carried ten Degrees Southward: All Ranks from the Prince to
the Swain would soon feel the warmth of it.


C. If 'twould ascertain the Payment of Rents, that we might have current
Security again, 'twere somewhat like; but for raising the Purchase of Land, I
reckon, it is only robbing Peter to pay Paul.


V. Are you deaf, or asleep? Would not our Rents be current, if our Markets
were quick and steady? And what has been all this while the drift of our
Argument, but to show, how all things rise and fall with the Land?


C. Nay, I am not yet your Proselyte.


V. But do you not apprehend of what Importance it is to raise the Purchase of
Land; how it enlarges both the Public Fund, and every individual Estate; what
an Indies 'twere to us, if our Lands were currently sold for thirty or forty
years Purchase; and what magnificent Improvements of Revenue must of course
ensue!


C. You are still vnpouring with your Improvements, when it is the opinion of
our wisest men, we have already improved our selves out of doors, and nothing
else has undone us.


V. Nothing has indeed undone us, but the Discouragement of it: For most of
our Land without it, is no better than a Waste to the Commonwealth, and De-quoy
to the Farmer; whereas solid Improvements are to the Owner more valuable than
any Purchase to the State, more considerable than Conquest.


C. Well, you differ herein from all I converse with.


V. Then you converse with none but Money-mongers: For Rusticus knows, there is
not half the Improvement now stirring, he and I remembered, which is, and must
be the ruin of our Farmers; since without regular Cost bestowed on most Lands,
it is easily ghessed, what the Tillage of them will come to.


R. I would not be bound to plough the better half of our Farms Rent -- free,
without constant and chargeable manuring them. But alas, where are the Tenants,
or indeed Owners, that are able, as things now go, considerably to mend their
Land without borrowing? Which are like the Chemists vanity, to make Gold
without Loss.


V. Nay, though they never borrowed, could they afford it at our present Rate
of Interest, and the now current prices of Land and Stock, unless they
challenged the Privilege of doing what they list with their own: Would not
they raise double the Ret venue by lending, or purchase cheaper at least by
half?


R. That likewise would be well advised on.


V. As I am grieved to see such Tracts of Arable lie untilled upon these
accounts; So am I scandalized to observe thousands of Acres yearly ploughed to
great loss for want of good Husbandry, which* with our familiar amendments (not
discouraged) might have yielded Crops equally profitable to the owner and the
public.


R. Did but our Sages and Critics mark the different Product of the same
Lands, according as they are well or ill Husbanded, and withal consider, that
however the Crop proves, the Charge of Tillage is the same, they would not so
deride Improvement, but wise men are apt to abound in their own sense.


V. Nay surely, if the Farmer, who now has twelve or fourteen Bushels of Wheat
on an Acre, and sells by the Medium of three Shillings, could (as formerly)
have eighteen or twenty, and sell by that of five, 'twould soon make all things
smile: It Is doubtless from the same decay, that both our Crops and Prices
falls, and as they fell, so they must rise together.


C. Imarvel, you should still Rove on improving the Land, when already it
yields more than people we have can consume.


V. Are we then purely to depend on our own Consumption?


C. I suppose we must, if we find no better vent abroad.


V. Small cause we have to Complain of Foreign vent, especially at this time,
having more Market than Grain to vend.


R. No it is a fatal constellation, where half-crops, low prices, and high
wages meet, as we see they here do in the Embasing of the Land.


C. Do you not then allow our Deadness of Vent to proceed from want of People?


V. As if there were any thriving without increase, or decay without fayler of
People.


C. That want however, it seems, you admit.


R. We feel it indeed shrewdly in the Country; but methinks, we do not meet
with it in your streets at London, nor find it by your Buildings in the
Suburbs: Now surely 'twere Charitable in you to spare us some of your Colonies.


V. It Is too manifest, that both in Wealth and People, (which are plainly
inseparable,) and in effect Synonomous, our Cities and Trading Towns have of
late dangerously gained upon our Villages, though perhaps without loss in the
Total: In London, within forty years, there has been an increase of
Inhabitants, alone sufficient to stop all our Gaps* Witness our weekly Bills of
Christenings and Burials: however, can we colourably complain for want of
People* that employ not half those we have? Use Legs, and have Legs, was the
old rule.


C. To me it appears, we want only mouths to eat what we cannot utter.


R. Where I beseech you, are those vast Granaries of ours? If we be not grossly
abused in our intelligence, we might soon be rid of that burden* were our
Stores far greater, then I doubt they will prove.


V. Had you told me, Mr. Civis, we wanted hands to work, or Stocks to employ
them, you had said somewhat: But Mouths without hands, in troth, it is such a
complaint, as was never, I think, offered before: For were not that want soon
supplied, by cherishing our breed of Vermin?


R. Does any large and fruitful Parish, judge you, lack a hundred poor and
lazy Families to maintain for vent of their Corn? If not why should you fancy
the Commonwealth wants Creeples or Beggars?


C. Still I affirm, that had we twice the People, 'twere much the better.


R. Troth, I should be of your mind, if I saw those we now have, a little more
useful and profitable to us than they are: Indeed the more the merrier, we say,
yet withal the fewer the better Cheer


V What Pastime it is to hear the goodly Expedients commonly propounded to
quicken our Vent! One is for the raising and fixing of Prices by Law; Another
would have sowing of Corn, when cheap, prohibited; A third gives Sentence
against great Crops, to be half burnt; A fourth is for the drowning of our Fens
and Marshes, and restraint of all future Improvements: A fifth is Tooth and
Nayl for Polygamy: With such Bulrushes am I often encountered by the bravest
Champions of Six per Cent.


C. But what if our Consumption were promoted, by generally clogging the
Importation of foreign Growths and Manufactures.


R. As if Trade would soar the higher for being more clogged.


V. I hate these shallow and Penny-wise Projects, which serve rather to
proclaim us Bankrupt, than prevent or cure our Poverty: It Is like the Tithing
of Mint and Rue, but neglecting matters of moment: Or like hard pumping in a
Ship without stopping the Leaks: God help us, when we must have Recourse to
such shifts as are sometimes offered; that were playing at small Game indeed:
No, I Will for feit my Senses if any thing effectually raise our Markets, but the
buoying up of Land by the fall of Ujury, and equality of Assessments, not the
public only, but the Parochial: In a word, be but just to the Land, and all
will come right of it self.


R. To baffle Truth, and maintain Paradoxes is a Sophisters task: But common
sense, one would think, might soon discover, That an inconvenient Rate of
Interest and Taxes is alone sufficient to Embase the Land, and consequently all
its Fruits, though lofty Wits, it should seem cannot stoop to such vulgar
Aphorisms.


V. Indeed the profound Enquiries, politic Lectures I daily meet with
concerning the fall of Rents, make me think of the Butcher, that searched
narrowly for his knife, when 'twas in his mouth: And most of the Remedies
offered are not unlike a Plaster to the Shin or Toe for a Hectic Fever.


C. I was lately at a serious Club, where this was the Argument: And low
Interest was there resolved to be profitable, if seasonable: But 'twas withal
agreed, That matters with us are not yet Ripe for it.


V. Yet a little Sleep, a little Slumber, says the sluggard: But surely never
were matters so Ripe as now; when our Farms are half under-stocked, yet our
Markets clogged; when Borrowing notoriously crushes almost wheresoever it
lights; when Tillage and Trade cry aloud for it, as it were One and all; when
Mortgages of double or treble value daily become scarce worth Redeeming; when
security as well as Credit is worn thredbare, and Lenders almost as much
distressed as Borrowers: when the Business expects only the Midwifery of Law,
being ready, (if 'twere possible) to teem of it self.


C. You are Princes in conceit, but for Abatement of Interest, let me tell you,
for your Comfort, 'twill not pass in our time.


R. Then let me tell you, for your Comfort, the Tail of this Comet, I doubt,
hangs over your City.


V. For my part, really I should despair, from the strange Contradictions and
Evasions it meets with, if I saw any shift could be made without it: But though
Reason may be foiled, yet Sense and fatal Experience will not; For who can now
provide for posterity with an indifferent Estate? And what, indeed, does a
great one signify more than the Noise and Trouble of it? How casual do most of
our Dealings, and even our Callings prove? Besides, without the Rise of Land,
what can enliven our Farmers, quicken our Markets, or rescue us from the deadly
Fits of Cheapness and Scarcity* But above all; In case His Majesty's Occasions
and the public Safety should require large and frequent Levies, (as in Reason
they must) what else can enable us to the comfortable payment of them? 'Twere a
Miracle one would think, if one of these Motives should at length prevail: My
Life for it, this Distemper of ours has a speedy Crisis.


R. Nay, it is a catching Disease, and will without speedy prevention, go round
the house.


V. I tell you Mr. Civis, I would scarce thank any man to secure me, that
Interest shall be abated within a few years: For 'twill cut it is way through
the Rocks, and is now methinks, at our Threshold; though I wish we might step
forward to meet him; For otherwise, as near as it is, e're it do it self, we, I
doubt, shall be more than half undone: And, indeed, who can be without
Concernment, for thousands of honest Families are now languishing under the
Delay of it? But you may remember, I have often upon this Occasion compared my
self to the man in the Dark, digging for Day, which with a little Patience will
certainly come of it is own accord.


C. Faith, come and welcome* Four per Cent. say I, could we but hope for a
Register of Titles and Encumbrances; there were some Comfort yet* if once they
passed Hand in Hand.


V. How many Knots do you find or make in a Bulrush! Alas, low Interest and a
Register have a little mutual dependence or affinity* though some would
cunningly pin them together, that the heavier may clog the lighter; A Register
will be an Engine, which will be long in framing, and then perhaps not work in
an Age; whereas Abatement of Interest being fully precedented to our Hands, and
lying ready for present use, may both pass in a trice, and operate from the
very time of it is passing. Besides, what I pray, would your Register finally
import to the due and necessary Balance of our Trade* and Markets, or to the
exciting of Industry, and curbing of Sloth, which are our principal Aims: But
I must take another Evening to discourse it with you; it is time we were at our
Lodgings.


ERRATA.
Page 5. line 17. for Ranks, read Rooks.

FINIS.

