AN EXPOSITION WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS CONTINUED Upon the Eighth, Ninth
and Tenth Chapters of the Book of JOB: BEING The Sum of thirty two Lectures,
delivered at Magnus near the Bridge, London.

By JOSEPH CARYL, Preacher of the Word, and Pastor of the Congregation there.

PSALM. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers him out of them all.

LONDON, Printed by A. Miller, for Henry Overton in Popes-head-alley, and Luke
Fawn, and John Rothwell in Paul's Churchyard, and Giles Calvert at the west
end of Paul's, 1647.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
To those chiefly of this City, who have been the Movers, and continue the
Promoters of this Work.
I Am your Debtour, and because my stock cannot pass out great sums at once,
therefore I am constrained to discharge my credit by these smaller paiments. I
need not call upon you for acquittances or canceled Bonds: I know your
ingenuity will confess more received then I have paid. I have paid you in the
Book now presented, as much as I intended for this time. But time will not
suffer me to pay you what I intended and had projected for an Epistle. And I
believe your selves will easier excuse a short Epistle, then a longer stay for
the whole Book. Accept both with your wonted candor, and let all these Labors
on your behalf be the return of your own prayers to the Father of lights, by
the help of the Spirit of Grace, in Jesus Christ, for

January 12. 1646. Your affectionate Friend and servant in this work of the
Lord Joseph Caryl.

AN EXPOSITION WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS, CONTINVED Upon the Eighth, Ninth
and Tenth Chapters of the BOOK of JOB.
JOB 8.1, 2, 3. Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,

How long will thou speak these things? And how long shall the words of thy
mouth be like a strong wind?

Does God pervert judgment? or does the Almighty pervert justice?


THe answer of Eliphaz to Jobs first complaint, has been opened in the fourth
and fifth Chapters, together with Jobs reply, in the sixth and seventh. In
which he labors to disasperse and vindicate himself from what Eliphaz had
rashly taxed him with, Hypocrisy, The name of an hypocrite (like that of a
heretic) is such, as no man ought to be patient under.

But while Job endeavors to clear himself in the opinion, or from the
imputations of one of his friends, he runs into a further arrere of
prejudices with a second: Some of those arguments which he had framed to pay
his debt to Eliphaz, and save his own integrity, being again charged upon his
account, by his friend Bildad the Shuhite; who presents himself (a duty very
commendable) as an Advocate for God; and he conceived there was but need he
should. Job in his reply having (in his sense) wronged the justice of God, he
takes himself obliged to stand up and clear it, to show Job his supposed sin,
and provoke him to repentance, both by threatenings of further wrath, and
promises of speedy mercy. Thus in general.

More distinctly, there are four parts of Bildads speech.

First, A confutation of Jobs reply to Eliphaz; and he gives it us shadowed by
an elegant similitude in the second verse, How long will thou speak these
things? and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like the strong wind?
There Is a censure upon all that he had spoken.

Secondly, He gives us an assertive Question, concerning the justice of God; to
clear it from, and set it above, whatsoever might seem to stain it in the eyes
of men. This we have at the third verse, Does God pervert judgment? or does
the Almighty pervert justice? Not he.

Thirdly, In the body of the Chapter he urges diverse arguments to confirm this
conclusion, that, God is just; and there are three heads of argument, by which
he confirms it.

First, From the example of Jobs children, and from his own present, with the
possibility of his future condition, in case he repent, from the third verse
unto the eighth.

The second argument is drawn from the testimony of antiquity, and that is laid
down in the eighth, ninth and tenth verses.

The third argument appears in the similitudes; 1. Of a rush or flag, in the
11, 12, and 13, verses. 2. Of a spiders-web, in the 14, and 15, verses. 3. Of a
Tree flourishing for a time, but anon plucked up, in the 16, 17, 18, and 19,
verses. These are the arguments and illustrations of his grand assertion.


Does God pervert judgment? or does the Almighty pervert justice? No he does
not. And thou may learn this lesson from thy own experience, from the
example of thy children, from the testimony of antiquity, yea the withering
rush, the spiders-web, the luxuriant roots and branches of a tree, may all be
thy Masters and instructours to teach thee this truth, That God is just.

The fourth and last part of the Chapter, sets forth the favor of God, to
those who are faithful and sincere: for having maintained the justice of God,
and showed how terrible he will be to hypocrites who deal falsely with him; he
now mitigates and mollifies his discourse, by proclaiming the goodness of God
to sinners repenting, yea (who are the worst of sinners) to hypocrites if they
repent, pluck off their masks or disguises, and truly humble themselves before
him. This is the subject of the three last verses of the Chapter, Behold God
will not cast away a perfect man. etc. As if he had said, Though God be just to
deal with hypocrites, as he has dealt with thee and thy children, yet he will
not cast away the perfect and upright; show thy self such, and he will receive
thee. This he quickens by subjoyning the further severity of God to those that
shall persist in their hypocrisy, ver. 20. and in the close of the 22. Neither
will he help the evil doers, and the dwelling place of the wicked shall come to
naught.

Thus you have both the general scope, and likewise the special parts of
Bildads discourse, which will give us some help toward a more clear discovery
of particulars.

Verse 1. Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,
The Speaker is Bildad; I shall not stay upon the person, who this Bildad was,
of what line and pedigree, was touched in opening the 11. verse of the second
Chapter, and therefore I shall pass to the matter about which he speaks.

Verse 2. How long will thou speak these things? and how long shall the words
of thy mouth be as a strong wind?
He begins very chidingly, How long will thou speak these things?

The words import either, first, admiration, How long! As if he had said, Could
any man have believed that thou would have spoken such things as these, and
these so long! How strangely have thou forgot thy self, to twist such a thread,
and spin out a discourse so sinfully, so frowardly, so long?

Secondly, The words may carry a sense of indignation in the Speaker, How long
will thou speak these things? As if he had said, I am not able to bear thee any
longer, I cannot endure such language, it grates harshly upon mine ear and is a
burden to my spirit; for shame give over, hold thy peace, enjoin thy self
silence, lock up thy lips, How long will thou speak these things?

Thirdly, The charge of an accusation may lie under these words, How long will thou speak these things? That is, How long will thou speak vain and foolish
words, indiscreet and false words, dangerous and blasphemous words, imputing
injustice unto God? Interrogatio ex adjuncto tempore acu eos ad dit
reprehensioni. Sanct.
Art thou obstinate and pertinacious? Will thou not yet hearken to the
admonitions and wholesome counsel of thy friends? How long! Thus he taxes and
censures him, How long will thou speak? We have the like sense in that
Question, Psalm. 4.2. where David contests with his hardened enemies, O ye sons
of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? How long will ye love
vanity, and seek after leesing? How long, and how long? it is matter of
admiration, to think that reasonable creatures should be so unreasonable to
love vanity, and to love it long. His spirit rises and boyls so high with holy
indignation, to see men so foolish, that his mouth must run over in censure and
accusation, How long! The text of wisdoms expostulation, Prove. 1.22. (How long
ye simple ones will ye love simplicity?) bears the same gloss, one
interpretation fits both.

How long will thou speak these things? These things.] The demonstrative
particle may have reference to the words immediately foregoing, and only to
them, How long will thou speak these things? That is, the things which thou
have spoken in the sixth and seventh Chapters. The language is undervaluing and
contemptuous, How long will thou speak these things? Such poor stuff. How long
will thou trouble thy Auditors with such matter, such fruitless, frothy,
crude, and undigested matter; matter so injurious, so dishonorable to God, so
unsavory, and unedifying to man.

Taking Job (under Bildads apprehension) as having failed and erred in his
discourse. Observe, first,

Perseverance in evil is worse then the doing of evil, How long will thou sp^ak
these things? If thou having spoken once amiss had recalled thy self, and
stopped there, it had been more excusable, To outlash sometimes in a word, may
be a wise man's case: but to make such a continued studied oration as this, and
be out in all, and all to be an invective against heaven, who is able to bear
it? To speak or do ill though but once, is too often by once; To act evil
often, is to double every act. The shortest time is too long to serve any lust
in. When the Apostle Peter (1 Pet. 4.3.) says, The time past of our life may
suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles; his meaning is, the time
past is too much: our lusts have got too much of our lives, as the world has
got too much of our loves. One minute is more then we owe to the service of
sin. The sufficiency here spoken of is an excess; the time past of our lives
is too much to work the will of the Gentiles. We may not make an equal
division of our lives between our lusts and Christ, so much to Christ, so much
to lust. Nothing is more unequal then this equality. We can never serve Christ
too long, nor sin too short a time. We cannot bestow too much of our breath
in holy speeches and conferences; nor can we bestow too little in those which
are vain and sinful. We may justly take off those who are most concise and
laconicall in useless discourses, with, How long will you speak these things?
Frothie words are the waste of time as well as of breath.

Secondly, Note, Bildad rebukes Job for his lavish language.

It is our duty to be watchful over our words. How long will thou speak thus?
We must observe our own words, and know what we speak. We should stop our own
mouths, and put our selves to silence, when the tongue grows unruly. It were
very happy that some had power as well as authority over their own mouths, and
knew how to put that bridle (spoken of in the Psalm) upon their own lips. It is
better for a man to stop his own mouth by prudence, then that another should
stop it by reproof.

Thirdly, Taking Bildads supposition still, that Job was in the wrong. Note,

It is our duty to give check to fruitless and frothie speeches, much more to
blasp^emous and wicked speeches. Bildad thought it high time to silence Job,
seeing Job would not silence himself. The Apostle represents to Titus the
tongue-folly of the Cretians, There are many u^ruly and vain talkers among you,
especially they of the circumcision; and what must be done with these, who
cared so little what they said? He is counseled how to deal with them in the
next words, Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, etc. It is
a sin in the hearer to let another speak sinfully without a signification of
his distaste. The word which the Apostle uses to Titus, (...).
is a metaphor taken from the muzling of barking, bauling dogs, when they open
unseasonably and are unquiet, Rational conviction is a Gospel-muzle, and an
effectual stop-mouth for unruly talkers. And it is observable, that the
Apostle uses this similitude of muzling a dog, when he speaks of those of
the circumcision, concerning whom he had given caution in a very suitable
character ( Phil. 3.2.) Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the
concision; that is, of those who stood for circumcision. Writing to the
Philippians, he calls them dogs; and his advice to Titus is, they must be
muz^'d. The noxious issues of the tongue must either be cured or stopped, Evil
words corrupt (which is worse then the corrupting of good air) good manners. An
infection taken in at the ear, has often poisoned the heart.

Fourthly, Taking Bildad as mistaken (and so he was) in this reproof and
censure upon Job. Observe

Reproofs and often grounded upon mistakes. It is easy to reprove, what we do
not apprehend. Bildad perceived not the reach and drift of Job, and yet he falls
heavily upon him with reproofs. A due understanding of his scope, would have
given a fair comment upon his words. But Bildad clothes the speech of Job, in a
sense which he abhorred; and having put it in that ugly dress, he reproves and
censures it accordingly. Many disfigure the opinions and doctrines of others
with conceits of their own, and presuming they hold or mean thus and thus, they
dispute not against the real opinion of the opposite party, but their own
disguise. As the persons of the Primitive Christians were often put into Lions,
or Bears-skins, by their barbarous and heathenish persecutours, and then baited
with dogs; so are the opinions of many later Christians debated.

(...) Spiritus sumitur prohalitu and per Metonymiam pro verbis, i e. pro de^e
articulate, and per loquelae instrumenta in verba formate. Bald.
And how long shall the words of thy mouth be as a strong wind? The Hebrew word
for word runs thus, And the words of thy mouth a strong wind: We resume in
this later clause, How long, and add, be like, to supply the sense. There is
no term of comparison expressed in the original, yet the strength of one is
employed, and therefore to fill up the meaning, we render, And how long shall
the words of thy mouth be as a strong wind? M. Broughton translates it without
a note of similitude, How long will thou talk in this sort, that the words of
thy mouth be a vehement wind?

Words are air or breath formed and articulated, by the instruments of speech.
Hence breath and words are put for the same in diverse Scriptures (Psalm. 33.6.)
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth. Breath in the later clause, is no more then word in the
first, for it was a powerful word, which caused all the creatures to stand out
in their several forms. So Isa. 11.4. He shall smite the earth with the rod of
his mouth, and with the breath of his lips (or with the wind of his lips)
shall he stay the wicked; It is not blowing upon wicked men that will slay
them, but it is speaking to them; there is a power in the word of a Prophet,
when spoken in the Name of Christ, which destroys those who will not obey it,
Hos. 6.5. I have hewed them by my Prophets, I have slain them by the words of
my mouth.

Secondly, Graeci and latini Prophetas quosdam ex Hebraeo Cabiros
cognominarunt, ob insignem eorum ad extra gravitatem and loquacitatem idem
dicti Corybantes. Bold. Quos Authors latini Divos potes, seu potentes vocant,
Graecis (...) dicuntur ab hac voce, quae potem sive potentem denotat. Drus. Ad
magnanimitatem referri potest, quod corpore attenuato exhaustisque viribus
fortiter tamen persisteret in loquendo and respondendo. Cajet. Iobi oration non
fuit frigida and languidased vehemens and concitata. Pined.
Bildad is conceived to allude to a certain sort or sect of men. For from Cabir
here translated strong, the name of certain Poets or old Prophets is derived,
whom the Greeks and Latins called Cabirs or Cabirims. These men had an
affected outward gravity, yet were full of words, and much given to Battologie,
repeating the same things over and over. Bildad ranks Job (say some) with those
Prophets, How long shall the words of thy mouth be like those roming Cabirs,
who by a needless multiplying of words, grated the ears, and burdened the
spirits of all the hearers? Why do thou speak, as if thou could carry the
matter with empty words, and bare repetitions.

Thirdly, The word strong wind, may note the stoutnesse of Jobs spirit, or the
magnanimity he expressed in his words. Jobs language was not cold and chill, as
if his breath were frozen, but he spoke with hight and heat, The spirit and
courage of a man, breaths out at his lips; How long shall the words of thy
mouth be a strong wind? When will thou yield to God, and lie humbly at his
feet? What a heart have thou? Thou speak as big, as if thou had never been
touched, as if God never laid one stroke upon thee; thou have a weak body, but
a stiff spirit: Thou speak as if thou would bear all down before thee, and
by thy boldness, storm and bluster those out of countenance, who are here to
give thee counsel.

Fourthly, Take in the similitude, How long shall the words of thy mouth be as
a strong wind? That is, how long will thou speak so much, and speak so
fiercely. For the word Caber is more then Gadol, which signifies barely great.
Gramarians note, that it signifies both continued quantity and discreet
quantity, multitude and magnitude. How many words will thou speak? and how
great words will thou speak? Spiritus multiplex ermones oris tui. Vulg (...)
Spiritus multiloquus. Sept.
Shall thy words be as a great, various, enfolded wind? (so the Vulgar,) Will thou blow all the points of the compass at once, and like a whirle-winde,
invade and circle us on every side.

Such words are like a strong wind.

First, Because of their blustering noise. There are stormy and tempestuous
words. The tempest of the tongue is one of the greatest tempests in the world.
Passionate language troubles both the air and ear, makes all unquiet, like an
enraged angry wind.

Secondly, In such words as in stormy winds there is great strength to bear
all down before them, or to sway all to that point they blow for. As all the
trees in a forest look that way which the wind sits: so all the spirits in
any Assembly, are apt to turn that way which words bearing a fair show of
reason direct. How often are the judgments and opinions of men, carried by
words either to good or evil, to truth or error. And unless a man have good
abilities of judgment and reason, to manage what he knows or holds, and to
make himself master of it: It is a hard thing upon a large wind of another
discourse, not to have his opinion turned. Hence the Apostle ( Tit. 1.11.)
speaking of vain-talkers, says, Their words subvert whole houses; as a strong
wind, so strong words blow houses down, They subvert whole houses; as that
subverts the frame and materials of the house, so this the people or
inhabitants of the house; when Christ breathed graciously toward Zacheus, he
said ( Luke 19.9.) This day is salvation come to this house; when false
teachers breathe erroniously, subversion comes to many houses. The Apostle (
Ephesians 4.14.) using this similitude about the doctrines of men, advises us to
look to our ground, and that we be well rooted; That we be no more children,
tossed too and fro, and carried with every wind of doctrine; as if he had
said, The wind that blows from the lips of seducers (unless you be well
established) will carry you to and fro like children, or wave your tops up and
down as trees, yea endanger the pulling you up by the roots.

Thirdly, Strong words are as strong winds in a good sense, for as many strong
winds purge and cleanse the air, making it more pure and healthy, so those
strong wholesome winds from the mouths of men, purge the mind of error and
cleanse the soul of sin: This is the special means which Christ has set up
to cleanse his people from infectious and noisome opinions. These he disperses
and dispels by the breath of his Ministers, in the faithful and authoritative
dispensation of the Gospel.

Fourthly, There are ill qualities in strong winds; some are infectious
winds, they corrupt the air, conveying ill vapors to the places on which they
breathe: So there is a strong, unwholesome wind of words, which carries unto
sin or error. How often are the spirits and manners of men infected and
poisoned by such a breath?

Fifthly, They may be compared unto strong winds, in regard of the lightness
of them; the wind has little solidity in it, and that is it, which Bildad
especially reproves in Job; here are a great many words, much of the tongue,
but here is little matter, Words without weight are but wind: when you gather
them up, weigh and consider them fully, you can make nothing of them, there is no
tack in them. Wind will not feed, no more will such words; but wholesome and
faithful words are meat and drink, strength and nourishment to the soul:
Sound discourse yields a well tempered understanding, many refreshing morsels.

Lastly, They are like strong winds for the swiftness of them; words pass
speedily, and fill all quickly; Their line is gone out through all the earth,
and their words to the end of the world, Psalm. 19.4. Another Psalm speaks as
much of wicked men, Their tongue walks through the earth, Psalm. 73.9. as the
wind runs from one part of the world to another: So do words, when they are
sent upon an errand, either to do good, or to do hurt; Therefore God chose
the Ministry of the Word, as an instrument to save his people. And it is the
fittest instrument, running swiftly into the ears, and so conducting truth into
the hearts of thousands at once. Upon the day of Pentecost ( Act. 2.2, 3.) when
the Disciples met together, the text says, Suddenly there came a sound from
heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they
were sitting; first comes a rushing wind; what follows? There appeared unto
them cloven tongues with fire. These represented the manner how the Gospel
should be conveyed through the world: The holy Ghost is sent in tongues, to show
that by tongues tipped and inspired, acted and moved by the holy Ghost, the world
should be subdued to the knowledge of Jesus Christ. The tongue is the chief
Organ of speech. And observe, with the tongues there comes a wind, a rushing
wind, implying that words spoken by those tongues should be as a mighty rushing
wind, and like that wind, which filled all the house where they sat, should
fill the world, even all Nations with the sound of the Gospel; that, like a
strong wind they should bear down the errors, sins and lusts of men before
them, and like a wholesome wind, purge and winnow out all the filthiness and
uncleanness, the chaff and dust of men's spirits. By cloven tongues and a
rushing wind, wonders have been wrought in the world. As those unruly talkers
(Tit. 1.11.) subverted, so those who talk by rule, have converted whole houses;
The wind of words blows both good and evil to the world; and we may as much
encourage holy tongues, Let your words he long and long, a strong wind: as
check a vain talker in the language of Bildad, How long shall thy words be a
strong wind.

From this general reproof, Bildad descends to a special charge against Job.

(...), Injuste aget judicans. Sept. Thesis est dicendorum.
Verse 3. Does God pervert judgment? or does the Almighty pervert justice?
As if he had said, Job, thou have spoken words which like a strong wind
pervert all things, and turn them up-side-down. But, Does God pervert? Does he
turn things up-side-down. This blasphemy is the interpretation of many of thy
complaints. Thou seem to lay this aspersion upon God. But (with indignation
I speak it) does God pervert judgment?

The Question is resolvable into a vehement negation, God does not pervert
judgment, neither does the Almighty pervert justice. He gives it with a
question for greater emphasis, Does God pervert judgment? Do thou think he
will? Far be it from thee to think so; Injustice lies far from the heart
of God, justice lies at his heart, He loves judgment, Psalm. 37.28.

To clear the Text, I shall briefly touch upon the single terms, 1. God. 2.
Almighty. 3. Judgment. 4. Justice: And then show what it is to pervert
judgment and justice; from all it will appear, how extremely opposite it is to
the very nature of God to pervert either.

(...) Fortis potens.
Does God.] The word is, El, signifying the strong God, the mighty God, the
powerful God. In the second clause, Does the Almighty pervert justice? We have
the word, Shaddai, which name of God was largely opened at the seventeenth
verse of the fifth Chapter. I shall not stay upon it here, but only as it
respects the point in hand, Shaddai netat robustum and sufficientem ad omnia
perpetra^da and executioni manda^da, quae facienda jud caverit: aliqui vertunt,
invictum. Alij vertunt ubetrimum, abundantem coplosu^, cujus virtus, and
munificentia, per omnia permeat, and cujus uberibus and bonitare omnia alantar
and nutriantur, qui nullius indiget, qui bonorum nostrorum nulla cupiditate
tangitur. Pined. (...). Sept. Quod sic explicant, qui cunctarum rerum naturas
summo ordine and equitate constituit, is in te affligerdo, quod justum est, non
subvertet.
and so there are three interpretations of that title observable.

1. It notes God all-sufficient to do what he pleases, or to effect what he
designeth: if he gives direction for any judgment to be executed, he is
Shaddai, It shall be done. As he is El, a powerful Judge to give sentence, so
he is Shaddai, an Almighty God to execute the sentence: There is no resisting
his power, no getting out of his hands, his name is Shaddai.

Secondly, The word signifies, one who has all abundance, plenty and fullness
in himself; As also, whose power, goodness and bounty, flow out to the supply
of others, himself having no need to receive from any other. He is a fountain
of all for all. Hence Shaddai cannot but do justice; He that has abundance in
himself needs not take bribes to pervert justice, Needy Judges are often
covetous Judges: they who have not a fullness of their own, are under a great
temptation to wrong others, to supply their wants. But he that gives to all,
needs not receive from any. This consideration sets God infinitely above one of
the strongest temptations to injustice.

Thirdly, The word Shaddai, is rendered, The maker of all things. Will the
Almighty, the maker of all things, who has set the world in such an exquisite
form and order, who has given so much beauty to the creature; will he put
things out of order, or do such a deformed act as this, pervert justice? He
that is the maker of all things, and has made them in number, weight and
measure, will he turn the world up-side-down, or make confusion in the world*
it is not possible he should.

So then the name Shaddai, in these three senses, is aptly applied to God, in
opposition to the perverting of justice. As Abraham debates the matter with him
( Genesis 18.25.) Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? It is impossible
for God who judges all men, to do an act of injustice unto any man. He that
judges all can do injustice to none. God takes no advantage to be unjust,
because none can call him to account for injustice. They should be furthest
from doing wrong, who need not fear any appeal from them, or complaint against
them, if they do wrong. The Judge of the whole earth has none to judge him.
He will do right to all, who cannot be judged by any.

Further, Consider those two words, judgment and justice. Judgment and
justice are often put in Scripture for the same, and when put together, the
later is as an epithet to the former, Psalm. 119.121. I have done judgment and
justice: that is, I have done judgment justly, exactly, to a hair. Sometimes
they have a distinct signification.

Facere legem and praeceptum est facere judicium. Deus ideo leges suas judicia
vocat, quod aequissima sunt, quae praescribit.
First, Judgment signifies, that right which every man ought to do at all
times ( Psalm. 106.3. Isa. 5.7.)

Secondly, The Law or rule it self according to which every man is to do right,
Levit. 26.26. Psalm. 19.10. God calls all his Laws judgments, because they are
all, most just and equal. Judgment has a threefold opposition, by which we
may understand the nature of it.

First, Judgment is opposed to anger, rigor and severity, Jer. 10.24. Correct
me, O Lord, but with judgment, not in thine angere That is, Correct me
mercifully, moderately, and in measure: suffer not thy whole displeasure to
arise; Ezekiel. 44.14.
do not exact the utmost farthing. In which sense the judgments of God upon
wicked men in hell, shall be without judgment: And thus to do a thing without
judgment, is all one, as to do it without mercy.

2. Judgment is opposed to folly, or to foolishness: Judgment is wisdom;
when we say, Such an one is a man of judgment, we mean, he is a wise man. Thus
judgment is an ability to judge.

3. Judgment opposed to injustice and wrong, which is the vulgar and common
meaning.

We may take it in any of these senses here. As judgment is opposed to anger,
so it is moderation in justice, Will the Lord pervert judgment? That is, will
not he be as moderate in execut^ng judgment, as equity can admit? Hos. 11.9. I
will not execute the fierceness of mine anger. I will not return to destroy
Ephraim, for I am God and not man, the Holy One in the midst of thee, and I
will not enter into the City. As an enemy having taken a City, to show them
some favor, says, I will not enter your City with my Army, to spoil and
plunder you: so God speaks here, Though men be as wicked as they can, yet God
will not be as angry as he can.

Again, Will he pervert judgment, as it imports wisdom? No, he walks exactly
by the rule of wisdom, of the highest and purest wisdom. There are no mists
or clouds of ignorance before the eye of his understanding. And as he has no
darkness, so no false lights.

Lastly, Take it as opposed to injustice; (...) Iudicium jus, and mos seu modus
in judicando. Iudicium est in vero absque errore cognoscendo, justitia in
tribuendo cuique quod suum est. Iudicium paena^ respicit, justitia
compensationem been actorum. Drus.
Will the Lord pervert judgment? Will he wrong any man? Carries he a matter
sinisterly or partially? He will not do it.

Again, As judgment and justice are taken precisely or distinctly.

First, Judgment signifies due order in trying and finding out the state of a
cause: And justice the giving of sentence upon that trial.

Secondly, Judgment is a clear knowledge of what ought to be done: And justice
is the doing of that which we know. Justice is an evennesse and uprightness of
conscience, in passing every thing according to received light.

Thirdly, Some distinguish them thus: Judgment is in condemning those that are
guilty, and justice is in absolving and acquitting those that are innocent, or
rewarding those who have done well.

Fourthly, Thus: Judgment respects capital causes which are for life; and
justice respects civil causes, which are for estate or liberty.

Take them in any of these senses, or under whatsoever other distinction they
are considerable. The Lord God El-Shaddai, is no perverter of either. He never
disturbs or cloggs the order of trial; He is no hinderer of the sentence from
due execution. He exactly understands every cause, and he awards what is due to
every person. He wrongs no man in life or limb, in estate or liberty.

Thus we see what judgment and justice are: I shall now open what it is to
pervert judgment and justice. The same word is used in both. Istae
repetitiones div na eloquia multum comme^dant, sive eadem verba alia sententia,
sive aliis verbis eadem sententia repetatur: illa enim ejusdem rei resumptio,
moram quandam in meditando and ponderando requirit, quod in psalmis frequens
August. (...) Pervertit, subvertit, detorquet a recto and aequo, supplantat.
Vulg. Est autem in verbo (supplanto) perbella Metaphora, proprie est objecto,
vel supposito pede aliquem ad casum in pellere.


Does God pervert?] Some translate it, supplant justice. And so it imports,
secret, cunning ways of injustice; for to supplant, properly is to come
behind a man, and to strike up his heels, and cast him down, or to lay
somewhat in his way, upon which he may trip or stumble, and then fall. God does
not supplant justice, he lays no plots, he sets no snares to entangle or
overthrow a man in his cause.

More largely, The word signifies, To make crooked, and so it very well
answers the point in hand. Judgment and justice are both carried by a straight
line: They are the rectitude of our actions. To pervert judgment, is to make
crooked lines: So we have the word ( Eccles. 1.16.) That which is crooked
cannot be made straight. He means it of civil, not natural things, whose
crookedness is often cured by art; but who can cure all civil evils; man is
not able by all his diligence to turn the course of things which God has
determined, though to him there appear much crookedness, and many distortions.
Solomon himself makes this interpretation (Chap. 7.13.) where he shows, that it
is best to submit to God, because his will is irresistible, and the effects of
it unavoidable, Consider the work of God, for who can make that straight which
he has made crooked? So then, to pervert judgment is to make judgment
crooked; or to make judgment (to which all things and persons should bow) to
bow it self down, as the word is also used, Eccles. 12.3. In the description of
old age, The strong men shall bow themselves; the legs and knees in old age
bow and double under us. To pervert justice is to creeple justice, to make it
lame and halt. This word is translated to overthrow (Job 19.6.) Know now that
God has overthrown me, and has compast me in with his net. Job speaks in a
great passion, as if God had come upon him violently in judgment, and cast
him: We say a man is overthrown or cast in his suit. God overthrows men and
Nations; but he never overthrows justice. A man who overthrowes his adversary,
may settle justice. Job looked upon himself, as one against whom God had entered
his action, and overthrown him in the suit. Lamenting Jeremy cries out ( Lam.
3.59.) O Lord, thou have seen my wrong (it is this word) Thou have seen how I
am vexed, and wrested by the hard dealings of men, judge thou my cause; Thou will judge me aright, and set me straight again.

Judgment is perverted two ways, 1. By subtilty. 2. By power.


First, Some pervert judgment by subtilty; They are wise to do evil. The Lord
has infinite wisdom, and so is able to go beyond and overreach all
creatures; he is wise enough to be-fool all the world: but he is not wise to
do evil; His wisdom is not a trap or a snare to others, but an unerring
guide and light to himself.

2. Some pervert judgment by violence and force: if they cannot untie the knot
by craft, they will cut it asunder by power; and if they have not law for it,
they have will for it, and an arm for it, and it shall be done. The Lord can
do what he will, but he has no will to do what is evil. He can put forth as
much strength as he desires, but he has no desire to pervert justice, or to
act his power to over-aw and master it.

Further, To pervert judgment and justice, has these two things in it.

1. To darken and obscure the rule of judgment. 2. To torture or mis-interpret
the rule of judgment.
1. Judgment is perverted by darkning and obscuring the law or rule of
justice. God does not do so. He never casts a mist before his Word, or a vail
over it, that he may act against it.

2. Neither does he mis-interpret his law. A good law ill expounded is made the
warrant of an evil judgment. A gloss corrupting the text of the Law corrupts
justice. Where tongue and conscience are set to sale, the wit must find out
somewhat to help the market.

The words opened invite these Observations. First, That

God is most exact in judgment, God is a just God. It is a high truth, and we
should adore it, that whatsoever God does, he is just in doing it. When reason
cannot reach, or make it out, yet faith must; and we must honor God in what we
cannot understand: The Lord is righteous in all his ways, though his ways are
past finding out. For,

1. He hears every cause before he judges. He does not judge one side, before
he knows the other, or judge any man before he has heard him fully out: We see
both ( Genesis 11. and Genesis 18.) in those two great acts of justice, when God
confounded the builders of Babel, and when he destroyed Sodom, I will go down
and see whether it be altogether according to the report that is come up unto
me. God needs no intelligence to be brought him unto heaven: neither does he
that fills all places go to any place to enform himself: but he speaks thus, to
note how exact he is in point of justice; To show, that he deals with the
children of men, as a man: who, hearing a report of such a thing done, says, I
will not judge of it by what I hear, but I will go see whether it be so or no.
Without evidence of the fact, the sentence cannot be just, though it may be
right.

2. He examineth and takes confession, which is another point of justice. So he
proceeded with our first parents ( Genesis 3.) proposing interrogatories unto
them, and then the judgment is pronounced according unto what was confessed; he
judges them out of their own mouths, ver. 17. Because thou have done this, and
hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, therefore, etc.

3. God proceeds by the evidence of the Law, as well as by the evidence of the
fact; and this also sets forth the exactness of his judgment: These two
things make judgment perfect; you must not only have the evidence of the fact,
that such a thing is done, but you must have the evidence of the Law condemning
such a deed. Though God himself be an everlasting Law, and he may judge all
from his own breast; yet he has given out a Law, which gives the knowledge of
sin. It is said, Romans 2. They that have sinned without the Law, shall perish
without the Law, as if some should be judged without Law: but he means without
a Law formally published, not materially enacted. For he speaks of the
Gentiles, who were not within the hearing of Mount Sinai, and had not seen that
formality of a Law written in tables of stone; yet they had a Law written in
their hearts; They that have not heard the Law published or seen it written in
a book, shall be judged by the Law written in their hearts, their conscience
bearing them witness, and their thoughts accusing, or else excusing one
another.

4. God is impartial in giving judgment. He does not strike one and spare
another, who is under the same condemnation; nothing can sway or bias him,
nothing can preponderate the balance of justice in his hand; you cannot put in
any consideration to sway his beam, beside the right.

There are three things which usually cause men to pervert justice, The Lord is
free from them all.

1. Fear of greatness. Some would do justice, but they dare not, the
business concerns a great man, and to do justice upon such, is, To take a
Bear by the tooth (as we say) or to play with the paw of a Lion. Now the Lord
is not turned away for fear, nor deferrs he justice for any man's big looks, The
day of the Lord (says the Prophet, Isa. 2.) shall be against the high Oaks. He
is El-Shaddai, the All-mighty, the all-powerfull God, and therefore cares not
for the might or power of man.

2. Hope of reward, that is another thing which causes many to pervert
judgment. With some their hope is stronger then their fear: They care not for
the greatness of men, but they hope for gain. A bribe taken or promised clogs
and obstructs the course of justice (Hos. 4.14.) Her Rulers with shame do
love, Give ye; the Hebrew is, Her shields, Magistrates should be as shields to
the people to protect them, but what did they? They love, Give ye, that word
pleased them. They were more pleased with receiving rewards, then with doing
right. The Lord is above all gifts, he is Shaddai, he has all in himself, and
needs not that any should give unto him; and he tells them expressly ( Ezekiel.
7.19.) That their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in
the day of his wrath; offer thousands of silver and gold, he will not stay
judgment a minute for it, Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath;
In the day of man's wrath they sometimes will, but never in the day of Gods.

Thirdly, Affection and neernesse of relation pervert judgment. Many have
clean hands, free from bribes, and stout hearts free from fears, yet they are
overcome with affection and relations; these put out the eye of justice. The
Lord is above all relations. As he commands us in our cleaving unto Christ, not
to know father or mother, Yea to hate Father and mother, wife, Etiamsi fuisset
Ieconia mihi charissimus, que^ semper in oculis serrem. Jun.
etc. (and those are nearest to us) that we may keep close unto Christ: So
himself does not know the nearest relation, to pervert judgment or do wrong
in favor of it. Hence he says of Coniah (Jer. 22.24.) Though Coniah be as the
signet upon my right hand, yet will I pluck him thence; Let him plead neernesse
(as men do, such a man is of your blood or alliance, pray spare him) God will
not spare the signet on his right hand, that is, he will not stop justice upon
any pretense of neernesse or usefulness.

5. God is exact (take them dictinctly) both in judgment and in justice. He is
as curious in searching out the cause, as in sentencing the person. As ready to
acquit the innocent, as to condemn the guilty: as careful to relieve the
oppressed, as to chasten the oppressor: as Pervertii jus, qui non punit
improbos, pervertit justitiam, qui non remunerat justorum bona opera. Drus.
zealous in rewarding those who deserve well, as in punishing those who do
evil. Not to reward is as great injustice, as not to punish. What God has
promised shall be performed, and what he threatens shall be inflicted. He will
neither discourage goodness by neglecting it, nor encourage sin by winking
at it. He has bread in one hand, and a sword in the other.

Thus we see, The Lord is most exact in justice (Psalm. 48.10.) The right hand
of the Lord is full of righteousness. His power and might are his right hand;
and that right hand has nothing but righteousness in it. Few men come to that
of Laban, It is in the power of mine hand to do thee hurt, but I will not:
most do as much hurt as is in their power. God has all power in his hand, but
he wrongs no man. As none have now any cause to say, that they have received
wrong from the hand of God: so at last all shall confess they have not.

Further, Bildad speaking upon supposition, that God was wronged injustice,
teaches us, That

It is a duty to vindicate the justice of God, whenever we hear i^ wronged.
When we hear any wounding God is his faithfulness, truth, or justice, we
should presently stand up to plead for him; What, will God be unfaithful? Will
God pervert judgment? Will God be untrue? etc. Thus we should plead for God.
When Jeremy could not make out the justice of God, he is an advocate for his
justice, Lord, thou art righteous, yet let me plead with thee. He would not
have the matter once questioned, though the manner was enquired.

Lastly, Observe, That

The judgments of God may be secrets to us, but they are never injuries to us.
Justice is in all the dealings of God, but his justice is not always visible.
His judgments are founded upon reason, when upon his will, for his will is the
highest reason. God cannot be unjust, and he ever punishes those who are. He is
so far from subverting judgment, that he subverteth Kings and Magistrates,
yea Nations and Kingdoms for subverting judgment; To subvert a man in his
cause, the Lord approves not, Lam. 3.36. The Hebrew is, The Lord sees not:
That is, he does not see it to approve it; but he does see it to punish it. He
is an avenger of those who will not avenge the oppressed. And as he looks for
judgment in all places, so especially among his own people, upon whom he
bestows most mercy. ( Isa. 5.2.) When the Lord done so much for his vineyard,
He looked for judgments, and behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold
a cry. God makes privy search through a Nation to find this jewel: Judgment
between man and man in commerce, which is, commutative justice; judgment from
Magistrates to the people, which is distributive justice: for these God is
searching at this day; one of the greatest sins among us, is, the perverting of
judgment: And until judgment return to man, how can we expect mercy should
return from God? (Jer. 5.1.) Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem,
and seek in the broad places thereof, if you can find a man, if there be any
that executes judgment, that loves the truth, and I will pardon it. A Land is
seldom filled with the judgments of God, till it is emptied of judgment among
men. What a sad thing is it that there should be so many cries against
injustice on earth, in a time when there is so much crying out for mercy from
heaven! That in such a time when the judgments of God are upon our selves, we
should not learn righteousness to act it among our selves! I am persuaded the
Sword of war had been rusting in it is sheath to this day, if the Sword of
justice had been used as it ought, both to punish offenders, and protect the
innocent. And when the sword of justice shall be both ways employed, I doubt
not but the sword of war shall be sheathed again, and employed no more, but
be beaten into plow-shares, and our spears into pruning hoks. Keep ye judgment
(says the Lord by his Prophet, Isa 56.1) for my salvation is near to come, and
my righteousness to be revealed. God has done terrible things in
righteousness among us, and we hope he will do comfortable things in
righteousness among us: seeing the righteous destructions of God have been
upon us, and his righteous salvations (we hope) are near us, let not our
righteousness be far off.

JOB Cap. 8. Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. If thy children have sinned against him, and he
have cast them away for their transgression.

If thou would seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the
Almighty.

If thou were pure and upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make
the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.

Though thy beginning was small, yet thy later end should greatly increase.


THese four verses contain the first confirmation of the former general
position, That God is just: which is resolved out of those Questions, Does God
pervert judgment? or does the Almighty pervert justice? He does not. Then, God
is just, there is the Position. And as that Position consists of two parts, so
also does this proof or confirmation of it.

1. That God does not pervert judgment (taking judgment under that strict
notion for punishing of offenders) he proves by the example of Jobs children,
whom God punished because of their transgression, as he conceived.

2. That God does not pervert justice (taking justice under that strict and
distinct notion of rewarding and relieving the innocent) he proves by the
readiness of God to do Job good in case he should humble himself and repent,
in the fifth, sixth, and seventh verses.

His argument for the former may be thus conceived.

He does not pervert judgment who punishes those who have sinned against him.

But God has punished thy children for their sin.

Therefore he does not pervert judgment.

His argument for the later may be thus formed.

He does not pervert justice who is ready to pity as soon as an offender humbly
seeks, sues and submits unto him.

But God is ready to help thee as soon as ever thou humbly seek unto him.

Therefore God does not pervert justice.

Thus you have the general sense of these four verses, as arguments brought
for proof of the former point, that God does not pervert judgment or justice.
I shall now open them distinctly.

If thy children have sinned against him.
There may be a twofold sense given of these words.

First, Thus: Although thy children have sinned against him, and he has cast
them away for their iniquity: yet, if thou wile seek unto him, he will do thee
good. Which translation makes the sense more clear then ours, If thy children
have sinned against him, etc. The one is a supposition of what might be; the
other a concession of what was.

Secondly, By way of proportion, thus: As thy children have sinned against him,
so he has cast them away for their transgression. And so Bildad argues with
Job upon the same principle that Eliphaz had done before, scil. that his sons
and himself had exceedingly provoked God, and that therefore God had sent that
judgment, and laid that heavy stroke upon them, If thy children, or, although
thy children have sinned.

(...)
Against him.] That word is to be opened a little. The Hebrew is, Have sinned
to him. Which is indifferently translated, either before him or against him; we
take the later.

Every sin is committed against God; that is the first. Sin is most opposite
to God. It is against God in his nature: against God in his will: against God
in his very being. Sin would thrust God out of the world, if it were possible;
and therefore it is rightly translated, They have sinned against him. No
marvel if God do so much against sinners, when sin does so much against him;
but is it not a miracle, that God should do any thing, especially such great
things for sinners, when sin does so much against him? David (Psalm. 51.4.)
saw his sin was so much against God, that he overlooks all others against
whom it was, (...) Tibi, tibi soli.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, which
some mis-interpret, as if, because he was a King, he could do no injury to his
subjects, and therefore says, Against thee, thee only have I sinned. But, They
who rule men, may sin against man: and David sinned in that act against man;
First, by doing private wrong. Secondly, by giving public scandal. The reason
then why David spoke thus, was because the sin he had committed was so much
against God, that though he had grievously offended against man, in taking away
the life of one subject, the chastity of another, and by endangering the whole
army to compass a cover for his sin, yet, in this his sin exceeded in
sinfulness, that he sinned against God; and therefore he says, Against thee,
thee only; or, take it comparatively, the sin is so much against thee, that
what is against any other is not worth the naming. God is not only wronged, but
he is chiefly wronged in every sin. As, because in the wrong done to the life
or estate of a subject, the King is chiefly wronged, therefore all inditements
run in this style, Against the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his
Crown and Dignity. Lastly, That place may be understood in the second sense of,
Against thee, that is, Before thee; and so it seems to be expounded in the
later part, Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight,
that is, though others took no notice of this, though it was done in secret (2 Samuel 12.12.) yet it was committed clearly and plainly before thine eyes, thine
eyes, which are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, beheld me in the
darkness of that folly; and therefore against thee have I sinned, and done
this evil in thy sight; as noting that though it were concealed and hidden from
men, yet it could not be concealed and hidden from God. If thy children have
sinned against hi^

And he have cast them away for their transgression. Bildads position is true
in it self, but false in the application, If thy children have sinned against
him. It is a truth that godly parents may have wicked children. Grace does not
always run in a blood. But it was unevident unto Bildad that Jobs children had
sinned against God in his sense. It is not the common sinner whom Bildad
means; by sinning against God he intends, not the inevitable actings of
sinful nature, but the voluntary studied improvements, heightnings, and
provocations of sinful nature.

Further, In that he concludes, They were cast away for their transgression: He
fails again. It is a truth, that sin is the meritorious cause of
punishment, Thy destruction is from thy self, says the Lord, Hos. 13.9. Thy
way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee, Jer. 4.18. Sin will
help us to sorrow enough. Yet this is not a truth, that every man is afflicted
for his sin. As no man knows the love or hatred of God: so no man knows the
sin or holiness of man by all that is before him: we cannot argue every one
is cast away for his transgression, because he is cast away.

He has cast them away for their transgression. (...)
The Hebrew is very elegant, He has sent them away in the hand of their
transgression: or, He has put them into the hand of their transgression. M.
Broughton translates it so. As thy children have sinned against him: so he has
sent them into the hand of their trespasses. Into the hand, that is, into the
power, as ( Chap. 5.20. the hand of the Sword, is, the power of the Sword: and
(Psalm. 63.10.) They shall fall by the Sword; the Hebrew is, They shall fall by
the hand of the Sword. Then, He has delivered them into the hand of their
transgression, is, into the power of their transgression.

(...) Simpliciter mittere aut ejicere significat, quaficum recto tramire
aberrassent aberrandi copiam pro libidine fecisset.
There are two things considerable about this expression of sending or giving up
into the hand of transgression.

1. It may note, That God had delivered up Jobs children unto the reign or
dominion of their own sinful hearts, or had laid the raines in their necks,
suffering their lusts to hurry them whither they would, to carry them captive
unto every sin, and rush them headlong into every evil. The word -- here
used, signifies either simply, to send, or violently to cast, or to put a thing
away from us: and so, it is as much as if Bildad had said, For ^^^uch as thy
children would sin against God, he suffered them to sin their fill; they being
wicked, he gave them up to do all wickednesses; They loved to wander from him,
and he let them wander. We have this sense of the word ( Prove. 29.15) A child
left unto himself brings his mother to shame: The Hebrew is, A child sent
away, sent to himself, or put into his own hands, A child sent away to
himself, or left alone, brings shame, that is, will certainly run into vile
and enormious courses, to the shame of her that bare him. A child left, or
sent to himself, is one that has no guide, no governor, no instructour but
himself. A man that will learn only of himself, has but a fool to his Master,
How much more then a weak child, what a master, what a tutour has a child,
if he have none but himself. To be left or sent out to themselves is, to have
none to counsel or advise them in a right way, or to give them any stop and
check in an ill way. The character that Paul and Barnabas gave of the former
times, when they preached to the Heathens at Lystra, was this ( Act. 14.16.) We
exhort you to turn unto the living God that made heaven and earth, who in times
past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. He let them go, and
never stayed them at all, they had no bridle of restraint, not so much as a
word to bring them back; He suffered all Nations, as if he had said, He left
them in the hand of their transgression, that their own evil hearts should do
what they would with them. In which sense we may also understand that place (
Act. 17.30.) when Paul at Athens disputed with the Philosophers, he tells them
that now God began to look toward them, and had sent them the knowledge of
Christ, The times of that ignorance God wicked at; but now he calls all men
every where to repent. The words undergo a twofold interpretation; Some thus,
to note the indulgence of God, The time past of that ignorance God winked at;
that is, he did not deal severely and strictly with them, when they sinned,
because they had no means, or so little means to keep them from sin. And
there is a truth in it, N^hil aliud filtie volunt Pauli verba quam caecitati
addict o^ fuisse homines, donec se illis Deus patefaciat Calv.
for though ignorance does not totally excuse sin, yet it does abate the
degree and measure of sin. But there is another sense, which I rather
embrace, The times of that ignorance God winked at; that is, in those times
wherein there was so much darkness and blindness in the world, God let men
go on in their sin; they sinned, and he never called upon them, he never
opposed them, or sent any to teach them better. God did not manifest his will
to them as unto the Jews, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his
statutes and judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation, etc.
So that this winking is opposed to favor, rather then to justice. To have the
eye upon a place, or upon persons, is to show them favor, 1 King. 8.29. The
later branch clears this meaning, But now he calls all men every where to
repent: now he does not leave men in the hands of their transgressions: He does
not wink and let them do what they list; now Gospel Light is risen to the
world, and there are many sent out to call in and reclaim wandering prodigals,
many to cry, Return, return. He speaks of it as of the mercy and privilege of
that age, beyond what the former ages had enjoyed. That of the same Apostle
has a parallel sense ( Romans 1.20. and 26.) where describing the dealings of
God with the Gentiles, who sinned against the light of nature, he concludes,
Therefore God left them in the darkness of nature, in the worst of nature:
they came not up so high, as the principles of nature might have led them in
the worship of God, therefore he left them below the principles of nature in
the things of man, He gave them up to vile affect^ons, which is as much as to
say, He put them in the hands of their transgressions. And, ver. 28. He gave
them over to a reprobate mind, to a mind that could not judge aright, which
had not a true understanding of any thing: Hence they elected the worst, and
reprobated the best things. The like we have ( Psalm. 81.11.) of Gods own people
the Jews, So I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts, and they walked in
their own counsels. The Hebrew is, I sent them into the pertinacy of their
hearts, because I had so often called upon them, and they would not hearken,
nor return unto me, therefore I said, forasmuch as you will not hear, you shall
not hear; because you will not obey, you shall have none to call you to
obedience; follow the counsels of your own hearts, as long as you will. This is
the first sense, of putting or sending them into the hand of their
transgression, scil. a leaving them to the reign of their lusts.

Expulit eos e mundo propter praevaricit^^nem. Pagn. Permifit eis pervenire,
quod scelus eorum postulabat. Tygur.
Secondly, (Which is the sense our translation holds out) Thou have left them,
or sent them into the hand of their transgression; That is, Thou have left them
in those evils, which their transgressions did deserve and call for. Our
reading carries that meaning, He has cast them away for their transgression:
Others thus, He has thrust them out of the world for their transgression, He
has suffered that to befall them which their transgression called for.
According to these, the sense is, Thy children sinned against him, and he has
let those evils which their sin deserved fall upon them; He has rewarded
them according to their iniquity (Isa. 64.6, 7.) Our iniquities like the wind
have taken us away: Thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed (or
melted) us, because of our iniquities. The Hebrew is, Allisisti nos in manu
iniquitatis nostrae. Vol.
Thou have consumed or melted us in the hand, or in the power of our
iniquities. And somewhat parallel to this sense, is that ( Genesis 4.6.) If thou
do ill (says God to Cain) sin lies at the door; As if he had said, Thou
shall be given into the hand of sin presently, thy sin shall arrest thee,
and bring those evils upon thee which it deserves, thou shall not need any
other punishment, then thy own wickedness.

Hands and power are ascribed to sin, because God gives men over to those
punishments which their sins challenge at his hands. Some sins have a louder
voice then others; but every sin unpardoned (the mouth whereof is not stopped
by the blood of Christ) cries to God for vengeance, till God put the sinner
into the hand of sin, that he may at once receive pay for, and from his own
folly. Observe from the former interpretation. First, That

The Lord does often in judgment give man up to the power of his sinful
lusts.

This is a general truth, though we cannot draw it down to the instance of
Jobs children: The Lord in wrath leaves man to himself. Every man by nature
sins freely, and many are left by God to a judiciary freedom in sinning. He
cannot restrain himself, and sometimes God will not restrain him, but lets him
take his fill of sin, and be as wicked as he will (Revel. 22.11.) He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still; he that is filthy, let him be filthy still.
This permission is the highest and sorest affliction. This liberty is worse
then any bondage. Thus also the Church leaves those to their ignorance, who
obstinately refuse instruction (1 Cor. 14.38.) He tha^ is ignorant, let him be
ignorant still. Those souls are in a desperate condition, who are put out of
the care either of God or of his Church. Secondly, Observe, That

Sin is a punishment.

Sin is the punishment of sin: Thy children sinned against him, and he gave
them into the hand of their sin; Tu, Domine, dixisti and ita est, ut omna
malus animus sibi ipsi fit poena. August.
he never goes unpunished for sin, who sins and repents not. Thou, Lord
(says one of the Ancients) have decreed it, and so it is, That every evil
mind is it is own scourge. The Apostle tells us ( Heb. 10.31.) that it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hand of the living God: it is indeed; and it is
as fearful a thing to fall into the hand of deadly sins, or dead works. How
dreadful a thing is it to be under the power and tyranny of our own hearts.
The committing of sin is worse then the enduring of trouble? The Lord does
not only punish men according to their sins, but he makes their sin their
punishment, yea, their sins are their punishers. He puts them into the hand of
sin, as into the hand of a tormentour. A Heathen could threaten a wicked man,
Vlciscentur eu^ mones sui. Cicero ad Attich.
thus, His manners shall be his revenge. Holiness carries its reward with it,
and though no creature will recompense the good we do, yet doing good is a
recompense. In keeping the Commandments of God, there is an exceeding great
reward, Psalm. 19.11. The act of keeping them is a reward, as well as the issue.
A good work is pay enough to the worker. So also is an evil work, Prove. 1.32.
The turning away of the simple shall slay him. A simple child, that will not
be ruled, counseled or ordered (such Solomon speaks of, Ye simple ones, how
long will ye love simplicity? That is, your own foolish, vain ways.) The
turning away of such simple ones from the counsel of the wise, shall slay
them. The way of sin is death, as well as the end or wages of it. As faith
the Proverb of the Ancients (they are the words of David concerning Saul, 1 Samuel 24.14.) Wickedness proceeds from the wicked, but mine hand shall not be
upon him. David knew that Saul was a man so wicked, that he needed no other
revenger but his own self, his own sin would bring misery enough upon him:
therefore, says he, Wickedness proceeds from the wicked, that is, the
punishment of wickedness proceeds from the wicked man himself. Observe the
occasion of those words, it was, when some about David advised him to slay
Saul; not I, says he, my hand shall not be upon him, I know he is a man so
given up to sin, so enslaved to his own vile affections, that there is enough
upon him already, and in a short time more will be upon him, Wickedness
proceeds from the wicked, but mine hand shall not be upon him; I will leave
him to the hand of his sin, which is his plague already, and which in a little
time will attach him, and do me right, though he never would. When God took up
a resolution against his own people, that he would not hear or be entreated,
and protested his mind could not be toward them, he says (Jer. 15.2.) Let
them go forth, such as are for the sword to the sword; and such as are for the
famine, to the famine; and such as are for the captivity, to the captivity.
This was a dreadful sentence; but for God to say to a people, Let them go
forth in the ways of their sin; he that is for drunkenness, to be drunk; he
that is for uncleanness, to be unclean; he that is for pride, to be proud; he
that is for swearing to oaths; and he that is for envy, to be envious; and he
that is for idolatry, to his idols. O how unconceivably miserable are such a
people! To be left in the hand of these sins, is a spiritual judgment; and
these sins will quickly bring in temporal judgments, and not long hence
eternal.

From the later interpretation, Observe,

Sin shall not always go away unpunished by outward, sensible evils.

God will sink and cast men away for their transgressions: If sin be in the
house, punishment lies at the doors, and will turn the lock and open it, or
break it open upon the sinner. And though he hide himself in vaults or secret
corners, yet his iniquity will find him out. He that will not cast away his
transgression, shall be cast away for his transgression, whether he will or no.

So much for these words, wherein Bildad sets before Job the sinfulness of his
children, thereby to vindicate the justice of God in giving them up to the
dominion of their sin, or to destruction for their sin. In the next words he
advises Job to take heed by their harms, and assures him of happy success, in
case he do. As if he had said, Though they perished in their transgression,
yet do not thou despair. For,

Verse 5. If thou would seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to
the Almighty, etc.
God has been just in punishing thy children, and he will be merciful in
pardoning thee, in accepting thy person, in prospering thy estate, if now at
last thou apply thy self to seek him diligently; Though thy children have
fallen into the hand of their transgression, yet there is hope that thou may
escape. Thus he deals with him in a way of counsel, as Eliphaz had done
before, Chap. 5. v. 8. I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my
cause; this is the counsel I give thee, and the course I would take my self.
Bildad speaks the same in effect, and almost in the letter; If thou would
seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication unto the Almighty, etc, He
would awake for thee.

There are two parts of Bildads counsel.

1. To humble himself in prayer, ver. 5. 2. To purge himself by repentance,
ver. 6.
Or, we may look upon this counsel as a pattern of repentance, and turning to
God, in three things.

1. To seek unto God. 2. To acknowledge our own unworthiness to receive any
mercy from God. 3. To be sincere and upright-hearted with God in both.
If thou would seek unto God betimes. (...) Est quafi aurorare aut
diluculare Deu^. Di^igenter, sedulo, and magno studio quaerere. Qui mare surgit
precandi causa, dicitur manicare Deu^. D^us.
We have met with the word more then once before; and in strictness of
translation it sounds thus much, If thou would seek unto God in the morning;
or, If thou would morning God, be with him early in the morning, that is, If
thou would seek unto him diligently: they that come in the morning about
business, are diligent in their business. The Apostles rule is ( Heb. 3.) To
day harden not your hearts; but here Bildad advises, Whilst it is morning,
which is the first part or beginning of the day, pour out thy heart to God. So
then, it may be taken for seeking God either at the first of the day, the
morning; or, for any earnest, diligent and fervent seeking unto God in any part
of the day; To seek God diligently, though in the night, is according to this
Hebraisme, a seeking him in the morning.

It was an ancient custom to seek God in the morning (take it in the letter)
early in the morning. David professes this, Psalm. 5.3. My voice shall thou hear
in the morning, O Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and
will look up. And Heathens, by the light of nature, took this course in their
profane and superstitious worship. Herodot l 10. Plin Ep. 57. ad Tr^j^^.
Tertul. Apol. to p. 2.
Herodotus in his tenth book, tells us of the Persian Magi, who addressed
themselves early in the morning to seek their false gods. And the Primitive
Christians were wondered at for their early devotions. Pliny in an Epistle to
Trajan, and Tertullian in his Apologeticks for the Christians, report their
assemblies, before daybreak to pray and call upon God. And there has been,
and still is a superstitious abuse of this among the Papists, who call their
morning prayers, their Mattins, because they begin early in the morning.

Hence, observe, First,

Prayer is our seeking unto God.

That Is the general description of prayer. When we pray, our work is to get
near to God, to find God; every soul that prays indeed, feels it self at a
loss for somewhat, that God only can bestow. In God all that we want is to be
found, and therefore he invites us to seek him. In this life the Saints are a
generation of seekers: in the next, they shall be a generation of enjoyers;
when God is fully found, there is nothing more to be sought: Having him, we have
all. The work of heaven is to bless God for what we have found, not to seek
him for what we want.

Secondly, God must be sought unto without delay.

As it is with vows, so with prayers, Defer not to pay them; defer not to
pray, Isa. 5.5. Seek him whilst he may be found, Matthew. 6.33. Seek first the
Kingdom of God; first in time; not only chiefly, but early, put not God behind
in the later end of the day, or in the later end of your businesses. It is best
to begin with him who is best.

Thirdly, God must be sought unto with diligence.

We must lay our strength and spirits out in seeking God. It is not a slight
enquiry which finds out God. We read that he is found of some who seek him not
at all, but that he is found of any, who seek him negligently, we read not.
Free Grace prevents those who have no ability to seek him, but it meets not
those who will not lay out their abilities in seeking him. If thou would
seek unto God betimes.

And make thy supplication to the Almighty. The word which we translate [Make
thy supplication] is very significant of the manner how we should seek unto
God, namely, Verbum (...) denotat gratuita^ illa^ commiserationem, quae sine
ullo merito impenditur.
bottoming our selves upon free grace alone. A thought of our own worth is
inconsistent with a supplication; Call upon the Almighty for pity, says M.
Broughton, when we supplicate, we desire that to be done for us, for which
there is no reason in us why it should be done. To make supplication: is to
seek help and relief freely or gratis, acknowledging there is nothing in us
worthy love. That adverb used in the first, and repeated in the second Chapter,
where the devil objects, Does Job serve God for naught, that is, without
respect of good pay for his pains from God, that adverb (I say) comes from this
verb. As we ought to serve God (in this sense) for naught, and not like
mercenaries for our hire: So God helps us for naught, without looking to any
thing in us, or from us, as an hire of his help. The Baptist had his name
(John) from this word, either because he preached the free grace of God in
Christ, then exhibited; or, because God bestowed him upon his parents in their
old age, as a special grace and favor: The poor (says Solomon, Prove. 18.23.)
uses entreaties; some render it thus, The poor makes, or speaks
supplications; a poor man has nothing of desert to plead, why he should
receive your charity, but he lies at your feet, and begs somewhat, because he
is in want, because misery has arrested and taken hold upon him: The poor
uses entreaties, he does not call for any thing of right, and he will not
wrest any thing from you by force; he only supplicates your favor. We in our
drawing nigh unto God should pray for grace and favor, as a poor man, begging
an alms, who makes this his plea, that he is poor. So then, Bildads counsel to
Job is this, Stand not upon thy terms with God, plead not thine own integrity
and good works, but cast thy self at his feet for mercy, Make thy supplication
unto him. The word is used by Moses, Deuteronomy. 3.23. when he describes his own
unbelief, for which God said he should not go into Canaan, And I besought the
Lord at that time, saying, etc. When Moses perceived God was angry, he did not
reckon his former good services to balance this failing, but he sought unto God
for mercy, as one that had never done him any service at all. And as man
expresses his desires of free grace by this word, so does the Lord his highest
actings of it, Exodus 33.19. I will be gracious unto whom I will be gracious. To
show, that to make supplication, is, to desire the Lord to be gracious: and
that to be gracious is to do that, which is desired by a supplication; the
same word in the Hebrew signifies, both an act of lowest humility in us, namely
the making a supplication, and an act of the highest grace in God, namely the
granting of a supplication. Hence observe,

First, In seeking God we must look to receive all from his free grace and
undeserved favor.

Seek unto God, and make thy supplication to him. Mercy in God is the spring of
all the mercies received by man. What can a beggar, who comes to a King, ask
upon desert? That Is the condition of every one that comes to God: we are a
company of beggars, the riches both of temporal and spiritual blessings are
treasured up in God. Blessed are the poor in spirit, they who look upon
themselves as mean and low, as not having a rag of goodness about them, as
emptied of themselves, are the vessels which God will fill, He that is full
loatheth a honeycomb, and he that thinks he is full, is loathed so much by
God, that his real emptines shall never be filled. When Jacob held God so fast
that he would not let him go without a blessing, he had quite let go all hold,
yea, or opinion of his worthiness to receive a blessing, I am less then the
least of all thy mercies (Genesis 32.10.) Then we are fit to receive great things
from God, when we are little, and then fittest, when we are least in our own
eyes. Yea, we must supplicate God, not only as a beggar, but as a traitor or a
rebel does a King: who has not only nothing in him to commend him to his
acceptance, or procure his favor, but much to provoke his wrath, and incur
the weight of his displeasure. Every sin in it self renders us rebels against
God. And though his own people, coming unto him in Christ, are under another
notion, they are his sons, yet, even they ought to have such apprehensions of
themselves for sin. Abraham believed in him that justifies the ungodly, Romans
4.5. Even Abraham, after he was justified in the sight of God through faith,
looked upon himself as ungodly, in reference to his own works. In all our
approaches to God, we should reflect upon our selves, not only as having many
wants, and no worthiness, but as having many sins, and (of our own) no
goodness. God (in justice) visits iniquity upon them that hate him (Exodus
20.6.) And he shows mercy unto thousands of them that love him, and keep his
Commandments; They who love God and keep his Commandments, receive all from
mercy. Justice punishes those who break the Commandment, but mercy does them
good who keep the Commandments. We have at any time sin enough to merit the
wrath of God; but we never have goodness enough to merit his favor. And as no
objection from our sinfulness can obstruct the way of free grace from moving
toward us: so no argument from our holiness can open the way, for free grace
to move toward us. In all our duties we are to lie in the dust, yea, we are to
lay our duties in the dust, and to seek all of God in humble supplications.

Consider this verse in connection with the former, and then two points are
observable from it. Bildad assuring Job, that though his sons had fallen by
their sin, yet, if himself would seek unto God, and make his supplication it
might be well with him, teaches us,

First, That the falls of others, whether into sin, or under judgment for
sin, should be warnings to us.

Thou see what is become of thy sons: let them be as a looking-glass for
thee. Children may teach their parents, parents are often whipped upon their
childrens backs. The hand of God upon others points toward us, and while they
are smitten we are instructed. The Apostle sums up the most remarkable
judgments which fell upon the Jews in their passage from Egypt to Canaan, and
closes all with this application to Christians, These things happened unto
them as ensamples, and they are written for our admonition, etc. to the intent
that we should not lust, 1 Cor. 10.11. As if he had said, God let them fall
into the hand of their sins, and their falls may help us to keep our feet.
Their falls were types (so the word is) these things happened unto them
typically, in them we may see what God will do with us, if we take their
course, and go their way.

(...), propre significat nota^ insculpta^ pulsatione seu percussione effectam
Beza in Joh. 20 25. (...), percutere. Vnde Ars Typographica.
The Greek is very elegant and expressive of this sense. For a type is such a
form or representation of a thing, as is made by hard pressing or striking of
it, such as we see in stamps and seals. It is the leaving of a mark with a
blow; implying, that the Lord by those strokes upon his ancient people, left
marks upon their bodies or printed letters there (the Greek word for a Printer
is a Typewriter) which were legible to their posterity, and are to this day.
Hence the scarre which the nails made in the hands of our blessed Savior upon
the cross, is called, The print of the nails; or, The type of the nails, Joh.
20.25. Such a type or print sufferings leave behind them. How many such types
have we this day. Where can we go, but we may see the print of the Sword, and
thrust our hands into wounded sides, Let us not be faithless, but believing?
The Apostle Peter, (2 Epist. 2.6.) brings the apostate Angels, the old world,
filthy Sodom, as admonitory examples unto those that should live ungodly. They
made themselves evil examples by committing sin, and God made them good
ensamples by punishing them for their sin.

Secondly, From the connection, observe,

That they who are equal in sin, may be unequal in punishment.

Job was (in the judgment of his friends) as deep in sin as his children;
but though he had sinned like them, or more then they, yet he might be unlike
them in suffering, or suffer less then they. God (says Bildad) has taken
them quite away, he has but wounded you, and if you seek unto God he is ready
to heal you. The same sinners for matter, are in heaven and in hell, that is,
take two who have committed the same sins for matter, and for degree also (as
sin is a transgression of the Law) and the one of these may be found in
heaven, and the other in hell at the last day. Yea, I believe, there are many
in heaven, that have committed greater sins then some that are in hell. It is
not the matter of sin committed, but the obstinacy, impenitency, or unbelief
of the sinner, which binds on the guilt, and seals up the sinner to judgments
temporal, and to condemnation eternal.

Verse 6. If thou were pure and upright, he would awaken for thee, etc.
Bildad counsels Job to seek God, yet he puts in a caution, If thou were pure
and upright: As if he had said, I advise thee to seek unto God, and to make thy
supplication to him; but take heed of doing this with a purpose to continue in
thy sin, If thou would seek unto God, and make thy supplication to him in
purity, and uprightness of heart, He would awaken for thee. Holy Prayers awake
God. Be holy, and thou shall be sure of audience and acceptance when thou
praiest.

In the former verse he gave advice for the duty to be performed, here he gives
advice in reference to the person who is to perform the duty. Thy duty is to
seek unto God, and to make supplication to the Almighty, but look thine own
heart be pure and upright. Take heed of coming to a holy God in thine
unholinesse.

Pure and upright.] The word signifies to shine or glister, (...) est lucere
in modum vitre atque crystalli.
as glass or crystal, noting, that the purity of our lives in holiness
shines as light, Mat. 5. Let your light so shine before men. The works of the
Saints should be clear as Crystal; The word is used ( Lam. 4.7.) to set forth
the exactest beauty, Her Nazarites were purer then snow, they were whiter then
milk, they were more ruddy in body then rubies, their polishing was of Saphyr.
The oil ( Levit. 24.2.) and the frankinsense ( Exodus 30.4. Thus lucidissimum,
pellucidu^.
) appointed for the use of the Sanctuary, are both thus expressed, pure oil,
pure frankincense, shining oil, or shining frankincense, transparent oil, etc.
such as you may look through, not obscure or dark. The oil and frankincense were
a type of their purity, who had communion with God in holy things. The same
word is used by David, complaining under a temptation ( Psalm. 73.15.) of lost
labor, or labor in vain in washing himself. Some wash in vain, because they
are still unclean, and get not out their spots; others think they wash in
vain, because, though clean, they cannot obtain their comforts. Thus David
thought he had washed in vain, I said, Verily I have cleansed mine heart in
vain, and washed my hands in innocence, for I am chastened, Peccatum vocatur
macula, and sanctitas mundities, quod quae maculata and in^ecta era^t
habebantur profana and divino co^spectu indigna.
etc. David by cleansing got the sin-spots out as well as most men, but he
could not get the affliction-spots out, this was his temptation. Sin is a
blot, a spot, an uncleanness, a filthiness; holiness is purity, beauty,
honor, light; Things which have the greatest excellency and luster, are but
the shadows of holiness.

There is a twofold purity: First, The purity of our natures, which is
received at conversion. Secondly, The purity of our conversations, which is
renewed by repentance; we may understand both, or either in this place.

Purus ad cor pertinet, rectus ad actiones, ut dicat, purus cord, rectus
opere. D^us.
And upright.] It is the word used in the first verse of the first Chapter,
Perfect and upright. Here pure and upright: we may thus distinguish them:
purity referres to outward acted holiness; or holiness of life; and
uprightness, to inward sincerity, or holiness of the heart; and so his
meaning is, If thou were pure in thy ways, and sincere in thine ends; If thy
outward man, and inward man were washed and reformed, Then he would awake, etc.
Observe hence,

First, Holy persons fit for holy duties, and only they.

Sin is our separation from God, and holy duties are acts of communion with
him: how then shall sin and duty stand together?

Make thy supplication, seek unto God, but be thou pure and upright. What have
unholy persons to do about holy things? God cannot like the services of those
who are unlike him. Prayer purifies, yet purifying must be a preparative to
prayer. Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart (if I lodge filthiness
there) God will not bear me; he will not regard my prayer. The blind man saw
this truth, Joh. 9.31. (it seems this was a received maxim among them) God
hears not sinners. We are commanded to pray, lefting up pure hands, 1 Timothy
2.8. An Heathen being at sea in a great storm, and perceiving many wicked
wretches with him in the ship, calling upon the gods, Silete (inquit) ne vos
hic navigare dij sentiant. Bias.
O (says he) forbear prayer, hold your tongues, I would not have the gods take
notice that you are here, they will sure drown us all if they do. If an
Heathen by the light of nature could say this, much more may we by the light of
Scripture, That God hears not sinners, Isa. 1. When you spread forth your
hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, yea, when ye make many prayers, I will
not hear, your hands are full of blood. As he speaks out the fullness of the
grace of God ( Come let us reason together, though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow, etc.) So also the necessity of gracious purity
in man, Wash ye, make ye clean, etc. Observe,

Secondly, The prayers of the pure and upright are prevailing prayers.

In the next words God awakes, Jam. 5.16. The effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much. Fervency of prayer effects nothing, unless the
person praying be righteous, God is not melted into compassion by the heat of
our words, but by the holiness of our hearts. In the prayer of a righteous man
there is strength, prevailing strength, such, as God himself yields to. As a
Prince thou have power with God, and have prevailed, says he to Jacob when he
wrestled with him. Observe,

Thirdly, It is no way contrary to the doctrine of free grace to say we must be
holy, if we desire to be heard.

Bildads doctrine is an excellent piece of Divinity, Though he said before,
Thou must seek unto God, and make supplication to him, that out of his
free grace he would bestow a blessing upon thee, yet he adds, If thou were pure
and upright. Though we are not heard, because we are pure and upright, yet none
can come with a warrantable confidence to be heard in their impurity and
hypocrisy: if they do, God will reject their confidences, and they shall not
prosper in them. It is impudence, not confidence, to make supplication to God
with a reserve, or a resolve in secret, to go on in sin. The greatest sinners
in the world may come to God, they that are most impure and filthy, may find
favor; yet every man that comes unto God, must come with this desire, to
have his impurities removed, and his backslidings healed, Unto the wicked,
says God, What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or to take my covenant
in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instrustion, and castest my words behind
thee, Psalm. 50.16. It no way crosses the doctrine of grace, when with the same
breath we say, God will do us good freely for his own names sake, and that, we
must be pure and upright who come to God, With the pure thou will show thy self
pure, and with the upright man thou w^lt show thy self upright, and with the
froward thou will show thy self froward, Psalm. 18.25, 26. But does the Lord
take color from every one he meets, or change his temper as the company
changes? That Is the weakness of sinful man, he cannot do so, with whom there
is no variableness nor shadow of changing. God is pure and upright with the
unclean and hypocritical, as well as with the pure and upright, and his
actions show him to be so. God shows himself froward with the froward, when he
deals with them, as he has said he will deal with the froward; deny them, and
reject them. God shows himself pure with the pure, when he deals with them as
he has said he will; hear them and accept them. Though there be nothing in
purity and sincerity, which deserves mercy, yet we cannot expect mercy without
them. Our comforts are not grounded upon our graces, but our comforts are the
fruits or consequents of our graces.

Bildad having showed Job his duty, shows him a promise of mercy, If thou were
pure and upright, surely now he would awake for thee. There is a threefold
gradation of mercy in this promise.

1. That God would Awake for him. 2. That God would Prosper, or pacify his
habitation. 3. That God would Abundantly increase and multiply him in his later
end.
The first step of mercy, is, That God would awake for him. Surely now he would
awake for thee. And there are three things observable about this.

First, The certainty of it, in the word [Surely] without all doubt or
peradventure, if thou would thus seek to him, He would awake.

Secondly, The speediness of it; Surely now he would awake, [Now] without
delay or demurre; thou should no sooner seek to God, but find an answer of
mercy from him.

Thirdly, The benefit of it to Job, He would awake for thee. For Job might say,
(...)
I may awaken a sleepie Lion to rise up against me; God may be angry with my
prayer, and in stead of blessing pour out some further judgment upon me: No,
says Bildad, I assure thee, if thou thus seek to him, He will awake for thee,
not against thee.

God sometimes awakes against us, Jer. 31.28. It shall come to pass, that as I
have watched over them, to pluck up and to break down, and to destroy; and to
afflict, so will I watch over them to build and to plant, says the Lord. As
the Lord would watch to do them a good turn; so he had watched to do them (as
we speak) a shrewd turn. He threatens them with such a watchfulness, Chap.
44.27. I will watch over them for evil, and not for good. When we are dull and
sleepy in doing the will of God, he will be watchful and active to afflict us.
And when men cannot sleep till they do evil, God will not sleep till he brings
evil. So, Daniel, in the ninth of that Prophecy and the 14. verse, having
humbled himself before God in prayer and fasting, and confessed the sins of the
people, concludes, Therefore has the Lord watched upon the evil, and brought
it upon us. God not only awakes, but watches to do a people evil, who have
long abused his goodness; As men in maliciousness of spirit watch for
advantages, and spy out opportunities to revenge themselves, All my familiars
watch for my halting, says Jeremy, Chap. 20.12. So the Lord in abundant
holiness and exactness of justice, though with a great deal of wrath and
severity, watches to revenge himself of a wicked people. He takes all
opportunities and advantages against them, Thou have watched evil, and brought
it upon us. His love to a returning people is as vigilant, as his anger against
a blacksliding people.

Surely now he would awak^ for thee. Awake.] The word signifies both to awake,
and to arise. There are two interpretations of this awaking.

Some take the words transitively, thus, He will awake good for thee.
Suscitabit super te bonum. Transitive accipitur; excitabit super te, sc. bonum
quod nu^c in te sopitu^ est.
Not, of Job awakening God by prayer, but of God awakening prosperity, or
stirring up blessings for Job. As if Bildad had said, Joh, now blessings are
(as it were) asleep, but if thou pray, God will awaken them; He will stir up
mercies for thee, he will cure thy broken condition, he will restore that which
is fallen, repair that which is ruined, and fetch thee up out of the grave of
thy desolate estate. As a man's spirits, gifts, yea graces are sometime asleep
and need awakening, so also are, and do our outward comforts. It is frequent
in Scripture to call the repairing of a man's estate, or the bringing of good to
him, the raising of him up, He raises the poor out of the dust; he awakens
them out of that low condition. Job was in the dust, and his children in the
grave, God made a resurrection of both for him. That Is a good sense.

But rather understand it (as our translation reads) of God awakening, He will
awake for thee.

He will awake.] The Psalmist assures us (Psalm. 121.4.) He that keeps Israel
does neither slumber nor sleep. God never sleeps: How is it then said, that
God awakes?

For the opening of this metaphor; First, As, The Church confesses and
professes (Cant. 5.2.) I sleep, but my heart waketh; when the Church is asleep,
yet her heart is awake toward God: So much more, when in regard of outward
providence God seems to be asleep, his heart is awake toward his Church, his
heart ( scil. his affection, etc.) never slumbereth nor sleeps.

Secondly, God is said to sleep, when he does not answer our prayers; and when
he hears prayer, then he is said to awake. Hence the Septuagint render this
text, (...). Deprecationem exaudiet tuam. Sept.
not as we, He will awake; but, He will hear thy prayer for deliverance.

Thirdly, God sleeps, not in regard of the act, but the consequents of sleep.
Natural sleep is the binding or locking up of the senses. The eye and ear of
God is never bound. But to man's apprehension the affairs of the world pass, as
if God did neither hear nor see. When men are asleep things are done, which
they can take no notice of, much less stop and prevent. The Parable tells us
(Mat. 13.) While men slept, the envious man came and sowed tares: While the
householder slept, the thief brake the house: and the Pharisees direct the
watchmen to say of Christ in the sepulcher, While we slept his Disciples came
and stole him away. So now, when things are so carried in the world, as if the
God of heaven did not regard or take notice of them; Dormire videtur cum te
relinquit in his calamitatibus. Drus.
when he does not prevent or hinder evil; when he does not stop or restrain the
rage and malice of men; this retiring of himself in the way of his providence,
is called his sleep.

The complaint runs high, Psalm. 44.9, etc. Lord, thou go not forth with
our Armies, we are become a reproach unto our enemies; Thou sellest thy people
for naught; we are killed like sheep all the day long. There Is a description of
the confusion of things, then follows (verse. 23.) Awake, why sleep thou, O
Lord? Arise, cast us not off for ever; wherefore hidest thou thy face, and
forgettest our affliction and our oppression. Such a time was accounted the
sleeping time of God.

Hence when God in the workings of his providence, searches out the wicked,
and brings them to destruction; when he breaks their designs, and turns their
counsels backwards; when he turns their wickedness upon their own heads, and
catches them in the snare which they have laid for others, then he is said to
awake, Ps. 78.65. He gave his people over to the sword, and the fire consumed
the young men; then the Lord awakened as one out of sleep, and like a giant
refreshed with wine, He smote his enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to
a perpetual shame. Such a time was accounted Gods waking time.

So then, Sleeping and awaking, note only the changes of providence. Hence also
the providence of God is described by an eye 2 Chronicles. 16.9.) which is the
proper organ of sleeping, or waking; and the exactness of providence, is set
out by seven eyes, Zech. 3.9. The Scripture speaks this language in reference
to our soul-sleep and awakening. When we sin and let things go which way they
will in our hearts, without taking any care, or keeping our watch against
temptation, then we are asleep in sin: And when we begin to consider our
estates, and return to our selves, when we take notice how it is with us, and
ask our hearts the question, What have we done? This in a spiritual sense is
our awakening, Awake thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5.14. Our spiritual sleeping
and waking are the decaies or quicknings of soul-endeavours. And Gods
providentiall sleeping and waking are the seeming stops and visible motions of
his power, mercy and justice in the world. This is the awaking which Bildad
promises. If thou would seek God, etc. Surely he would awake for thee.

The words opened teach us.

First, That holy prayer shall certainly be heard.

If thou make thy supplication to him, surely he will awake. God cannot sleep
when a poor believing soul cries in his ears, If I regard iniquity in my heart,
God will not hear my prayer (Psalm. 66.18.) But verily God has heard me, he
has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me. What, God turn prayer
away? No, he cannot lie still (as I may so speak) when prayer knocks at the
door, he must arise and open presently. That Is a second note,

Prayer shall be heard presently.

What? presently? Yes, presently heard, though not presently answered; Surely
now he will awaken for thee, even now. Holy prayers are never deferred the
hearing, no not a minute, Isa. 65.24. Before they call I will hear, and while
they are yet speaking I will answer. In the very act of praying the answer came
forth: yea the answer sometimes antedates our asking, and the grant comes
before the petition. The giving out of the answer may be deferred, but the
answer is not deferred. We may be heard, and heard graciously, and yet not
presently receive the thing we ask; but every prayer is heard and laid up,
as soon as put up; he hangs it upon the file, he has it safe by him. Prayer
receives an answer in heaven, as soon as spoken upon earth, though the answer be
not returned to us on earth. God sleeps not at the prayer of those who are
awake in prayer. Thirdly, Observe,

Prayer is the best means to awaken God.

God has many ways to awaken man; and he has directed man a way to awaken
himself. When we are asleep he awakeneth us chiefly two ways: First, by the
voice of his word: Secondly, by the voice of his rod. He now awakens us by the
loud sounding trumpet, and the alarms of war: when God awakeneth us by
judgments, it is time for us to awaken him by prayer. We find two things in
Scripture which awaken God. First, the prayers of his own people. And secondly,
the rage and blasphemy of his enemies, Psalm. 78.65. The Prophet having
described the cruelty and rage of the enemy, adds, Then the Lord awaked as one
out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine: David
makes this an argument in prayer, (Psalm. 7.) Because of the rage of mine
enemies awake for me to the judgment which thou have commanded. As if he had
said, Lord, shall mine enemies rage, and will thou sleep? Wilt not thou awake
for me? Arise, I pray thee. The noise of blasphemy, and the cry of violence
from wicked men, stir up God when he seems to lie asleep. The noise of prayer,
the cries and calls of faith in his own people, will not let him sleep. A man
whose heart is drenched in the world, and drowned in rivers of earthly
pleasures, prays himself asleep, and his prayers bring God asleep to: he
sleeps when he prays, and God sleeps at his prayers, that is, God regards not
his prayer; he is as one that sleeps, as if he heard not what was said. A
wordly man does not hear what he speaks, he knows not what his own requests
are. God sleeps when men are thus asleep. But when we (as the Apostle
directs) watch and pray, then God awakes at our prayers. As in the former verse
Job was counseled to awake to pray to God, so now he is promised, That the
Lord will awake when he prays.

Fourthly, Seeing the Lord is awakened by prayer. W^ learn, That

Prayer ought to be very strong and fervent.

As men are graduall in their sleep, so is the Lord in his. A man is sometimes
so slumberingly asleep that the least noise will awake him, you cannot stir,
but he will hear it. At another time a man is so dead asleep, that though you
hollow in his ear you cannot awake him, thunder cannot stir him. Sometimes
God departs so little, that the least voice calls him again, he comes at the
first word; at another time he is gone so far, that (as to a man in a deep
sleep) you must cry and cry again, call and call again, cry aloud before he
hears. And we may (in a safe sense) apply that to the true God, which Elijah
did to that false god, Baal; when his Priests were calling to him from morning
to night, Elijah mocking, bids them cry aloud, it may be (says he) he
sleeps: We may say (with reverence) thus, when any pray to God, and he does
not hear, pray aloud; not in regard of the voice and outward sound, but pray
with louder desires of heart, with more fervency and zeal of spirit,
Peradventure God sleeps; peradventure he is in a deep sleep at this time, and
he will not suddenly be awakened, therefore cry aloud. When God seemed to
depart far from the Church of the Jews, with how much fervency do they cry
after him (Isa. 51.9.) Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord, awake,
as in the ancient days, etc? They double and treble it upon him, and cry with
an outstretched voice, Art not thou he that has cut Rahab, and wounded the
dragon? What a clamor, what a holy stir was here, to awaken God. God himself
sometimes seems (as it were) willing to take his rest; as when he said to
Moses, Let me alone; he spoke like a man that is in bed, or very sleepy, Do
not trouble me, let me alone; as he in the Gospel ( Luke 11.7.) when he was
awakened in the night to come and give bread unto his neighbor, Do not
trouble me (says he) the doors are shut, and I am in bed with my children, I
cannot rise and give thee, let me alone. Thus in some sense the Lord expresses
himself to his people, I am now in bed, do not trouble me, Let me alone. What
must we do in this case? We must knock harder at the door, as he in the Gospel
did, For whom, though his neighbor would not rise and give him, because he was
his friend, yet because of his importunity he rises and gives him as many
loaves as he needed. We must be the more importunate to awake God, by how much
he seems more unwilling to hear us; our modesty (in this case) pleases him not:
we must call and call again: He will take it well at our hands, if we do so.
We must give our selves no rest, and let him take none; so the Prophet resolves
(Isa. 62.1.) For Jerusalems sake, I will take no rest, I will never give over
praying; and at the sixth verse, I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night, you that make
mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish,
and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. If the Lord should carry it
in the present answers of his providence, as if he were willing to rest, and
desired not to be troubled in this business; be not you so put off: but with a
holy boldness and confidence come to him and awaken him: take no answer, till
ye have an answer. He is best pleased and most at ease, when (in prayer) we
give him no rest. Lastly, Observe,

If God do but awake for us, all is presently well with us.

If the eye of God be upon us for good, that brings us in all good: therefore (
Zech. 2. ult.) when the Church was in her return from Babylon, the Prophet
concludes with an exultation of spirit, Be silent, O all flesh, before the
Lord, for he is raised up out of his holy habitation; it is this word, He is
awaked out of his holy habitation, now be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord:
All flesh, ye that are the wicked of the world, ye that are enemies, be ye
silent, leave your boasting, your reproaching and blaspheming, for the Lord is
awaked, now he begins to stir for his people, he will stop your mouths
shortly: All flesh, takes in the Church and people of God too, O be ye silent,
in regard of your fears and doubtings, murmurings and distracted complainings,
silence all these, why? The Lord is awaked, he is raised up out of his holy
habitation; that is, he that seemed before to confine himself to those higher
regions, and as the Atheist speaks in Job, to walk in the circle of the
heavens, not intermedling with the earth: This God is now awaked, he is raised
out of his holy habitation, and now ye shall know that he orders all things
here below: therefore be silent, O all flesh. When Christ was asleep ( Matthew.
8.25.) A grievous tempest arose (says the text) insomuch as the Ship was
covered with waves. When storms and tempests are upon the Church, God is then
asleep, though even then he directs the storms, and gives law to the proud
waves. But what did the Disciples in this storm? They awoke Christ, Master,
save us, we perish; and as soon as ever Christ was awakened, He rebuked the
storm, and there was a great calm. Thus, when we are tossed up and down with
contrary winds, and in danger to be split and sunk, if God once awake, all is
calm. How quietly may they sleep for whom God wakes. I do not say they should
sleep carelessly, but confidently they may. God does not wake for us, to the
intent we should sleep in security; but we may sleep quietly, when He shows
himself awake for us, who (indeed) never slumbereth nor sleeps. And if God
awake not for us, all our watchfulness is as useless to us, as our
sleepiness, The watchman waketh but in vain, except the Lord keep the City.
Except he awake our watching can do no good; and if he awake, good will come,
though we be asleep. It is our duty to be careful, and it is our comfort that
the care of God is enough for us. The eye of divine providence helps us in many
humane improvidences. What their happiness is for whom God awakes, see in the
next words.

He will make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous. This is the
second degree or step of mercy promised; when the Lord awakes, he will awake
to purpose. We say of some men, Early up, and never the near; They awake, and
do little work: but if God awakes, see what he does, He will make the
habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.

Some of the Rabbis understand these words as a description of the soul; The
habitation of thy righteousness, that is, Anima est justitiae and omniu^
virtutum domicilium. Aben. Ezr.
thy soul shall prosper, because the soul is the proper seat of righteousness
and holiness. Righteousness belongs to the inward man. Righteousness being
a spiritual thing, is housed and lodged in the spirit, that is the habitation
of it.

There are others of the Jews, who take this habitation of righteousness for the
body, because the body is the habitation of the soul, in which righteousness
is seated, and so the habitation of righteousness by a second remove is the
outward man. The Lord shall bless thy body, which now lies in a woeful
plight, distempered and disfigured with sores and sicknesses.

But rather take the word habitation in those two ordinary Scripture-senses,
either strictly for the place where Job dwelt; or more largely, for all that
did belong unto him. The habitation of a man, is all his estate, and all that
appertains to his estate; He will make thy habitation, that is, thy children,
thy servants, thy fields, thy cattle, thy stock, thy all, to be prosperous.
(...)


The Chaldee Paraphrase reads, Significat domu^ vel speciem, pull, chritudinem
justitiae tuae. Tar.
He will make thy beautiful place to be prosperous. The word signifies beauty
as well as an habitation, as was showed, upon Chap. 5. ver. 3. thither I
refer the Reader. Then, habitation is the seat of a man's outward estate, and
his estate: the shell and the kernel, the outside and inside of all he has.

Quasi nihil aliud quam aequitatem and justitiam ^edoleant bona just acquisita
Merc. (...). Arist. Ethic. l. 5. c. 1.
The habitation of thy righteousness. That is, the habitation where
righteousness does flourish, or wherein thou live righteously.

But what is righteousness?

Righteousness is a very comprehensive word. The Philosopher tells us, it takes
in all other virtues whatsoever, It is not a part of virtue, but all virtue.

When righteousness is set as distinct from holiness and piety, then it is
restrained to our dealings with men. Righteousness relates to men, and
holiness to God, Luke 1.75. Tit. 2.12. Gospel Grace teaches us to live
soberly, in opposition to the intemperance of our bodies: righteously, in
opposition to wrong in our actions, godly, in opposition to all impiety and
profaneness of our minds.

But righteousness here takes in our whole duty, whether to God or man, The
habitation of thy righteousness; that is, the place where thou exercisest all
manner of holy and righteous duties toward God and toward man. Righteousness
toward man, first, in distributive justice, giving every one his due in
judgment, as thou art a Magistrate: Secondly, Righteousness toward man in
commutative justice, giving every one his due in commerce, as thou art a
neighbor.

The habitation of thy righteousness. It is an elegant expression. The Church
is sometimes called so, Jer. 31.23. Thus says the Lord God of hosts, the God
of Israel, as yet they shall use this speech in the land of Judah, and in the
Cities thereof, when I shall bring again their captivity. The Lord bless thee,
O habitation of righteousness, and mountain of holiness. This speech they
shall use: It seems it had been an ordinary salutation thus to bespeak Judah, O
thou habitation of justice or righteousness, and mountain of holiness. Every
particular member of the Church is named, A tree of righteousness, Isa. 61.3.
They shall be called trees of righteousness, the plantation of the Lord. Each
Saint is a tree of righteousness, and all of them together are an habitation,
a plantation of righteousness.

God himself is styled, The habitation of righteousness, because he (in a way
of highest excellency, or in the most superlative degree) is the seat of
righteousness; all righteousness is (as it were) housed, and dwelling in him.
The Prophet ( Jer. 50.7.) describing the unkind usage which the true
worshippers should find in the days of which he prophesies; speaks thus, All
that found them have devoured them, and their adversaries said, we offend not,
because they have sinned against the Lord: They thought their brethren had
sinned against the Lord, and that therefore they might trouble them without
sin; They have sinned against the Lord, the habitation of justice, even the
Lord, the hope of their fathers. It is but justice (say they) for us to punish
those, who sin against the habitation of justice. Men (take it in passage) do
evil sometimes out of conscience, and think they do God good service, while
they really wrong their brethren.

He shall make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous. (...)
Pacificabit, p^catum reddet, i. e. integrum, perfectum, omnibus bonis
redundans, qualia affert pax. (...). Sept.
] That is, he shall make it peaceable and quiet, settled and established. The
word signifies peace, plenty and prosperity. He shall pacify or quiet the
habitation of thy righteousness. The Septuagint thus, He shall restore it to,
or repair it for thee.

There are three things in that word. It may note,

1. The quietness of all within his family. There shall be peace and a good
agreement in thy habitation.

2. The abundance, the fruitfulness, the great increase of all within his
family, he will make thee thrive.

3. The peaceable holding or enjoyment of all those good things, free from
foreign invasion or oppressions. Do thus, and then neither Sabeans nor
Chaldeans shall any more come upon thee and plunder thee. Thus he will make the
habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.

The sum of all is, as if Bildad had said unto Job: Thy habitation has
heretofore been an habitation of unrighteousness, of impiety, of tyranny, thy
house has been filled with spoil and oppression, thy Tabernacle has been a
Sanctuary for wickedness, a lodging or rendezvous for all manner of riot and
intemperance, of rapine and injustice; but now, Job, if thou will make thy self
pure and upright, thou shall see the case will alter; whereas before troops and
armies of miseries have invaded thee, and spoiled all thou had within and
without; now, if in thy house, where wickedness formerly dwelt, righteousness
shall enter and dwell, Vbi facta fuerit morum and studiorum, fie^ etia^ magna
fortunae conversio.
thou shall see that with righteousness peace will enter too; Troubles will
depart, when wickedness departs, and evils of punishment will dislodge with
the evil of sin; when those better guests, righteousness and holiness come
into, and are welcomed at thy house, then thy house shall be better; when thy
heart, and thy life change, thy estate shall change; and those comforts which
have so long been strangers from thee shall return; thy banished mercies shall
come home again, adorn thy walls, and strengthen thy family.

This is the sum of what he promises in these words, He will make the
habitation of thy righteousness prosperous. Hence observe,

First, Prosperity is in the power of God.

If he awakes he can make us prosperous and peaceful. If he do but speak the
word our captivity shall teturn. He says to a dry stick, flourish, and to a
green tree, wither: his word is clothed with power to do good or evil.

Secondly, Observe, A righteous habitation shall be a prosperous habitation.

Whether we respect persons, families or nations, thus it is in the ordinary
dispensations of God. As in regard of our spiritual and eternal estate, The
work of righteousness is peace (Isa. 32.17.) so, in regard of our temporal
and outward. Christ, who is the Prince of righteousness, is also, the Prince
of peace. He brought righteousness into the world, and then peace came into
the world. If he had not made an habitation of righteousness in the world,
there had never been an habitation of peace in the world: in that work of his,
the foundation of our prosperity was laid. Jesus Christ, who as a Priest
purchased our peace, is also, The King of righteousness. Blessings crown the
head of a righteous people (Jer. 31.23.) They shall say, the Lord bless thee,
O habitation of righteousness. If thou art a habitation of righteousness, a
blessing shall rest upon thee; The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. as the
spiritual Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost:
So the joy and peace of worldly Kingdoms, is not meat and drink, but
righteousness. When Kingdoms are holy habitations, they will soon be quiet
habitations. In Isa. 26.2. Open ye the gates that the righteous Nation which
keeps the truth may enter in; thou shall keep him in perfect peace. God will
give and preserve the peace of the righteous. Righteousness is the pillar of a
State, and the parent of peace. The mountains (Psalm. 72.3.) shall bring peace
to the people, and the little hills by righteousness. Plant righteousness upon
barren hills and mountains, and peace will flourish there.

I might hence infer a corollary, by the rule of contrary, That
Unrighteousness makes unprosperous and unpeacefull habitations. An habitation
of idolatry and false worship, an habitation of cruelty and hard dealing, shall
be an habitation for owls and shreech-owls, a dwelling place for every unclean
bird and beast; these shall take up their lodgings within such walls, and make
their nests in such chambers.

Whilst we are filled (as the Apostle characterizeth the Gentiles, Romans 1.) with
all unrighteousness; it is no marvel if we are filled with all trouble. The
Prophet Malachi brings in Edom thus reflecting upon himself (Chap. 1.4.)
whereas Edom says, I am impoverished etc. Edom began to be sensible all was
not well with him. Hereupon he advises upon a way to help himself, and
concludes thus, We will return and build the desolate places. This was their
resolve; but what says God to it? Even this, Will ye build, ye shall build, I
will give you leave to build, but I will throw it down again. I will spoil your
work. Why would the Lord be thus severe? The next words give a reason, They
shall call thee, the border of wickedness, the people against whom the Lord has
indignation for ever. Wickedness is a large word, and takes in all
unrighteousness toward man, as well as impiety toward God. That building
cannot stand long, where unrighteousnes lies between the timber and the stones.
God will pull down by night, what such men build by day. If then we would have
buildings stand, and our habitations prosperous, let us labor to build with
justice, and make ours, the habitations of righteousness. Look upon it in
families, that which withers the comfort of a family, in children, in servants,
is the unrighteousness found in a family; if there be unrighteousness there,
no wonder, if there be decaies and discontents there too. If there be
unrighteousness in Cities; If (Psalm. 55.11.) deceit and guile go not out of
our streets, no marvel if complainings go not out of our streets. We call for
peace and prosperity, O that peace would come! but if our hearts were set upon
this, if we labored every one with himself, and every one with his brother,
and every one with the public to the uttermost of his line, that we may in our
persons, in our families, in our policies, be an habitation of righteousness;
how soon should we all be a prosperous habitation, an habitation of peace?

Two things make a Nation an habitation of righteousness.

First, When right is done speedily.

Secondly, When right is done impartially.

Tedious delays make Courts, prisons of righteousness, not habitations of
righteousness. Partial distributions show a place to be a market of
righteousness (where he shall have it that bid^ most for it) not an habitation
of righteousness, where every one ought to have it that comes for it; Ye shall
do no unrighteousness in judgment (says the Law, Levit. 19.15.) how shall
they avoid it? The next words give direction, Thou shall not respect the person
of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty. Righteousness takes not
notice of the persons of men, but of their causes. We must not do unrighteously
in charity to the poor, as well as not in hopes, or for gifts from the rich.

Again, The Hebrew signifies a beautiful habitation. Righteousness loves to
dwell in a fair house. It is so, when, first swept from bribes, these are filth
in the house, and the corrupters of righteousness.

Secondly, A beautiful house has store of lights in it. Justice and truth
love not corners and close cells. Justice must act clearly: men cannot bear it,
that, what falls upon their senses, should not be in the light of their
understandings. God has secret judgments, but man must not. One potsheard
must show another, why he forms or breaks him thus in judgment.

Lastly, The beauty of the house of justice arises from good Laws, and good men
to execute them. Righteousness cannot act without a rule; and rules cannot act
themselves. Good Laws without good Magistrates never made any people a
habitation of righteousness. It is not good Laws, but good men which make a
Kingdom happy. Now, as unrighteousnes makes a strong people weak, a rich
people poor, an honorable people base, a great estate to decrease, and come to
nothing: So righteousness makes a weak people strong, a poor people rich, a
mean people honorable, a little estate increase and come to much. Thus Bildad
assures Job with his next breath.

Verse 7. Though thy beginning was small, yet thy later end should greatly
increase.
This is the third gradation. God will not only awake for thee, and make thee
prosperous, but he will greatly increase thee. Thou shall not only be set in as
good a condition as thou wast, but in a far better.

Though thy beginning were small. Though the head of thy estate (so the Hebrew)
though the first of thy estate were small. (...) A quo quid incipit.


The word small, notes a smalnesse either in quantity or in quality; and it is
opposed to a double greatness ( Genesis 25.23.) Jacob and Esau are thus
distinguished, the one shall be great, the other small, which we translate, the
Elder shall serve the younger; the greater shall serve the less.

Though thy beginning was small.] The City that Lot desired ( Genesis 19.) is
called Zoar, from this word, Is it not a little one? Though thy estate were but
a Zoar, a little one, yet it shall be built of a larger compass.

The Septuagint raises the sense of the later clause, (...). Sept.
Though thy beginning was small yet thy later end shall be ineffable, such as
none shall be able to tell over or describe. Thy estate shall be beyond account.

A Question arises how we are to make this comparis^n between Jobs beginning
and later end? Whether we are to refer it to the estate he had before his
affliction, compared with what he should have after his affliction; or, whether
we are to understand it of the augmentation and increase of his estate after
his affliction, which at the beginning should be but small, but afterward
should receive a mighty augmentation. The sense is good either way.

First, If we understand it of his estate before and after his troubles
compared together, Though thy beginning or the first estate which God gave thee
were small, yet thy later end, or the estate which God will give thee, when
these storms are over-blown shall wonderfully increase.

Against this it may be objected, How can the former estate of Job be called
small, when as it is said (Chap. 1.) that Job had a very vast estate? We have
heard the inventory of his goods, the total sum or apprizement of all, being
given in by God himself, That Job was the greatest of all the men in the East.
How then can it be said, that his first estate was small? Though thy beginning
were small.

I answer, comparatively it may be called small. An exceeding excess of
greatness, lessens and littles any other greatness. The Moon is a great
light, but the light of the Sun makes that light darkness. That which is
glorious has no glory, by reason of the glory that excels; he that is rich
or great has no riches or greatness, by reason of riches and greatness which
excel. Job had a fair estate before, and was the greatest man of all the men
of the East; but his estate is promised to be such as shall obscure the former,
and render it inconsiderable. Accordingly, it is said, in the story of his
restoring (Chap. 42.10.) That the Lord turned the captivity of Job; also the
Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before. Half is but a little to the
whole. And at the 12. verse, The Lord blessed the later end of Job more then
his beginning. Which words are a good exposition upon the text in hand. When
Joseph sent for his father and brethren to come into Egypt (Genesis 45.20.) he
says, but as for your stuff, do not regard that, for the good of all the land
of Egypt is before you. Joseph knew his father was a rich man. Jacob was no
beggar: but let all that go for nothing, leave it to those that will take it
up, all the good of Egypt is before you, what is all you have to the riches of
Egypt? That Is the first sense.

Observe ^^om it, That

The Lord is able to repair all our losses with abundant advantages.

We complain of losses; I have lost a great estate, says one, but the Lord is
able to give thee such an estate, as that the greatness of the former shall
not be remembered.

Secondly, They who lose much, usually have great repairs.

Job was great above all others in the East, but now he shall be made greater
then himself. As in spirituals, they that have, to them more shall be given,
and they shall have more abundance; so they that lose much in temporals, to
them more is given sometimes then they have lost, and they shall have abundance.

There is a second sense, to which the letter of the original does rather
incline, which makes both parts of the verse look only to his second estate,
namely, his restoration: and so the sense is this, Though thou do not
presently thrive and grow up to a great estate, yet afterward thou shall;
Though after this breaking and undoing thou should set up (as it were) but
with a little stock, one friend bringing thee a piece of silver, another, a
piece of gold, a third, a jewel, all making a purse for thee: and so thou
beginnest but upon alms and charity, yet thy later end shall greatly increase.
As if Bildad had said, Though God should now begin to comfort, and restore thee
but with small matters, yet do not think he will so conclude with thee, he
has enough in store. The letter of the original is most clear for this, the
words being assertive, rather then suppositive, Thy beginning shall be small,
Cum dicat, erit, satis ind^cat se loqui de ijs bonis, quae habiturus est, si
resipuerit, non de ijs quae habuit, ante hanc tempestatem. Drus. Sic solet Deus
ditare suos, non uno tempore simul, sed paulatim: and ut Itali dicunt, poco a
poco, Galli, peu a peu. Idem.
and thy later end shall greatly increase: which referrs to the time future,
not past, as we and others translate.

Hence observe, That

The Lord does usually raise his people by degrees.

They do not receive all at once. It is true of persons, families and Nations.
We must not look for all in a day. Outward mercies may come too fast upon us,
there may be a glut of them. We may have more than we know how to order and
take in, it may do hurt to receive all together. As it is with men that have
been long pined with famine and hunger, and are grown out of their ordinary
course, by reason of their necessitated abstinence: We do not presently give
them all manner of good cheer, or bring them to a full table, and let them eat
as much as they will; but we give them a little and a little at a time, and so
by degrees bring their stomachs on, till they be wrought for plenty. So when
the Lord brings persons or nations very low, he does not bring in a glut of
mercies at first, this would be more then they are able to bear, as they may be
undone, if they have all at one receipt; but he gives they are able to take them
in, and make a right use of them. As Jacob said to Esau his brother, when he
invited him to march with him; no, says Jacob, I cannot march thy pace, I must
consider what my train is, I have flocks here that are great with young, And if
I should over-drive them one day, they would all die: therefore (says he) I
will lead on softly, according as the cattle that are before me, and the
children be able to endure. So it is in this case, the Lord in infinite wisdom
gives, as men are able to receive. We may be over-mercy'd, as well as
over-affli^ted; over-laden with comforts, as well as with sorrows. And
therefore as the Lord does correct in judgment and in measure: So also does he
restore. We have not full-tide in a moment, or in a quarter of an hour: it
would be terrible, dangerous and troublesome, if when it is low water we should
have full tide in a moment, but it comes in stealing by degrees, and at last it
swells all over the banks. Such a stealing flood of mercies the Lord gives his
people.

Therefore be cautioned. In the returns of mercy do not despise small things.
Your beginnings may be inconsiderable, this is but a little, and that is but a
little, but do not despise the first or second little. So the Prophet counsels
( Zech. 4.10.) Despise not the day of small things: The beginnings of mercy
were scarce discernable, and they looked upon them as nothing, they thought
they would never come to any thing. Take heed (says the Prophet) do not
despise small things, there is more a coming. Have thou but a little? Does God
make but some little repairs of outward comforts? Do not slight these, look
upon them as the beginnings of greater things. When Elijah sent his servant to
go and look toward the sea whether he saw any sign of rain, he at last brought
him word that he saw a little cloud arise out of the sea as big as a man's hand:
would any one think that a prognostic of great rain? Elijahs servant might
despise this, and say this is no sign of rain; but Elijah knew better, that
little assured him there was a mighty shower at hand, he knew how it would work
presently: Go, bid Ahab prepare his Chariot, and get him down, that the rain
stop him not. Thus it is, respecting daily providence; if you see a mercy
coming but as big as a man's hand, be psrswaded that the Lord sends it as a
forerunner, as that which shall usher in large and extensive mercies. If we see
the glimmering light of day break, we are not angry, because it is not
presently high noon, or, because we have not full light, we know the light will
come by degrees; Thy beginning shall be small, but thy later end shall greatly
increase.

JOB Chap. 8. Verse. 8, 9, 10. For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and
prepare thy self to the search of their fathers.

(For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing; our days upon earth are a
shadow)

Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their heart?


WE have opened the first argument, by which Bildad confirms his proposition
laid down at the third verse, That God is just; both from the example of Gods
dealing with Jobs children, verse. 4. and from what, God was ready to do for
him, in the 5, 6, and 7. verses.

The context now read contains a second general argument to prove the former
assertion, and it is grounded upon the testimony or authority of the Ancients;
as if Bildad had said thus, I will not press thee with my own bare sentence,
and say so, with my own reason and authority, but I wish thee to search the
records of former times, to consult the wisest and the holiest men that ever
were in the world, and let them judge in this case. Enquire of the former age,
and prepare thy self to the search of their fathers.

It is here observable that Bildad manages his counsel by the same arguments
which Eliphaz had used before him: Eliphaz bid Job (Enquire who ever perished
being innocent, Chap. 4.) and promises him peace upon repentance (Chap. 5.23,
24.) Bildad runs the same strain, If thou were pure, etc. and here, Enquire of
the former age, etc.

The strength of his argument may be cast into this form.

That is true which the holiest and wisest in all antiquity with one mouth and
one consent agree in.

But the holiest and wisest in all antiquity agree in this, that God is just.

Therefore this is a truth.

Hereupon he infers, that God had dealt justly with Job in consuming his
estate, in destroying his children, and in afflicting his person. That Is the
logical meaning or argument of these three verses.

Enquire I pray thee.
(...) Significat petere, postulare and quidem cum precibus. Etiam sciscitari
in dubiis.
The word notes a very earnest, and a diligent search or enquiry: To enquire
with industry, yea, with importunity. The grave has it is name in Hebrew from
this word, and so has hell: because the grave (as it were) calls for, or
enquires after all flesh; and hell with much earnestness gapes for wicked men,
Eccl. 2.10. Whatsoever mine eyes desired. The eye is a strong asker.

It is applied sometimes to persons, and then it signifies, to enquire or
consult what is to be done. De persona, sic consulere: de rebus, sic petere.
Merc.
Sometimes it is applied to things, and then it signifies, to ask that a thing
may be done. Prayer is an enquiry after God, and the things of God, 1 Samuel
1.17, 20, 27. This word is used about Hannah's prayer to God for a child,
Hannah conceived and bare a son, and called his name Samuel, saying, Because I
have asked him of the Lord.

Further, The word is applied to God, when he enquires after, or asks somewhat
of us, as if he made his request and suit to us, ( Deuteronomy. 10.12.) And now,
Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee? Or, what does he enquire
after in thee? It is this, To fear the Lord thy God etc.

Here, to enquire, is to use all endeavors and means to find out the best
informations and resolutions, which the fathers in those former ages were able
to give Job in the controversy then a foot between him and his friends,
Enquire, I pray thee.

Of the former age. By the former we are not to understand those that were
immediately preceding only, or those that were preceding for some few
generations past, (...).
but as the Septuagint well renders it, by former generations, we may
understand the first generation; begin at the first, and so come down all
along, begin as high as thou can. Enquire not only of those who lived since
the flood, but of all who have been since God created man upon the earth; draw
the line of thy search through all ages, and thou shall find the pedigree of
this truth from age to age, (...) a radice. (...) Continue and successive
vixit, duravit: sensu and sono idem quod vox latina. Duro.
from generation to generation. Enquire, I pray thee, of the former Age.

This word age, is taken three ways.

1. For the whole space of man's life; which, when it is doubled, signifies a
very long life, Psalm. 61.7. Thou shall prolong the Kings life (or, according to
the letter of the Hebrew, thou shall add days to the days of the King) and
his years as many gen^rations; or, as generation and generation, age and age:
long and long, that is, very long; Two lives, or two men's ages, being (as it
were) laid into one.

2. For some special part of man's life. Man's life is divided into several
ages. Some divide it into four, alluding to the four parts of the year. Some,
into five, infancy, childehood, youth, mans-estate, and old age; comparing them
to the five acts of an interlude, the Prologue whereof is infancy, and the
Epilogue, decrepid old age. Others into seven, in allusion to the seven Planets.

3. It is taken for an age of men, or the state of the time present. Aetatem
vocant Hebraei genus hominum simul viventiu^, sic aetas prava, adultera. Apud
Graecos (...), significat intervallum septem annoru^, unde medici vetant duas
aetates habenti, i. e. annos quatuordecem nato venam incidi, quod sanguine
egeat. Suidas.
So in the Gospel, Christ calls the Scribes and Pharisees, A generation of
vipers, and an adulterous generation. As if he had said; You of this time and
age of the world, are a viperous and an adulterous brood. So Psalm. 14.5. God is
in the generation of the righteous: That is, he favors that generation, or
sort of men; God is in all generations, but such he delights in most; the
wicked have cause enough to fear those, in whom God delights.

T^^t of the Prophet (which text has variety of interpretations) is taken in
this sense ( Isa. 53.8.) Who shall declare his generation? It is the word of
the text, Who shall declare his age, or the generation of Christ? Some
understand it of his eter^^^^ generation. Others of his ^^^^^rall generation,
when he was ^^^^rnate, the mystery whereof was beyond words. A third, of that
eternity which followed his passion. As if it were an Antithesis to those
words, He was taken from prison, and he was cut off, but who shall declare his
generation? You may quickly write up the days that Christ lived here upon
earth, they were but few, even his pilgrimage was short on earth, but who can
declare his generation? Those infinite and eternal ages and revolutions,
through which he shall pass, though now you have quickly cut off his life?
Others, by his generation understand the holy seed and issue, the children of
Christ. His Cross was fruitful, and his sufferings productive of an infinite
generation, Who can declare it? Though you cut off the Father, yet this father
by dying will give life to an innumerable posterity, Who can declare his
generation? So (verse. 10.) He shall see his seed. But besides all these we may
with good probability interpret the word generation for the time when Christ
sojourned in the flesh, Quis cogitare aut dicere potest, quam perversi fuerint
homines, qui tempore ejus victuri sint. Pined.
Who can declare his generation? That is, who can describe the time or the age
wherein Christ lived? As if he had said, you see here in this glass of
prophecy how they will use Christ, how bloudily and cruelly they will deal with
him, he shall be imprisoned, he shall be cut off and numbered among
transgressors, Who can declare his generation? What pen is able with lively
colors to paint out the several wickednesses and tyrannies of that age, acted
against, and inflicted upon that holy and innocent lamb Jesus Christ, who came
to die for the sins of the world? Surely his generation, or the story of his
age will be such, as no pen is able to draw out, or fully to delineate, Who
shall declare his age?

The age which Bildad calls Job to enquire into, is not a part of man's life, or
the whole life of a man, or one age of men, or state of times, but the whole
space of time from the very beginning, with all things done or suffered, and
the persons who have been active or passive, doers or sufferers in those times.
Thus enquire of the former age.

The reason why he called him to enquire of the former age, was, because in
those times the will of God was not reduced to writing. The divinity of the
first ages was traditionall; The Scriptures were not composed for more than
2000. years after the creation, bu^ ^he mind of God was either immediately
revealed, or carried from father to son, from generation to generation; being
preserved, not in paper and (...) or other formal records, but in the memories
and hearts of t^^ ^^ithfull, until the giving of the D^^. Hence it was that
Bildad refers Job to those revelations, or to the experiences of the fathers
concerning the dealings of God in former ages. Columnae duae inscriptae a
nepotibus Adami, characteres quosdam and figuras mathematicas, pro siderum
observatione potius qua^ ullam historia^, aut exquisitam de Deo and ejus
providentia doctrinam habuisse dicuntur. Beros. l. 8 Ant.


Berosus in his eighth book of Antiquities, reports that the fathers after Adam
set up two great pillars, upon which, some affirm they inscribed many divine
truths: but he tells us that those pillars, (of which some monuments were seen
after the flood) were filled rather with Astronomicall observations,
Mathematical scheams of the heavens and figures of stars; we cannot put much
value upon either of these opinions. The former cannot warrant us that any
thing was registered and written by Gods appointment, till the writing of the
Law. And therefore Bildad, according to the usage of those times, sends Job for
information to the traditions and reports of the fathers. For after the Law was
written, the Prophets, in case of emergent doubts and controversies, sent the
people, not to the traditions or experiences of former ages, but, To the Law
and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light, or no morning in them, Isa. 8.20. The word once written was
the rule, and though it cannot speak, yet it must teach us how to speak. If we
speak not according to this, there is no light in us. But the word not being
written, Bildad advises Job well, Enquire of the former age, And prepare thy
self to the search of their fathers.

Having counseled him to enquire of the former age; he adds, (...)
Prepare thy self to the search of their fathers; as if he had said, Fundare,
aptare parare, ordinare, stabilire significat.
though I bid thee enquire, yet I would not have thee rush hand over head upon
this enquiry, Prepare thy self. The word signifies to lay a good foundation;
Due preparations are the foundations of action. Hence it signifies also to
establish; because a matter is established and confirmed by wise preparations
and considerate addresses to it. Those things stand fastest about which we make
not too much haste. Further, the word signifies the fixing of the mind, Fix
thy heart upon this work; keep thy spirits intent ( Psalm. 108.1.) My heart is
fixed (says David, which some render, My heart is prepared) I will sing and
give praise. Prepare thy self To the search of their fathers.

Before he advised him to enquire of the former age, here, To search their
fathers; as if he had said, Do not confine thy self to the immediately
fore-passed times, but go as high as thou can: The former age (as was touched
upon that passage) may include all times past: but here to avoid all mistakes,
he gives it in expressly. The fathers of the former age, are the fathers of
every age. All that have lived before us, come under the relation of our
fathers. The fathers were dead, but they lived in their monuments and works:
these he must search, so far as any mark or remembrance of them could be
found. Hence observe,

First, That as it is a duty in all, so it was a custom in ancient times,
carefully to record the dealings of God with them, for the use of ensuing
generations.

To what end should Job search, if nothing were to be found; The Jews were
commanded to remember the works of God for their learning after the word was
written, Psalm. 78.5. He established a testimony in Jacob, etc. That they should
make them known to their children. God has always had a book of his acts and
monuments, as well as of his laws and institutions. Names given to children and
yearly feasts, to stones and pillars, have been the preservatives and memorials
of his wonderful works. The works of God are his holiness, justice, power,
mercy, truth made visible. The administrations of God in one age, are for the
instruction of all ages. God spoke with Jacob only in person at Bethel, yet
there the Scripture says he spoke with all his posterity, Hos. 12.4. He found
him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us. It is then a debt to posterity, to
show them what God has done for us. Observe,

Secondly, That it is our duty to enquire into the dealings of God in all ages.

It was their duty before the word was written, and it is a duty still. The
works of God are to be studied and read over as well as his word, Deuteronomy. 4.20.
and 32. Ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the
day that God created man upon earth; and ask from one side of heaven to
another, enquire every way to see whether ever God dealt with a people, as he
has dealt with thee, whether God did ever assay to take to himself a Nation
from the midst of another Nation by temptations, and by signs, and by
wonders, etc. Enquire this of all the former times. So, Deuteronomy. 32.7. Remember
the days of old, consider the years of many generations, ask thy father and he
will show thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee. The Psalmist promises to
rehearse what these were enjoined to record, Psalm. 78.3, 4. I will open my
mouth in a parable, I will utter dark sayings of old, which we have heard and
known, and our fathers have told us. Our speaking of, and enquiring into, what
God has done, shows the harmony between his word and works. And the former
providence of God are food for our faith, as well as the promises of God.

Thirdly, That which I shall rather insist upon, is this,

True antiquity ever gives a testimony to the truth.

Hence the Prophets send the people back to antiquity, Jer. 6.16. Enquire for
the good old-way. Every old way is not a good way, but in every good old way we
may walk safely and see the footsteps of truth. Quod antiquissimum verissi^um.
It is a received rule, That is truest which is ancientest. It is certainly so,
for truth is not only ancient, but eternal. Truth is as old as God himself,
for truth is nothing else but the mind of God, truth was with God from
everlasting. Truth is commonly called the daughter of time, yet (in a sense) it
is the mother of time, for it was before time was; and therefore (no question)
that which is ancientest is truest.

Yet there is a great abuse of this principle. Look back to antiquity and
consult with your fathers (say many) and see what they did, how they believed.
But what is the antiquity they call us to consult with? It is not (as Moses
spoke in that place of Deuteronomy) antiquity, since God created man upon
earth, or since Jesus Christ was upon the earth, and gave out his Gospel-laws:
but it is the antiquity of some later ages and editions, an antiquity far short
of what is indeed the ancient time. The Apostle (1 John 2.7.) gives us the
definition of an old commandment, This is the old commandment which was from
the beginning. Our sinful nature is called the old man, and yet it is a
corrupt man. It is called the old man not that it is older then the new man;
the new man is not of a younger house, or later date then the old man.
Holiness was before corruption. And the image of God upon man, elder then
sin, the image of the devil. There are many corruptions in doctrine, in
opinion, in worship, in practice, which go for very old: And there are many
doctrines which we call new truths; Is it because those corruptions are older
then these new truths? No, new truths are elder then the oldest corruptions.
That which we call the new world, was created in the beginning, though
discovered but yesterday. So new truths were given from the beginning, only
they were unknown till of late; and we may well conceive that some goodly
regions of truth are still (terra incognita) undiscovered; God having reserved
them for the honor, and industry of some divine Columbus, who may give us an
exacter sea-card of divine mysteries, then the world has yet seen, though
enough has been seen from the beginning for the safe steering of our course to
heaven. He that would enquire and make a diligent search for truth, must go to
the first institutions, That Is the old commandment which was from the
beginning. The Prophet Ezekiel (Chap. 23.43.) speaks of some who were grown old
in adulteries; that is, old in adulterating and corrupting the truth, and
worship of God, That which is old may be old in evil, and fuller of errors
then it is of days. We find when the good Kings of Judah reformed, they did
not search only into what was done in the ages immediately before them, or what
their next fathers had done, but they searched what was done in the times of
their godly fathers, how many removes soever distant from them. Hezekiah (2 Chronicles. 29.6.) tells the Levites that their fathers were in an error, that they
had trespassed, and done that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and had
forsaken him; and Chap. 30.5. speaking of the observation of the Passover, he
says, They had not done it of a long time in such sort as it was written;
therefore, v. 7. he dehorteth them saying, Be not ye like your fathers which
trespassed against the Lord God of your fathers; he does not mean that they
should not be like their first fathers, who had the truth purely committed to
them, and so worshipped God purely; but be not like your immediate
forefathers, or your corrupt forefathers, how many descents and generations
so ever, ye can number from them. And this was a thing so strange, that when
Hezekiah sent the Posts from City to City through the Countries of Ephraim and
Manasseh with this message, that he would have a reformation according to the
first institution or pattern, and would not have them stay in what their
forefathers had done; It is said, verse. 10. That they laughed the messengers
to scorn, and they mocked them, what must we now be wiser then our fathers?
Yes, says he, you have done evil a long time, you and your fathers, therefore
I must bring you back to your first fathers, in comparison of whom, the fathers
you claim by were but children, and those degenerate children. It is said of
Josiah's reformation (2 King. 23.22.) That there was not the like from the
days of the Judges, nor in all the days of the Kings of Israel and Judah, he
went to the very beginning of all, there had not been such a thing done before.
So that if any should have objected, why may not such a reformation serve us as
served those Kings and Judges? No, says Josiah, I will search what was beyond
their time, into the remotest antiquities. The Church makes humble confession
(Psalm. 106.6.) We have erred with our fathers; let not any turn this into a
stubborn resolution, and say, We will err with their fathers: if that be an
error which our fathers believed and practiced, we will err with them. So
those rebellious Jews pleaded (Jer. 44.17.) We will do as our fathers. They
who will do as their fathers, may suffer with their fathers; they who will
needs err by their fathers copy, may go to hell too by their fathers copy.
Jerome once desired leave of Austin to err with seven fathers whom he found of
his opinion, I should not desire that leave, nor envy any one the privilege.
The Fathers are but children, when they err, and they who will err with their
fathers, are worse then children.

Consider then to what antiquity and to what fathers you appeal. Many practices
are very old, yet very erroneous. Many old sayings and old doings, must be
unsaid and undone, or we shall be undone for ever. How many old sayings of the
Jews does Christ gainsay (Mat. 5.) Ye have heard that it has been said by
them of old time, thus and thus, But I say unto you etc. And (Mat. 19.)
answering the Question about divorce, Moses indeed for the hardness of your
hearts, suffered you to put away your wives, but from the beginning it was not
so. Besides, some (like the Gibeonites) feign antiquity, they can put a gray
beard upon a green head; and their opinions will be found fennowed and moldy
with error, not with age. As we must take heed of novelties so we must be
cautious about antiquities. Some antiquities of old men are no better than old
wives fables of which the Apostle bids us beware; unlearned old wives fables
are as authentic as many learned men's antiquities pleaded for. To have an itch
after novelties, and to dote upon antiquities, are alike vain and dangerous.
Old fables and young fancies are with me at the same rate, No man having drunk
old wine (says Christ, Luke 5.35.) strait way calls for new, for he says the
old is better. Old is better then new, if it be as good as new. But any new
truth is better then the oldest error; and every error, the elder it is, the
worser it is.

Again Bildad advises Job to prepare himself to the search of his fathers.
Hence observe,

We must not presume to find truth with ease, or to come slightly by it.

Prepare thy self (Prove. 2.3.) If thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up
thy voice for understanding: if thou dig for it as silver, and search for it as
for hid treasures, then thou shall find, etc. A man that will find silver,
must prepare and fit himself to search for silver. That lies not upon the
surface, but in the bosom and bowels of the earth. There are four things
wherein this preparation consists.

1. Humility: God does not teach but resist the proud, he gives more grace
(humility is much grace) to the humble. A lowly minded man shall know the mind
of the most high God.

2. Holiness submitting to and practicing the truth we know prepares us for
the receiving of more truth. He that does the will of Christ shall know his
doctrine, Ioh. 7.17.

3. Prayer: Does any man want wisdom, let him ask of God Jam. 1.5. Truth is
the daughter of God, and he will not bestow her in marriage upon our minds,
unless we ask him.

4. Love unto truth. Truth is a beauty, and deserves our love; to love truth is
not a civility, but a duty: to search for truth without love to truth, is a
dishonor to truth; and as the not receiving the love of the truth, is the
cause why many apostatize and fall from it, so it is a reason why many are
still ignorant and cannot come at it. As God, the Father of truth must be asked
his good will before we can have her: So truth the daughter of God shall be
loved before we have her.

Bildad having thus advised Job to search antiquity, gives him a reason of his
advice, a modest reason, reflecting upon himself and upon his friends.

Verse 9. For we are but of yesterday and know nothing, our days on earth are
a shadow.
As if he had said, the reason, why we refer thee to the former ages, is,
because we are able to say so little of our selves and from our own experience,
we are but of yesterday, that is, the time we have lived is very little, our
days have been few upon earth. Truth is the daughter of time, and we are
scarce sons of time, we are but of yesterday.

(...) Heri dicitur de die praeterito, tam de propinquo, quam de longinquo,
quasi diceres antea Rab Dav. Apostolus Hebraizans, s^c utitur voca^ulo, (...).
Heb 13.8.
Yesterday] Taken in our common speech, signifies only the day immediately
going before. 2. It is put for the time a little before, and is as much as
lately, 2 King. 9.26. Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the
blood of his sons: That is, It is not long since Naboth and his sons were
slain, and their blood is as fresh in my memory, as if it were in my eye. 3. It
is put for all time, how long so ever past ( Heb. 13.8.) The Apostle
Hebraizing, says, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday and to day and for ever;
yesterday is not put for the day immediately before, or for many days before,
but for all days before, even from the beginning of the world; yea, not only
are all days past included in yesterday, but the eternity, which is past.

Heri and nudius tertius, dum simul junguntur proverbialem conficivet
hyperbolem, tempus ru^er actu^ significantem. Sic etiam apud Graecos (...).
Bold.
Yesterday and the day before, are often translated before or heretofore, Genesis
31.2, 5. Exodus 40.10. Ruth 2.11. 2 Samuel 5.2. noting time not much past, the
present.

In this place by yesterday, we are not to understand all time past, nor the
time immediately past, but small time past, We are but of yesterday, that is,
we have lived but a while in the world (yet they were old men) the days which
we have seen are as nothing, he expresses their lives by the least complete
time past, to show that they had lived but a little time past.

So, in Scripture, this phrase, (...) usurpatur in^efinite de tempore
praeterito ut cras de futuro. Drus.
to morrow (opposite to yesterday) signifies not only the day immediately to
come, but any time to come indefinitely (1 Samuel 28.19.) the devil answers Saul,
To morrow thou and thy sons shall be with me; he did not know exactly and
precisely that it should be the very next day, but he uses a word which would
save his credit, if it should have fallen out many days or some years after.
To morrow may be any time to come. As then to morrow signifies the immediate
day coming, (...). Sensus est antea nunc. Nazianz. de Mat.
or all time to come, so yesterday signifies the immediate day past, or all
time past. Thus one of the Ancients speaks of Matthew, Yesterday a Publican, to
day a Preacher: that is, he was heretofore a Publican, and now a Preacher.

For we are but as yesterday. Bildad styles himself and his friends yesterday,
to show they had been but short-lived, though they had lived long. Some have
given us the date of their years, or an account how old they were. They reckon
Bildad an hundred and forty, Eliphaz an hundred and fifty, and Zophar an
hundred and twenty years old. Histerni, quasi unius diei homines sunt, novi and
recentes.
In what records the years of their nativities were found, I know not: but
probable enough it is, that they were ancient men; And ( Chap. 15.10.) Eliphaz
speaks as much, With us are both the gray headed and very ancient men, much
elder then thy father. Yet Bildad calls himself and them, but as of
yesterday, either absolutely, because the life of man is short, or
comparatively to the lives of the fathers in the first age of the world, who
lived much longer. His meaning then is, we will not bound thee to our
experiences, who have lived but a while, but enform thy self from them who
lived many years ago, and lived many years, some of them nine hundred years and
more; enquire of Methuselah, and his contemporaries who are able to give thee a
better account then we. Therefore he adds, And know nothing.

The particle [And] is here causall, We are but of yesterday, therefore we know
nothing; in which sense we read it often. Take an instance ( Ezekiel. 23.31.) Thou
have walked in the way of thy sister, therefore I will give her cup into thine
hand: The Hebrew is, And I will give her cup into thy hand, thou shall pledge
her in the same cup of affliction. So here, We are but of yesterday and know
nothing; that is, We are but of yesterday, therefore we know nothing.

Know nothing. The negation is not absolute but comparative. We know nothing,
that is, we neotericks know but little in comparison of those who lived long
ago, and lived so long, even many centuries, gathering knowledge, and making up
their observations: for ( Chap. 12.12.) With the ancient is wisdom, and in
length of days understanding. Hence observe,

The short life of man is not sufficient to gain much knowledge.

We are but of yesterday, and we know nothing, we cannot know much who live but
little. The great Physician complained long ago, Life is short, Ars longa vita
brevis. Hippoc.
and art is long; Natural life is not long enough for the journey of natural
knowledge. How much less is it for divine knowledge, in the mystery of Christ:
which is the art of all arts, and science of sciences. Those mysteries are very
long, and our lives are very short, therefore at our best, we come short in the
knowledge of them. Hence the Apostle (1 Cor. 13.) speaking of the most perfect
knowledge we have in this life, concludes, We know but in part; there is a vast
ocean of truths in the Gospel, but we are straightnecked vessels, we take in
truth but by drops; we are long a taking it in, and we have not long to take it
in; hence the emptiness of those who are fullest. He that has much to learn,
and out a little to live, cannot learn much. And as our time is little, so we
lose a great deal of our time. Non parum temporis habemus, sed multum perdimus
Sen.
Our losses of the time we have, hinder more then our having but little time.
Our days are few, but if we could number them, we should apply our selves to,
and gain to our selves a sufficient stock of holy wisdom. The greatest reason
why we profit no more in knowledge, is because we improve our time no more,
though that be a reason also, because we have no more time.

Secondly, Observe, how modestly Bildad speaks of himself, and of his friends,
We are but of yesterday, and we know nothing.

It becomes us to have humble thoughts of our own knowledge, how much soever
we know.

These were neither children nor fools, who had to do with Job, they were the
wisest of that age, Oracles of wisdom, yet we know nothing, says Bildad. The
best of our knowledge here, is to know our imperfections; it is as much
knowledge as we can reach, to know wherein our knowledge comes short. The
Apostle (1 Cor. 8.2.) is direct, He that thinks he knows any thing, knows
nothing as he ought to know: He would not have us think that we know any
thing: Though he had said in the former verse, We know that we all have
knowledge; the Apostle knew it, but he would not have them think it. His
meaning is, I grant there is knowledge abroad in the world, I have some, and
you have some. We know that we all have knowledge: which yet some understand,
as if he spoke in a secret irony, against those who bragged so much of their
knowledge, Yea, We know you have knowledge, (...) geminatio negantis particu ae
vehementius negat. Bez.
but let me tell you thus much, you who stand so much upon your knowledge, He
that thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing yet as he ought to know.
How can that be? Is not a man to think that he knows what he knows? Must a man
think himself ignorant, or otherwise, he must be accounted ignorant? Surely
no. There are very many that know much, and they may think that they may know
something, yea, that they know many things. (...) non signifi^at simpli^em
aliquam persuasionem, sed quae cum superbia and insolentia conjuncta est,
alioquin nihil magis repugnat fidei, quam Academica dubitatio. Bez.
But observe the word there, He that thinks: the word does not signify a
simple apprehension of a thing, or a bare and naked knowledge, for so a man may
reflect upon his own knowledge, and know that he knows as well as what he
knows: but it imports thinking, with a kind of insolency and pride of spirit,
with affectation, boasting and vainglory in that knowledge. He that thinks
he knows any thing, that is, he that vaunts and stands upon his knowledge, who
conceits he has so much knowledge, such a head-peece that he can carry all
before him by the strength of his wit and parts, such a knowing man knows
nothing, That man's wisdom is but conceit, who is wise in his own conceit. In
this sense we have the word ( Mat. 3.9.) where the Baptist bespeaks the
Pharisees, Think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our father;
Think not, it was not a sin for them to think that Abraham was their
father, and that they were descended from him, but, think not, that is, do
not think of this, and so be proud of it. Be not lifted up upon an outward
privilege, which will stand you in no stead at all, if you stand upon it:
Except you be changed and born again of the Spirit, it will not avail you that
you are born of Abraham's flesh: If Abraham's faith be not in your hearts, it
shall be no advantage to you that Abraham's blood runs in your veins. The word
is so used again (Phil. 3.4.) If any one thinks he may be confident, I much
more: If any one may have an opinion of himself in regard of outward
privileges, surely I may, but I will not. So then an opinion or a
conceitednesse of our knowledge blasts all our knowledge, such a man knows
nothing as he ought to know; he knows somewhat by rote, but he does not know
any thing (as a Christian ought) by heart. By how much we have the more true
knowledge of the highest objects, by so much we have the lower thoughts of our
knowledge. It is best to know as much as we can of the best things, and to
think as little as we can of our selves.

Our days upon earth are a shadow. But were not the days of all the fathers a
shadow? Yes, the longest life is but a long shadow; he means comparatively, our
lives are shorter by much then theirs were, and therefore but a shadow.

There are three sorts of shadows. 1. Natural. 2. Civil. 3. Spiritual.

First, A natural shadow is a dark light caused by the coming of some thick
body between us and the Sun. This is a shadow in a proper and strict
acception.

Secondly, Besides the natural, there is a civil shadow, Protection is a
shadow: and to be under a shadow, is to be protected. We translate ( Numb. 14,
9.) Their defense is departed from them, the Hebrew is, Their shadow, So Isa.
4.5. and 25.4.

Thirdly, A shadow is taken for a dark or imperfect representation of things
spiritual; so all the Ceremonies of the old Law are called shadows ( Heb. 8.5.
and 10.1. and 9.9. Col. 2.17.) Ceremonial worship is expressed by a shadow,
because it was but an obscure representation of the truth: The Ceremonies were
interposed between Christ the true light and us, and so cast a shadow of him.
Or, as a Painter, who is to draw the lively figure or shape of a man, at first
makes an obscure draught, or some imperfect lines of the body, but afterward
gives it beauty and luster to the life. The Mosaicall rites were such a shadow
of heavenly things. Yet further, a shadow (which comes nearest the meaning of
this text) notes the least imaginable sign or semblance of a thing: So ( Jam.
1.17.) when the Apostle says, That with God the Father of lights, there is not
so much as a shadow of turning, he means, there is not the least sign or token
of turning with God.

When Bildad says, Our days upon earth are but as a shadow, we may
understand it, either of the time past, and so our life is but as a shadow that
is gone. Or, it may be meant of the whole life of man taken together. The life
of man (take it from the beginning to the ending, from the Alpha to the Omega,
from the first to the last of it) is a shadow. The comparison is frequent in
Scripture, I shall not need to stay upon it. See two or three particulars of
the resemblance.

1. The life of man is as a shadow, Vmbra est quid tnane, and nihil habens
solidae substantiae.
because it has little in it that is substantial, a shadow is opposed to a
substance; our life rather seems to be, then is, it is so quickly gone.

2. A shadow (though sometimes it be put for protection and safety, yet)
implies unsetlednesse and uncertainty; Vmbra denotat malefidam stationem and
protectionem fugacem, nam qui sub umbra dormit proditur stati^, atque traditur
radiis so^is. Pined.
if a man stands or rests under a shadow, the shadow will leave him, 'twill be
gone from him, and betray him to the scorching Sunne-beams; a shadow never
keeps long in one place, but varies with the motion of the Sun, and when it
is high noon the shadow goes quite up, and is not. There is such an uncertainty
in the life of man, it holds not one tenor, it stays not in any state, there
is a deceitfulness in it, changes are upon it. The greatest certainty of our
lives, is, that they are uncertain.

In general, the life of man being compared to a shadow, teaches us, that it
is short, moveable and unconstant, there is no hold or tack in it, Psalm.
102.11. My days are like a shadow that declineth. The increase of our days
has a declension in it, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. We are strangers before thee, and
sojourners, as were all our fathers; our days on the earth are as the shadow.
How does he explain that? There is none abiding in our days, as there is no
abiding in a shadow. Homo vocatur (...). Pin. (...). Soph (...). Aesch.
Many of the Ancients have represented the life of man, not only as a shadow,
but less then a shadow, A dream of a shadow, a shadow of a sh^dow an Idol of a
sh^dow which is the lowest expression that can be, as much as to say, a nothing
of nothing. An Idol is nothing in the world. God made no such thing in the
world. And though our days be made by God in the world, yet they are no such
thing as God made, or as the world makes them. We have met with points about
the shortness and transitorines of man's life often in this book, I shall
therefore only add a word here.

It is our wisdom forasmuch as our life on earth is as a shadow, that we
improve this shadow to gain assurance of eternal light: Life here is but a
fleeting shadow, that to come is an abiding substance. Shall we for the
pleasures and comforts of a life, which is no more enduring then a shadow,
hazard the pleasures and comforts of a life, which endures for ever. A man has
not a shadow of reason, Attendat igitur homo in diebus umbrae suae, ut faciat
aliquid dignum defide ratae l^cis suae. Aug in Ps. 143.
not a shadow of true wisdom and understanding, who will spend out a shadowish
life in those things which are but a shadow, neglecting that which is the true
light, and will bring us to eternal light?

Bildad having put in this parenthesis as a reason why he sends Job to the
fathers, gives him an encouragement at the tenth verse, to make this enquiry,
he tells him what he shall get for his pains in consulting with those former
ages, and with the fathers.

Verse 10. Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of
their heart?
As if he had said, Thou shall not lose thy labor by enquiring into those
ancient times, shall not they teach thee? Certainly, they shall, thou shall not
come away empty, undirected, uncounsel'd.

Shall not they teach thee? How, could they teach? They were dead and gone,
they were past many ages before. Bildad may be conceived to answer, Though the
fathers are dead, yet they will speak to thee, and counsel thee, as well as if
they lived and stood before thee with our selves. They shall teach thee, and
they shall instruct thee. And more then that, they will not only teach thee in
a complement, and speak words to thee, but they will speak their very hearts to
thee: thou shall find that they will give thee cordial counsel, They will
utter words to thee out of their heart.

Utter words out of their heart. The meaning of that is, either: First in
general, they will give thee the real conceptions of their minds about these
points, they will speak sincerely, they will not speak to thee from the teeth
outward, but from the heart inward. Secondly, they will speak wisely and
judiciously to thee about these things; they will utter, not so much words as
oracles to thee out of their heart.

The heart is the seat of knowledge and understanding, and a wise man is (homo
cordatus) a hearty man, Eloquia ex cord proferre, est sapienter loqui, sapiens
cordatus dicitur; stultus excors.
a man with a heart; and a fool in Scripture is said to be a heartles man, a
man without a heart; he cannot utter words from his heart, who wants a heart,
he utters them from his mouth, or from his tongue. A fools heart is in his
mouth, and a wise man's mouth is in his heart; he speaks that which lies in the
in-most recesses and closets of his spirit: he speaks from meditation, he
brings what he speaks to his heart, Cor loquitur, quae animus praemeditatus
est; os loquitur sine meditatione.
and from his heart utters what he speaks. Christ assures us, That a good man
out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things, and an evil man
out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil things. Every heart is
a treasury. When a good man speaks evil, he speaks not from his heart (though
he has a stock of sinfulness in him) but from his lips; and when an evil man
speaks good, he speaks it not from his heart, but from his lips: for he has no
stock or treasury of good within. An hypocrite speaks good with a heart and a
heart, with a double heart. A fool speaks without a heart, yet of the two, it
is better to have no heart then two.

Or we may take the meaning of the words, as a secret reproof of Job; If thou will look after these fathers, and search them, they will not speak as thou
have done, rashly, unadvisedly and indiscreetly, but they will speak from their
hearts, they will utter things of weight and serious consideration. From hence
observe,

First, That old men are presumed to have a great stock of knowledge.

Go to the fathers, they will certainly teach thee. Every man should labor to
have a proportion of knowledge to his proportion of years, we should not be
children in understanding, when we are men in time. The Apostle reproves such
as are so ( Heb. 5.2.) When (says he) for the time you ought to be teachers
(look upon the years that are gone over your heads, and you ought to be
teachers; you should have much in your hearts for the instruction of others,
yet so it is) you have need that one teach you again, which be the first
principles of the oracles of God, and you are become such as have need of milk,
and not of strong meat.

Secondly, observe, They who are dead and gone, yet speak to us as if they were
living.

Bildad sends Job to the ancient fathers, Go, they will teach thee and utter
words out of their heart. Whilst we consider what they have spoken and done,
it is as if they now spoke, Heb. 11.4. Abel by faith offered a better sacrifice
then Cain, and being dead he yet speaks. They who are dead speak by their
works, and they speak by the words which they spoke, while they were alive. The
records which they have left give us counsel to this day. When the rich man
(it is the scope of the Parable) I say, when the rich man ( Luke 16.2^.)
desired that Lazarus might go from the dead to speak to his brethren, Abraham
answers him, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, etc. If they
hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose
from the dead. They have Moses and the Prophets; but Moses and the Prophets
were dead and gone; how have they Moses and the Prophets? they have not the men
before them, but they had their writings and records: they who read the
Prophets writings, hear their speakings. Books are silent voices.

If Moses and the Prophets may be heard when dead and gone, then much more may
we hear Christ, since he died and rose, and his Apostles who are dead. And
whereas some have an opinion that they do not know the mind of Christ, or that
they cannot reform the Church or their Churches till Christ himself come from
heaven to do it, or till there be Apostles sent personally to do it (they
wanting an Apostle, cannot order the worship and ordinances of God, and
therefore conclude against a present Church State) I say to such, if that be
your ground that you must have Christ and his Apostles to settle all for you;
you have your desires. Look into the works and word of Christ, into the
vvritings and practices of his Apostles, both for your rule and pattern. If
Abraham could say, they have Moses and the Prophets, they may hear them:
surely, we may say much more, we have Christ and his Apostles whom we may
hear and consult about all the institutions and orders that concern the frame
of his Church. We need not stay till Christ come down in person from heaven, or
till new Apostles are sent, and furnished with instruction for this work, for
we have Christ and his Apostles already, we hear what Christ spoke, we read
the rules which he gave concerning the ways of his worship and government
of his Church (in all the essential and constitutive parts of either) to the
end of the world.

Thirdly, observe, They that teach others should teach their own hearts to
speak.

It is best speaking to others with the heart. The heart will teach better then
the tongue, yea better then the understanding, ^he word which comes from the
heart of the teacher, goes soonest to the heart of the hearer.

Fourthly, observe, The heart is the true repository or treasury of holy truths.

You may see where the fathers, the holy men in ancient time laid up truth:
they utter words out of their heart, then, truth was laid up there. Truth is
(as it were) the heart of God, and therefore we must put it into our hearts.
David hid the Commandments of God in his heart: Mary laid up the words of
Christ there. To have the word only swimming in our brains, is to as little
purpose, as to have it only in our Note-books. To have truth only in our brains
or in our books, will do us as little good as water in our shoes. It is a sad
thing to consider how many thousand Sermons are written almost word for word in
books, and scarce a letter of them written in the heart. The promise of the new
Covenant is, that God will write his law in our hearts: Let not any rest
satisfied in having the word written in their books.

Observe further, Holy men of old did highly esteem the word and truths of God.

You may know the esteem they had of these by the place where they laid these;
the heart is the best place, the fairest room in man. To put a thing into the
heart, notes highest esteem and approbation. When we say a thing is in our
hearts we cannot say more to express our esteem of it. When the Apostle (
Phil. 1.7.) professes to the Philippians, I have you in my heart; his meaning
is, you are most dear and precious to me. When we see a man preparing a
special place, a safe place, a convenient place to lay a thing in, we conclude
that the thing he would lay up is of value and account with him: when we
are preparing and fitting our hearts to put the word and truths of God in,
hereby we give a real testimony, that we honor the word of God. For the most
part the truths of God (as we say of things we neglect) are cast at men's heels
rather then laid up in their hearts. We may know the esteem a Queen of England
had of the City of Calice, when she said, It was in her heart, and there they
should find it, if they opened her.

So much concerning these three verses, containing an argument from antiquity,
and the testimony of the first ages, by which Bildad confirms his former
position, That God is just.

JOB Chap. 8. Verse. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Can the rush grow up without mire? Can
the flag grow up without water?

Whilst it is yet in his greenness and not cut down, it withers before any
other herb.

So are the paths of all that forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish.

Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spiders web.

He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall hold it fast,
but it shall not endure.


THis context from the 11th to the 20th verse, contains an illustration (for so
are similitudes) of the former argument; and it is taken from a threefold
similitude. First, of a rush, which is explained, verse. 11, 12. and applied in
the 13th verse. The second is, of a Spiders web, explained and applied, verse.
14, 15. The third, of a luxuriant flourishing tree, explained, verse 16, 17,
18. applied, verse nineteenth. Behold, this is the joy of his way, etc.

The sum of all may be given in this brief;

That it is as equal and ordinary in the course of divine justice to destroy
wicked men; as it is in the course of nature, for a rush to wither when it
wants water; (...) Iuncus a (...) bibit, ingurgi tavit, quia juncus est aquae
immersus, and eam semper imhibens. Cons^ritur hibula Memphytis cymba papyro.
Luc. l. 4. Perque papyriferi septemflua flumina Nili.
or, for a spiders web to break when it is leaned upon; or for a tree to be
hewn down, when it either undergrows or overgrows its owners house, when
casting it is roots under the foundation, it loosens the stones, and weakens the
groundwork; or, when it spreads its boughs and grows so high that it drops
upon the roof, or darkens the windows of it.

Ver. 11. Can the rush grow without mire?
It cannot. The original word for a rush speaks its nature; the root
signifying to suck and drink in, or always to be guzling down. The rush lives
in liquour, and is always drinking. These abounded near the banks of Nilus in
Egypt. There Moses was put into an Ark or skiff made of bulrushes, Exodus 2.3.
The Prophet ( Isa. 18.1, 2.) tells us of a land, sending Ambassadors by the
sea, even in vessels of bulrushes upon the waters. (...) Elatus, eminuit, est
mediae significationis, sumitur pro vitiosa elatione, quae est superbia, etiam
pro magnificentia and decore. Rivet. in Hos. 5.5. Limosu^ juncus, palustres
junc^. Amphibia.


Can the rush grow? In strength, luster and beauty. The word implies growing
with a kind of pride, so plants do in a rich or proper soil, they lift up
their heads, and carry it highly.

Can the rush grow without mire? Which is as much as to say, can a man live
without food? Mire is the rushes meat and drink. It loves and delights in a
moorish soil, and by the rivers side. A rush upon the dry land, is like a fish
upon the dry land. At most the rush among vegetables and plants, is like those
fowls and beasts among sensitives, which live part upon the water, and part
upon the land.

Can the flag grow without water? (...) Locus graminis ubi pascuntur pecora,
forsan ab (...) frater quod ex una stirpe velute multifratres gignantur, quasi
herbarum quaedam fraternitas.
The word signifies any fertile place for grass, a meadow, Genesis 41.2. Pharaoh
saw in his dream seven welfavoured kine, and fatfleshed, and they fed in a
meadow. Some render it so here, Can the meadow grow without water? Both flags and
medows are such drinkers, that they quickly wither, if they want water: which
Bildad gives us plainly in the next verse.

Verse 12. Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut down, it withers
before any other herb.
Whilst it is yet in his greenness.] Or, shooting up in his stem. (...)
Abib est spica maturescens, ve^spica cum calamo, inde Ibbo virgultu^ aut lignum
virens in eo, sc. tempore quo est parens novarum frugum and fro^dium. Vel ob
(...) pater, q. d. in paternitate sua.
Some derive the Hebrew word from Ab, Father; and so it may be rendered from
the letter of the Hebrew, though the expression be somewhat uncouth. While it
is yet in it is paternity, or fatherhood, that is, while it is flourishing and
procreative. Others derive it from Abib, which signifies an ear of corn, or the
ear with the stalk. Hence the month Abib among the Jews had its name, because
in those climates, corn was then eared and began to be ripe; it was the first
month to the Israelites, because of their coming out of Egypt, and answered
to part of our March, and part of April, Exodus 13.4. Chap. 23.15. This day came
ye out in the month Abib, this month shall be to you the beginning of
months. So then this greenness of the rush implies the strength and best of
it, the goodlinesse and beauty of it.

And not cut down. That is, before it is cropped and pulled up by the hand, or is
fully ripe.

It withers before any other herb. That is, sooner or more speedily then any
other herb of lesser show, but better rooting. There are two causes why trees
wither, both which are here removed from the rush, and yet it withers.

First, Age, but the rush withers while it is young in its greenness.

Secondly, Violence, when it is pulled up or cut down by force of hand: but the
rush withers, while it is not cut down. Both argue enough, the little
subsistency which the rush has in it self; to seek any further account about
it, were but to seek a knot in a rush.

Verse. 13. So are the paths of all that forget God etc. Bildad having explained
his similitude, now applies it. The comparison may be made out three ways.

First, That hypocrites are kept in life and luster, by outward, earthly
supplies only, as the rush is by mire and water; and therefore when these fail,
they fail also.

Secondly, As the rush dies, because it has no water; so an hypocrite declines
and wastes, because he is not watered by the blessings of God, and has no
rooting in grace. The seed cast on the stony ground (Matthew. 13.6.) withered,
because it had no earth. ^he lack of earth to the one is the same with the lack
of water to the other.

Thirdly, In the general, that as a rush flourishes a while, but quickly
withers; so the best estate of an hypocrite, his greenness is of no long
continuance; his seeming graces, like his joys, are but for a moment. Hence
observe,

Natural things are shadows to us of spiritual.

We may learn many lessons from speechless creatures. While we turn the leaves
and peruse the contents of this great volume the book of nature, we may find
much of the God of nature. David took instructions from it daily (Psalm. 8.)
When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars
which thou have ordained, what is man that thou art mindful of him? I say
likewise, when we behold the grass and flowers of the field, the flag, the
rush in the water: we may not only put the Question, What is man? but we may
resolve the Question, what the man is: when we look upon the meanest creatures,
we may see pieces of our selves, they are as we are in many considerations, and
we as they; what is man? Man is as grass. What is a wicked man an hypocrite?
He is a rush, He is like the chaff which the wind drives away. What is a godly
man? He is like a tree planted by the rivers of water that brings forth his
fruit in his season. The Spirit of God from things sensible and visible,
raises us up to things spiritual and invisible.

The Ancients were very frequent in this kind of study, Praemifit Deus naturam
magistram, submissurus and prophetiam, quo facilius credas prophetiae
discipulus naturae. Tertul. Familiare est Syris and maxim Palestinia ad omnem
sermonem suum parabolas jungere, ut quod per simplex praeceptum teneri non
potest, per similitudines teneatur. Hier. in c. 19. Mat.
perusing the book of nature, and taking helps to better the understanding by
every object of the eye. It is well observed by one of them, That God sent us
the book of nature, before he sent the book of Scripture. The mind of God was
written upon the things which he had made, before he made tables or books to
write his mind in. The Fathers had many revelations from the beginning, but
they had not Scripture from the beginning. Some conceive that Isaac going out
into the fields to meditate, meditated upon the text of the creature, and used
to raise his heart by those steps of earth to heavenly contemplations. It is
said of Solomon (1 King. 4.32, 33.) That he spoke three thousand Proverbs, and
his songs were a thousand and five, and that he spoke of trees, from the Cedar
tree that is in Leba^^n, even unto the hysop that springs out of the wall;
which Cuilibet specie: plantarum suam adhibuit parabolam Joseph. in loc.
Josephus expounds thus, Solomon applied his three thousand parables or
similitudes unto those trees or plants about which he discoursed, drawing some
divine moral from every plant, whose nature as a Philosopher he had described.

More distinctly for the spiritualizing of this similitude, consider wherein a
wicked man or an hypocrite, is like unto a rush; the rush may be of good value
to us, being thus improved.

First, The rush is a very spungy, hoven, hollow substance, it is not solid or
close-grain'd: An hypocrite has no solidity, we call him a hollow-hearted man.

Secondly, Hypocrites are well compared to a rush or a flag, because in windy
weather they sit which way soever the wind sits. They take no ha^^ by a storm,
because they yield to every turn: let the wind blow which way it will, the
rush breaks neither body nor branch. Let things turn which way they will,
hypocrites can shift, and bend, and yield with them. And therefore when storms
arise, which pull down and destroy many goodly trees of Gods own planting,
these rushes continue. Hypocrites keep their standing, because they never
stand. A great man being asked how he kept his honor and preferment in so many
changes of wind and weather, of times and Princes, answered, By being a
willow, and not an Oak. He that can sway, seldom breaks. Hypocrites in the
Church and State, live by the same principles.

Thirdly, A bulrush or a flag in time of a storm hangs down the head, but when
the storm is over, it holds up the head, and stands upright again. This
resemblance between the hypocrite and a bulrush is given by the Prophet (Isa.
58.5.) Is this the fast that I have chosen, a day for a man to afflict his
soul? Is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, etc? The bulrush in a storm
seems to be humbled to the very ground, but in fair weather it is as high as
ever. Hypocrites in times of public humiliation, hang down their heads, and
seem to lay their mouths in the dust, but when the day is past, they quickly
forget their sorrows, If I (says the Apostle, Gal. 1.18.) build again the
things which I have destroyed, I make my self a transgressour. Hypocrites are
the worst sort of transgressors, for they seem to destroy their sins one day,
but they indeed build them again the next.

Fourthly, The rush and the flag grow only in miry places, where they may have
abundance of water and moisture, which notes a kind of sensuality in them, and
therefore they have their names from drinking. So hypocrites seem to be
heavenly, but are indeed earthly: they are like the rush, they cannot live
without store of water, they are sensual, they must please their appetites,
and delight their palates. The Apostle describes them so, They serve not the
Lord Jesus, but their own bellies; they must be supported with the affluence of
outward things, else they cannot hold out, in profession. Whereas the godly and
true believers can live, when the water is drained or dried away, when outward
things fail and are gone. So the Prophet Habakkuk professes, Chap. 3. ult.
Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines,
though the fields shall yield no meat, and there be no herds in the stalls, yet
I will rejoice in the Lord, and will joy in the God of my salvation. A godly
man will grow when all the world decaies to him; he will rejoice in God when
all outward comforts fail him; hypocrites must have sensual supplies, or they
are lost. A feigned love of spiritual things is ever joined with a true love
of worldly things. Christ speaks of some who followed him more for the loaves
then for the word. And Judas followed his Masters bag, more then his Master.

Fifthly, Bulrushes or flags yield no fruit at all, they only make a fair show;
hypocrites how green so ever they are, what show or profession soever they
make, yield no fruit of holiness.

Sixthly, A bulrush or a flag withers sooner then any other herb, that is, then
other herbs that are not seated so near the water. And this agrees well with
the hypocrite, for when the hypocrite begins once to wither, he withers
quickly. He never had any true life, and he will not long appear to have any.
When one that has made a fair profession begins to decay, he decaies sooner
than a mere civil man; a civil man will hold out in honesty and justice a great
while, but a hypocrite gives over holiness and godliness presently. Besides,
God blasts and withers an hypocrite sooner than any other man, because he has
abused and wronged God more then any other man. When judgments come they fall
first upon hypocrites, The hypocrites in Zion tremble, Isa. 33. Trembling will
take hold upon the profane and openly wicked, but trembling takes hold foonest
upon hypocrites; they have most cause to tremble, who were confident without a
cause. False hope is the parent of real fear; and they who believe without
repenting, shall repent without believing.

Verse 13. So are the paths of all that forget God, and the hypocrites hope
shall perish.
So are the paths.] So, that is, thus it comes to pass, Sic sane illis accidit
and usu venit, talis est eorum conditio. Drus.
this is the way and the end of all those who forget God.

The path of a man is taken two ways.

First, For his state and condition, Psalm. 1. The way of the wicked shall
perish; that is, the whole state of a wicked man shall perish.

Secondly, For his course and conversation, Job 33.11. He puts my feet in
the stocks, he marketh all my paths, that is, he takes notice of the whole
course of my life; all my conversation, all my tradings and dealings are before
God. This path of man's course and conversation is twofold. There is an
internal, and there is an external path. The internal is that of the mind;
the mind has it is course, the heart has a way, Isa. 57.17. He went on
frowardly in the way of his heart. The external path is that of outward
actions: That which we usually do, is our path. Thus the actions and works of
God are called the paths of God, Job 40.19. Behemeth is the chief of the ways
of God. Prove. 8.22. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before
his works of old. Psalm. 77.13. Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary; that is,
thy actings and doings are seen there.

Our actions are compared to a path in two respects. 1. Because we are frequent
in them, that which is a man's course he treads every day. 2. They are called
our paths, because they lead us to same end; every path leads us to some place
or other. Some actions lead to life, and some to death, some lead to heaven,
some to hell, some to Christ, and some to Satan, to one of these ends, we are
traveling and journeying all the days of our lives.

Of those that forget God. To forget God imports these four things.

1. Not to think of God, we forget that which we mind not. The first act of
remembering is thinking. The thief on the cross prayed, Lord remember me when
thou come into thy Kingdom; that is, think of me for good. God is not in all
the thoughts of a wicked man ^o obey or honor him, and a wicked man is not in
all the thought of God (in this sense) to bless or pardon him.

2. To forget God, is to disobey God, or not to do the will of God, Deuteronomy.
8.11. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God in not keeping his
Commandments. As to remember God is to do the will of God, Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: that is do the will of thy
Creator in the days of thy youth: so to forget God, is to disobey God, not to
do his will. God is said to forget us when he does not our will, that is, when
we in prayer propose ^u^d^^fe to God to do them for us, the not doing of those
things for us, into forget us. David expostulates, Psalm. 77.9. Has the Lord
forgotten to be gracious? He had prayed much at the beginning of the Psalm with
success, I cried unto God with my mouth, even unto God with my voice, and he
gave ear unto me. He puts up other requests, which finding no present answer or
sensible acceptance, he cries out, Has the Lord forgotten to be gracious? Now,
as when the Lord does not our will, he is said in Scripture to forget us, so
when we do not the will of God, we indeed forget him.

3. To forget is lightly to esteem, to slight the Lord. That which a man
highly esteems, he keeps in his memory, and treasure it up there; and when a
man forgets a thing, Oblivio affert contemptum.
especially when he wilfully forgets it, he disrespects it, he sleights and
contemns it, Jer. 30.14. All thy lovers have forgotten thee; that is, thy
lovers care not for thee, they slight and esteem lightly of thee. When a man
comes not at one, whom he loves, he is said to forget him, Jer. 2.32. Can a
maid forget her ornaments. or a bride her attire? A maid has a great esteem of
her ornaments; especially of her wedding ornaments, and therefore she is often
thinking of them; it may be she can hardly sleep the night before, for thinking
of the rich garments, yea the bracelets and bables she is to wear upon the
wedding day. Can a bride forget her attire? Will she throw these by the walls
(as we speak) or cast them at her heels? Yet, says the Lord, My people have
forgotten me days without number. They have lightly esteemed me, I am not so
much to them as new clothes, who am indeed their life; I am not so much
remembered as unnecessary curiosities, from whom they receive all things
necessary, and whose favor is the one thing necessary.

4. To forget God is to depart from God. We stay with God no longer then we
remember him: as we cannot have communion with truth, so not with the God of
truth, without an act of memory (Heb. 12.5.) Ye have forgotten the exhortation
which speaks unto you as unto children, My son, despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord etc. A word forgotten is to us of no more use then a
word never spoken. We are without all the good we forget; and to forget God is
(Ephesians. 2.12.) to be without God in the world, or, to live on earth as if there
were no God in heaven, either in regard of mercy to be received, or of duty to
be performed. Hypocrites forget God all these ways; though their natural
memory may be good, yet spiritual memory (and that only holds spiritual
things) they have none. Observe hence,

First, That the hypocrite is a forgotter of God.

Every wicked man is forgetful of God. Hence we find these put together,
Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations that
forget God: But this is the special character of an hypocrite, he is a
forgetter of God. Consider this (says the Psalmist) ye that forget God; that
is, ye hypocrites consider this ((...) 50.22) for he speaks of such as had
taken their covenant of God in their mouths; What have thou to do (verse. 16.)
to take my Covenant in thy mouth? As if he had said, thou professest to be in
Covenant with me, to have an interest in me, Yet when thou saw a thief, then
thou consentest with him, and have been partaker with adulterers, thou give
thy mouth to evil, etc. Hypocrites take the Covenant of God in their mouths,
but cast it out of their lives, God is near in their mouths, but from their
reins (Jer. 12.2.) If the hypocrite did not forget, that God is about his bed,
and about his path, and espieth out all his ways, he could not be so false
with God, so polluted in his ways, so rotten in his inward parts. If an
hypocrite did not forget, that God being a spirit delights to be worshipped
in Spirit, he would never be satisfied in worshipping him with his body. If he
did not forget that God is jealous, that he will not hold them guiltless who
take his name in vain, he durst not (which is his every days work) take the
name of God in vain.

Secondly, observe, That forgetfulness of God (howsoever it seems no great
matter, yet) is exceeding sinful, a wickedness of the highest stature.

Forgetfulness of God is therefore a great wickedness, because God has done
so many things to be remembered by. What could the Lord have done more to make
himself remembered then he has done, Have I been a wilderness to Israel, or a
land of darkness? (says the Lord, Jer. 2.31.) the words are an aggravation of
their forgetfulness. As if the Lord had said, I have been a light to you
wheresoever you go, and wheresoever I go my steps drop fatness for you, and
am I forgotten? Where can we set a step but we tread upon a remembrance of God?
Every creature holds forth God unto us. He has left his remembrance upon every
ordinance, Do this in remembrance of me, says Christ in that great ordinance
of his Supper: yea all the works of his providence are remembrancers of him. He
leaves an impression of his wisdom, holiness, justice, power upon all he
does. Now for us to forget God who has (as it were) studied so many ways to
fasten himself in our remembrance, must needs be extremely sinful. Further it
is very sinful to forget God, because God does so abundantly remember us. He
has not only done that which may cause man to remember him; but he has man
always in his remembrance, especially his own people, He has graven them upon
the palms of his hands, and they are continually before him. They who desire to
preserve their friends fresh in memory, get their pictures in their houses, or
engrave them upon rings and jewels which they wear always about them. But he
that cuts the image of his friend in his flesh, or draws it upon his skin, how
zealous is he of his friends remembrance? Pictures and annulets may be lost,
but our hands cannot fall off. When the Lord would show how mindful he is of
his Church, he assures her that he carries her picture always about him, not
drawn upon a Tablet, or engraven upon the signet of his right hand, but upon
the palms of his hands; as if he should say, I must lose my self, before I can
lose the sight of memory of thee ( Isa. 49.16.) He remembers her so, that he
cannot forget her. And because the characters and stamps of nature are more
abiding and indelible then those of art, therefore he says ( verse. 15.) Can a
woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the
son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget thee. A woman
may break the bonds of nature, but God will never break the bonds of his own
free grace. May not all this raise us into David's rapture of holy admiration,
Psalm. 8. Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the sonn^ of
man, that thou visitest him with such remembrances? What is a wicked man, that
God should give him bread to eat, and clothes to put on? And what is a godly
man that God should give him Christ to eat, and cloth himself withal? That,
God should remember us is a wonder of mercy; but what a wonder of
unthankfulness is it, that we should not remember God? What, or who is God,
that man should be so mindelesse of him? Is not God worthy of all our
remembrance? Is it loss of time to call God into our thoughts? Do we ever, or
in any thing remember our selves so much, as when we remember God most? It is a
wonderful favor that God should be mindful of us at all; and is it not a
wonderful sin, that man should be so unmindefull of God?

Thirdly, Observe, That, Forgetfulness of God is a mother-sinne, or the cause
of all other sins.

It is the cause of this sin of hypocrisy, Bildad puts it as a fruit of
forgetting God. Forgetfulness of God is threefold.

First, A forgetfulness that there is a God.

Secondly, A forgetfulness who, or what manner of God he is, Thou thoughtest
that I was such an one as thy self (Psalm. 50.) Thou forgettest what manner of
God I am: thou presumest that will serve my turn, which serves thine, or that
every thing will please me which pleases thee: thou say, because it is no
great trouble to thee to steal and lie, etc. therefore it is no great trouble
unto me neither.

Thirdly, To forget God, is to forget what God requires; this Forgetfulness of
these three sorts is productive of any, of every sin.

Lastly, Observe, They that forget God shall quickly wither, how great and
flourishing soever they are.

The reason is this, because the forgetting of God, is a departing from God,
and he that departs from God departs from the fountain of life. If the rush go
out of the water it quickly withers, and if men will depart from God, they
shall quickly decay, neither grace nor comforts can hold out separated from
Christ. Why is the godly man compared to a tree planted by the river side,
which brings forth fruit in his season, whose leaf also shall not wither, and
whatsoever he does shall prosper? Why is the man that trusts in the Lord
compared to a Tree planted by the waters, that spreads out her roots by the
river, and shall not see when heat comes? Jer. 17.7, 8. is it not because the
Saints always keep close to God, by Jesus Christ, who is as an everliving
fountain of water to them, refreshing and moistening them so, with continual
supplies of the Spirit, that they shall not see when heat comes? that is,
they shall not be afflicted with those evil effects of heat, drought and
barrenness. They who keep Covenant with God, may possibly feel some decaies,
but die they shall not, they shall revive and sprout up again; They shall again
put forth their leaves as a plant, and their fruit as the garden of Eden; They
shall bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing.

And the hypocrites hope shall perish. (...) Similavit, dissimulavit, ce ulte
peccavit, per Metaphoram, pollutus, contaminatus.
The word which we translate hypocrite, comes from a root that signifies close
and covered, and by a Metaphor, polluted, defiled, contaminated, because an
hypocrite, though he be outwardly covered, and beautifully painted over, yet
his paint is a spot upon him. All painting is but a spot, in comparison of
natural beauty. An hypocrite is not so much painted, as polluted. Hence he is
called a vile person (Isa. 32.6.) The vile person will speak villainy, and his
heart will work iniquity to practice hypocrisy, and to utter error against
the Lord. We have the character of hypocrites, Isa. 58.3. They daily call upon
my Name as a people that would know the Lord: As a people; an hypocrite does
but play a part in religion, he does but personate another; like an actour upon
a stage, who puts forth the several postures and gestures of a King, when as
himself is some mean fellow. An hypocrite is described acting a double part;
the one is, similation: he labors to appear what he is not, he would seem to
have some good which he has not. Externasa^ie internam sanctitatem mentitur.
And the other is, dissimulation; he labors, not to appear what he is, he
would hide and cover the evil that he has. An hypocrite is one who seems to be
what he is not, and would not seem what he is. He is a Jew outwardly, and his
religion, circumcision outward in the flesh, Romans 1.18. He seems to be
religious (Jam. 1.26.) He is a whited sepulcher (Mat. 23.27.) stately on the
outside, within nothing but rottenness and dead bones. The hypocrite has a
divided heart, Hos. 10.3. and a double mind, Jam. 1.8. He is not half enough
for God, and too much for himself.

Hypocrites are of two sorts, some in a large, others in a strict sense. Most
wicked men are hypocrites in a large sense, though some are above hypocrisy,
they are arrived at impudence. The Prophet speaks of such ( Isa. 3.9.) The show
of their countenance does witness against them, and they declare their sin as
Sodom, they hide it not. They declare it not as the mourners in Zion declare
their sin, who are ashamed of it; but they declare it as Sodom her sin, that
they may delight in it. But though there are some such as these, yet the
greatest number of wicked men fall under the notion of hypocrisy in a large
sense, because they keep their sins close and hide them. Hence the works of
sin are called works of darkness. Wicked men usually hide their wickedness,
and show that which has but a show, their goodness. But in a strict sense, he
is an hypocrite that seems to be very religious, who has nothing but God, and
Christ, and heaven in his mouth; but in his heart and secret practices nothing
but earth and hell. The hypocrite is like the Onyx-stone, of which Naturalists
write, that it is clear and bright in the superficies, but the center is dark
and earthy. This generation is pure, not only in their own eyes ( Prove. 30.12.)
but in the eyes of many men, possibly in the eyes of all men, yet are they not
cleansed from their wickedness.

The hypocrites hope shall perish.] That is, the time shall come when he shall
give over the hope which he has hoped, or the thing shall fail him, wherein he
hoped. First, the object of his hope shall fail him, that is, those benefits,
blessings, accommodations and comforts which he looked for in the profession of
religion, these shall fail him and prove false hopes. Hypocrites ( Mat. 7.)
plead with Christ for heaven, Lord, we have prophesied in thy Name, and in thy
Name cast out devils, etc. but their hopes perished, Depart from me (says
Christ) I know you not. His hope perishes when he cannot have the things he
hoped for. Secondly, The act of his hope shall fail, his hope shall be so long
deferred that his hope shall die: he never had any true ground of hope, and at
the last he shall not have a show of hope. His hope shall perish.

Observe from the name given hypocrites. First,

That hypocrites are filthy and polluted persons. None are so ugly in the eye
of God, as they who paint for spiritual beauty. Pretended holiness is more
unlovely then professed unholines to them that can discern it. As it is said of
Nabal (1 Samuel 20.) Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: So we may say of
an hypocrite, filthiness is his name, and filth is in him. Nabal had his name
from folly, and hypocrites have theirs from filthiness.

Observe, secondly, Hypocrites may be full of hope for a time.

They have somewhat (though it be unsound) upon which they build, they think
what they do and are will serve turn, and go for current with God. This raises
up their spirits. Some hypocrites will be full of hope, even while they are
descending to the pit of despair. Some hypocrites are not convinced of their
hypocrisy to the very last: such die in peace, while they are going down to
eternal war; They go away (as we use to say) like lambs, when their souls
are among lions, and they are tumbling into the place of dragons.

Observe, thirdly, The hope of hypocrites will deceive and fail them. God
rejects their confidences, they shall not prosper in them, Jer. 2.37.

Lastly, Observe, That to lose our hope is the utmost of evils.

Bildad does not say that the hypocrite is damned, and shall go to hell, and
endure the wrath of God for ever: This one expression, Their hope shall perish,
amounts to all this and more, if more can be. Do but sit down and imagine in
your thoughts, and contrive the utmost of all evils felt by men, yea, the
utmost (were it possible) of all the evils of punishment that are in the
thoughts of God, and all are wrapped up and comprehended in this one word,
Their hope shall perish. Hell, and wrath, and fire, and brimstone, and the worm
that never dies meet in this one word.

Bildad goes on to illustrate this by a further instance.

Verse 14. Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be as a spiders
web.

Verse 15. He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall hold
it fast, but it shall not endure.


The hypocrite clings about the object of his hope, as a man that is ready to
drown takes hold on any thing, upon a straw or a rotten stick; but though he
lean upon his house, it shall not stand, etc.

These words contain the second similitude, which is both a confirmation and a
further illustration of the former; for having concluded in the 13. verse with
these words, The hypocrites hope shall perish; he (as it were) doubleth and
resumeth it here again, Whose hope shall be cut off and whose trust shall be a
spiders web.

The original bears different interpretations, and from that, several
senses have been given of these words.

The word here used for [hope] is not the same in the Hebrew, (...)
which we had in the last clause of the former verse, His hope shall perish.
This word was opened at large in the fourth Chapter at the sixth verse, where
we translate it confidence, Is not this thy hope, thy confidence, the
uprightness of thy ways? Now, besides, that the word signifies hope or
confidence, it signifies also folly, inconstancy, frowardness of spirit,
vanity and levity of mind. And thus some render it here.

This hope shall be cut off. (...) Debilitatus la^guef actus fuit, per
Metaphora^, maestitia, ^olore, taedio affectus fuit, proprie, tanquam (...), i.
e. rem putidam, et quae nauseam parit, aversari, and eam abhorrere. Non enim
plac^bit ei ve^ordia ejus. Vulg.
] That word also bears different interpretations.

1. To be weakened, to languish; and because those things which languish and are
weak, either are cut off, or are ready to be cut off; therefore it signifies
likewise cutting off.

2. Further, the word imports gradually, 1. displeasing, 2. loathing or
abominating, 3. chiding or contending.

The words yielding these senses, receive different translations and
interpretations.

First thus, taking the former for inconstancy or folly, his folly shall
displease him, or, His folly shall not please him: So the Vulgar, Hypocrites
never please God, and at last they shall not please themselves. The ways and
works of hypocrites are ever displeasing to God, and they shall at last be
displeasing to themselves. That's the sense of their translation.

And not only shall the ways of an hypocrite be displeasing, but they shall be
a loathing, an abhorring to him: the Lord loathes him now, The prayer of the
wicked is an abomination, and he shall loath himself hereafter. Haec
displicentia cum fastidio quodam and tabescentia conjuncta est.
There is a double loathing. There is, a loathing of repentance. And there is,
a loathing of despair. The former (though it be unpleasant, yet it) is an happy
loathing of our selves. Such loathing of our selves is pleasing to God in the
act, and will be pleasant to us in the fruit ( Ezekiel. 6.9.) They shall loath
themselves for the evils they have committed. And again, Ezekiel. 16.47. and
20.43. the word is taken for this loathing of repentance. But the hypocrite
shall have another kind of loathing. What? a loathing of despair, seeing
himself utterly lost, and his hopes quite cut off, he shall be an abhorring to
himself.

There is yet a third step or degree of sense in this word, He shall not only
be displeased with himself, and loath himself, but he shall fall out with
himself; his hope shall displease or vex him, into self-anger. Secum ipse liti
gabit, rixabitur, quae omnia ad mentis commotionem and animi cruciatum
pertinent. Pin.
Some render the word by contending or chiding: as a man that is displeased
with another, falls out with him, wrangleth and contendeth with him; so an
hypocrite, at last shall chide, contend and wrangle with himself: he shall
contend as much with himself at last, as ever the word of God contended with
him before. An hypocrite never comes to a Sermon, but God chides him, the
Word of God contends with him, and the Spirit of God has a controversy with
him; this man will not be warned by the chiding of God, nor take that to heart,
he still goes on in his hypocrisy. But when no reproofs nor chidings can
prevail upon his heart, he is left to the reproofs and chidings of his own
heart: which will read him such a lecture, and give him such a schooling as he
never had in all his life. Conscience may be long silent, and it may long
flatter, but when once it begins to speak, and to speak right, it is the most
terrible Preacher in the world. There is no Boanerges or son of thunder has
so dreadful a voice. Mount Sinai it self did not thunder so loud as conscience
will. And as conscience speaks loud, so it speaks long. An hypocrite shall
reprove and chide himself for ever; What a fool was I? What a beast was I thus
to flatter my self, thus to mask mine own filthiness, and to dawb over the
rottenness of my heart with the fair covering of a verbal profession? Why did
I wilfully deceive my self into irrecoverable perdition?

Again, Observe from, Whose folly shall displease him.

That the whole course of hypocrisy is nothing but foolishness.

Of all fools the hypocrite is the greatest; and the reason is, because he
takes a great deal of pains in profession, and has no good at all by
profession: he ventureth himself many times in the world to persecution; he
runs the hazard of his credit, of his estate, of liberty and life. What a fool
is this to take so much pains, and subject himself to so many dangers in the
outward profession of Christ, yet at last to lose the fruit and benefit of all?
This folly must needs displease him: he shall at last see what an extreme fool
he has been, to trouble himself about that which brings him in no real
good, but will really double and increase all evil upon him. No man sins at so
dear a rate as the hypocrite.

A second translation takes the Noun (as we) for hope, and not for folly, and
retains the former sense of the Verb; and so the words are thus, Whose hope
shall loath him; that is, Quem fastidit spes sua Jun. Eum quasi fastidius fugit
idipsum quod sperat. Jun.
The thing which he hoped for shall loath him; how loath him? It shall loath
him, not formally, but equivalently, because it shall do that which man does,
when he loathes any thing; when we loath a thing, we flee or turn away from it;
so, His hope shall has him, that is, the thing which he hoped for shall flee
far away, and quite depart, it will not come near him. Good shall remove from
the hypocrite when he expects and makes after it. An hypocrite at once loathes
true grace, and hopes for true comforts: but comfort here and glory hereafter
shall loath him, heaven shall shut against him.

Or take it for the act of hope (as others) he shall loath his hope; Spes ei
molesta erit, quod ea excidat, nec id consequatur quod expectarat. Merc.
that is, the very hope which he has had shall be grievous and vexatious to
him; nothing shall grieve him more then this, that he has hoped so much. His
hope shall grieve and afflict him as bad as all his afflictions; Raised
expectations disappointed, prove our greatest sorrows. That man sinks lowest in
grief, whose heart was highest in hope. How extremely shall the hypocrite be
grieved, who falls as low as hell, when his hopes were raised up as high as
heaven? The hypocrite both in his way, and in his end is like the King of
Babylon. He says in his heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my
throne above the stars of God, I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I
will be like the most high, yet, he shall be brought down to hell, to the sides
of the pit, Isa. 14.13, 14.

Take the words as we translate, so they yield a clear sense, and very
agreeable to the original, Whose hope shall be cut off. Sumitur Melaphorice,
quod ij quos taedet sese torquent, and vestes, and se membraque sua d^scindant
ac lacerant. and v^lut dissecent. Merc.
The word is rendered, Cut off, by a Metaphor, because when a man is exceedingly
displeased and vexed (as the word properly signifies) he many times tears his
garments, and even cuts his own flesh, like the idolatrous Priests of Baal, who
were so angry, because they could not get an answer, that they cut themselves
after their manner with knives and lancers, till the blood gushed out upon
them, 1 King. 18.28. Grief cuts the heart always, and sometime causes cutting
of the flesh. The Lord complains (Psalm. 95.10.) Forty years long was I grieved
with this generation, it is this word, forty years long was I vexed and cut
with this generation, with their murmurings, backslidings and unbelief. They
did (as it were) cut the Lord to the heart; as in another place, They broke him
with their whorish hearts, Eze. 6.9. God speaks there as a man, whose patience
is almost spent, or, as an husband grieved with the disloialties of an
adulterous wife.

And thus we may join it with hope, either as hope imports the act of hope, or
the object of hope, Whose hope shall be cut off; the expectation which the
hypocrite has had shall come to an end. Or, a time is at hand when an
hypocrite shall be past hoping. Observe hence,

Despairing is the cutting off of hope, and such is the condition of an
hypocrite. To have hope cut off, is the greatest cut in the world. Will the
hypocrite pray always? No, at last his prayer shall be cut off; Will the
hypocrite hope always? No, at last his hope shall be cut off. The Saints in
heaven have (in a sense) their hope cut off, because they are above hope: and
at last all wicked men's hope shall be cut off, because they are below hope. It
is better to have all our possessions cut off, then our hopes. Better have the
thread of our lives cut off, then the Anchor-cord of our hope cut off, and so
we left to the rage and tempest of despair.

Again, join it with the object of hope, thus,

All that an hypocrite hops for or expects, shall be utterly taken away, and
cut off from him.

His worldly comfort will be gone, and heavenly comforts will never come. He
shall find that he has been in a golden dream, that he has been, as one that
is hungry, who dreameth that he is eating, but when he awakes his soul is
empty; or, as a thirsty man, that dreams he is drinking, but he awakes, and
behold, he is faint, Isa. 29.8. When dreams satisfy hunger and thirst, the
hypocrites hope shall be satisfied. Hypocrites shall have as good as they
bring. They bring God nothing but words and empty professions; and they shall
have nothing from God, but air and empty expectations; their real hopes, or
the thing they hoped for shall be cut off. When hypocrites awake out of their
sleep, their hopes vanish as a dream. Not only does the world, but the Christ
on whom they hoped, prove a shadow, a fancy, an image, an idol of their own
making; Their hearts were filled with leaves, instead of gold, as the devil
cosens his greedy votaries, Their hope shall be cut off.

And whose trust shall be a spiders web. As hope before, so here trust, may be
put either for the act or object of trust: and both (by a Synecdoche) for the
whole profession of an hypocrite.

Hope and trust are often taken promiscuously. There is a graduall difference
between them, not an essential. Trust being the strength of hope, or the
acting of a strong faith. (...)
The original word signifies a very quiet, secure, settled trust; when a man
trusts upon, or about a thing, without casting so much as a jealous thought
after it. Thus the hypocrite trusts; he never suspects himself; his heart says
all is well, Levit. 25.18. Ye shall dwell in the land in safety; the word is,
Ye shall dwell in the land in trust, because an opinion of safety is the
companion of trust; when we trust our condition is good, then we think our
selves safe.

There are two things noted by this word:

First, Boldness and confidence.

Secondly, Security and peaceablenesse. The hypocrite feels no trouble, and he
fears none; The language of his heart is like that of Babylon the mother of
whoredoms and hypocrisy, who says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no
widow, and shall see no sorrow, Revel. 18.6.

This trust where it is true has a double effect. The want of which discovers
the falsenesse of it in the hypocrite.

First, It confirms and strengthens the heart against all oppositions. And

Secondly, It encourages the heart against all dangers. He that trusts in God
will walk through the valley of the shadow of death, and fear no evil. He dares
take a bear by the tooth, or a lion by the beard. In both these the trust of
the hypocrite fails. He will work and go on boldly till he meets with
opposition: he will work in a fair day, till he meets with a storm, and dangers
threaten; but there he gives over. He that is not acquainted with the assurance
office of heaven, will seldom, if at all run hazards here on earth. True
trust brings God and the soul together, but the hypocrite never comes near God:
and then no marvel if he be afraid to come near danger.

Note from it, before we put the words together, thus much,

That an hypocrite has a trust of his own, a trust like himself.

Whose trust. An hypocrite does most things which the upright and sincere
hearted do, and he seems to have every thing which the upright and sincere
hearted have. Do they pray? so does he. Do they hear? se does he. Do they
fast? so does he. Have they faith? He has a faith too. Have they the fear of
God? he also has a kind of fear. Have they zeal? so has he; yea, the zeal of
hypocrisy burns hotter for a blast, then the zeal of sincerity. He has grace
proper to his state; false grace for his false heart; he has trust, such as it
is, a trust which belongs to all of his rank; see the character of it in the
next words.

It shall be a spiders web. (...) Tam animal, quam rete ejus, quod solet
contexere, significat
The Hebrew is, It shall be the spiders house; the web is the house of the
spider. We have the same word, Isa. 59.5. They weave the spiders web. Isaiah
speaks of such pretenders, They trust in vanity, and speaklie. These were the
spiders web, which they weaved.

But why is the trust of the hypocrite compared unto the spiders web? I shall
clear that in four or five particulars, which will be as so many notes upon
this text.

1. Because the profession, and all the works of an hypocrite are very weak and
unstable, as the spiders web is. There is a kind of curiosity in them, but
there is no strength or stability in them. The spider works very curiously, but
her house will not bear any stresse of weather, much less force of battery.
The spiders web is no match for a broom or a whisk. Thus it is with the
profession, the trust of hypocrites; you may see a neat spinning, a fine thread
of profession, accurate weavings and contrivances, but when it comes to a push,
it is not able to stand; if you do but touch it, it is gone. Some will stand
out longer then others, yet all fall, as Christ assures us ( Mat. 7. ult.) it
is the hypocrite who builds his house upon the sand; to have a house built
upon the sand, is no better then to have a house built in the cicling; when the
storm comes that house falls; and when the broom comes, this must down.

2. The trust of an hypocrite is called a spiders web, because he fetches and
frames it (as it were) out of his own bowels: that whereunto he trusts is
wrought out of himself. That Is the nature of the spider, she has no
extrinsecall materials to build her house with; she does not hew her stones out
of any quarry, or fetch her timber from any forest (as we may allude) the
materials which she has she fetches out of her own bowels. The Be makes an
house, and fetches the materials from this and that flower: so the Be makes a
comb for a house: but the spider sucks no flowers. Thus it is with hypocrites,
their trust and hope is as the spiders web, made out of their own substance;
they eviscerate themselves, they fetch all out of themselves. The meaning is,
all their trust is in their own duties, in their own strength, in their own
stock, in their own gifts, upon these they build, these are their house. We
find the Pharisees trust thus grounded, such was his house ( Luke 18.) I fast
twice a week, I give alms, I pay all men their due. He was very exact in
righteousness according to the Law, upon this, and out of this he makes his
house; this is to make an house like a spider. Though it be our graces we trust
upon, our trust will be a spiders web. The believer is well compared to a Be,
the Be has an house and honey, but the Be fetches all from abroad, from
herbs and flowers: Believers have their house to dwell in, and their honey to
feed upon, but they such all from the promises of Christ; yea, they suck it
from Christ himself, they rest not in the letter of the promises, but they go
to Christ who is the matter promised, and the accomplisher of all the promises.
Here they build their house, and hew out the pillars of it.

3. Their trust shall be a spiders web, in the issue it shall perish like a
spiders web. How is that? As Soon as the house comes to be cleansed, down go the
spiders webs; when the house is swept, the cob-webs are first swept away. Thus
it is with the trust of all hypocrites: when God sweeps his house, his Church,
he quickly sweeps out these spiders webs ( Isa. 14.23.) the Prophet speaks of
the besome of God; the judgments of God are the besome of God, by which he
sweepeth his house. God has a double besome, or a double use of his besome; he
has a besome of destruction, and a besome of purgation. It is a besome of
destruction to hypocrites, and it is a besome of purgation to his Saints. When
either the besome of destruction, or the besome of purgation is in hand, the
trust of hypocrites is swept away. When the Prophet describes the Lord in his
great and terrible judgments ( Isa. 33.14.) the text says, The sinners in
Zion are afraid, fearfulness surprizeth the hypocrite, who shall dwell with
devouring fire? God provoked is a devouring fire. How shall stubble and spiders
webs stand before him? When trouble comes, the trust of hypocrites goes to
wrack, they tremble then, for their trust is but a spiders web, it cannot stand
one stroke, or endure the flaming heat. The hope of a godly man grows strongest
in times of trouble, he is purified in the fire; and the hope of an hypocrite
weakens, till it be none at all in times of trouble, it is cast out of doors
amongst the rubbish, or is consumed with the fire.

4. Take this parallel between the spiders web, and the profession of
hypocrites. The spider makes his web to catch and ensnare others, to catch the
poor flies. She has a double use of her house, to lie in it, and to entrap
flies in it. Her house is a snare. The profession of an hypocrite is a spiders
web in this notion; he makes it to catch flies with, to ensnare and deceive the
simple, that he may prey upon them: He would count godliness a poor thing, did
he not make a gain of godliness; That brings him in food and clothing, he lives
upon it. This his deceitful web is so fine spun, and fairly woven that you
cannot easily discern any thing, but truth and beauty in it: Hypocrites cannot
be distinguished by the outside of what they do; their lewdness is under a
cover. Some tell us that the Hebrew word for an hypocrite, may be derived from
another, which signifies a cloud; Nebulo, a neb^la, qui men laciis suis nebula^
quandam and tenebras objicit
the wickedness of such is wrapped up in a cloud; whence the latin word for a
crafty, dishonest man, imports one who casts a cloud or a mist before his
dishonesty: So that it is hard to make this discovery, till effects and issues
make it. Only God looks quite through all clouds and coverings, he sees what is
in the heart, though man cannot. God sees his contrivances are only to serve
his turn, and attain earthly ends.

Anima^culum illud valde imbec^llum and ma liciosum atque meditabundu^ poti^s
quam pru^ens domicilium aedificat in quo ^e tutum existimat Bol.
5. The hypocrite like the spider, thinks himself safe and out of harms way,
when once lodged in this profession. He is ready to boast that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. So much for the similitude.

Now follows the application of the similitude in the fifteenth verse.

Verse 15. He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand; he shall take
hold of it, but it shall not endure.
Bildad goes on to bring down his similitude to this particular. Thus the
spider does, and thus the hypocrite: the spider leans upon his house, there he
dwells; and so the hypocrite he leans upon his house, there he dwells and rests
himself.

The word which we translate lean, (...) Ni^^ innif^ est, re^inotus fuit,
incid^uit to^is viribus, per M^taphora^, considit.
is often used in the old Testament, to note the vital act of faith, the act
of recumbency; Faith in the vital act of it is a resting upon another. Now
false faith imitates true faith, that will be resting and leaning. Faith
whether true or false cannot stand alone, it must have a lean-to.

He leans upon his house. It notes leaning upon a staff, or upon any stay (1 Samuel 1.6.) Saul leaned upon his spear being weary in the battle. And, Prove.
3.5. Lean not to thine own understanding. Wise men, men of deep reach and
judgment, lean to their own understandings, their wits are their props (Isa.
10.20.) The remnant of Israel shall no more stay themselves upon him that smote
them but they shall stay upon the Lord, or, they shall lean upon the Lord, the
holy One of Israel in truth. (2 Samuel 22.19.) they prevented me in the day of my
calamity, but the Lord was my stay. God prevents his people with mercy, and
their enemies prevent them with unkindenesses, but the love of God out-runs the
malice of man; His love stays up those whom malice would cast down. The Lord
was my stay. And hence, the Noun of this Verb in the Hebrew, signifies a staff,
because we use a staff to lean and rest the body upon (Isa. 3.1.) Behold, the
Lord of hosts does take away from Jerusalem and from Judah, the stay and the
staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water. The stay of bread,
or, the staff of bread; because bread is that upon which the life of man leans
or depends, as we depend or lean upon a staff. Scita est Metaphora ^um
fulcimentum paniusurpat pro pane fulciente, s^^nificans foris vim illam panu^
accedere Vt enim gressus senum reguntur baculo, ita panis dicitur habere ^acu
um Mol. in Isa. 3.1.
Bread is elegantly called a staff, because bread supports the life of man, as
a staff does the body. It implies this also, that the power, virtue and
strength by which bread does sustain us, comes from without; The staff of
bread; he does not call the bread it self a staff, but he says, there is a
staff of bread, the bread must have a staff (of blessing from God) or else it
cannot be a staff (of strengthening to us) as the bread is the immediate staff
of our bodies: so the blessing of God is the immediate staff of the bread: the
bread leans upon the blessing of God, as we lean upon the bread. As an hungry
man leans upon his bread, so an hypocrite leans upon his house, He shall lean
upon his house. That Is his stay.

But, what is his house? He shall lean upon his house.

The house of this hypocrite it is twofold; or he has two houses. He has a
worldly house, and he has a spiritual house. He has one house made out of
earthly materials; and another made out of heavenly materials.

Domum impij vocat bona and facultates ejus quibus homines se fulciant, juxta
illud, opes divitis arac ejus valida. Drus.
He has an house made out of worldly materials, and so some interpret this
place, He shall lean upon his house; that is, upon his riches, upon his
relations, upon his greatness, upon his friends, upon his correspondencies,
upon the estimation that he has abroad in the world, upon his reputation with
his neighbors at home.

These framed and put together are a house which the hypocrite builds for
himself, upon these he rests: and that is a truth, the world is an hypocrites
support, the house upon which he leans. The money in his chest upholds him, not
faith in his heart; his goods please him more then goodness. He easily
believes that he is in the favor of God, because he has so much favor among
men. That Is one house.

Bildad might aim at this, because Job was a man of a full and vast estate, the
richest and greatest of all the men in the East; as if he had said, Job, thou
have leaned upon thy outward abundance, upon thy sheep and oxen, upon thy
children and servants, and now thou find all but a spiders web, swept away
in a moment. Yet (I conceive) he means rather a house built of heavenly
materials. And there are three sorts of heavenly materials, out of which the
hypocrite builds his house.

1. Gifts: he has knowledge and understanding in the word and ways of God,
the gift of prayer, the gift (it may be) of tongues, of prophecy and preaching.
These are excellent materials, and upon these he builds his trust, that he is
in a good estate.

The second sort of materials, are holy duties, he prays, he hears, he
fasteth, and he gives alms, and the like; These he does, and out of these
materials he builds his house, very strongly he hopes.

Thirdly, He has finer stuff then all this to build his house of, he builds
upon supposed graces; he can tell you, he has faith, he has love, he has
patience, he has humility, and he has sorrow for sin; he can count all
these things, and out of these he builds himself an house of special
confidence, such a house as he doubts not will stand all winds and weathers:
he hopes to stand safe in judgment, under the roof and goodly fabric of this
house.

Out of these three sorts of materials, spiritual gifts, spiritual duties,
and supposed spiritual graces; upon all these, and out of these he builds,
and thinks he has made an house that shall stand for ever.

The point I shall give you, taking in those three sorts of materials is,

That gifts, duties and supposed graces are the stay and the staff, the house,
and the strength of hypocrites.

Upon these they lean, and in these they secure themselves; they rest upon this
bottom for eternity. Hence they even dare to plead with God himself about it
(Mat. 7.22.) Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out devils, and done many great
wonders? They trusted upon, Have we not prophesied? Have we not prayed? Have we
not done wonders? They thought those sufficient materials to build them a tower
which should reach heaven it self; who can doubt but they who do such things as
these shall do well? The gift of prophecy, the power to cast out devils, and
work miracles, sound high, and make a great noise. Yet at last, this tower of
their confidence proves but a Castle in the air, or a spiders web. How
confident were they who could plead thus with God: He has opened the secrets
of heaven to us, and do you think he will shut the gates of heaven upon us? We
have preached, we have been instruments of saving others, and shall not we be
saved ourselves? We have cast out devils, and shall we be cast to the devil? We
have not walked in an ordinary tract of Profession, but we have traded in
wonders and done miracles, we have amazed the world with reports of the great
things we have done, is all this nothing? Thus they plead with Christ, as if he
were bound to save them by the law of these services: yet Christ tells them,
Depart from me. I know you not: Surely, thought they, God will fetch his fuel
for those everlasting burnings from among the rude Heathens, (...), etc.
Chrysostom.
or debauched drunkards, adulterers, etc. not from among us. Were it not a
wonder greater then any we have wrought, if we who have wrought great wonders
should not be admitted? One of the Ancients represents them in such an
amazement. What means this strange, unexpected answer from Christ, Depart, etc.
Must we depart who have lived so near thee? Must we be damned, whom thou have
thus honored?

The Apostle Paul (Romans 2.17.) speaking of the hypocritical Jews, discovers
such a confidence, Thou restest in the Law, as a man rests in his house,
there he sleeps, and is quiet, so these in the Law, there they were quiet; that
is, in the privileges and outward profession of the Law, or in a literal and
outward obedience to the Law. The Jews built their house upon, or with legal
righteousness, Thou restest in the Law; Tibi appl^u lis quod legem scriptam
acceperis, quod frequenses in lectione and auditione legis
he speaks both by way of narration; and likewise by way of redargution. He
tells what they did, and how ill they did in doing so. Paul rejects this as
refuse stuff, as hay and straw, as dross and dung, as confidence in the flesh
(Phil. 3.3, etc.) Those things which acted or enjoyed, are spirit, being
trusted, to are flesh. So Prayer is flesh, ordinances are flesh, the
righteousness of the Law is flesh; yea, Grace it self trusted to is flesh. The
duties which Christ has appointed are the house of the hypocrite: but Christ
himself is the house of the upright; He would be found in him, (Phil. 3.9.) not
in duties or inherent graces. Saints desire that much grace may be found in
them; but they dare not be found in graces; they would ever be acting graces,
but never thrusting to them.

Secondly, Observe,

An hypocrites hope is high and strong, that his estate is good now, and that
he shall receive good at the last.

He leans upon this house. Some are without hope in the world, of whom we may
speak as the Apostle of an heretic ( Tit. 3.11.) they are condemned of
themselves. Some men have the sentence of condemnation in their own hearts. But
there are others, as you see here, who have great and strong confidences in
themselves, who live and die with this confidence too; This they do upon the
former witness. As the Apostle John speaks concerning the witness which the
Saints have for heaven, There are three which bear witness etc. and these
three are one: So there are three which bear witness to the hypocrite, and
these three are one; they agree in one to deceive, as the other to give
assurance.

First, The world that gives many a man a witness and letters testimonial,
that his estate is good, his neighbors say so, they flatter him and cry peace
peace to him.

Secondly, Satan applauds him, the devil gives him his good word, and tells him
that certainly his estate is very good.

Thirdly, His own heart will seal to all, he shall have the witness in
himself, as it is spoken of the true believer. So that the hypocrite having
such witnesses, a witness within himself, a certificate under the hand of
Satan, and letters commendatory from the world, all this must needs give him
strength of hope, that his house shall stand for ever.

But see the issue, He leans upon his house, What then?

It shall not stand. The word signifies to stand firmly and strongly, (...)
Stetit, subsist it, mansit.
or to continue standing. He thought that the materials which he had brought
together, and the hopes which he had raised upon them, would have been as Mount
Zion, that cannot be removed, but he leans upon it, and it shall not stand.

Whence observe, All that an hypocrite trusts unto shall deceive him at the
last.

It shall not stand. Their webs shall not become garments, Neither shall they
cover themselves with their works, Isa. 59.6. The language is proverbiall,
importing highest disappointment: Who would weave a web, if he knew he should
never have a garment by it? Or work hard, when himself must go naked? Jer. 7.1,
2. the Lord sends to the people by his Prophet, Say to this people, Trust not
to lying words; that is, words which will deceive and fail you, you trust and
lean to them, but they will fall away from you: What were those words? Even
that they had a goodly house to lean to, they cried, The temple of the Lord,
the temple of the Lord: but I hope that is a strong house, as well as a
beautiful, a man may lean upon that, upon the temple of the Lord, and do well.
No, The temple of the Lord leaned upon will be but a spiders web; God gave the
Jews a temple to worship him in, and many of them worshipped the temple. We
adore every duty we depend upon, and give the Ordinances of God the honor of
God. We can stand no more by such trust to Ordinances, then we shall by the
neglect of them.

These, and all the materials before mentioned, will be found too weak, they
shall not stand. Gifts cannot commend to God. If a man had the tongue of men
and angels, if all the knowledge that ever was scattered in the world were
brought together into one head; this cannot commend him unto God. The devil is
as full of knowledge as he can hold, and yet he is as full of wickedness as he
can hold. Duties cannot commend to God.

And there are two special reasons why the hypocrites duties cannot.

First, He is not at all changed in duties. He prays and sins, hears and sins,
professes and continues wicked closely, if not openly.

Secondly, He leans upon his duties. Could we suppose true grace leaned on,
that could not stand. Nothing is a sufficient strength for us to stay upon, but
the free grace of God, and Jesus Christ: Lean to these houses, for they will
stand for ever. Of all other houses you shall say as Adam did of his wife,
(...) Deducitur a Gnamad, mulier quam dedisti mihi, ut adstaret, juvaret,
essetque vicarium auxilium, ipsa author hujus mali exstitit. Fagius in loc.
(...) Quafi apud me stans.
Genesis 3.12. (and it is the word here used in the Text) The woman which thou
gave to be with me, to stay by me, to be a helper and a support to me, this
woman has given me, and I did eat, she has been the cause of my ruin. The
same will be said of all the gifts, and duties and graces, which we stand upon.
God has given them us, and he has given them us as meet helpers, but they
will deceive and ruin us, if we lean on them. We shall fall by them, if we
hope to stand by them (Psalm. 23.4.) Thou art with me in trouble (says David)
therefore I shall not fall; it is this word, Thou stand with me. Christ will
stand by us at all times, Thou stand with me, or by me: When the world
fails, and when gifts fail, and when duties fail, yea, when graces fail, in
degree and activity, then Jesus Christ, and free grace will stand by us, Isa.
26.7. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee.
Christ is the only lean-to.

There is one clause further, He shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure.

This clause is of the same importance with the former, only the sense is
somewhat heightened. It notes, that the hypocrite shall not only lean upon his
house, but he shall take strong hold upon his house, He shall fasten on it; so
Mr Broughton. A man may lean to a thing, and have no hold of it; he that takes
hold of a thing would make it firm to himself, and himself firm to it. Thus the
hypocrite leans upon his house, and takes fast hold of it; if it would fall
from him, if any attempt to pull him away from it, or he sticks to it, he will
not let it go.

(...) Eam mordicus tenens, se in ea stabilem and firmum semper fore putans.
Merc.
The word signifies to hold fast, strongly and prevailingly. Jobs wife ( Chap.
2.) speaks thus, Do thou still hold fast thine integrity? And God himself
speaks in the same language concerning Job, Do thou not see, though thou
have moved me to afflict him without cause, how he holds fast his integrity?
The hypocrite (after his manner, Mordicus tenet) holds his duties,
performancies, gifts, tufly, or (as it were) with his very teeth, he will hold
them to the very death, and not let them go, the hypocrite will not give over,
will not be beaten off from trusting to these false and weak props, here he
sets up his rest, he will die by his gifts, his duties, his outward profession,
and go no further.

It is our glory to hold integrity fast, to hold grace fast, yea and duties in
point of practice and obedience; but it is our sin and danger, to hold them
fast in reliance and confidence.

It is a sad use which some make of this truth, when they hear that hypocrites
hold fast upon duties, etc. they let go their duties; they let prayer go,
repentance, and sorrow for sin go; they say, it is no matter for duties, they
need not trouble themselves, Christ does all. This is to turn the grace of God
into wantonness. We must let go both our graces and our duties in point of
justification, but hold them we must as our lives, in conversation, and the
tenor of our lives. Prayer, hearing, fasting, repenting must not die, while we
live; Do them we must, but glory in them we must not.

He holds them fast, but (yet) it shall not endure. (...) a radice (...)
Surrexit, ad standum erectus, stabilis, solidus mansit, perseveravit.
That Is the last thing. We see as often as the hypocrite rises to take hold of
his hopes, so often his hopes fail him: (before) It shall not stand (now) it
shall not endure.

The word signifies, it shall not be established to him, he would establish
this house to himself, but it shall not be established, his worldly estate
shall not be established, his duties, his graces, his gifts, shall not be
established.

The word notes that establishment which is made by a politic act or edict. It
is the Jews operative word, in which they enact laws, Esth. 9. The word is used
three times (v. 29, 31, and 32.) for a political establishment of that decree
about the deliverance of the Jews from the conspiracy of Haman, they
established or made a Law for it. Laws are for continuance, therefore they are
established and settled. An hypocrite would do so too, he would enact and
establish what he does, but it shall not endure, it will be nulled and repealed
quickly.

The word also signifies, that which is substantial (it shall not endure) that
is, it shall not be as a substance, it shall appear at last to be but a shadow,
Genesis 7.23. Every living substance was destroyed; it is this word, that is,
every thing that stood up and subsisted. So, Deuteronomy. 11.6. the word signifies the
substance and outward estate which Korah, Dathan and Abiram had, They and their
substance went down into the pit. The hypocrite thinks his estate is a
substantial estate, yet both his worldly house, and his spiritual house,
builded as was before described, shall moulder away and rot, they shall not
endure. 1 King. 7.21. Solomon set up two pillars in the Temple, and an
hypocrite in his building sets up two pillars, and he calls them after the
name that Solomon called his, the text says, The one he called Jachin, and the
other, Boaz; Jachin, he will establish, and Boaz, strength. Which may note that
the people of God, who worship him in his temple, have two pillars, two
everlasting pillars, they have Christ, and the free grace of God to trust upon;
these are the two pillars of the Temple, that support our hopes, and the one is
truly called Jachin, established, and the other, Boaz, strength. The hypocrite
has a Temple, an house, and two pillars, upon which he makes these
inscriptions, Upon his worldly estate he writes Jachin, Established. Upon his
spiritual estate he writes Boaz Strength; but he will be deceived in both,
They shall not endure, When a wicked man begins to fall, nothing shall support
him. As it was said of Haman in regard of his outward honor, If these men be
of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall fall
utterly: So, though when an hypocrite sees his house falling, he takes fast
hold of it, and endeavors to support it, yet it shall not stand, fall it
shall. Vbi semel corruerit impius non erigetur. Merc.
The righteous falls and rise again, he falls seven times in a day, and yet is
raised up again, Prove. 24.16. but when an hypocrite begins to fall he falls
down, down, for ever. It is said of the righteous (Psalm. 37.24.) Though he fall
he shall not utterly be cast off, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand; but
when the hypocrite falls he shall be utterly cast away, for his duties only
hold him by the hand, he has only somewhat of himself to support himself with,
therefore though he take hold of it, It shall not endure.

JOB Chap. 8. Verse. 16, 17, 18, 19. He is green before the Sun, and his branch
shoots forth in his garden.

His roots are wrapped about the heap, and sees the place of stones.

If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying, I have not
seen thee.

Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall others grow.


THe context of these four verses holds forth to us the third similitude, by
which Bildad illustrates the condition of an hypocrite.

The similitude is explained in the 16, 17, and 18. verses, and applied in the
19th.

The hypocrite was first compared to a rush or a flag. Secondly, to a spiders
web. But now to a goodly tree. This third similitude grants the hypocrite the
best of his condition, and puts him in the fairest posture that can be
imagined, and yet all proves naught; his root is but rottenness, and his
blossom shall go up as the dust; or his branches shall be cut down, and his
root stubbed up. It is as if Bildad had said; If you think I have spoken too
little and too low, or have debased the hypocrite more then was meet, by
comparing him to a poor rush or a flag, and his estate to a spiders web; then
take him in his highest notion, let him be looked upon as a green flourishing
tree before the Sun, fastening his roots, and spreading out his branches, yet
you shall see, at the last, destruction is his end. Behold, this is the joy of
the hypocrite.

That Is the sum, and the general sense of the words.

Three thingt are held forth in this similitude concerning the hypocrite.

First, His outward happiness and flourishing estate in the 16th verse, He is
green before the Sun, and his branch shoots forth in his garden.

Secondly, His hurtfulnesse, or the anoyance which he does to his neighbors
and brethren, shadowed out in the 17. verse, His roots are wrapped about the
heap, and he sees the place of stones.

Thirdly, We have his ruin or cutting down, his destruction or pulling up, in
the 18th verse, If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him,
saying, I have not seen thee.

His flourishing estate begins in the 16. ver.

He is green before the Sun.
The word (green) signifies moist, juicy or sappy, proper to trees: (...)
Madere humidu^ succosum esse.
So Mr Broughton translates, He is juicefull before the Sun. And others, He
is full of sap. In which sense the word is used, Chap. 24.8. of this book, They
are wet with the showers of the mountains, or, moist and sappy, receiving in
many showers from the mountains.

A tree green, juicy and full of sap, is in the height of his strength and
beauty: Juice and sap is to the tree, as blood to the veins, and marrow to the
bones of a man; and therefore as a young man in the prime and strength of his
age is described by having his veins full of blood, and his bones full of
marrow, so a tree is described in it is greatest verdure, by having his root and
branches full of sap and moisture. The hypocrite may be such a flourishing
tree, He is green before the Sun.

Before the Sun. (...)
The Hebrew is, Before the face of the Sun. The word Shemesh (the Sun)
signifies a Minister or servant, because the Sun is the great servant of the
world, and ministers those benefits of light, heat, influence. This (by the
way) should have kept the Nations from adoring it as a God, which both in name
and nature was their servant. But what means this, Before the Sun?

1. Some take, before the Sun, to be only this, openly, conspicuously, and in
the sight of all; for to do a thing before the Sun, is to do it without covert
or secrecy, 2 Samuel 12.12. Thus the Lord threatens David, after that sin of
privacy committed with Bathsheba, Thou did it secretly, Ante solemn, i. e.
palam in oculis omnium.
but I will do this before all Israel, and before the Sun: So the hypocrite, is
green before the Sun; that is, he flourishes in the eye, view and sight of all
men. He has fair leaves and branches of outward profession in the Church, and
of outward prosperity in the world.

2. Before the Sun, that is as a tree in Summer, when the Sun returns to us,
or turns upon us. In the beginning of the spring the Sun returns: having
traveled furthest off from us, it comes to the vertical point, and turns
about to us again. So that, before the Sun, or the Sun looking toward us, is a
description of the spring. And so it is, as if he had said, As a tree when the
Sun comes toward it in the Spring, and shines hot upon it in the Summer,
makes a fair show: So the hypocrite is very green, joyful, full of
contentment, whilst he has the Sun of prosperity shining upon him, whilst
those warm rays of outward comforts, heat and nourish him, so long he is green
and flourishing.

3. Before the Sun, that is (according to others) before the Sun shines too hot
upon him, before the Sun scorches and withers him; Antequam se^ veniat. Bibl.
Reg Ante exortum and ardorem solis, i. e. antequa^ o^ inardescens cum adurat.
q. d. priusqua^ a Domino puniatur and visitatur. Ardor est ira Domini. Merc.
as if he had said, The hypocrite is a green tree, till the heat comes upon
him, till the Sun arises in his strength: but as soon as the heat of the day,
or the year comes, this tree withers. An hypocrite cannot abide the extreme
heat of the Sun, whereas the godly have such an everlasting supply of moisture
and sap, that let the Sun shine as hot as it will upon them, they are green
still. The ordinary heat of the Sun is put for prosperity: the extreme heat of
the Sun, is put for persecution. So, the meaning may be this, He is green
before the Sun, that is, before the Sun of trouble and persecution arises, or
(as some render it) before God looks angerly upon him and scorcheth his leaves,
till then, He is green and flourishing. Before refers both to time, and
presence.

4. Ante solemn, i. e. in ardore solis arboris more, qu^ pulchre aliqu^n^^u
s^cores^^^ ^stum non ^im^^, ^mo calo^^ solis moder^^^ adjuvatur and alitur.
Merc.
Others take it as a description of the hypocrites outward flourishing, which
may be such sometimes as holds out before the Sun, that is, when the Sun is
very hot upon him; And then this clause stands in opposition to the rush, which
whilst it is yet in its greenness withers before any other herb. If the Sun
rise hot upon the rush, it withers presently, where it wants outward
moisture. But here Bildad seems to grant, or at least to suppose, that the
hypocrite may possibly rise to such a flourishing estate, that he holds his
greenness, even before the Sun, in a great deal of heat and trouble. Thus
Before notes presence.

Either way the sense is good, He is green, before the Sun comes with his
heat, that is, he cannot endure the scorching time of trouble: or, he is green
before the Sun; that is, before some trouble or scorching, before some heat
of persecution, this hypocrite may stand, He is green before the Sun.

And his branch shoots forth in his garden. Branch.] The word which we
translate branch is derived from a root which signifies a little sucking
child, (...) Significat lacta^tem seu inf^^tem lac sugentem: per Metaphora^
sumitur pro surculo aut tenero ramo qui sugit arborem. Teneriores ramusculi
lacta^tibus pueris sunt fimites.
or an infant; and the reason is, because branches which come from a tree, draw
moisture and sap from the tree, as an infant does milk from the mothers breast:
therefore we elegantly in our language, answering the Hebrew, call such
branches suckers, and we cut them off where we see many sprouting from one
fruit-bearing tree, because they draw too much from the tree, and hinder the
fruit, that is the meaning of the Hebrew word, His suckers: So M. Broughton
translates, His suckers sprout out over his orchard. By these branches we may
understand either his children, or his honor, his relations, or his
reputation, these shoot forth and show themselves as branches from a tree, His
branches shoot forth in his garden.

In his garden. Hortus (...) a radice Ganan, velavit metaphorice protexit, quod
septo protegi solet.
That is, in that place which he has fenced or taken in for himself; a garden
is a plot separated and enclosed from those places which lie open and in
common. So much the Hebrew word imports, coming from a root which signifies to
protect or to fence a thing about, because gardens are places fenced, hedged,
or walled in, Cant. 4.12. A garden enclosed is my beloved, Eccles. 2.5, 6. I
made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in them of all (kind of)
fruits, I made me pools of water to water therewith the wood that brings
forth trees.

His branches shoot forth in his garden.] That is, he appears very beautiful
and glorious, very green and flourishing in his state or condition, in his
dignity and honor. He lives as in a garden or paradise: Per hortum intellige
omnes rations, quibus suam tuetur and auget magnitudinom Merc.
So the word is translated ( Genesis 2.8.) And the Lord God planted a paradise, or
a garden of delight. The hypocrites garden is all that by which he preserves
and keeps his worldly comforts, as we do plants and flowers of profit or
delight in gardens. Thus the hypocrite grows as a goodly tree, and shoots
forth his branches.

This is the first part of the description of his flourishing estate. Hence
note a point or two.

First, In general (which has heretofore been observed, therefore I shall but
touch it.) viz.

That a wicked man, an hypocrite may abound exceedingly in outward prosperity.

He is a tree, green before the Sun, and shooting forth his branches in his
garden.

Secondly, Note, That the thriving of hypocrites, their greenness and
flourishing, is only outward.

The tree is green before the Sun, but he is withered in his soul. Hypocrites
do all before the Sun, to be seen, or in the sight of men. They are of those
who rebel against the light, which would keep them from sin, and they say,
No eye sees us, while they are sinning. But they love the light which shows any
good they do; then they say, O that all eyes did see us. Pharisees pray in the
markets, and blow a trumpet when they give alms, that the ears of all, as well
as the bellies of the poor, may be filled with their charity. Come, see my
zeal, says Jehu. Moses was faithful, but he never said, Come, see my
fidelity. Joshua was valiant in the battles of the Lord, yet he never said,
Come, see my fortitude. The upright heart cares not to be thus before the
Sun: He delights in secret holiness. His goodness is not less prized, or
less pleasing to him, because it is hidden. He takes infinitely more content
in being and doing good, then in being known to be or do good.

Thirdly, Taking, before the Sun, to note the extreme heat of the Sun, we may
observe thus much from it,

That an hypocrite may endure trouble and persecution for his profession.

He is not like the rush which presently withers, but he is sometimes like a
tree that stands it out before the Sun a great while. We know that many
have not only performed outward acts of holiness, but they have sometimes
suffered in a holy cause; they can be passive in obedience, as well as active,
and yet have fallen away at the last. Before the Sun of prosperity the
hypocrite will continue green very long; and before the Sun of persecution he
may continue green a while. It is conceived by most that Alexander the
Coppersmith, spoken of by Paul (2 Timothy 4.14.) as a man very grievous to him,
Alexander the Coppersmith did me much evil, He opposed the Apostle, yet, I say,
this Alexander is conceived to be the man of whom we read ( Act. 19.32.) that
stood to Paul, when he was in that danger at Ephesus; there he had like to have
lost his life for appearing on his side, the text says, They dragged him out
of the multitude to the market place. It is possible for an hypocrite to be
green before the Sun of persecution, at least before some scorching beams of
that Sun, though he is not able to bear it, when it comes to the utmost trial,
to the extreme heat of the day.

Thus we see the hypocrites greenness in his branches, yet that is not all,
for in the next verse we find his roots also, he is seemingly settled below, as
well as beautiful above. And when a tree has flourishing branches, and firm
roots, what can be desired more? For, as when a tree is cut down root and
branch, it is then utterly taken away; so when a tree flourishes, root and
branch, it is in best estate, and highest perfection. Both these meet here, not
only does he shoot forth his branches in his garden, But he wrappeth his roots
about the heap, and sees the place of stones.

His roots are wrapped about the heap.
The root of this hypocritical tree, is, that by which he fastens himself,
Radices sunt divitiae, liberi, a micitiae, dignitates, honores.
any accommodation or strength which he has in the world, credit, riches,
friends, whatsoever strengthens a man, that is his root: it is as necessary to
fasten a tree, as to moisten and feed a tree: Now (says Bildad) he spreads his
roots, he has not only excellent branches outwardly, but he lays his matter
so, that he has rooting also in the world; yea, he seems to have rooting in
the Church too.

His roots are wrapped about the heap. (...) radice (...) Volvit a summo ad
imum.
The word in the Hebrew signifies, to roll, or to bring things together, to put
them up in a heap. Hence the Verb is used for that act of the soul in
believing, whereby a Christian gathers himself together, and all that he has,
and lays it upon the Lord, Psalm. 22.8. He trusted in the Lord; the Hebrew is,
He rolled himself upon the Lord. Hence it is translated to signify; First, a
tempest wherein the winds roll and are enfolded together. Secondly, a wave of
the sea, which is a rolling water. Thirdly, as here a heap, because in a heap,
a great many stones are gathered or rolled together. As Genesis 31.47. after that
contest and debate of Laban with Jacob about his departure, Jacob said, Let us
gather stones together, or roll stones together, and make an heap; and Laban
gave it a name, he called it, J^ger-shahadutha, which is to say, A heap of
witness, because these stones were rolled together for a witness.

Lastly (which sense is applied by some interpreters to this text) The word
signifies a spring or a fountain, Josh. 15.19. because springs and fountains
are as the gathering together of waters: The sea is called the gathering
together of waters ( Genesis 1.) there waters are rolled, and laid as upon a heap:
and so proportionably every spring, fountain and river, is a place wherein the
waters are rolled or wrapped together. Some translate the word thus, His roots
are wrapped about the water, or about the fountain. And that further sets forth
the seemingly sure and steadfast estate of the hypocrite, as he has goodly
green branches above, so his roots are wrapped about the fountain, he looks as
if he were planted by the waters side, as the flourishing tree described, Psalm.
1. A godly man is as a tree planted by the rivers side; so the hypocrite seems
to have his roots wrapped about the waters, as if he had an everlasting supply
from an everliving fountain, as if his leaves should not wither, or his fruit
fall off from him. That Is one sense.

But most go with our translation, His roots are wrapped about the heap, they
are intricated and folded about the heap of stones; and so the meaning of it
may be gi^en three ways.

1. In that it is said, Impius aliqua^do floret inter varia impedimenta.
His roots are wrapped about the heap, the heap of stones; it notes his
thriving against all opposition, here shadowed by heaps of stones. Heaps of
stones are hindrances to the growing of a tree, to the rooting of it:
therefore we set or plant trees in places free from stones; but to show that he
may even overcome, conquer and subdue those difficulties which hinder his
growth, he says, His roots are wrapped about the stones. The seed that was
cast in stony ground could not take root, the stones hindered it from a due
depth of earth, Mat. 13.15. So that Bildad according to this sense magnifies
the hypocrite, and speaks high of him, He wrappeth his root about the stones,
he grows in places of greatest disadvantage. A wicked man may conquer
oppositions, and prevail against the pull-backs which hinder his worldly, yea
and his seeming spiritual estate; he may increase when he wants encouragements
and means of increase, yea, he sometimes increases against stops and
discouragements, he thrives among stones.

2. His roots are wrapped about the heap, notes, that he thrives, Ita late
radices diffundat ut fu^damenti struem offendat in aedibus Domini sui. Iun. In
aliorum da^num propagatio denotatur. Idem
or will thrive, if he can, though it be to the hinderance and damage of
others: for by the heap some understand the foundation of an house, where
stones are artificially heaped or laid together, not a natural or accidental
heap. Trees that grow near a house shoot their roots under or about the
foundation of the house, and so may be dangerous to the whole structure. Thus
the hypocrite will grow if he can, though he inwraps himself about the
foundation of another man's house, raising or securing his estate upon his
neighbors wrong or ruin.

Hypocrites care not whom they injure, so themselves may thrive, though they
undermine the foundation of another man's house, and loosen his estate, to
fasten their own.

3. His roots are wrapped about the heaps, may note the firmness, and the
seeming strength of his standing. He is rooted, not in some loose and sandy
earth, or in tougher clay, but his roots are wrapped about a heap of stones. As
( Mat. 7.) the house founded upon the sand could not continue when the storms
came, but the house founded upon the rock did; so a tree that is rooted only in
loose, slight ground, cannot stand against a great tempest, we see such trees
blown down; but that which is rooted among the stones, and wrapped about their
heaps, that which interweaves and incorporates it self (as it were) with a
rock, this has strength against all storms. Thus hypocrites pretend to Christ,
and say they have wrapped themselves about, that rock; they will speak great
words, and bid defiance to all the world can do, professing they have laid up a
good foundation, and that the munition of rocks is their defense.

And sees the place of stones. Domum lapidu^ cernet, id est inter lapides
^^^^iciter provenit. (...) Sept. Inter lapides commorabitur. Vulg. Domum
lapidu^ oculis vidit. Drus.
The words may be translated, He dwells, and he staieth in the place of
stones, or, He plants himself among the stones; and then it carries the same
sense with the former clause: So M. Broughton, He platteth about the house of
stone. The Septuagint thus, He shall live in the midst of the stones: And the
Chaldee Paraphrast, He shall see with his eyes the place of stones. We are near
that sense, And sees the place of stones: That is (for all these rendrings of
the Hebrew will come to a fair agreement, and the result is this) he lives,
abides, converses or dwells, even, where there seems to be the least
probability of his stay, he staieth in the place of stones.

(...) Domus vel generaliter seeds, vel locus quo aliquid capitur, vel
continetur.
The Hebrew is, house of stones; and house is taken either for that special
place wherein men dwell, or generally for any place; so that, the house of
stones, is either an house naturally built, Nature uses a kind of art; or an
house artificially built, art is but an imitation of nature. He sees, that is,
he seems to abide or continue in that house of stones, he is very eminent or
glorious in that place: The same word is read ( Dan. 8.5.) where Daniel
speaking of his vision, says, (...) Cornu aspectus est cornu conspicuum and
eminens, quod supra alia cernatur. Alij, cornu perplexitatis, id est, perplexum
and intricatum. Merc.
The Goat which he saw in the vision had a notable horn, the Chaldee is, a born
of sight, he had a horn of sight, that is, a conspicuous or a notable horn: or,
as others render it, he had a perplexed, enfolded, or enwrapped horn, a
wreathed horn. So that the word signifies both the conspicuousnesse of a thing,
and likewise the infoldednesse and complication of it.

A learned interpreter gives yet another sense, He looks into the house of
stone; that is, he hinders the light, or darkens the house by perking up so
proudly by, or near the windows; as if he had said, he anoyes his Masters house
both below and above, at the foundation, and at the windows.

The state of the hypocrite thus settled and made firm among stones, is yet a
tottering one, it will not be able to stand, the 18. verse shows this.

Verse 18. If he destroy him from his place, it shall deny him, saying, I have
not seen thee.
There is much difficulty in giving a clear sense of these words.

If he destroy him from his place, etc. If he.] Who is that? Who is the
Antecedent to this he?

There is no antecedent expressed in the Hebrew. Some understand it thus, If he,
that is, if the Lord, if God come to take vengeance of this man, who seems to
be a tree, so highly grown, and so deeply rooted.

Secondly, we may carry on the similitude thus, If he destroy him, that is, if
the Gardener or the Husbandman; if the Master or owner of that ground or place,
seeing a tree thus luxuriant, growing so near the foundation of his house, and
so wrapped about the place of stones, hindering the light, darkning the windows
of his house; if he come to destroy or cut him down, it shall deny him.

Or, thirdly, If he destroy him; that is, if the Sun destroy him: So M.
Broughton translates, If the Sun root him up from his place. But can the Sun
root a tree up from his place? Yes, the Sun roots up a tree, when the Sun,
before which a tree flourishes a while, casts his beams so hot upon it, that it
is scorched. Extreme heat draws out all the moisture of a tree and kills it. In
that sense the Sun may be said to root up a tree, the Sun killing the tree,
causes it to be rooted up. Thus we see diverse Antecedents answering the he,
the agent in the Text.

If he destroy him from his place. (...) Absorbuit, devoravit, Met^phorice,
corrupit, destruxit, consumpsit, quia quod deglutitur perditur, absumitur,
The word which we translate destroy, signifies properly to swallow down, as a
man swallows down meat and drink: And it signifies to swallow as a man
swallows, when he is very hungry; a man that is very hungry eats his meat
greedily; he throws it down whole into his throat rather then chews it. Now,
because when meat is swallowed down, the meat is consumed and spent, and is
destroyed and comes to nothing, therefore the Hebrews elegantly translate that
word, which properly signifies to swallow up, Pereleganter qui vinum multum
degiutiunt, avino absorberi dicuntur, Pined
to destroy; to destroy is to swallow up: And in that sense ( Isa. 28.7.) wine
is said to swallow up a man, that is, to destroy and consume him. Intemperate
persons swallow up wine, and at last wine swallows up them: The wine drinks up
their estates, their wits, their healths, their lives, their all at last. It is
a metaphor taken also from cruel and savage beasts, who devour men; as Jacob
says of Joseph, Surely a wild beast has devoured, or swa^^owed him up: And (
Psalm. 35.25.) we have that word, applied to wicked men, conspiring against the
Saints, they say, We have swallowed him up, ah, so would we have it; that is,
we have utterly destroyed him, this pleases, this goes well on our side.

Then the meaning is, Though the tree be in this state, yet if the husbandman
come, he can quickly destroy it from his place: Yea, though it be thus fairly
grown, and firmly rooted, the Sun is able to kill this tree, and to draw out
all it is moisture, and so leave it dry and feared, fit only to be stubbed up
for fuel. Or take it for an hypocrite to whom the similitude refers, If
God come to destroy him out of his place, to swallow him up, there is an end of
him quickly, It shall deny him, saying, I have not seen him.

From this consideration, that the destruction of the tree is spoken of so
immediately after the flourishing of it; That word, He is green etc. is no
sooner out, but he adds, If he destroy him, etc. We may note,

That the destruction of hypocrites and wicked men comes often upon them, in
the height of their prosperity.

Even in the time of his greenness, he shall be destroyed, and when his roots
are wrapped about the heap. Trees stand so long sometimes, that they wither of
themselves, and then we cut them down for the fire, but this man shall be cut
down like a tree in his prime, in his flourishing, when affliction and
withering seem farthest off, when he thinks least of destruction, then it shall
come upon him; when his estate is like Jonah's gourd, a very pleasant plant,
and a great rejoicing to him, a worm smites the roots and kills it.

That of Job (Chap. 20.22.) is full to this point, In the fullness of his
sufficiency he shall be in straits: A strange thing that a man should be in
straits, when he is in his greatest enlargement, that a man should be emptied
when he is full, that a man should be nothing, when he has all sufficiency
about him, yet thus it shall be, In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be
in straits. As a godly man has a sufficiency in his wants, yea a fullness of
sufficiency in his wants: So on the other side, an hypocrite, whose heart is
false with God, has want in his sufficiency, yea want in the fullness of his
sufficiency. Which may be understood two ways; either that his fullness in the
greatest sufficiency of it is unsatisfying; or that his fullness in the
greatest sufficiency of it, is upon decaying and abating. ( Psalm. 78.13.)
Whilst the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God fell upon them; while
meat is in the mouth, rich clothes upon the back, while store of money is in
the purse, while the land brings forth abundance of increase, even in all these
sufficiencies a man may be in straits. As it was with Agag (1 Samuel 15.) Surely
(says he) the bitterness of death is past; he thought himself safe, and that
the storm was quite blown over, but then, in that nick of time comes Samuel,
and cutteth him in pieces. The Apostle Paul says (2 Cor. 1.9.) I had the
sentence of death in my self; that is, I concluded, I could not survive those
sufferings, I thought my self a lost man: yet the Lord delivered him, and
fetched him from the grave. But when hypocrites (like Agag) have the sentence,
yea the sweetness of life in themselves; When they say peace and safety, then
sudden destruction comes, as pain upon a woman in travel, and they shall not
escape: God cuts them off. It follows,

If he destroy him from his place; what then? It shall deny him, saying, I have
not seen thee.

Here is a further aggravation of his misery, when he is destroyed, It shall
deny him; What shall deny him? Some read it thus, his place shall deny him. Can
a place speak, affirm, or deny? No, it cannot; but it is usual in Scripture,
by a Prosopopeia, a fiction of a person to ascribe speech to beasts, to trees
and places too, things not only without reason, but without life. Such an
elegancy is here, It shall deny him; that is, when he is destroyed, if any man
shall ask the question, where is this man? Where is this goodly tree that stood
here before? The place shall answer, He is not here now.

(...) ^ontietur ei (...). Sept. er prosopope a^ tribuit sermone^ and mendacium
rei inanimae; quod insolens non est in his libris Ita e loco suo excidetur and
interibit, ut nullus jam agnoscat eum ibi unquam fuisse. Merc
The Hebrew is, The place shall lie; the place shall feign and say, we have not
seen him; we know not what is become of him: So men use to answer, when they
are either afraid or ashamed to own one that is asked for.

Some understand it of a person, Then one may deny him: I see then no more, so
M. Broughton. Suppose a traveller, who oftentimes past by, and saw this goodly
tree, when he comes to the place again, sees it no more, the tree is down: So
he, who has past by such a man's house, and beheld his goodly seat, when he
comes another time, there is no such man there, the man is gone, It, or, he
shall deny him, saying, I have not seen thee.

I have not seen thee. We have near the same words, Psalm. 37.35, 36. where the
flourishing estate of a wicked man is shadowed under the notion of a tree, I
have seen the wicked flourish like a green bay tree, etc. (yet) he past away,
and he was not; as much as to say, if it be asked, what is become of him? A man
shall answer, he has not seen him; yea, I sought him, but he could not be
found. Such a sense has been showed ( Job 7.18.) upon those words, The place
thereof shall know him no more; A clear riddance shall be made of all men out
of the world, especially of wicked men. In that description ( Dan. 2.35.) of
the four Monarchies, under the similitude of a great Image, whose head was of
gold, his breast and arms of silver, his belly and thighs of brass, his legs of
iron, and his feet of iron and clay; the text says, Then was the iron, the
clay, the brass, the silver and the gold broken to pieces together, and became
like the chaff of the Summer threshing floors, and the wind carried them away,
that no place was found for them; or, as the Chaldee, They were found in no
place: A time will come when all Monarchies and worldly Kingdoms, which have
stood up in so much luster, which have dazzled the eyes of all beholders with
their splendor, and kept all their neighbor nations under by their power (a
time shall come) when this clay, and iron, and brass, and silver, and gold
shall be all beaten to pieces, so that if a man ask, where are the four
Monarchies? What Is become of the pomp and state of those great Empires? The
places of them shall know them no more; no man can tell where they are. There
is such a meaning here, this green tree. This hypocrite shall have his branches
so pulled off, his roots so stubbed up, that it will be hard to give an account
what is become of him.

We find the happy and flourishing estate of the Church and people of God
described, as if no place were large enough for them to dwell in ( Zech.
10.10.) I will bring them again out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out
of Assyria, etc. that is, I will gather my Saints, my Church together from all
the parts of the world where they have lived (while they could not live, but
sculking in corners) I will bring them together, so conspicuously, that there
shall be no place found for them; that is, no place capacious enough to receive
them and their families. We have the same promise of enlargement ( Isa. 49.)
They shall say, The place is too strait for me, give place to me that I may
dwell. Now, as the Saints shall be gathered together so eminently and
abundantly, that no place shall be found big enough to hold them; so the
hypocrite with all his greenness and verdure shall be so blasted and rooted
up, that the place where he was shall not be visible, as his; he shall be so
far from filling all places, that he shall fill none, The place where he
dwelt shall spue him out, and by any remaining symptom it shall not be known,
where that man was.

So then, the sum of all may be given thus, taking the comparison from the
tree to this wicked man;

That as a tree highly grown and deeply rooted, may be so cut down and stubbed
up, that it shall not be known whether ever it grew upon that place or no; so a
wicked man though for a while he flourishes and overcommeth all impediments
that hinder him, in the eye of the world, yet at last himself and his family
shall be so clean removed and swept away, his name and memory so blotted out,
that there shall not be any print or foot-step of his being upon the face of
the earth.

Whence note, That the memory of wicked men shall perish for ever, none shall
own them.

If they be asked about them, they shall say, We have not seen them. Peter in
his temptation denied Christ, Mat. 27. when they asked him, saying, Art not
thou one of his Disciples? No, says he, I know not the man. As the Saints
under temptation, and as hypocrites in their daily conversation deny Christ: so
the time will come when hypocrites and wicked men shall be denied themselves,
their places shall say, We know them no more. They shall be remembered only as
Pilate is remembered in that, which is called the Apostles Creed, who stands
there upon record for his wickedness, cowardice and injustice in condemning
Christ, whom he knew to be innocent. Wicked men are either forgotten, or else
remembered with a brand of disgrace. They who have been adored and flattered,
and crept to like little gods, shall not be owned by the meanest men. Even
their parasites who have hung about them, will fall off from them, and say,
Who, we know them? we know no such men. It is prophesied ( Zech. 8.23.) of the
Jews, who are now a despised and scattered people (yet still a people in the
heart of Christ) that God will bring them forth at last, and they shall be a
people so much honored, that ten men out of every Nation shall take hold of
the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have heard
that God is with you. The despised Saints, such as the world has cast out, and
said, We will not see or take notice of them, shall be honored or envied of
all. Men will be glad to take hold of their skirts, and say, Come, let us go
with you; O that we might have a part and a portion with you, for we know that
God is with you! O that we had lived the lives, and might die the deaths of the
righteous! O that our beginnings had been, and that our later ends might be
like theirs! Likewise a time will come, when hypocrites and wicked men shall be
despised by their admirers, and cast out, as not worth the looking on by their
grossest flatterers. It was a great honor which the Orator gives Homer, Cic.
in Orat. pro Arch. poet.
a Heathen Poet, who was a man of such reputation, that many great Cities
strove for him. One said, he was born here; another said, he was born there; a
third, among us was the place of his birth. All desired to own him, because he
was a man highly honored for his learning in those times: So on the other
side, every place shall be ashamed of some men; this place shall say, we have
nothing to do with him; and that place shall say, we have nothing to do with
him; one shall disclaim him, and another shall disclaim him, all shall refuse
him. It shall be the honor of Saints to be desired of all; and it shall be the
shame and punishment of wicked men, to be cast out and disregarded by all. They
who despise God, shall at last be lightly esteemed among men.

Bildad having thus enlarged his similitude, in all the parts of it, and at
last laid the hypocrite as low as forgetfulness, so low that no man will own
him, as he is always so low that God will not own him, he concludes
tryumphantly against him.

Verse 19. Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall
others grow.
Here Is his conclusion.

This is the joy.] The word which we translate joy, signifies the highest joy,
a kind of leaping for joy. (...) Dicitur quando gaudio gestimus, ut canes
solent quando peregre advenienti Domino adulantur. En haec est exultatio viae
ejus ironic^^s dictum Haec est laetitia qua sibi placebit in magnitudine sua.
Viam appellat statum in quo erat, q. d. en quo redeat ejus gaudium dum ita sese
efferret. Merc.
It is an allusion to dogs or spaniels, who (you know) when their Masters come
home, leap about them for joy, and in their language bid them welcome. Such a
joy is here meant, a joy lifting up the heart, a leaping, an exulting joy. The
word is often applied to the joy of the Saints, they rejoice, and (as it were)
leap about Jesus Christ, they triumph in the favor of God. The leaping, the
exulting joy, the best joy, all the joy which an hypocrite has, is but this,
which has been described; Is it not a desirable joy? a goodly joy sure? the
words are ironicall, This is the joy of his way.

Of his way.] Way is taken for the course, purpose and institution of a man's
life, for the tenor of his conversation, which he holds in the world, This is
the joy of his way: This is it. The particle is demonstrative, This is it which
I have told you; as if he had said, cast up all the comfort and happiness of
that flourishing tree, of the hypocrite, this is all that it comes to, his end
is to be rooted up, and not so much as to be owned by those that knew him
before.

There are three things which I should observe from this, This is the joy of
his way.

First, That an hypocrite may have much joy in his way. He may rejoice much in
his condition, and think all is well. False hopes can produce false joys.
False faith brings forth a comfort like it self, a fading comfort, a shadow of
comfort, as that is, but a shadow of faith. The fancy of faith is usually
fuller of joy then true faith. Satan helps forward this joy, and God for a time
will not hinder it. Faith (though feigned) gives the soul a sight of such
things as are worth the rejoicing in, and a supposed title to them will move
joy, as well as a real title does. The stony ground received the word with
joy. The promises are delicious to the sensitive and rational part, as well as
to the spiritual and regenerate part. Hence ( Heb. 6.) they that fall away are
said to have had tastes of the joys of the world to come. An hypocrite may
think himself in heaven sometimes, and then like one in heaven, he cannot but
rejoice. He may have a glimpse of heaven upon earth, all whose heaven is earth.
This is his joy.

Secondly, This, may be demonstrative, and answers the question; what is his
joy? It is this, His worldly comforts, his flourishing outward condition is his
chiefest joy. Then note, The joy of hypocrites is chiefly bo^tomed upon outward
things. It is not the joy of the Lord, no, nor joy in the Lord, Rejoice in the
Lord, and again, I say rejoice, is the Gospell-command. An hypocrite cannot
rejoice thus. When he rejoices in the Lord, somewhat besides the Lord causes
his joy. He rejoices in his green boughs, in his goodly branches, in his
supposed strong root; but to rejoice in God as God he knows not how. David's joy
was the opposite of this (Psalm. 4.6.) Lord, lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon me, and that will put gladness in my heart, more then in the
time that their corn and wine increased. Let me have the Sunshine of thy love,
and then though I have nothing but darkness and clouds from the world, I shall
rejoice. But what says the hypocrite? let my corn and wine increase, let the
Sun of outward prosperity shine warm upon me, let me have my greenness of
creature-contentments, let me have credit and fair repute among men, these will
put gladness in my heart. These glad his heart, when he has not a dram of
grace or goodness there.

Thirdly, The joy of an hypocrite is but for a moment. It is a perishing joy.
This is the joy of his way; you see what it amounts to, how well it last. His
greenness is turned into withering, his root rots, and his fruit falls off.
This is his joy. He is like those spoken of in the Epistle of Jude (verse. 14.)
Trees twice dead, and plucked up by the roots. That Is the conclusion of the
hypocrite: he has a name to live, but he is dead, twice dead, naturally dead
in sin, and judicially dead under wrath: he was born spiritually dead, and
his whole life is a passage to eternal death. He has rejoiced a while, but he
must mourn for ever. The portion of hypocrites is weeping and gnashing of teeth
(Mat. 24.51.) Their joy is but for a morning or a day, weeping comes at night,
and that night has no morning after it.

And out of the earth shall others grow. Some read, Out of the earth shall
somewhat else, some other thing grow: We, out of the earth (when these are
removed) other persons shall grow, who shall inherit the place, and possess
the dwelling of these prosperous trees. For he follows the similitude of a
tree, when, or where one is pulled up, another is planted and grows up in it is
room. Or, others shall possess what he has gotten. In which sense Job speaks
(Chap. 27.16, 17. Alij, qui alieni erunt ab eo, and quasi e terra alia
germinabu^t, in bona ipsius su cede^tes juxta illud, reposit^e sunt justo opes
peccatoris. D^^l.
) Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay, he may
prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the
silver. Which words may be a Comment upon these, Out of the earth shall others
grow; that is, others shall rise up, God will bring a new generation to enjoy
his ill-gotten substance, and eat the sweet of all his labors. Solomon
(Eccles. 2.18.) was much afflicted, because he knew not who should grow up
after him. I hated (says he) all my labor which I have taken under the Sun,
because I shall leave it to a man, and I know not what he shall be, whether a
wise man or a fool. It is a part of the vanity which lies upon mankind, that
after all a man's labor and pains, he must leave all unto some body, he knows
not certainly who. But there is a greater and sorer vanity upon the hypocrite;
he seldom stays to take his part, He shall not roast that which he has taken
in hunting (Pro. 12.) that is, he shall not have the benefit himself of what he
has, but others (unthought of) shall come out of the ground and grow in his
place, This is the upshot or sum of all his misery, he has labored for
others in temporal things, and he has got nothing for himself in spiritual
things.

Further, the words may carry this sense. That

When wi^ked men are taken away, the righteous shall grow in their room.

Pull up the briars and thorns, and then vines and fig trees, lilies and roses
will grow the better. When wicked men are removed, good men will prosper.

Again, Out of the earth shall others grow; they were not worth the ground they
went upon, though they were worth a great deal of ground, therefore out of the
ground shall others grow. God will raise up a generation which shall be more
faithful and serviceable unto him.

There is a fourth sense of this expression, Out of the earth shall others
grow; that is, out of the meanest and lowest condition others shall grow: and
so it carries an opposition between the condition of an hypocrite, and of a
godly man. The hypocrite in his flourishing greenness shall be cut down to the
ground, but they whose hearts are sincere and upright, though they are as low
as the ground, though they are upon the earth, and are trodden down as mire in
the streets, yet they shall grow up. They who were growing high shall be cut
down, and they who were below shall grow up; such as they feared not, nor
suspected, shall prevail over them. They who are lowest, even as low as the
earth, shall be raised, built up and set on high in the world, when God speaks
the word.

There is an Exposition of this whole context, about which (because many close
with it) I shall give a brief account. Diverse of the learned understand this
third similitude, not as describing the state of an hypocrite, but as an
instance in opposition to the state of an hypocrite, set forth by the rush and
by the spider in the former verses.

Hence it is that the Italian version begins the sixteenth verse thus, But the
perfect man is green before the Sun, etc. And so the sense may be given to this
effect. As if Bildad had said, Though hypocrites wither like a rush, or like a
flag, though they are suddenly swept down like a spiders web, yet a godly man
is a green tree before the Sun; he is not like a rush without water, but like
a tree planted by the rivers side, which is able to endure the heat of the
Sun, yea the hottest Sun of persecution: [His branches shoot forth in his
garden] he is no wild tree, no tree of the forest, or of the wilderness, he
is a tree of the enclosed garden, which if it want the water from the clouds,
the Gardener will take care to water it with his hand. Or [his roots are
wrapped about the heap, about the fountain;] he is strongly set, and he has
water continually to feed and supply his branches; Thus the Church is so
described by Balaam (Numb. 24.6.) How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy
tabernacles, O Israel! as the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the
rivers sides, as the trees of Lign aloes, which the Lord has planted, and as
Cedar-trees besides the waters. Thus the godly man's roots are wrapped about the
fountain, and there he is fruitful; though the Sun shine hot upon him, yet
it cannot exhale his moisture faster then the river can supply him with more.
And he sees the place of stones, he will live upon a flint, having a lively
root of faith continually sucking in refreshings from Christ, under whose
protection and favor he remains strong and abounding in the work of the Lord.
[But if he destroy him from his place, it shall deny him] that is, if the
wicked of the world attempt to root the godly man up: the place, that is, the
men of the place shall take part with them, own him, and deny to give him up
into the hands of those who would destroy him. But if the place should not
secure him, if the power and violence of the enemy destroy and pluck him up,
yet this is his joy, a godly man may be destroyed, but none can destroy the joy
of a godly man. [This is the joy of his way] he delights in persecution, he is
as sorrowful, but always rejoicing, even in death it self, [And out of his
earth shall others grow] He shall have a blessed posterity to stand up in his
stead, in whom he shall live, when he is dead. Or, if the power of the
adversary root him out of this earth, in which he lived, and drive him from
this ground, from house and home, he shall grow in another earth (The original
may bear that sense. De terra alia germinabunt. Pagn.
) If he be removed from this place, he shall grow in another place; if you take
him from his own Country, he can grow in any Country, and if he be plucked
from all Countries, he will grow up to, and in Heaven.

Thus the whole Context may be made out as a similitude of a godly man, in
opposition to the hypocrite. But I rather acquiesse and settle in the
interpretation before, that it is a third description of the condition of an
hypocrite. The original and our translation fairly carry it so.

Bildad having thus far prosecuted the point, vindicated the justice of God,
and illustrated his former proof by a threefold similitude, shuts up and states
the point for God, that He is just, For he will not hurt the innocent, neither
will he help the evil doers, etc.

JOB Chap. 8. Verse. 20, 21, 22. Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man,
neither will he help the evil doers.

Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing.

They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame, and the dwelling place of
the wicked shall come to naught.


THese three verses are the epilogue or close of Bildads discourse with Job
having in the former parts of the Chapter asserted, and with great clearness
illustrated the justice of God in his dealings against impenitents and
hypocrites; he now concludes in a mollifying language, with the assurance of
his favor and goodness unto those who return and humble themselves. Yet this
he interweaves with threats of the displeasure of God seen in the effects of
it, against the wicked, in the twentieth and two and twentieth verses.

It is, as if Bildad had thus said, Behold, God will not cast away a perfect
man. Job, thou may perceive, by what has now been spoken, that God is no
enemy to the righteous, nor no friend to wicked men: Thou see what the
portion of a wicked man is from God, and how just God is in giving him such a
portion; yet know, that mercy shall act as gloriously in the hand of God, as
justice does; as God is not unjust to favor hypocrites, so neither will he be
unjust to forget the righteous and the perfect man: the hypocrite shall perish,
but he will fill the mouth of a godly man with laughing, and his lips with
rejoicing.

Or, if we consider his speech more distinctly, we may see two negative acts of
justice, one toward the perfect, the other toward the hypocrite, with the
effects of both.

His justice acts toward the perfect man, in that, He will not cast him away.
The effect whereof is, The filling of his mouth with laughing, and his lips
with rejoicing.

His justice acts against the hypocrite, thus, He will not help the evil doers.
The effect whereof is, That evil doers shall be clothed with shame, and that
their tabernacles shall not be.

We may cast all into a form of argument. First, to the general; and then to
the particular case of Job.

He that does not cast away a perfect and a good man, is just and righteous in
his dealings and administrations.

But God does not, will not cast away a perfect, and a good man.

Therefore he i^ just and righteous in his dealings and admiministrations.

Then, to the particular case of Job.

He that does not cast away any perfect man, will not cast thee away, if thou
art perfect.

Therefore, Job, return, make thy way perfect before God, and He will not cast
thee away. Or take this inference. God will not cast away a perfect man:
therefore surely thou have a great deal of imperfection or insincerity in thee,
because God has thus cast thee off, and laid thee aside.

The like arguments may be framed upon the other part of his justice, in his
dealings with the wicked.

From the general sense of the Context thus given, I come to open the
particulars, as they here lie in order.

Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man.
Behold.] Is here a strong affirmation. This is a certain truth.

God will not. The strong God, or the puissant, will not cast away a perfect
man. (...)
God has infinite power, but he puts none of it forth, Deus fortis non
abutitur potenti^ sua ad conterendun simplicem. Pined.
to this purpose: he never lays out himself in opposing those who are perfect
and righteous, The powerful God does not cast away a perfect man.

Cast away. The word which we translate, cast away, (...)
was opened at the 14th verse of this Chapter, and in the fifth Chapter, verse.
9. Fasti divit reprobavit.
There it was translated by despising, Despise not thou the chastening of the
Lord, cast not away, or cast not off the chastening of the Lord. And in the
14th verse of this Chapter, The hypocrites hope shall be cut off, he shall cast
away his hope, or his hope should cast away and abhor him, for so the word
bears. Non reprobabit innocentem. 7^
The Seventy translate it to that sense, He will not cast off; that is, he will
not reprobate, or disapprove, he will not reject or discountenance a perfect
man. And M. Broughton, Loc, the omnipotent will not loath the perfect. Either
of the senses are full enough to the Text.

Only take notice that in the words there is a figure; for when it is said,
Meiofis.
That God will not cast away a perfect man; this is not all the meaning, as if
God made no other reckoning of perfect men then thus, that he would not cast
them away; more is intended then expressed, namely, that the Lord does highly
esteem and prize righteous men; he lays them, as it were, in his bosom and
next his heart: thus the Lord deals with the righteous, His not casting away,
is a near embracing.

There is a twofold casting away; First, Temporal. Secondly, Eternal: and in
neither of these senses does God cast away a perfect man. Not only shall he not
perish eternally, but not temporally. He does not reject or cast him away for a
moment; his love is an everlasting love, and there can be no breaches or gaps
made in it, so as to cut off his love to the person, although he often
signifies displeasure against his sin.

The perfect man. (...)
The word we had in the first Chapter, where it is used to express Jobs
compleatnesse in spirituals: A compleatnesse, not in degrees, but in parts;
sincerity filled up his soul, and so perfected all the limbs and members of his
inward man. Observe hence,

First, A gracious soul shall never be rejected of God.

Whatsoever God does in the world, he will never do this, Heb. 13.5. He has
said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. If God does not leave a perfect
man, he will not cast him away. The Apostle puts the question, ( Romans 11.1.)
Has God cast away his people? God forbid. God has not cast away his people
whom he fore-knew.

Perfect men are Gods jewels, not the rubbish or offscouring of the world,
though the world count them so. A wise man will not cast away jewels.

Perfect men are Gods servants, his faithful servants; all the willing service
he has done him in the world (on this side Angels) is done by these men. A
wise man will not cast away such as are truly serviceable unto him.

Perfect men are Gods children; they are borne of God, and sons of the most
high. Natural love will not cast away a child.

Perfect men are Gods portion, the lot of his inheritance, his revenue comes
in, he has his in-comes of glory, by them. A man will not despise his own
glory, he will not reject his own inheritance.

Further, They who are perfect come to him in his Son; and he has pawned his
truth for it ( Joh. 6.37.) He that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out:
As if he had said, this thing is furthest from my heart of any thing in the
world. God calls after many who go away from him, but he casts away none who
come to him. None come to him till he draws them, therefore he will not drive
them away who come.

Again, Perfect men have the Spirit of God, God cannot cast away, or stop his
ears at the voice of his own Spirit. They have the earnest of his Spirit; if
God should go about to put them off, or lay them aside, they will show God
those tokens and pledges of his love, the earnest he has given them to assure
their hearts.

Lastly, He has tied himself to them in the bond of a Covenant, they are fast
to him in the everlasting bonds of his own love; therefore they cannot be cast
off. So he promises his people ( Levit. 26.44.) though they should provoke him
to afflict them, yet he would not reject them utterly; he might put them into
the hands of their enemies, but he would never cease to be their friend, For
all that, when they be in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away.
(Many think when the Saints are cast into trouble, that God has cast them
away: no, there is no such matter, when they are in their enemies hand, God
holds them still in his hand, yea, in his heart.) I will not cast them away,
neither will I abhor them to destroy them utterly, and to break my Covenant
with them, for I am the Lord their God. The Covenant holds God and his people
so fast together, that they shall never part.

We find the Church complaining grievously, as if she were cast away (Psalm.
44.9.) Thou have cast us off, and put us to shame, and go not forth with our
Armies: and verse 23. the Church prays, Arise, O Lord, cast us not off for
ever. So ( Psalm. 60.1.) O God, thou have cast us off: and verse. 9. Who will
bring me into the strong City? Wilt not thou, O God, which had cast us off?
God (to sense) casts off his own people, when he casts them into dangers: but
even then their faith takes hold of God, and Gods love takes hold of them.
Though all this be come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt
falsely in thy Covenant ( Psalm. 44.17.) neither had God forgotten them, or
dealt falsely in the Covenant: they were his people still, and as near unto him,
as when they were furthest from those troubles.

God casts away some indeed, but they are such as he never had within the bonds
of his Covenant. He casts away wicked men, as rubbish, as filth and dirt; such
the Prophet speaks of ( Hos. 9.15.) My God will cast them away, because they
did not hearken unto him. These were imperfect, not perfect men. God cast these
away, not from any interest they had in him, but because they never had any.
Such as will not hearken unto the Word of God, God will cast away; why? They
cast God away, when they cast the Word of God away. They cast the Covenant
behind their backs ( Psalm. 50.) no wonder God casts them behind his back; he
throws them o^t of doors, when they throw his truth out of their hearts.
Perfect men love the truth of God for ever, and the God of truth loves them for
ever.

Secondly, (For, as was said, these words express less then is meant.)
Observe,

That perfect men are highly esteemed by God.

He prizes them greatly, he delights in them, They that honor me, I will
honor, says God; not only will I not cast them away, or abhor them, but I
will honor them. God esteems and prizes them, though the world disesteem and
reject them. There is many a soul which the world tramples under their feet, as
the mire in the streets, which at that time God lays in his bosom. Christ
imbraceth some in his arms, whom the world, yea, whom their brethren hate, and
smite with their tongues (Isa. 66.5.) Your brethren that hated you, that cast
you out for my Names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified (Not only the wicked
world may do this, but brethren, even those that are brethren indeed in the
main, may possibly hate a perfect man, and cast him out) your brethren that
hated you, and cast you out for my Names sake; but the Lord at that time loved
them, as it follows, But he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

And if God does not only not cast away perfect ones, but esteem them, then
take these three cautions.

First, Ye that are perfect, be sure ye keep close to God, do not cast him
off; do not cast away the word, any one truth or command of God. Cast not the
ways of God away, for he will never cast you away.

Secondly, Ye that are perfect, Cast not away your confidence, Heb. 10.35. The
Apostle had showed how close God would stick to his people; now, says he, if
it be so, if he will bring his promises to pass, then cast not away your
confidence. There is a great strength of engagement in it, when we read that
God will not cast away his people, that they should not cast away their
confidence in God, which has great recompense of reward.

Thirdly to all, take heed of casting of casting off or sleighting any perfect
man; we should act toward men, and think of them as God does. It is best to
love where God loves, and to love most where he loves most. Negative promises,
and negative threatenings have greatest force in them. God holds them fastest;
and loves them dearest, of whom he says, I will not cast them away. God will
not cast away a perfect man. There Is a negative promise. Now see the portion of
the wicked, that is given out in a negative threatening: God says not what he
will do against them, but what he will not do for them, Neither will he help
the evil doers.

He will not help them. Some read it, He will not put forth his hand to evil
doers. Non perrigit manum malignis. Vulg. Ad a^^^tiae foedus pertinere videtur.
So the letter of the Hebrew imports. And there may be a threefold sense given
of that reading. Putting forth the hand, notes, first, our taking men into
society, fellowship and familiarity with us: when we would show a man how we
love him at our hearts, we put forth a hand, and take him by the hand. Now
(says he) God will not take an evil doer by the hand, to welcome or entertain
him, to countenance and respect him (Exodus 23.1.) Put not thy hand with the
wicked to be an unrighteous witness: Be not of the same side, communion and
fellowship with him, in giving witness.

Secondly, (As the Septuagint gives the sense) He will not put forth his hand;
that is, to receive a gift or an offering from wicked men. When a gift or a
present is brought, the receiver (if he would testify his liking and
acceptance of it) puts forth his hand and receives it. Nec ullum munus impij
accipier. Sept. q. d. Non porriget manus, accepturus manus, impiorum dona non
sunt Deograta. Pined.
Now (says Bildad) God will not put forth his hand to receive any offering or
gift from wicked men; the oblations of wicked men are an abomination unto the
Lord, The good deeds of evil doers are evil in his sight. He had no respect to
Cain and his offering. He did not put forth his hand to receive Cains offering,
but he put forth his hand to receive Abels offering. This is a profitable sense.

Thirdly, It rather refers to Gods not assisting wicked men. So Mr Broughton
renders it, He will not maintain the hand of the mischievous. To put forth or
stretch out the hand, according to this Hebrew phrase, (...) Denotat fortiter
apprehendere, aut potius apprehendendo consortare, and roborare hoc est
praestare auxilium. Improbis non favet nec eos juvat. Merc.
implies strong holding, or the taking of strong hold upon any thing, so as by
taking hold of it to strengthen and confirm it, to give it help and assistance.
A man that would give assistance to another in any business or work, puts
forth his hand to him. When we want help, we usually bespeak a friend, Pray
lend me your hand. Now here, The Lord will not put forth his hand to evil
doers; that is, the Lord gives them no assistance or help in their wickedness.
If wicked men say, Lord, lend us thy hand: no, says he, I will not lend you my
hand. We find this phrase frequent in Scripture. That ( Genesis 19.16.)
illustrates it fully; where Lot being warned to go out of Sodom (verse. 16.)
while he lingered the men (that is, the Angels) laid hold upon his hand, and
upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters, the Lord
being merciful unto him, and they brought him forth, and set him without the
City. They laid hold upon their hands: It is the word of the text. When the
Lord sees wicked men, in any distress or danger (as Lot was in Sodom) or when
they want help and assistance in any business, he will not be merciful to
them in taking them by the hand, or in laying his hand strongly upon them,
either to pull them out of the danger, or to give them help in difficulties.
The sin of Jerusalem is charged upon her in this language by the Prophet, in
a parity with that of filthy Sodom. (Ezekiel. 16.49.) Neither did she strengthen
the hand of the poor and needy: that is, she did not relieve, comfort or help
them. The sin opposite to this is charged upon the false Prophets by Jeremy
(Chap. 23.14.) They strengthen the hands of evil doers, either by counsel or
by countenance, by flatteries or connivence. We read ( Nehem. 6.) how often the
enemies sent false alarms to Nehemiah, and the people that were with him, to
terrify and affright them: Nehemiah shows the enemies design in it, verse. 9.
They all made us afraid, saying, their hands shall be weakened from the work
that it be not done; therefore in the close Nehemiah prays, Lord, strengthen
mine hands (it is this word) as if he had said, Lord, help me, put thine hands
to mine. So (Isa. 35.3.) strengthen the weak hands, put your hands to their
hands, Psalm. 73.23. David acknowledging how he had almost fallen at the rising
of the wicked, shows yet what kept him up, Nevertheless, I am continually with
thee, thou have holden me by my right hand: the hand of providence is the power
of God upholding our being, as the hand of Creation was the power of God giving
us our being, Isa. 42.6. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and I
will hold thine hand and help thee. So, Isa. 41.13. that is, by holding of
thine hand I will help thee. The same word in the original is used for
hardening the heart ( Exodus 9.12. (...)
) because hardness of heart strengthens it to do evil. A hard heart is armed
for any sin.

So then we see, when the Lord refuses to put forth his hand, or to take
strong hold (as the word imports) upon the hand of evil men, the meaning lies
in one of these three things,

1. That he bears no favor to them, he does not approve their cause or
business.

2. That he gives them no assistance nor encouragement in their business.

3. That he will not deliver or rescue them out of their distresses; when they
are sinking and falling he will not put forth his hand to hold them up, or to
keep them from sinking. God is hot a Patron or a Protector, an Adjutor or
Aider of evil doers.

Evil doers. We must not take these evil doers for all and every one that does
evil, for then whom would God help? (...)
We may then say (with reverence) God help us indeed: what a miserable
condition were we then in, if God would not put forth his hand to help any that
do evil? The evil doer is a man notoriously, professedly, studiously wicked,
one that acts and devises evil against God and his ways. Every one who does
evil is not to be reckoned an evil doer. A man does evil in any one act: but
one act does not make him an evil doer. A Magistrate must count him an evil
doer, who does evil; and therefore he must take vengeance (in many cases) of
him that does evil (though but once) Romans 13.4. and though he repent. The
Angels were cast as evil doers for one act, and so was man in innocence: but
now the evil doer is one who multiplies and continues in evil deeds; to such as
these the Lord will not put forth his hand, or give them his help. Observe then,

First, That God is no friend, no assistant unto men in sinful ways.

He will not strengthen the hands, or help forward the work of wicked men. God
is the punisher and judge of evil doers, therefore not their helper.

Evil doers oppose not only Gods law, but his nature, therefore he will not
help them. He cannot exercise one Attribute against another; his power will not
work against his holiness, or against his will.

There is a twofold help which God gives,

First, A common help.

Secondly, A special help.

We grant that God strengthens the hands even of evil doers in regard of a
common help: For no man could put forth his hand to any evil, as a sinner, if
God did not give him a general assistance, as a creature. In this sense the
strength by which men rebel and sin against God, comes from God. But he does
not strengthen their hands, or give them help by any special assistance. In
the doing of good, we have a common assistance to the act, as there is a
natural motion in it, which God gives his people with the rest of the world:
but this will not carry them out to do good completely. To bring forth any
gracious act, they must have a special assistance. Hence Christ says, Without
me ye can do nothing; he means it not of that general support which Christ
gives to man, by which all live and move, and have their being in him (in that
sense no man is able to do any thing without Christ, for in him all things
cons st) but when he says, Without me ye can do nothing, he means, without my
special assistance and strength ye cannot perform holy and spiritual duties,
acceptable unto God. So the Apostle, We have no sufficiency of our selves, so
much as to think a good thought. We have no sufficiency to think any thought
without some assistance; but to think a good thought, we have not any
sufficiency without a special assistance. Wicked men are not able to do evil,
without a common assistance; but they have no special assistance from God to
do evil. He does neither stir up and excite then lusts to the act, nor supply
their lusts while they are acting. Wicked men have assistance enough in both
from their own hearts, and from Satan. Though man has no sufficiency in
himself to think one good thought, yet he has a sufficiency in himself to
think all evil thoughts; As he is a creature he acts, and as he is a corrupt
creature he sins. Man has full power and free will to do evil therefore the
Lord does not put forth his hand to help the evil doer.

But it will be necessary for the understanding of this and other like
Scripture, to consider somewhat more distinctly, what God does in reference to
evil acts, or the acts of evil doers. He concurs, but not with such a
concurrence, as amounts to the helping of evil doers, or the strengthening of
their hands.

The first help which God gives evil doers, is privative, or negative, the
calling in, or not giving out of that power, by which they might do good, or
avoid evil. Thus he departed from Saul and then Saul went on, worse and worse
against David. God has somewhat to do with evil doers, when he with-draws
that help from them, by which they might be kept from doing evil. Or, when he
does not assist them against the evil of their own hearts, and the pollutions
of the world. This deserting and leaving them unto themselves, lays them open
to sin. Yet the sin which a man thus deserted commits, can no more be charged
upon God, then the darkness of the night can be charged upon the Sun for
going down; sin follows divine desertion, not as an effect does the cause,
but as a consequent does it is antecedent.

Secondly, He delivers or gives them up, first, to Satan: And secondly, to
their own counsels, to a reprobate mind and vile affections, Psalm. 81.12. Romans
1.24, 26. This tradition is an act beyond desertion; there is a greater
spiritual judgment in it, when God makes a man's own wickedness active
against him, then when he does not make his Spirit or grace active in him. It
were better to be put into the hands of all the tyrants in the world, yea,
better be put into the hands of the devil, then into the hands of our own lusts
and passions. God does not give a reprobate mind or vile affections, but he
gives up to them.

Thirdly, Evil doers in their doing evil are ordered by God. Wicked men (in
every sinful act) run beyond the line of obedience, but they cannot run
beyond the line of providence. God limits and circumscribes the acts of wicked
men, for otherwise every wicked man would be a monster, a nonesuch in
wickedness, if he could; every one would be a Cain, an Ahab, a Nero, a
Cal^gula, etc. The sinfulness of men would be, not only out of measure sinful
intensive, in regard of the quality of it, but out of measure sinful
extensive, in regard of the quantity of it, it would break all bounds, carry
all down before it, did not the Lord order and direct the disorders and
confusions of it. There is a sea of wickedness in the heart of a wicked man,
which is as boisterous and unruly as the natural sea, and if the Lord did not
set bounds to that sea of wickedness, and say, Hitherto shall thou come and no
further, it would overwhelm all. Thus far also God has to do in the
sinfulness of men, to limit and stay them, to restrain and keep them in
compass, while they sin. Every sin goes without the compass of that law
which God has given, but no sin can get beyond the compass of that leave
which God gives.

Fourthly, We may say, God assists the motions of sin, but not the motions to
sin, or the sinfulness of the motion. The strength of a wicked man's hand,
while he sins is from the Lord, but the Lord does not strengthen his hand to
sin. A sinner has natural help from God, but he has no moral help from
God; he has all that from himself, from his own wicked heart, or from Satan.
To eat was a natural act in our first parents, this was from God; but to eat
against the command was a moral act, and that was from man, and the serpent.
As suppose that a Musician should touch or play upon a Lute that is out of
tune, his touching the Lute is an artificial act, but the sounding of it comes
from the nature of the instrument: the sounding of the instrument is from the
hand of him that plays upon it, but, that it sounds untuneably, is, because
the instrument is out of tune. So the Lord by natural assistance puts the
hearts and hands of wicked men into motion, but that they move irregularly,
that they make such harsh music, that there is so much discord in their
actions, that is from the disorder and untuneablenesse of their own spirits, not
from the hand of God. They have not any moral assistance from God in sin,
but a natural only.

Or, take it negatively, God does not help the evil doers.

First, He does not help the evil doers, by instilling the least motion of evil
into them. He casts in, or infuses holy thoughts and motions into the hearts of
his own people, to prepare them for holy performances, but he never dropped the
least motion of evil into the heart of man, to fit him for wickedness.

Secondly, The Lord does not excite or stir up that natural inherent
corruption that is in wicked men; he does not provoke or blow up their lusts.
He excites the graces of his own people, when they are to do any good: they
have a principle of grace in them, and this God breaths upon, moving and acting
it by fresh assistances. Neither of these ways does the Lord assist evil doers.

Further, Taking the words (as they must) in a figure, when it is said, God
does not help the evil doers; the meaning is, he does oppose and resist them.
Hence observe,

Wicked men are resisted and opposed by God in their evil doings.

God is so far from giving them any help, that he sets himself against them.
Understand this with a distinction.

There is a twofold resistance or opposition that God makes against the evil
doings of men. There is, 1. A moral opposition. 2. A natural opposition.


Or there is, 1. A declarative resistance. 2. An operative resistance.


When it is said, that God does resist (as this phrase imports or supposes)
wicked men in doing evil, we are to understand it, that he ever opposes them
morally; that is, he ever lays a moral impediment in their way, and he ever
opposes them declaratively, he declares his opposition in his Word. He never
shows the least liking of wicked men in their ways. For when he says, He that
is filthy, let him be filthy still, and he that is unjust, let him be unjust
still (Revel. 22.11.) he does not at all approve, but threatens these sinners.
This seeming admission is the highest rebuke of sin. But take it for a
natural opposition, which is the bringing out of strength and power to stop
men in the ways of sin: Thus the Lord does not always resist evil doers. For
if he did, it were impossible that any wicked man should move one hairs breadth
in doing evil; if God would put forth his power against man, he could not stir
to sin against God: but God does not so, neither is he bound to lay a natural
impediment in the ways of wicked men. It is enough to acquit him in his
holiness, that he ever lays a moral impediment in their way. He declares
his law against, and his dislike of their sins: and in this sense he always
resists them. All the sin of man is against the will of God, yet no man sins
whether God will or no. The declarative will of God is often resisted, but his
operative will cannot be resisted. As (which may illustrate this) in the civil
State, the laws of this Kingdom lay a moral impediment in the way of thievery
and robbery, etc. It is perpetually declared by the law, that no man ought to
take another man's estate from him violently; but yet the Kingdom does not ever
set a natural impediment against, robbers, etc. That is, we do not place a
power of men to guard all high ways or houses, to see that no passenger shall
be robbed, or house broken open: So the Lord lays a moral impediment in the
way of wicked men always, but he does not always set his power against them,
whereby he is able (if he please) to disable wicked men from doing evil.
Thirdly, Observe,

When wicked men are going down, down they shall.

Why? God will not put forth his hand to help them; they, whom God will not
assist or help, cannot stand long. They in the Psalm thought they had got the
godly man at an advantage, Come (say they) let us persecute and take him, for
God has forsaken him, and there is none to deliver him; Now we may have our
wills of this man, for God stands by and does not own him. If God be a neuter,
his friends cannot stand long, how then shall his enemies stand, when he is
their opposer? We may conclude against wicked men, that they shall be
destroyed, for God has forsaken them, he will not own them; and as Hamans wife
told him sadly, Est. 6.13. If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom
thou have begun to fall, thou shall surely fall before him. When a man is going
down, nothing can stay him, if God do not: his hand must support a sinking and
tottering person or Nation, or else either falls. When wicked enemies begin to
fall, they shall fall and perish, for God will not put forth his hand to help
the evil doers.

Now follows the effect of all. The effect first of Gods gracious helping of
the righteous, He will not cast away the righteous man; and is that all? Shall
a righteous man be only not rejected? As man's duty ought not, so the mercy of
God does not stay in negatives. The Lord has positive blessings in store for
his people; the later part of the promise affirms this, He will not cast away
the righteous man.

Verse 21. Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing.
Till he fill thy mouth with laughing.] And is it but just till then? Will the
Lord, when he has set his people a laughing, leave them and help them no more?
Will he, when he has given them cause of joy, cast them off? His people had
better never laugh at all, then laugh upon those terms. Particula, donec non
significat postea projiciendum esse a Deo simplicem, sed quod immutabiliter
servabitur a Deo.
No man can laugh long, nor at all (upon any due ground) if God leave him.

We are not to understand this [Till] to be a terminative, or a determinative
particle, as if the Lords care and favor toward his people, should be only
till he put them in a good estate, and then they must shift for themselves. God
puts no such limits to his love. It cannot so much comfort the soul to know God
loves us now, as it would trouble the soul, to think a time may come when he
will not love us. The [till] here notes a continued act; it is as much as to
say, He will never cast them off. The word [untill] both in the Hebrew and
Greek, often notes everlastingnesse. God makes a promise to Jacob in this form
( Genesis 28.19.) I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have
spoken to thee of. And would he leave him then? No, the meaning is, I will
never leave thee ( Psa. 110.1.) Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool. Christ shall not be put from the right hand of God when
his enemies are subdued under his feet, Christ shall sit there for ever.

Till he fill thy mouth with laughing. Thy mouth.] Observe here the change of
the person: he spoke before in the third person, The Lord will not east away
the perfect man, now he brings it home and applies it unto Job, Till he fill
thy mouth with laughing; as if he had said, That which I spoke in the third
person, I meant it as appliable unto thy self, that general truth may be made
good to thy person, Till he fill thy mouth. Hoc quod dixi in tantum veru^ est,
ut in te sentieris. Aquin.
I do not speak speculations or fleeing notions of things that shall never
come to pass; If thou follow my counsel, thy own experience will quickly
teach thee, That God will not cast thee off, till he fill thy mouth with
laughing.

Laughter is an act of joy flowing from reason. Os impleri dicitur risu, cum
aliquis tanta animi hilaritate perfruitur, ut illa cordis bilalaritas per
veciferationem conclamationem risum aut hujusmodi exteriora signa valde
appareat. Bold.
To fill the mouth with laughing notes great joy, such an income of joy, so
much matter of joy, that the heart cannot hold it, but out it must at the
mouth: joy begins at the heart, there is the seat of it: and when the heart is
so full of it that it cannot hold, then it runs over at the mouth and lips;
that is, we express the inward joy of the heart by some outward sign or token,
speech or gesture. So then to say, I will not cast thee away, till I have
filled thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing, is as much as to
say, I will not leave thee, till thou have more comfort then thine heart can
hold, so much, that thou must give it vent at thy lips, and be speaking of it.

The word for laughter signifies as well inward as outward joy, heart-laughter
as well as face-laughter. Besides there is a twofold laughter.

First, A laughing of joy. And

Secondly, A laughing of scorn, called subsannation. With both these laughters
the Lord will fill the mouths of his people.

First, With laughing for joy: for joy at their own comfortable and good
estate, for joy that the Lord has glorified himself in their deliverance.
These things are great matter of joy to them. And then he will fill their
mouths with a laughing of derision, they shall scorn their enemies who have
scorned at them. God laughs at the proud opposers of his truth and people,
Psalm. 2. He that fitteth in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them
in derision. When the Lord has confounded the plots of his enemies, he
laugheth at them; his people also shall laugh, not insulting in the sins and
miseries of men, but in the vengeance and disappointments which God pours
upon them. The derisions and scorns of the Saints have more holiness in them,
then the devotions and prayers of wicked men. The word in the next clause is
considerable.

(...) a radice (...)
And thy lips with rejoicing. We translate rejoicing, but the word properly
signifies a joyful sound. So it is used (Psalm. 89.15.) Blessed is the people
that know the joyful found And it signifies to make a joyful sound,
Personavit, vocifer^^^ est, vocem magnam edidit.
either with the mouth, which is a natural instrument, or with a trumpet or
any other artificial instrument. Blessed are the people that know the joyful
sound, that live within the sound of the silver trumpet which congregated the
people of God, (...) est laetum clamore^ tollere ut solent homines fiducia
praediti and speerecti, ut milites ante praelium. Latini Barritum vocant;
clamor quem Barritum vocant, non prius debet attolli quam acies utraque se
ju^xerit. Veget.
and gave notice of their solemn meetings for public worship. This word is
applied sometimes to that rude sound, or confused noise, which soldiers make
when they come on to charge in battle; they commonly make a great clamor, to
strike the adversary with terror and amazement, and to encourage and raise
their own spirits. The Greeks and Latins have their special terms to express
it by, noted by the learned in the proprieties of those languages.

Again, That word is used for the confused noise of worsted or conquered
enemies, when they flee and run away. So ( Judge. 7.31.) when Gideon had
discomfited the host of the Amalekites, all the host ran and cried they made a
doleful sound: so the word bears, as well as a joyful sound.

Thirdly, The word is chiefly used to note the sound or acclamation of
soldiers after victory is obtained; a prevailing army shouts when the adverse
forces are routed and overcome. Thus, in that famous instance ( Josh. 6.5.)
Joshua gives command, that when they make a long blast with the rams horns, and
when they heard the sound of the trumpet, all the people should shout with a
great shout. Which shout is expressed by the word of the text, and in the tenth
verse he charges that they should not shout or make a noise with their voice
till the seventh day, because that was designed for the day of victory, the day
when the wall should fall: You shall not shout nor make any noise with your
voice, neither shall any word proceed out of your mouths, till the day I bid
you shout, then shall ye shout. Balaam (Numb. 23.21.) confesses he could not
curse Israel, because the shout of a King was amongst them. It is this word.
That shout of a King may be understood three ways.

First, That it was such a shout as Kings used to have in their reception and
coronation; Such a shout, says he, there is among this people, as if a King
were to be received and crowned. Thus when Samuel brought Saul out, whom he had
anointed for King, and said, See ye him whom the Lord has chosen that there is
none like him among all the people? And all the people shouted, and said, God
save the King, 1 Samuel 10.24.

Or secondly, It notes such a shout as is in an army, where a King in person
is leader or victour.

Thirdly, The shout of a King is amongst them, because the voice of a King
should be as the sound of a trumpet, or some loud instrument, to enform and
direct his people, as also to enourage them.

From all, we see this rejoicing is no ordinary joy; It is a high, a triumphant
joy, I will fill thy lips with rejoicing, till thou shall sing VICTORIA over
all thine enemies and calamities.

Further, This also is in it, a rejoicing with praise: not a bare rejoicing in
the blessings and deliverances, but a rejoicing in the praises of God, who has
given those blessings, and wrought, those deliverances. The Septuagint
translate it by rendering of thanks, (...), i. e. confessio^e laudis and
gratiarum actionis pro accepta resti tutaque soelicitate.
or a confession of praise, I will not cast thee away, till I have filled thy
lips with rejoicing; that is, with my praises. Thus David prays ( Psalm. 71.8.)
Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thine honor all the day long.
Praise filling the heart fills the mouth; joy as well as sorrow pent up, stifles
the Spirit. Hence we may observe,

First, That as joy is the portion of the people of God, so in good time they
shall receive their portion.

He will not cast off a perfect man, till he fill his mouth with joy, and his
lips with rejoicing. Joy is their due, and joy they shall have. Hereafter they
shall have their Masters joy, Enter into your Masters joy, will Christ say at
last. Now they shall have such a joy as befits them, whilst they are in their
Masters service. And as rejoicing is the portion, so the proper portion, the
peculiar of godly men. Though laughing, as it is a natural act, is common to
all men, yet in the sense we speak of, laughter is appropriated unto godly and
perfect men: They only can laugh indeed who have mourned indeed. Tibi ridet and
mihi, non sibi.
A wicked man does but feign a laugh. He laughs to thee and to me, but he does
not laugh to himself: He has no true laughter, while he laughs. His laughter
is madness, and proceeds from his ignorance, not from his reason. Besides
other marks of difference which shall be put between the servants of God and
their enemies, this is one, My servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed
(Isa. 65.13.) This joy arises two ways.

First, From the greatness of the blessing, which they receive for themselves.
We must rejoice in the least mercy, how greatly then in the greatest? Our joys
take their measure by our mercies. When Sarah had a Son, she said, God has
made me to laugh, so that all that hear me shall laugh with me, Genesis 21.6. Her
mercy in receiving a son was so great, that it would serve a whole world to
make merry with. The man that had found his lost sheep, laid it on his
shoulders, rejoicing (it was a pleasant burden to him) and when he came home,
he called together his friends and neighbors, saying, Rejoice with me (Luke
15.6.) As some afflictions are so big, that all our own sorrows are not large
enough to weep and mourn over them: so some blessings are so big, that they
call out more then our own affections to rejoice over them.

Secondly, This overflowing joy arises from the greatness of those judgments,
which are poured out upon the enemies of the Saints. The overthrow of Pharaoh
at the red sea, of Jabin and Sisera at the brook Kishon, filled all hearts and
mouths with laughter, and so shall the overthrow of Babylon, Rev. 15.

Thus, when God does great things for his people, and great things against his
enemies, then it is time to rejoice greatly ( Psalm. 126.1.) The Lord has done
great things for us, whereof we rejoice, say the captive Jews in the morning or
first dawnings of their deliverance from Babylon; and more then so, Then was
our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing. And there is cause
of great rejoicing in those great things, because then God fulfils his
promises, and makes his Name glorious in his providence. Then God is greatly
honored, when his people are greatly delivered; then the blasphemies of wicked
men are unanswerably confuted, and their mouths for ever stopped. From all
these considerations the hearts of the Saints are filled with laughter, and
their mouths with rejoicing in a day when God works great things. At such times
joy, and this degree of it, is not only our privilege, but our duty. When we
carry a message of thanks to God, we must not come with uncheerfull
countenances, or sour faces. It is a comely thing, when our affections keep
time and proportion with the dispensations of God. When we cannot sing the
songs of Sion, or use our harps by the waters of Babylon, and when we cannot
but sing either in the restoring of Sion, or in the ruins of Babylon.

Some may object those texts, Woe to them that laugh, etc. ( Luke 6.25.) It
seems laughter is the portion of wicked men, for woe (we are sure) is their
portion. It Is true, worldly laughter, a laughter in corn, and wine, and oil, a
laughter in riches, and honors, and carnal pleasures, as such, is a laughter
with a woe annexed. But to laugh in the sense of the goodness of God, giving
us outward good things to express our selves joyfully, when God expresses
himself graciously, is not only comely, but holy. When Gods heart comes out at
his hand, and is seen in his actions, our hearts should come out at our mouths,
and be heard in our exultations.

Thus we have seen the effect of the goodness of God upon his own people. See
the effect of his justice upon wicked men.

Verse 22. They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame, and the dwelling
place of the wicked shall come to naught.
God resists, or will not put forth his hand to evil doers, then follows, They
shall be brought to shame. Shame is opposite to laughing: he that rejoices,
usually holds up his head, and cares not who sees him; but he that is ashamed,
holds down his head, and endures not to be seen. Some men laugh in their
sleeves (as we say) but all men would be ashamed in their sleeves.

They that hate thee. (...) Od^o habuit, contempsit. Dicitur etiam aliquando
pe^ comparationem alterius, quod nagis am^^ur non quod proprie odio habeatur.
Rab. Dav. in l. Rad.
The word has a double signification.

First, It imports the putting forth of bitter hatred, when a man sets himself
maliciously against his brother.

Secondly, It is taken comparatively for a lesser or more remiss putting forth
of love. He may be said to hate, who wants a due heat and height of love. In
that sense Jacob was taxed for hating Leah, Genesis 29.31. When the Lord saw that
Leah was hated, etc. Take hatred in the common notion, and then surely Jacob
was not a man so forgetful of a husbands duty, as to hate his wife: the
meaning then is only this, The Lord saw that Leah had a less portion of love
than Rachel had, or less then her conjugall relation called for. Jacob did not
love her with that strength of affection with which he loved Rachel. Which
exposition is clear (verse. 30.) and he (namely Jacob) loved Rachel more then
Leah; then, Leah was loved, yet Jacobs loving of Rachel more then Leah, is
called, hating of Leah. Not to love another in that degree we ought, is a
degree of hatred. And in this sense we may take it here; for though such as
maliciously, and professedly set themselves against the righteous are chiefly
intended and fitted for this vesture of shame; yet it is cut out also for them,
who do not love and esteem the righteous, who do not prize and rejoice in
them, as the beauty and dignity which Christ has put upon them, invites them
to do. These haters shall be clothed with shame; according to the degree of
their hatred shall be the degree of their shame.

They shall be clothed with shame. (...) a radice (...)
To be ashamed at all is a great punishment; what is it then to be clothed with
shame? To be clothed with shame is a great punishment, and most proper for
those who are proud of their clothing. Puduit aliquem rei vel facti. Our
English word abasht is as near it in ^ound as in sense.


Shame is the fruit of sin. When there was no sin in the world, there was
no shame in the world, The man and his wife were both naked, and were not
ashamed. Innocence knew no shame, and glory shall know none. It is good to be
ashamed when we have done evil, but it is best to do no evil, whereof to be
ashamed. Shame is a perturbation or trouble of mind, expressed outwardly by
holding down the head, or by blushing in the face. And it arises three ways.

1. From doing somewhat against common light: though every act of evil has
matter of shame in it, yet a man is not naturally ashamed of it, unless it be
done against the light of nature. Not to be ashamed of such sins, is to put
out the light of nature. Such men are grown down into beasts. The impudence of
Jerusalem is set forth in sinning against the light of Scripture without
blushing, Isa. 3.9. Were they at all ashamed? Some are so modest, that they are
ashamed to hear of, much more to be praised for the good which they have done:
Others are so impudent, that they are not ashamed to hear of, no, nor to be
reproved for, the evil which they have done, Were they at all ashamed? As if he
had said, what a boldness or impudence is this people come to, they are not
ashamed of those things, which are clearly forbidden in the Word. A good man is
ashamed of any thing he has done against the light of Scripture. Every man is
ashamed of what he does against the light of nature.

2. Shame arises from long delay, or detainments much beyond expectation. When
Moses staid long in the Mount, the people were ashamed (Exodus 32.1.) So Judge.
3.25. when Eglon staid long in the inner parlour, the text says, his servants,
who waited without, were ashamed.

3. Shame arises from utter disappointments. If hope deferred causes shame,
then much more hope destroyed. When a man sees his hopes quite cut off, so that
he can no way reach the thing he looked for, shame takes hold of him strongly.
David prays (Psalm. 119.116.) Uphold me according to thy word, that I may live,
and let me not be ashamed of my hope; that is, let me not lose my hope, for
then I shall be ashamed; my enemies will rejoice and hoot at me, where is the
word upon which you trusted to be upholden? Read Isa. 19.9. Psalm. 27.6. Psalm.
119.116. In all which Scriptures we find shame following the total
frustration and disappointment of hope.

Evil doers shall be ashamed upon these three grounds, they have done things
against common light. They shall stay waiting and gaping long for what they
desire. They shall see themselves totally disappointed and defeated in their
desires; hence shame shall fill their faces, and they shall be covered with it
as with a garment.

Here is more then bare shame waiting upon them, the text says, They shall be
clothed with shame. To be clothed is applied both to ornament and dishonor.
There are three degrees of expression in Scripture about shame.

1. Barely to be ashamed, that is the lowest.

2. To have the face covered with shame; Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord
God of hosts, be ashamed for my sake. Because for thy sake I have born
reproach, shame has covered my face (Psalm. 69.6, 7.) The Prophet complains,
that his face was covered with shame; his enemies endeavored to blot and
asperse him, they poured contempt and reproaches upon his face, that is, upon
his reputation in the world (to do so, is to cover the face with shame)
therefore he prays, Let not those that wait on thee be confounded for my sake.
Lord, they have covered me with shame, but do thou vindicate my reputation and
mine honor; let not them that wait on thee be ashamed for my sake, because I
have had shame upon me for thy sake: that is, let not any be discouraged in thy
service, through my sufferings. The Apostle feared some would faint, because of
his tribulations, Ephesians. 3.13.

Indui confusione est Hebraismus quo exprimitur omnimoda and u^dique con und^ns
verecu^dia. Bold. Vestimenta dicuntur abominari, quasi maculam contrabere
timentes.
3. To be clothed with shame, which implies the whole man under a covering of
disgrace. Some are so clothed with sin, that their very clothes are ashamed of
them, being unwilling to touch or hide such sins. Job speaks that sense in
the ninth Chapter ( verse. 31.) concerning his own righteousness in
justification, If I wash my self with snow-water, and make my hands never so
clean, yet thou will plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall a^horre
me; that is, if I should set my self up in my own righteousness; my own
clothes would be does to cover such a piece of spiritual pride, as that act
would witness me to be.

To be clothed with shame notes four things.

First, The extent or abundance of it. To be clothed with honor, is to have
much honor. To be clothed with humility, is to be very humble (1 Pet. 5.5.)
He that is clothed is covered all over with his clothing.

Secondly, The publikenesse of it, that shame cannot be hid. A man cannot go
abroad but his cloathingis seen: Manifest confundentur. Aqu.
the filthiness which lies underneath may be hid, but his clothing cannot.
Their shame shall cloth them, they shall not put their shame under their
clothes, their shame shall be in sight.

Thirdly, They shall be clothed with shame, may be understood thus, Est quasi
praemium peccati, mercedis onim nomine Syndones olim dabantur.
Shame shall be their reward. They have been doing the business of Satan, he set
them a work, now see what livery they shall have at last, into what suit the
devil will put them. They shall go in a livery of dishonor. Servants are
clothed by their Masters; Satan clothes his servants, and this is their
clothing, they shall be clothed with shame. Samson was to give thirty change
of garments to the Philistines for a reward, if they could declare his riddle (
Judge. 14.12. Natura pudore tact^ sa^guine^ ante se pro velamento diffund^t and
obte^dit. Macr. l. 7. c 11.
) Satan gives liveries and garments of shame to those who study out his
riddles, and do his drudgery.

Fourthly, If we take the letter of the Hebraisme, to be clothed with shame
implies thus much, that when a man has done a thing of which he is ashamed; he
(as it were) sends forth blood into the face, in a blush, to cover that foul
act, he puts out a red garment, or a scarlet vail to hide his filthiness. Thus
he is clothed with shame. Modesty commands nature, and (where it is but
honestly natured) prevails with it to cast this covering over all uncomelines
in speech or practice; and though this blush appears only in the face, yet the
whole body is dipped and died with the same color.

Hence also they who are ashamed, Solent qui erubescunt manum faciei, quia
opprobrium ac dedecus timent admovere. Bold.
either hold their hands before their faces to cover them, or hold their heads
down that they may not be discovered. Observe,

That which evil men glory in, will be matter of their abasement.

The Apostle says, They glory in their shame (Phil. 3.19.) not formally, but
materially. No man can glory in any thing under the notion of shame, but many
glory in that which is in it self shameful, (...) Idolum cujus pudet cultorem,
post quam ab eo in periculis destitutus, nec a^ jutus fuerit.
and will be their shame. The Hebrew expresses an Idol, by a word that
signifies shame, or a shameful thing (and it is the root of that in the text)
because Idols, first or last, make their worshippers ashamed, Jer. 11.13.
According to the number of thy Cities were thy gods, O Judah, ye have set up
altars to that shameful thing. Idolaters shall see at last how foolish they
have been in worshipping a stock or a stone, in adoring the inventions of their
own brains, which can do them no good in an evil day: every Idol is a shameful
thing, because it deceives it is worshippers: so every sinful act will be like
an Idol, matter of shame, because every sin is a deceit, Isa. 26. They shall be
ashamed for their envy at my people: They shall see their envy against the
people of God was unreasonable, groundless and fruitless, therefore they
shall be ashamed; and if they shall be ashamed of their envy against the people
of God, how shall they be ashamed of their opposition and injuries, of their
oppression and injustice, Isa. 41.11. Behold all they that were incensed
against thee shall be ashamed. The Churches enemies glory in their own shame,
and the Church shall glory in the shame of her enemies; therefore she is called
to behold it, as a piece of her glory.

Observe further, They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame, then,
wicked men are haters of the righteous. They are haters of God, therefore they
must be haters of those who have the Image of God upon them. As he that loves,
so he that hates him that begets, hates him also that is begotten. Natural men
are such haters of holiness, that they hate that which is but the image, the
Idol of holiness, hypocrisy, they cannot endure a man, who does but seem
religious. It is said of the Panther, that he bears such hatred against man,
that if he see but the picture of a man, he will tear it to pieces. Many men
have such an hatred against true, real goodness, that they cannot abide the
shadow or appearance of it.

Olim in tentorijs habitabant, unde factum ut tentorium pro qualibet domo
accipiatur. Per domum innuit familiam totam cum omnibus rebus domesticis. Drus.
(...) ad verbum, non ipsum, subintelligitur est, vel erit.
And the dwelling place of the wicked shall come to naught. We have met many
passages to this purpose. Dwelling place in the Hebrew is a tabernacle, because
they were wont to dwell in tabernacles. And when he says, His tabernacle shall
be brought to naught, The meaning is, His whole estate shall be brought to
naught, not only the walls of his house shall be overthrown, but all his goods,
his riches, his honors, his titles, his children, his relations, whatsoever is
dear to him shall be brought to naught; the Hebrew is, It shall not be; it
shall be, as if such a thing had never been in the world. God will at last make
an utter consumption of wicked men. None who have tabernacles in the world,
shall long have a tabernacle in the world. But the fall of these men's
tabernacles shall not be according to the condition of mortality only. As Moses
speaks of Corah, Dathan, etc. These men shall not die the common death of all
men, a remarkable judgment shall overtake them. Some take tabernacle, to note
their religious duties, their worship and service of God, and so their
spiritual estate. Wicked men will serve God outwardly, they have their
tabernacles as well as the Saints, they pray and hear, etc. But, be it a
civil, or be it a religious tabernacle, down it must, all their riches and all
their religion shall come to naught.

JOB Chap. 9. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. Then Job answered and said;

I know it is so of a truth: but how should man be just with God?

If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.

He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who has hardened himself against
him, and has prospered?


IN the former Chapter Bildad gave a threefold advice to Job.

First, To think aright of the justice and judgments of God.

Secondly, To humble himself and seek unto God.

Thirdly, (Which is implied in both the former) To forbear complaining of his
own troubled life, or desiring the end of it by death.

To these three heads of Bildads advice or reproof, Job shapes his answer in
this 9th, and in the 10th Chapter.

First, He opens his thoughts about, and highly magnifies the justice of God,
to the 21. verse.

Secondly, He renounces his own righteousness, and proves that no man is to be
judged by the present dealings of God with him, from the 21. verse to the end
of the Chapter.

Thirdly, He renews and justifies his complaint against his life, and his
wishes for death, by many arguments, in the tenth Chapter.

In most of these points he answers exactly, according to the strict laws and
rules of disputation.

First, Repeating his Opponents argument, and then yielding what was true,
denying what was false, and distinguishing about what was doubtful. Which he
does with so much acuteness and vigor, with so much strength and clearness
both of reason and judgment, that one of the Ancients cries out upon the whole
matter of his answer in these Chapters, O how much Philosophy (I may say,
Quantum verba haec praese feru^t philosophiam. Chrysostom.
how much logic) has Job showed in this reply to the argument of Bildad!

Bildads argument speaks to this effect; God who has punished thee is just,
therefore thou art unjust. Job in answer, grants the antecedent, but denies the
consequent. His grant of the antecedent appears in the two first verses of the
Chapter, I know it is so of a truth (I yield this) but how should man be just
with God? He proves and confirms that God is just, in the fourth verse, by a
double medium.

First, From his wisdom, He is wise in heart. And

Secondly, From his power, He is mighty in strength. What force there is in
these two Attributes to hold up the justice of God, we shall see afterward.

The fourth verse is likewise a concession unto the second part of Bildads
advice, namely, that Job should humble himself. As if Job had said, You advise
me to humble my self, and to seek unto God, it is most becoming I should do
so, for, he is wise in heart and mighty in strength; Who has hardened himself
against him, and has prospered? There is no standing out against God, and
therefore I yield, I fall down and abase my self before him.

That, God is thus powerful and wise, he goes on to prove in the following
parts of the Chapter to the 22. verse, by the enumeration of many particular
acts and effects, both of his power and wisdom.

The other part of his argument, namely, the consequent, that therefore Job was
unjust and wicked, he denies, and more, refutes it strongly. His negation and
refutation begin at the 22th verse. This is one thing, therefore I said it, He
destroys the righteous and the wicked. As if he had said, This is no
argument, that I am a wickedman, because God has destroyed my estate, and my
children; for God (in this sense) destroys both the righteous and the wicked.
It cannot be proved that I am wicked, because God has afflicted me; or, that
God has afflicted me for my wickedness: I know another way how to acquit the
justice of God, and to declare him righteous, though I do not join with you in
condemning and judging myself (in your notion) unrighteous.

This is the sum of his answer contained in the ninth Chapter.

In the tenth he renews his complaint, as before in the sixth, and shows
(after he had given God glory under all his sufferings) what great reason he
had to be sensible under the pain and smart of his sufferings.

Verse 1, 2. Then Job answered and said, I know it is so of a truth.
Thus he grants the antecedent, I know it to be so of a truth, (...)
Asseverario quaedam est rei sibi been exploratae. Radix Aman, fidelem,
stabilem, veracem esse, unde Amon.
or truly I know it to be so. The word has a double force in it. Sometime of a
bare, yet a strong asseveration, and sometimes of an Oath. I know it to be so
of a truth. I affirm or aver the thing, or truly and indeed, or verily I know
the thing to be so. As if Job had said, This is so much a truth, that I dare
swear it is a truth, that God is just, I durst take my oath of it, if I were
called to it; I would swear for the justice of God, above all things in the
world. As we ought to swear in truth (Psalm. 89.49.) so to affirm a thing to be
so in truth, is swearing.

Further, the word is taken either in way of affirmation, Amen duplice^ habet
sensum, 1. Vt fit affirmatio eorum quae dicturi sumu^. 2. Vt sit confirmatio
eorum quae jam dicta sunt. Hebraice innotare solet confirmationem. Syriace in
N. T. affirmationem. Bol.
or in way of confirmation. In way of affirmation, it refers to that which is
to be spoken, so frequently in the new Testament, Amen, Amen, verily, verily,
is a vehement affirmation of what was afterward to be spoken, Verily, verily,
I say unto you. But here rather it is a note of confirmation of the truth
already spoken; The Syriack of the new Testament uses it commonly for an
affirmation; the Hebrew in the old, for a confirmation.

So then, it is here a sealing to the former truth delivered, both by Bildad
and Eliphaz, about the justice of God; Eliphaz in the 4th Chapter, verse. 17.
and Bildad in the 8th, ver. 3. Does the Almighty pervert judgment? No (says
Job) I know it of a truth, that he does not. And so the sense runs thus.

Bildad, do thou surmise, by what I have spoken, that I have ill or hard
thoughts of the justice of God? Did I ever think that justice was perverted,
because I was afflicted? I acknowledge thou have truly said, that God does not
pervert judgment; and I acknowledge thou have faithfully counseled me to seek
unto God, and make my supplication to the Almighty; for alas! who am I that I
should contend with God? What am I that I should dispute it out with him
concerning my troubles, and his dealings with me? Or, if I should be so rash,
so foolhardy, and adventurous, to attempt such a thing; alas! I could make
nothing of it, I could not answer him one argument of a thousand, whereby he
might maintain his own justice, or to one charge and article of a thousand,
whereby he might impeach mine. I am no match for God. Therefore I yield thee
the whole matter, so far as concerns the honoring of God in that great
Attribute of his justice, and the duty of weak man in humbling himself before
the great God. I know it to be so of a truth. Note hence,

First, That in all disputes and controversies it is a note both of an
ingenuous and of an holy heart, to yield as much as without wrong to truth may
be yielded unto.

It is good to agree as far as we can, if we cannot agree in all. We should
walk with an adversary one mile (when it lies in our way) though we cannot walk
twain. Jobus veritatis fidissimus assertor, qui omnia ratione, non afflictionis
sensu metiretur; tam ingenue satetur and commendat vera quae ab impugnatoribus
promuntur, qua^ genero^e falsa depellit, quod hoc praesertim capite liquido
demonstrat, dum verum duorum disputatorum assertum, non admittit modo, verum
elegantissime and disertissime inte gro^ere capite amplificat and exo^nat.
Pined.
As Soon as Job hears a truth, he falls down before it. He has not a word to
speak against the truth of God, though it come from erroneous men. He will be a
friend to truth, though brought by them who seemed his enemies. If this law of
disputation were well observed, many disputes would be sooner ended. As some
out of love to men, are apt to entertain their very errors; so some out of
hatred to men reject their truths. Errors cannot be really adorned, nor truths
soiled by those who hold them. Our judgment about both must be carried by
reason, not swaied by affection. Willingly to embrace and receive a truth from
those, whose errors we most zealously oppose, is the due temper of a champion
for the truth.

Secondly, I know it to be so of a truth, says Job, Observe,

A godly man is a knowing man.

He is established in truths, especially in great and necessary truths, in the
vitals and fundamentals of religion. Job had been long acquainted with this
principle, that God is just, and that every man must abase himself before him,
how just soever any man is. Light is the first thing which God makes in the new
Creation of Grace, as it was in the old creation of nature: He casts in a beam,
a ray into the soul, whereby we may discern of things that differ. There may be
darkness in a godly man, but he dwells not in darkness: bring a truth to him,
and as there is somewhat in his heart that answers and is a kin to it, so that
apprehends and makes out his acquaintance with it, often at first light,
always after consideration, unless he be under clouds and temptations. In
those cases we may bring truths to holy men, which they do not know to be so
of a truth, yea, which they may refuse for errors. But usually a good man
knows truth, having learnt it before, or as having a likeness to other truths
he knew before.

Thirdly, I know this to be so of a truth (says Job) in the midst of his
pains, in the greatest troubles of his flesh, he forgets not to honor God.

Hence observe,

A gracious heart gives testimony to the righteousness of God, though severely
chastened under the hand of God.

When God deals most hardly with the soul or with the body, or with soul and
body, a holy heart has not a hard thought of God, I know it to be so of a
truth; He does not only acknowledge that God was just, when he punished others,
but when he afflicted him. The common argument which the friends of Job took up
to prove God to be just, was this: God is righteous, for he deals with men
according to their deserts: but Job argues thus, God is righteous, however he
deals with men, and whatsoever those men are, let men be wicked or upright,
holy or profane. When we see God breaking the wicked, and making gall and
wormwood, fire and brimstone the portion of their cup, this argues his
justice, because he has threatened such with wrath and vengeance. But the
Saints go further, they proceed upon purer and sublimer principles, maintaining
that God is just, though he afflict the justest and holiest man upon the earth.
The righteousness of God shines forth to them through the darkest sufferings of
righteous men. The righteousness of God is not grounded upon the object about
which he deals, whether righteous or unrighteous, but upon the act of his own
will, yea upon the pleasure of his own will. His righteousness proceeds from
himself, and his is a righteous act, whatever the object be upon which he acts.
We need not say, God is just, because he punishes the guilty; for God is just,
though he afflict the innocent. We may at once maintain our own innocence, and
the justice of God, while we bleed under his hand, or smart under his severest
scourges. I know it to be so of a truth.

But how shall man be just with God. Mr Broughton reads, And how can man be
just before the Omnipotent? and so the sense runs more clear, Illud cum Deo vel
ante Deuma erit aliquid sorense and judiciale.
taking the first particle for a pure copulative, whereas we read it as a
discretive, but how shall man be just before God? Namely, in your sense; as if
he had said, you discourse of justice under such a notion as renders it
impossible for any man to be just before God; in one sense a man may be
righteous before God, but in yours no man can. Would you not have a man know
himself to be just, unless he know himself to be without sin? If you take
just, to be the same as without in-dwelling sin, then it is impossible for
any man to appear just before God: but man may be just and righteous before
God, though he have sin dwelling in him, and that is my notion of justice in
this dispute.

Justice is either inherent or imputed. By inherent justice no man is just
before God: according to imputed justice, man may be just, and is before God.
So these two propositions are reconciled, No man is just before God: every
believer is just before God. Our translation using the discretive, But, seems
to carry this intendment, that no man can be just before God by inherent
justice, which the next verse implies, For if he contend with him, he cannot
answer him one of a thousand.

The words taken in this sense are the same with the seventeenth verse of the
fourth Chapter, Shall mortal man be more just then God? There Eliphaz speaks
comparatively, in a way of excess, more just, or, just rather then God: He
cannot exceed God in any thing. Here Job speaks comparatively in a way of
equality, How should man be just with God? Quisquis se authori bonorum
co^parat, bono se quod ac^eperat, private, ea ipsa ratione, qua quis se componit
Deo justus esse de sinit, quamvis justus suerit. Greg.
He cannot compare with God at all. Yet the sense is the same, and the denial
of man's perfect inherent righteousness is the subject of both. A just man
comparing with God, deprives himself of all his justice. He is not so much as
man may be, by aspiring to be what God is. But I need not stay in any further
clearing, how man is not just before God, or in any observations from it, but
shall refer the Reader back to the fourth Chapter.

Only take this from it, How shall man be just with God? With God; that is,
looking upon, or comparing himself unto God; as if he had said, It will take
down all the proud and high thoughts of man, in regard of his own justice and
righteousness, if he will but cast his eye upon God, and duly consider how
just and righteous God is. Hence observe,

The way for us to humble our selves for our own sinfulness, is to look up and
to consider the purity and holiness of God.

If we set our selves before him, we shall see how vile and corrupt we are. His
fullness will convince us abundantly of our emptiness, his purity will show us
our spots, and his all sufficiency our nothingnesse. If we bring a course piece
of cloth before a fine, we shall see what course stuff it is: if we lay a
better in any kind by a worse, the worse will appear worser then before. For
the most part we who are course stuff our selves, compare our selves with those
who are as course as our selves. While some men compare themselves with men,
they begin to think they are like God himself. A man looking upon his
neighbor is just before him, or sees him no better then himself, of no purer
thread, of no better die in his life then he; I have faults, and so have
others; I have failings, and so have my neighbors; if you charge me with my
sinnings, who is it that is without sin? As our usual phrase is, If the best
man's faults were written in his forehead it would make him pull his ha^ over
his eyes. Thus usually men compare themselves with men: but if they would look
up to God, O how would the thoughts of their hearts fall, and be abased before
him. The Pharisee could pride himself in his comparisons with men ( Luke 18.)
God be thanked I am not as other men are, nor as this Publican. But Pharisee,
art thou as God? pure, and holy, and just as he? Look upward, and pride will
down. The holy Apostle (2 Cor. 10.12.) speaking of those false Apostles, says,
They measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves amongst
themselves, are not wise. So we may say to men in general, while ye take a
scantling of your own ways, by your own rules, and measure your selves by your
selves, or while ye measure man by man, and compare creature with creature, ye
are not wise; while we go this way to work pride will not down. Man has some
reason to say, I am as good as man, I have sinned, and so has he, such a man
has as many sins as I. But if we look up to God, we shall quickly find that
he has no sin at all in him, and that we have no goodness at all in us. The
best of Saints must not only confess, with Paul, I know that in me (that is,
in my flesh) dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18.) but he must confess also, I
know that in me, even in my spirit dwells no good thing, in comparison of the
goodness of God. Though man in regeneration is made a partaker of the divine
nature (2 Pet. 1.4.) yet his nature cannot bear the perfections of the divine
nature. How shall man be just with God?

Verse 3. If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.
This is a confirmation of the former grant. I (faith he) acknowledge no man
can be just, by inherent righteousness before God, For, If he would comend
with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.

If he would contend. (...) Voluit, optavit.
The word, If he would, is, If he have a mind, or delight to contend, if any
man takes pleasure in contending with God, he shall quickly (as we speak) have
his hands full, and his belly full of it.

From this word the Church is called Hephzibah, that is, my pleasure is in her
( Isa. 64.2.) And ( Psalm. 16.3.) David professes of the Saints (Hephsiham) my
pleasure, or, my delight is in them. So here, (...)
if any one has a pleasure, or a delight, or would take upon him to contend
with God, or (as the word signifies) to chide, In foro and extra litigavit,
disceptavit, causam egit, seu dixit, etiam jurgavit, de verbali tantum
contentione seu action dicitur. Merc. Contentio haec, est rationibus,
objectionibus, responsionibus, argumentationibus cum Deo agere. Pined.
to argue, and plead with God. The word may be taken either for an angry
chiding, or a rational chiding, which is disputing. The place where the
Israelites did contend or chide with Moses, is called Meribah, from this word,
Exodus 17.7. And after Gideon had pulled down Baals altar, a great controversy
or contention, a pleading or arguing ensued, therefore he was called Jerubbaal,
a contender or pleader with Baal, Judge. 6.21.

Now (says Job) if a man take delight to contend, plead or argue with the
Lord, What will be the issue of it? He is like to have a cold pull of it, He
cannot answer him one of a thousand, poor creature! Before I open that, take
this observation.

Man naturally loves to be contending.

Some cannot live but in this fire, and in troubled waters (1 Cor. 11.16.) If
any man seems to be contentious, or as the Greek carries it, (...) est cui
victoria potiorest veritate. Est. in 1 Cor. 11. (...), non aliud est quam
(...). Si quis fibi in eo placeat, quod contentiosus sit. Dan. Heins. exerc.
a lover of victory. Contentious spirits love victory more then truth, and to
overcome more then to teach or be taught. Besides the verb, which we (in this
text of the Apostle) translate seems, does rather signify, is pleased to be,
desires, or has a will to be contentions, yea, boasts and prides himself in
it. So the word ((...)) is used, Mat. 3.9. and Gal. 6.3. If a man think
himself to be something, etc. That is, if he boast and take upon him as if he
were some great man. Thus some glory to be meddling and contending in all
Questions. Yea, though it be upon as unequal terms, as Jehoash the King of
Israel, by his parable, supposed Amaziah King of Judah would war with him (2
King. 14.9.) The thistle that was in Lebanon, sent to the Cedar that was in
Lebanon, etc. Thistles will sometimes challenge Cedars; whom we may counsel,
as he does, tarry at home, why should thou meddle to thy hurt? It argues
folly enough in any man to love contention with man, and pride enough to love
contention with men above him. Then how mad are they both with folly and pride,
who attempt to contend with God? Whom, as it follows, They cannot answer, One
of a thousand.

A thousand is a great number, a full number, (...) Paedagogus, dux quod alijs
praeire solet, sicut Al^ph prima litera reliquas omnes praecedit, hinc Eleph,
mill numeroru^ princeps.
and therefore it is put for all great numbers. It is a leading number,
therefore the word in the Hebrew for a thousand, comes from a root which
signifies to lead, and the Noun, Duke or a Captain, who is a chief and a leader
of men, Genesis 36. The Dukes of Edom, or the leaders of Edom, As also a master or
teacher, because he goes before, and is a chief over those he instructs. And
hence the number thousand in the Hebrew has it is name, because a thousand, is
(as it were) a prince among numbers, a chief number, a captain number; and is
therefore put for all great numbers, or for the greatest numbers that can be
imagined: to say, one of a thousand, is, as much as to say, One amongst all.
One is not a number, it is but the seed, principle or beginning of number,
Aunity has a seminall virtue in it; all numbers are made out of ones, but one
it self is no number. So that to say, One of a thousand, is to put the greatest
and the least number in opposition, it is as much as to say, a man cannot
answer God in any thing that ever he did in the whole course of his life (2
Pet. 3.8.) One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, Vnitas huic numero
opposita, pro nihilo habetur.
and a thousand years as one day. When he says, a thousand years, he means all
years, all time put together, is but as one day to the Lord. A day was the
first distinction of time; the first perfect time that was created, was a day:
now put a thousand years together, it is but as one day to the Lord; All times
and one time are all one to him who inhabits eternity. In Psalm. 90.6. it is, a
thousand years are but as yesterday, which notes all time past, as Peter notes,
all time to come, is, but as one day.

One of a thousand, referred to a person, notes a choice, excellent man, among
all men ( Job 33.23.) If there be an interpreter, one among a thousand, one
choice man amongst many, or amongst all. He that rightly expounds the text of a
troubled conscience, and interprets the mind of God to such a soul, is a
chief, the flower of a thousand, a man of men. Christ ( Cant. 5.10.) is called,
the chiefest of ten thousand; the Hebrew is, a Standard Bearer, such are choice
men, elect of the multitude, Christ is the elect of all the multitudes in the
whole world; bring all Armies of men together, or an Army of mankind, chose
amongst them all, and you cannot find such another as Christ is, he is the
choice of ten thousand, that is, the choice of all the thousands that are in
the world.

He cannot answer him one of a thousand. He cannot answer.] Some refer it
only to the person. He, that is, one man of a thousand men, is not able to
answer God.

Secondly, We may refer it to the matter, to the objections or charges, that
shall be brought against him, he cannot answer to one thing of a thousand. So M
Broughton; as if he had said, If God brings many charges, or lays many
articles against him, he is not able to satisfy God, or give a good account in
one.

Vilem hominum conditionem judex contemnet. Polychron. Tantum non est homo, ut
Deus eum sua responsione dignetur. Vatabl. Illud non poterit, idem erit quod
nolet, vel per transpositionem verborum, poterit non respondere.
Thirdly, Some refer it to God himself, If he, (that is, man) should contend
with him, he would not answer him one of a thousand, that is, God would not
answer him one of a thousand: as if he had said, the matters will be so
trivial and so slight, the charges that a man can bring against God, or the
objections he can make will be so easy, that the Lord will not vouchsafe to
answer one word of a thousand. Some men will plead privilege to some charges,
and all their answer shall be, they may choose, or it is at their liberty
whether they will answer or no. Here he would not (referred to God) is as much
as he needs not, he is no way obliged to answer, he may claim privilege.
Further, when arguments are poor and empty, a man will say in dispute, These
things are not worth answering; or of a book, there is not one page that is
worth a confutation, it carries its own confutation. Such a sense may be made
out here, God will not dishonor himself by contending with so weak an
adversary as man, or by answering such simple arguments.

Rogatus homo in judicio divino, haesitabit, aestuabit obmutescet.
But rather (as before) refer it to man, He cannot answer him one of a
thousand; that is, if God come to question man, to lay such and such matters to
his charge, or object against him, poor creature, he must shut his mouth, put
up his books, he has nothing to say, he must hide his face, for he cannot
answer him one of a thousand. So in the 14th verse of this Chapter. How much
less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to plead with him? Hence
observe,

First, That there is in man a spirit ready to contend against God himself.

If he contend with him, or, if he plead with him, which supposes that there is
such a principle of pride in the heart of man. The heart of man is very full of
quarrels and contentions with man, but fuller of quarrels with God himself. The
great controversy between God and man, is, whose will shall stand, Gods will
or man's. God directs man one way, and man contendeth he will go another way.
There is a natural unanswerablenes between the heart of man, and every thing
that God does or speaks; hence it is that man calls God so often to answer.
There is a contention, first, about that work of God, the foundation-stone of
all the works of God, his decrees and counsels. While the Apostle ( Romans 9.20.)
stops such mouths, he shows how ready they are to open, O man, Who art thou
that reply against God? Thou will say, wherefore does he complain? Thus man
begins to contend. But, O man, who art thou, that thou should dare to reply
upon God? Will thou be venturing to question the righteous God? Must he be
accountable to thee for what he did before thou had a being?

Secondly, What contentions are there continually about the rules which God
gives man to order his life by? Man thinks this is an unreasonable rule, that is
a hard rule, and a third is an unprofitable rule; how many rise up against the
Law, to which they should submit, and would shift off obedience to the rule, by
complaints against it? The carnal mind (or, the minding of the flesh) is
enmity against God, it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be
(Romans 8.7.) Words importing highest opposition, and that, irreconciliable. It
is not, it cannot be subject; the mind is never subject to the Law, till it be
changed into the Law. Christ says, that one iota or title of the Law shall not
pass, till all be fulfilled; it is as true, that not one iota or title of the
Law can be fulfilled by us, till our carnal minds pass away. Paul found just
as much stubbornness and contrariety against the will of God remaining in him,
as there was of a carnal mind remaining in him ( Romans 7.) As man desires not
the knowledge of the will of God ( Job 21.14.) and secretly wishes that he were
ignorant of what he knows, so he wishes there were no such thing to be known;
and that the revealed will of God were less by so much, as it specially
opposes his will.

Thirdly, The contest about providence grows as high in the hearts of men, as
that about predestination to life, or the rule of life. The Saints sometimes
(modestly) enter this controversy, Let me plead with thee, says Jeremy, Chap.
12.1. He does it, we see, with a great deal of trembling and submission; he
seems to ask leave before he does it. Hypocrites contend with God proudly about
their own good works, ( Isa. 58.3.) Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see
not? As if they had done so well, that God himself could not mend it. Carnal
men plead with God profanely about his works; as if he had done so ill, that
they could mend it. Ye say, the way of the Lord is not equal: hear now, O
house of Israel, is not my way equal? Are not your ways unequal, Ezekiel.
18.25. They charged God with ill dealing, because he punished them, who did
evil. Wherefore will ye plead with me? ye all have transgressed against me,
says the Lord (Jer. 2.29.) they began to plead with God about his
dispensations, as if he had been unrighteous or rigorous; Wherefore will ye
plead with me? I will plead with you, says God, verse. 9. God may plead and
contend with man, but shall man plead and contend with God? Ye have all sinned
and transgressed against me; that is enough to stop your mouths; I can answer
you with one word, Ye are a company of sinners, then plead not with me. Plead
with your mother, plead, Hos. 2.2. let man plead with man, man with his
neighbor. The wit of one man may compare with the wit of another, and their
justice may hold plea with one another. But neither the justice, nor the wit of
man will serve him to plead with God. That is a second observation,

Man is not able to maintain his cause, and hold plea, either against the works
of God, or for his own.

If he dispute with God in the schools, or fee an advocate to implead him at
the bar, he is not able to answer him one of a thousand, (Isa. 45.9.) Woe be
to him that striveth with his maker; it is this word, We be to him that
contendeth with his maker, for he shall not be able to make out one argument,
or prove any thing against him; such a man is in a very sad condition, woe unto
him. David prays, Ps. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant for in
thy sight shall no flesh living be just ^^ed; As if he had said, Lord, if the
holiest and purest, if the best of men should come and stand before thee in
judgment, or plead with thee, they could not be justified: therefore David was
so far from contending with God, that he deprecates Gods contending with him,
enter not into judgment with thy servant: such a charge is laid upon Job
(Chap. 33.13.) Why do thou strive with him? for he gives not an account of
any of his matters. And if he should condescend to give an account, can any man
gain by it? The Lord argues so convincingly, That every mouth must be stopped,
and all the world become guilty before God, Romans 3.19. Every mouth shall be
stopped, when God opens his. When God speaks, man has nothing to say against
him, Every mouth is stopped, with this one word, Man is a sinner. The Apostle
points at some (Tit. 1.11.) Whose mouths must be stopped, he means, with reason
to convince them that they are in an error. By this one argument, That all men
are sinners, God stops their mouths forever.

Thirdly, By way of corallary, we may give you that general ttuth,

That no man can be justified by his works.

If we contend with him, we cannot answer him one of a thousand. He that mixeth
but one sin with a thousand good actions, cannot be justified by his works; how
then shall he be justified by works, who has not one perfectly good action
amongst a thousand sins? Man is not able to answer for one thing he does of a
thousand, no not for one thing he does of all that he has done. He that would
be justified by his works must not have one ill action amongst all his actions.
One fly in the box of ointment corrupts all; one defect makes a sinner, but
many good actions cannot make one righteous, If our heart condemn us, God is
greater then our heart (1 John 3.20.) Should man contend with his own heart,
that will condemn him, his own heart would bring a thousand witnesses against
him sooner then one for him. Conscience is a thousand witnesses; man cannot
answer before that tribunal; how much less can he answer God, Who is greater
then our hearts, and knows all things! That Is the argument Job goes on with,
to prove that man cannot be justified before God.

Verse 4. He is wise in heart and mighty in strength, who has hardened himself
against him, and has prospered?
Which words are a further illustration both of the justice of God, and of man's
duty to be humbled and abased before him.

He is wise in heart and mighty in strength. Here is a double proof in these
words.

A proof, first of Gods justice; why? He is wise in heart, Integerrimus judex
cui nec sapientia ad judicandum, nec potentia ad ex equendum deest
therefore he knows how to do right: He is mighty in strength or power,
therefore he needs not pervert judgment, or do wrong for fear of man. Fear of
a higher power usually biasseth those who are in power. Here are two Attributes
which keep the balances of divine judgment in a due poise, He is wise in heart
and mighty in power, therefore there is no turning of him out of the path of
justice.

Secondly, It is a proof or a confirmation of the other point about which
Bildad advises Job, namely, that he ought to seek unto God, and humble himself
before him, it would be dangerous to contend or contest with God. Why? He is
wise in heart and mighty in power. As if he had said, Shall ignorant, foolish
man contend with the wise God? Shall weak man contend with the mighty God?
Alas! man is no match for God, He is wise in heart and mighty in strength, who
can enter such a controversy and prosper in it?

There are two ways to carry on a controversy.

First, By wit and policy.

Secondly, By strength and power. If man will take up the former weapon against
God, if he work by wit and dispute against God, God will be too hard for him,
For he is wise in heart. If man will set his shoulders, or take up weapons
against God, poor creature, what can he do? The Lord is mighty in strength;
from both we see there is no dealing with him.

These two attributes render God at once the most dreadful adversary, Dolus an
virtus quis in host requiret?
and the most desirable friend. It is a hard choice whether to have wit or
power in an enemy? And who would not have both wit and power in his friend? God
is here represented under these two notions, both meet in him, either of which
in an enemy render him dreadful. Will any man enter the lists, or meddle with
an adversary (who would not rather humble himself, and make him his friend?)
Who is wise in heart and mighty in power.

He is wise in heart. Humanitus dictum, cor in Hebraeo sumitur pro judicio and
intellectuali potentia, ita homo vel Deus sapiens cord dicitur, qui praestat
sapientia. ^in.
It is spoken after the manner of men; the heart natural is a principal organ
or part of the body, it is the seat of life, thither the spirits have their
recourse, there they have one special seat of residence; the heart is chief in
man. To say, God is wise in heart, is to say, He is most wise, because the
heart is the seat of wisdom. As when we say of a man, he is holy in heart, or
he is humble in heart, or upright in heart, or he obeys God from his heart, we
report such a man for exceeding humble, holy, upright and obedient. So when God
is said to be wise in heart, it imports that he has infinite wisdom; his, is
not only wisdom in the tongue, or some flashes of wit, but deep, solid, rooted
wisdom: He is wise, yea, he is wisdom at heart. A foolish man is without an
heart. As an hypocrite has two hearts, a double heart, an heart and an heart;
so a foolish man has never an heart. Hypocrites will be found at last to have
no hearts, they are the greatest fools of all. Ephraim (Hos. 7.11.) is called,
a silly Dove without heart. Silliness is heartlesnesse. Therefore in the 12th
Chapter of this book, ver. 3. the heart is put alone for understanding, I have
an heart as well as you (says Job) we translate it, I have understanding as
well as you. Heart alone notes wisdom, but a wise heart notes abundance of
wisdom. Hence observe,

God is infinitely wise.

He is wise in heart, wisdom it self. The Lord ingrosses all wisdom, and is
therefore styled by the Apostle, God only wise (1 Timothy 1.17.) he is only wise,
because all wisdom is his; the creature has none but what he gives out; he
has it all locked up in his own treasury, and as he dispenses it, so man
receives it.

There is a twofold act of wisdom, and both most eminent in God. The first
is, knowledge in the nature of things. The second is, knowledge how to order
and dispose of things. The former is properly called Science; and the later,
prudence. Where there is much of the former, and a want of the later, man in
that case is like a ship that has a very large sail, but wants a rudder to
order it is course, and ballast to poise it. Both these meet in the Lord: he
has (as we may say) a vast sail, infinitely extending to the knowledge of all
things: and he has a most exact rudder, and ballast of prudence, to order and
to manage all things. The knowledge of some men is too hard for their wisdom,
they are not master of their knowledge, though they may be masters in their
art. The Lord knows all, and he rules all his knowledge.

And mighty in strength. It is much for man, to be styled strong or mighty;
(...) Differ^ a (...) quod strenuit atem ad gesta praecla^a significat, idem
quod Graece (...) quae se for as exerit in opere. Merc.
but mighty in strength is the style of God. These in construction note the
Almightinesse, the All-powerfulnesse, the All Sufficiency of the Lord; he is
not only strong or mighty, but mighty in strength.

The word which we translate strength (referred to man) imports that natural
power and lively vigor which in man is the principle of strength, which nurses
and feeds man with continual supplies of activity. The Lord is mighty in this
strength, he has an infinite, an everlasting spring of strength in him, he
spends no strength at all, how much soever he uses. His lamp consumes not with
burning. His strength is ever vigorous, he knows no decaies or faintings, Have
thou not known, have thou not heard that the everlasting God, the Lord, the
Creator of the ends of the earth faints not, neither is weary? (Isa. 40.28.)
As if he had said, where have thou been bred, that thou seem to be a
stranger to this truth? Man cannot do much, and he faints in doing a little.
God who can do all things, never faints, how much soever he does.

Strength maybe considered two ways. There is civil strength, and there is
natural strength. Civil strength is authority and power to command. (...).
A man is armed and strengthened by laws and commissions. These put authority
into his hands. The Lord is mighty in this strength, he has all authority, all
command in his hands, not by commission from others, but originally from
himself. Natural strength executes and exercises the former; a man may have
much civil strength, but if he want natural strength, to put it in act, he
can do little or nothing. As God by his Sovereignty is above all creatures; so
by his power he is able to bring all creatures under him, and subdue them to
his command. Thus God is mighty in strength. He has a right of authority, by
which he may, and an arm of power, by which he can make all stoop to him. Hence
observe,

The power of God is an infinite power.

There is nothing too hard for the Lord, If he will work, who shall let it?
Isa. 43.13. No creature can supersedeat or stay the works of God, God can
supersedeat all creatures; when creatures are in their full carreer, he can let
them: The power of God is as large as his will; yea he can do more then he
wills. If the power of men were as large as their wills, what work would they
quickly make in the world? If infinite strength were not managed by infinite
wisdom, what a woeful condition were we in? Both these are joined in God.
Therefore we can fear no hurt from his power: he can do what he will, but he
will do nothing which is hurtful to his people; he will not wrong any
creature, much less his servants. The Lord (if I may so speak) is only weak
about those things, which proceed from weakness. There are some things which
he has no strength to do, because to do them argues a want of strength: he
cannot deny himself, he cannot lie, he cannot do any evil, he cannot sin.
These things import impotency, therefore the Lord cannot do them. But
whatsoever is for the good of his people, for the glory of his name, for the
executing of his justice, for the fulfilling of his counsels, whatsoever is for
the making good of his promises, for all these the Lord is mighty in strength.
Vis confilij expers mole ruit sua.
Never fear either a defect of power in God, or a defect in mannaging that
power. Sometimes power overthrows it self by it is own bulk and greatness; but
mighty strength ordered with equal wisdom, is dreadful to enemies, and
comfortable to friends. A rude rout, an undigested Chaos of men, though very
great, never did any great thing. But suppose a very numerous army of men, and
every man in that army having as much wisdom as would fit a General to lead
and command them all, what could stand before them? Thus it is with God (and
how admirable is the union and marriage of these two together!) he has all
power and all wisdom. Every degree of power in God is acted with a suitable
degree of wisdom; therefore there can be no miscarriage.

Note further, how this Attribute runs through all the Attributes of God, He is
mighty in strength; he is mighty also in truth, mighty in love, mighty in
mercy, mighty in faithfulness: a mighty strength is in whatsoever God is.

Again, Take this general concerning all the Attributes of God, when it is
said, He is wise in heart and mighty in strength etc. These are not qualities
in God; they are in men. Wisdom is to them an accident, and so is strength,
whether civil strength or natural, it may be severed from them, and they
still keep their being. But the wisdom of God is the wise God, and the power
of God is the powerful God, and the knowledge of God is the knowing God. These
Attributes are not accidents, but his essence, not qualities, but his nature.

From both these Attributes laid together, Job draws down his great conclusion,
which he puts by way of question.

Who has hardened himself against him, and has prospered? Show me the man:
having described the Lord in his wisdom and power, he challenges all the
world, and sends defiance to all creatures in heaven and in earth, to meet with
this God. As if he had said, Friends, Do ye think I have any thought to
contend with God? No, I know not one who has accepted this challenge, or
hardened himself against God and prospered. If my own conscience would not, yet
their harms who have attempted it, might warn me from such presumption.

Hardened himself. (...) Indurare aut obdurescere. Metaphorice a tactu ad alios
sensus transfertur; and denotat crudele saevum, difficile, quod dura sunt
difficilia. Durum est quod in se per superficiem non cedit Arist. l. 4. Met. c.
4. Durities est qualitas densas and been compactas habens parts, difficulter
cedens tactui. Arist. l. 2. de Gener.
Hardening under a natural consideration, comes by withdrawing the moisture out
of any substance, whence the parts of it are condensed, grew stiff and
unyeelding to the touch: So Philosophers define it. That is hard which does not
easily submit to impressions from without.

In a moral sense, to harden is to settle the spirit, or immoveably to resolve
upon the doing or not doing of a thing: when a man does purposely resolve and
resolvedly purpose to carry on a design, he hardens himself to do it. The
word is used both in a good sense and in an ill sense. In a good sense, when a
man is resolute to do the will of God, that is, when he grows so resolved, that
he will not be removed by hopes or fears, by promises or by threats; When a man
has not a soft, sequacious spirit to be swaied this way and that way, but
stands fixed and firm like a rock, such a resolute spirit in goodness, is a
spirit hardened to do good.

When the Lord had told Ezekiel that he should find the ears of Israel locked
against his messages, and their hearts hardened; he gives him assurance of a
suitable ability to deal even with such ( Ezekiel. 3.8, 9.) Behold, I have made thy
face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their
foreheads, as an adamant harder then flint have I made thy forehead. The
words seem to carry an allusion to Bulls or Rams, who use to run head against
head, when they are enraged against one another. And so the sense is, as if the
Lord had said, I know this people will be mad at thee, and run upon thee like
furious beasts; but trouble not thy self, I will (through my grace) make thee
as strong in declaring my will, as they (through pride and unbelief) are strong
in opposing it. Thou need not fear to encounter these Bulls and Rams:
holiness shall make thy forehead, that is, thy purpose to perform my
command, harder, then wickedness shall make their foreheads, that is, their
purposes to disobey what I command. As to be hardened in sin is worse then
sinning, so to be hardened in doing good is better then doing good. Sin and
grace act most like themselves, when they act against all opposition. As an
adamant have I made thy face. The adamant is insuperable, as the notation of
the Adamas ejus creditur esse, naturae, ut domet omnia, neque ipse ab ulla
vifive art domari possit. Vnde nomen traxit: (...), sonat indomitum, Sanct. in
Ezekiel. 3.
word imports. A heart thus hardened in holiness overcomes all the fears and
terrors which the world can raise against it. Heroical Luther was thus
hardened, when he said, he would go to Worms, though the tiles upon every
house in that City were matched with a like number of Devils, ready to resist
him and the truth of Christ. But usually hardening is taken in an ill sense:
and so to harden the spirit, notes,

First, A resolving to sin, whatsoever God says or does. Obdurare cor est Deum
loquente^ nolle audire, contemnere, pervicaciter resistere, nec se ejus verbo
subjicere velle Par. in Heb. c. 3. v. 8.
To sin against the word and works of God, that is hardening of the heart
against God: when a man will go on in his way, though a threat be sounding in
his ears, and a judgment appear terribly before his eyes; such a man is hardened
indeed, he is grown valiant and courageous in wickedness.

Secondly, A man hardens himself against God, when he speaks stoutly against
God: the hardness of the heart appears in the tongue (Mal. 3.13.) Your words
have been stout against me. Stout words are a sign of stout spirits. Our
language is usually the image of our minds. So the word of the text is used (2 Samuel 19.43.) The words of the men of Judah were fiercer then the words of the
men of Israel: Their words were harder then the words of the men of Israel;
they spoke more resolutely and manly. When a man sets himself to speak boldly
against God, the ways or the works of God, he hardens himself against God
fearfully.

Thirdly, We harden our selves against God when we are displeased with what God
does; That man makes a bold adventure, who dares pass but an unpleasing
thought against the ways or works of God.

Fourthly, Not to be satisfied with what God does, is a degree of hardening our
selves against God: discontents and unquietnesses upon our spirits are
oppositions.

Fifthly, Not to give God glory in what he does, has somewhat in it of
hardening of our selves against God.

And lastly, He that will not give God glory in what he commands, is in a
degree hardened against God. We may see what it is to harden our selves against
God by the opposite of it ( Prove. 28.14.) Blessed is the man that fears
always, but he that hardens himself shall fall into mischief. Hardness is
contrary to holy fear; holy fear is a disposition of heart ready to yield to
God in every thing: A man thus fearing, quickly takes impressions of the word,
will and works of God; and therefore whosoever does not comply with God in holy
submission to his will, hardens himself in part against God.

That which is here chiefly meant is, the grosser act of hardness, when men
either speak or go on in their way acting against God; let him say what he
will, his word stops them not; or do what he will, his works stop them not.
They are like the adamant, the hammer of the Word makes no impression upon hard
hearts, but recoyls back again upon him that strikes with it. More distinctly;
this is either a sensible hardness of heart, of which the Church complains (
Isa. 63.15.) Wherefore have thou hardened our hearts? etc. or an insensible
hardness, which in some arises from ignorance, in others from malice and
obstinacy.

Further, We read of Gods hardening man's heart, and sometimes of man's hardening
his own heart. There is a threefold hardness of heart.

First, Natural, which is the common stock of all men; we receive the stone of
a hard heart by descent; every man comes into the world hardened against God.

Secondly, There is an acquired hardness of heart. Men harden themselves, and
add to their former hardness. He stretches out his hand against God, and
strengthens himself against the Almighty, Job 15.25. There is a growth in
sin, as well as a growth in grace, many acts make hardness more habitual (2 Chronicles. 36.13.) He stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning unto
the Lord. I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck, Deuteronomy. 31.27.

Thirdly, There is a judiciary hardness of heart, an hard heart inflicted by
God, as a Judge. When men will harden their hearts against God, he agrees it,
their hearts shall be hard, he will take away all the means which should soften
and moisten them, he will not give them any help to make them pliable to his
will, or he will not bless it to them. He will speak to his Prophets, and they
shall make their hearts fat (that is, senseless) and their ears heavy, that is,
heedlesse under all they speak, Isa. 6.10. Thus also God hardened the heart of
Pharaoh and of the Egyptians by the ministry of Moses and Aaron.

So then we having hardness of heart by nature, do by custom acquire a
further hardness, and the Lord in wrath inflicteth hardness, then the sinner
is pertinacious in sinning. All these put together make him irrecoverably
sinful, His neck is an iron sinew, and his brow brass, Isa. 48.4.

Observe, first, There is an active hardness of heart, or man hardens his own
heart. Exodus 5. We read of Pharaoh hardening his heart, before the Lord
hardened it; Who is the Lord (says he) that I should let Israel go? Here was
Pharaoh hardening his heart, and steeling his spirit against the command of
God, God sent him a command to let Israel go; he replies, Who is the Lord? I
know not the Lord; who is this that takes upon him to command me? Am not I King
of Egypt? I know no Peer, much less Superior Lord. It was true indeed, poor
creature! he did not know the Lord; Pharaoh spoke right in that, I know not the
Lord; if he had, he would never have said, I will not let Israel go, he would
have let all go at his command, had he known who the Lord was that commanded.
Thus Sennacherib (2 Chronicles. 32.14.) blasphemes by his messengers, Who was there
among all the gods of those Nations that my fathers utterly destroyed, that
could deliver his people out of mine hand, that your God should be able to
deliver you out of mine hand? These are hard words against God, and hardening
words to man.

Every act of sin hardens the heart of man, but the heat of blasphemy at once
shows and puts it into the extremity of hardness. Man hardens himself against
God four ways especially.

First, Upon presumption of mercy; many do evil, because they hear God is
good; they turn his grace into wantonness, and are without all fear of the
Lord, because there is mercy so much with the Lord.

Secondly, The patience of God or his delays of judgment harden others,
because God is slow to strike, they are swift to sin. If the sound of judgment
be not at the heels of sin, they conclude, there is no such danger in sin;
Solomon observed this (Eccles. 8.11.) Because sentence against an evil work is
not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in
them to do evil, or, it is full in them to do evil. They have not some
velleities and propensions, some motions and inclinations, some queries and
debates about it, but the matter (upon this ground) is fully stated and
determined, they are so full of it, that they have no room in their hearts for
better thoughts or counsels: the sum of all is, they are hardened and
resolved to do evil.

Thirdly, Gross ignorance hardens many, 1. Ignorance of themselves. And, 2.
Ignorance of God: he that knows not what he ought to do, cares not much what
he does. None are so venturous as they, who know not their danger. Pharaoh
said, I know not the Lord, he knew not the Lord, nor himself, therefore he ran
on blinde-fold, and desperately hardened himself against the Lord.

Fourthly, Hardness of heart in sinning is contracted from the multitude of
those who sin. They think none shall suffer for that which so many do. The
Law of Moses said, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil (Exodus 23.2.)
There is a special restraint upon it, because man is so easily led by many.
The heart is ready to flatter it self into an opinion, that God will not be
very angry, when a practice is grown common: this is the course of the world,
this is the way of most men; therefore surely no great danger in it. And
examples harden chiefly upon three considerations.

Ego bomuncto non facerem. T^r.
First, If great ones go that way; the Heathen brings in a young man, who
hearing of the adulteries and wickednesses of the gods; said, what? Do they
so, and shall I stick at it?

Secondly, If some wise and learned men go that way, ignorant and unlearned men
conclude they may.

Thirdly, If any godly men, such as make more then ordinary profession, do
such things, then who may not? The failings of the Saints are a countenance to
wicked men in their follies. They are apt to follow the dark side of the cloud,
and to approve those in what they do ill, whom they scorn in what they do
well. They imitate their falls and sins, whose repentance they never think of
imitating. How many harden their hearts by their doing what is evil, whose
hearts have been broken, because they did evil? From the sin which a holy man
commits against his purpose and resolution, many purpose and resolve to commit
it.

Upon these and the like grounds, the heart of man is hardened against God.
Take a brief of the degrees of this hardness; see by what steps the heart
rises so high in sinning. Man does not grow hard at once, much less hardest.
But w^^n once he begins to harden himself, where he shall make an end he knows
not.

The first step is, the taking time and leave to meditate upon sin, and roll
it up and down in the thoughts. A hard heart lets vain thoughts dwell in it. A
holy heart would not let them lodge with it.

A second step is, some tastes of pleasure and delight in sin. It proves a
sweet morsel under his tongue. As the heart grows more delighted in sin, so
more hardened in sin. Nothing should be so bitter as sin in the act, for
nothing will be so bitter as sin in the issue: but when the act is pleasant,
the issue is seldom suspected.

The third step is, custom in sinning. It argues great boldness to venture
often. One said of him that had escaped danger at sea, Improbe Neptunum
accusat, qui iterum naufragium sacit.
If you go again, you have no reason to complain, though you be wracked.
Mariners are fearful of storms at first, but through custom they play with
them. When a man comes ofs once safe from sin, he will venture again, and so
often, till at last he thinks there is scarce any venture at all in sin. He
grows bold and hardy.

By the fourth step of hardness he comes to defend and maintain his sin. He
has spoken so long in his heart against the word, which forbids him to sin,
that now he can speak against it with his tongue. He has a plea or an argument
to make the evil he does good. He appears a Patron, an Advocate for sin, who
was before but a practiser of it.

Fifthly, The hard heart grows angry and passionate with those, who give advice
against sin; he is resolved, and a man that is resolved in his way, is angry if
he be desired to remove out of his way: He that is resolved to sleep, loves not
to be awakened. A touch or a jog from him that sits by, provokes him, he prays
to be let alone. We should love the man while we hate and reprove his sin. But
he that loves his sin will hate his reprovers.

Sixthly, Hard hearts grow too hard for the Word, they are Sermon-proof; they
can sit under the Preacher, and hear from day to day, but nothing touches them.
A man in armor feels not the stroke of a sword, much less the smart of a rod.
This hardness of heart is a steel armor to the heart; it makes the man past
feeling, till he be past healing. Some being often reproved hurden their hearts
(Prove. 29.1.) till their hearts are too hard for all reproves.

And then seventhly, The heart is so hard that the sword of affliction does not
pierce it, the man is judgement-proof: let God strike him in his person or
estate, let God set the world a fire about his ears, yet on goes he. He is like
the man of whom Solomon speaks, ( Prove. 23.34.) who lies sleeping in a storm
upon the top of a mast.

Eighthly, The hard heart sits down in the chair of the scorner, he derides the
Word, and mocks at the judgments of God. When Lot spoke to his sons in law
about fire and brimstone, ready to fall upon Sodom and consume it, the text
says, He seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in Law? what, tell us of
judgments? of fire descending from Heaven. When the sky falls we shall have
Larkes.

Lastly, The hard heart gets up to the tribunal of the persecutour, and from
scorner commences opposer of good men, and of the good ways of God; he will
do them the uttermost mischief he can, who would do him all the good they
can. Get thee from me (says Pharaoh to Moses, Exodus 10.28.) Take heed to thy
self: See my face no more; for in the day that thou see my face thou shall
die. Pharaohs hard heart spoke hard words, and was preparing to give hard
blows: he had only so much of honor and ingenuity left, as to warn the Prophet
to avoid the blow. Which yet is more then hardness of heart leaves to all.
Many an hard heart uses the hand before the tongue; and in stead of saying to
his reprover, See my face no more, lest thou die, calls him before his face,
that he may die, or seek his death behind his back, and lies in wait for
revenge. And here hardness of heart is at hardest. It is now a fit cushion for
Satan: He sits softest upon this stone; The devil is never so much pleased, as
when man is most hardened; the seed of his temptations takes root and prospers
best in this stony ground.

But shall man prosper too? Shall any man thrive or make a gain by hardening
himself against God? Shall he come off with honor or with profit? Job
answers, Who has hardened himself against him, and has prospered? Which may
be resolved into this negative proposition, (...) Et pacatus suit, vel in pace
abiit (i. e.) foeliciter and been cesserit. Merc.
No man ever hardened himself against God and prospered.

The Hebrew thus, Has any man hardened himself against God, and had peace? Mr
Broughton renders near it, Has any man hardened himself against God, and found
quietness? To have peace or quietness, and to prosper, are the same in the
language of the Jews, and in a hundred Texts of the old Testament. Nemo
pertinax gloriari potest, quod post consecutam victoria^, pace potitus fuerit.
Pined. Nemo cum Deo pugnans, sic eum assidua pugna fatigavit, ut pacem accipiat
ultro a Deo oblatam. Idem.


We may understand Job either of these three ways.

First, No pertinacious hard hearted man could ever glory that he got the
better, or the day of God, and so prospered into a peace by war; that is a way
of prosperity, in which he shall never tread. Gideon told the men of Penuel,
When I come again in peace; that is, when I have conquered and return
prosperous, then, etc. No man ever conquered God, and so returned in peace.
Peace was never the trophie of a war with him.

Secondly, Who ever hardened himself against God and prospered? That is, did
ever any man so weary out God by lengthening this war, that God was (as it
were) forced at last to offer him terms of peace? So it happens sometimes with
men, Ab aequipollente pacem aliquis pugnando obtinere potest, licet enim eum
supera^e non possit, tamen assi^uitate pugnae eum fatigat, ut ad pacem
reducatur. Aquin. Quis permansit, aut perstet^t, (...). Sep.
with Nations and Kingdoms. They not getting peace by victory, but being spent
and tired out with war, begin to think of treating. Did ever any one put the
Lord to offer a treaty with articles of peace, to save himself from further
trouble? They who have not strength enough to overcome, may yet have power
enough to vex and weary their adversary. But God can neither be vanquished by
force, nor vexed with our policies into a peace with man.

Thirdly, Others give this sense, Who ever held out, or was able to persist in
a war against the Lord? The wicked shall not stand before God in the day of
judgment, much less in the day of battle; Who would set the briars and
thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them
together (Isa. 27.4.) The most steely and and flinty spirits in the world can
no more stand before God, then briars and thorns can before a flaming fire. The
Lord soon breaks and destroies all opposing power. And so there is a figure in
the words, for, man does not only not prosper, but he is undone and crushed for
ever, by contending with God. Shall man prosper in a war with God? No, it
shall end in his own ruin and utter destruction. Whence observe,

That nothing can be got but blows by contending with God.

The greatest Monarchs in the world have at one time or other found their
matches, but the great God never found his match. Hoc est signum evidens, quod
fortitu lo Dei omnem humana^ fortitudinem exoedit; quia nullus cum eo pace^
habere potest resist endo, sed solum humiliter obediendo. Aquin. Vicisti,
Galilae.
Pharaoh contended with him, but did he prosper in it? You see what became of
him at last, he was drowned in the red sea. Julian contended with Christ, he
scoffed at him, (he came up to the highest degrees, he sat in the chair of the
scorner, and in the tribunal of the persecutour) but what got he at last? When
he was wounded and threw up his blood toward heaven, said he not? O Galilean,
thou have overcome: I acknowledge thy power, whose name and truth I have
opposed. Christ whom he had derided, and against whom he hardened himself into
scorns and scoffs, was too hard for him. All that harden themselves against God
shall be worsted. Gather your selves together, O ye people, and ye shall be
broken in pieces (Isa. 8.9.) Gather your selves together: against whom? Gather
your selves together against the people of God, and ye shall be broken in
pieces; Why? Emanuel, the Lord is with us. If no man can prosper by hardening
himself against the people of God, because the Lord is with them, how shall any
man prosper by hardening himself immediately against God? If Emanuel will not
let any prosper against his people, certainly he will not let any prosper
against himself. Therefore ( Prove. 28.24.) Solomon lays it down directly, He
that hardens his heart shall fall into mischief; and (Prove. 29.1.) He shall
be destroyed, and that without remedy; there is no help for it, all the world
cannot save him. A hard heart is it self the forest of all judgments, and it
brings all judgments upon us. A hard heart treasureth up wrath against the day
of wrath (Romans 2.5.) As a hard heart is Satan's treasury for sin: so it is
Gods treasury for wrath. The walls of that fiery Tophet are built up with these
stones, with their hard hearts, who turn themselves into stones against the
Lord.

Then take heed of hardening your selves against God. You know the counsel
which Gamaliel gave, Act. 5.39. Refrain from these men, and let them alone,
etc. (See how tremblingly he speaks) lest you be found even to fight against
God; as if he had said, take heed what you do, it is the most dreadful thing
in the world to contend with God; he speaks as of a thing he would not have
them come near, or be in the remotest tendency to. Man will not meddle with a
mortal man, if he be too hard for him: how should we tremble to meddle or
contend with the immortal God! Christ, Luke 14. warning his Disciples to
consider aforehand what it is to be his disciples, gives them an instance of a
King: What King (says he) going to make war against another King, sits
not down first and consulteth, whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet
him that comes against him with twenty thousand? Now, I say to you (if any
such be here) that have hearts steeled or hardened against God, who challenge
God the field, and send defiance to heaven, O sit down, sit down, consider
whether you with your ten thousand, are able to meet God with his twenty
thousand, that is great odds, half in half; but consider whether one single,
simple man can stand against his twenty thousand; whether a man of no strength
can stand against infinite strength; whether you who have no wisdom, are able
to stand against him that is of infinite wisdom. Can ignorance contend with
knowledge, folly with wisdom, weakness with strength, an earthen vessel with
an iron rod? O the boldness and madness of men, who will hazard themselves
upon such disadvantages. He is wise in heart, and mighty in power, who has
hardened himself against him, and has prospered?

And as God is so powerful that no wicked man in the world can mend himself by
contending with him: so neither can any of his own people. If they harden
themselves against God, they shall not prosper. To harden the heart against
God, is not only the sin of a Pharaoh, of a Senacherib, and of a Julian, but
possibly it may be the sin of a believer, the sin of a Saint. And therefore the
Apostle, Heb. 3. gives them caution, Take heed lest any of your hearts be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; and whose heart soever is hardened
against God, that man good or bad shall not prosper, or have peace in it. It is
mercy that God will not give his own peace, or let them thrive in sin. Grace
prospers not, when the heart is hardened; joy prospers not, nor comfort, nor
strength, when the heart is hardened: the whole state and stock of a believer is
impaired, when his heart is hardened.

And if the Saints harden their heart against God, God (in a sense) will harden
his heart against them; that is, he will not appear tender hearted, and
compassionate toward them, in reference to present comforts; he will harden
himself to afflict and chasten, when they harden themselves to sin and provoke.

When God afflicts his people, he hardens his heart against them; and it is
seldom that he hardens his heart against them, till they harden their hearts
against him. And the truth is, if they who are dearest to him do harden their
hearts against him; if they quarrel and contend with him; if they rise up
against his commands, or neglect his will, he will make their hearts submit, or
he will make their hearts ache, and break their bones. If they harden their
hearts against his fear, they shall feel his rod upon their backs and spirits
too. Which of the Saints ever hardened himself against God, and has prospered?
No man, whether holy or profane, righteous or wicked, could ever glory of a
conquest over God, or triumph after a war with him.

JOB Chap. 9. Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Which removes the mountains, and they
know not: which overturneth them in his anger.

Which shakes the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble.

Which commands the Sun, and it rises not: and seals up the stars.

Which alone spreads out the heavens, and treads upon the waves of the Sea.

Which makes Arcturus, Orion and Pleiadis, and the chambers of the South.

Which does great things past finding out, yea, and wonders without number.


JOB having in general asserted the power and wisdom of God (he must have
infinite power and wisdom against whom no man ever prospered by contending.)
Having I say asserted this in general, he descends to make a particular proof
of it; as if he had said, I will not only give you this argument, that God is
mighty in strength, because no man could ever harden his heart against him and
prosper, he has foiled all that ever meddled with him: but besides, I will give
you particular instances of it, and you shall see that the Lord has done such
things, as speak him mighty in strength, and prove him as powerful, as I have
reported him. These particulars are reported, in the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. verses, all
closed with a triumphant Elogy in the tenth, Subjicit Job confirmationem
proxime praecedentis sy^ogismi ab effectis potentiae and sapientiae Dei, quae
amplissima oratione describit. Merl.
Which does great things past finding out; yea, and wonders without number.

The Argument may be thus formed; He is infinite in power and wisdom, who
removes mountains, and shakes the earth, who commands the Sun, who spreads
out the heavens, and disposes of the stars in the firmament.

But the Lord does all these things, he removes mountains, he shakes the
earth, he commands the Sun etc.

Therefore he is mighty in power, and infinite in wisdom.



The first part of this argument is here implied. The assumption, or the minor,
is proved in the 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. verses, by so many instances. Here then is
an evident demonstration of the power of God from visible things, from acts
apparent to the eye; As if he had said, If you have not faith to believe that
God is infinite in power, let your senses teach it you, for he removes
mountains, and they know it not, He overturneth them in his anger, etc.

He removes mountains. (...)

That Is the first instance. The word which we translate to remove, Senescere;
quia quae sic inveterascunt forticra and robustiora cum tempore solent evadere,
ideo idem verbum significat roborari. (...). Sept.
signifies to wax old and strong, because things as they grow in age grow in
strength. There is a declining age, and an increasing age. Things very old
impair, and things growing older increase in strength; we have the word in that
sense (Job 21.2.) Wherefore do the wicked become old? yea, they are mighty in
power; he puts these two together, growing old and mighty in power. The
Septuagint render, Who makes the mountains wax old, because, that which waxes
old is ready to vanish away (Heb. 8.13.) or to be removed and taken away, as
the Ceremonial Law was, of which the Apostle speaks in that place.

And because growing old implies a kind of motion, therefore the word also
signifies motion, even local motion, a moving from or out of a place, Genesis
12.4. Abraham departed; he removed from the place, where he was. This local
motion is either natural or violent: of this later understand the Text, Which
removes the mountains.

The mountains. There are natural mountains, and metaphorical or figurative
mountains: it is an act of the mighty power of God to remove either.

Some understand this of metaphorical or figurative mountains, and so
mountains are great men, men of eminency, or of preeminency, the Kings and
Princes of the world. Chaldeus per montes intelligit reges, qui loco movet
reges fortes, ut mont^s. Targ.
The Chaldee is express for this sense, He removes Kings, who are as strong
and high as mountains. For as God has ordered the superficies of the earth,
and made some parts of it plain, others mountainous, some valleys and some
hills. So he has disposed of men, some men stand as upon level ground, men of
an ordinary condition; others are as the low valleys, men of a poor condition;
others are as the high mountains over-topping and over-looking the rest. The
word is used in this metaphorical sense, Isa. 41.15. I will make thee (says
the Lord to the Prophet) a new threshing instrument having teeth; And what
shall this new threshing iestrument do? Thou shall thresh the mountains and
beat them small, and shall make the hills as chaff. Here is a Prophet sent with
a flail or a threshing instrument, and his business is to thresh the
mountains, and to beat the hills: the meaning is, thou shall destroy the great
ones of the world, the hills, the mountains, those that think themselves
impregnable or inaccessible. But how could the Prophet thresh these mountains,
and what was his flail? Gideon (Judge. 8.7.) threatens the men of Succoth, that
he will tear or thresh their flesh with the thorns of the wilderness, and with
briars. And Damascus is threatened, because they threshed Gilead with threshing
instruments of iron, Am. 1.3. That is, they put them to extremest tortures.
Our Prophet could not thus torture men. His threshing instrument having iron
teeth, was only his tongue, the instrument of speech, With this he beat those
proud mountains to dust, that is, he declared they should be beaten and
destroyed. Of such a mountain, the Lord by his Prophet speaks (Jer. 51.25.)
Behold I am against thee, O destroying mountain, says the Lord, which
destroiest all the earth. Behold, I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and
will roll th^e down from the rocks, and make thee a burnt mountain. This
mountain was the proud State of Babylon, which was opposite to the Church of
God, this devouring mountain shall at last be a devoured mountain, devoured by
fire, therefore he calls it a burnt mountain. Thus (Zech. 4.7.) Who art thou, O
great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain. The Prophet is
assured, that all the power and strength, which opposed it self against the
reformation and re-edification of Jerusalem should be laid level with the
ground. Per montes intelligit rege^, qui si ut mo^tes, firmitate and ^o hoar
perstant. R^^. Dav in Ps 14^.5.
So we may interpret ( Psa. 144.5.) He touches the mountains and they smoke;
the meaning is, when God does but lay his hand upon great men, upon the
mightiest of the world, he makes them smoke or fune, which some understand of
their anger, they are presently in a passion, if God do but touch them. Or, we
may understand it of their consumption. A smoking mountain will soon be a burnt
mountain. In our language, to make a man smoke, is a proverbiall, for
destroying or subduing.

And besides, there are mountains (in this figurative sense) within us, as well
as without us. The soul has a mountain in it self, and it is an act of the
great power of God, yea, of an higher and greater power of God to remove
inward, than it is to remove outward mountains, Isa. 40.4. The Prophet
fore-shewing the coming of Christ, and the sending of the Baptist to prepare
his way, tells us, Every mountain and hill shall he made low. Christ did not
throw down the outward power of men, who withstood him: he let Herod and Pilate
prevail, but mountains and hills of sin and unbelief in the soul, which made
his passage into them impassible he overthrew. These mountains of high proud
thoughts, the Apostle describes (2 Cor. 10.14.) Casting down imaginations, and
every high thing, and bringing into captivity every thought (every mountainous
thought) to the obedience of Christ.

These are metaphorical mountains, the power of sinful men without us, and
the power of sin, the pride of our own hearts within us. It is a mighty work
of God to remove these mountains.

But these are not proper to the Text, for the instances which follow, being
all given in natural things, show, that those here intended are natural
mountains.

Taking mountains for earthly, material mountains, it is doubted how the Lord
removes them.

There are different opinions about the point. Some understand it of a natural
motion. Montes naturae sua generabiles sunt and corruptibiles, additione
partium generan^ur and detractione partiu^ corrumpuntur. Aquin and Caj. Minime
mirandum est, fi qua^ terrae parts, quae nunc habitantur, olim mare occupabat,
and quae nunc pelagus sunt, o^im habitabantur, sic campos and montes par est
invicem commutari. S^^b l 17.
Philosophers disputing about mountains and hills, conclude that they are
subject to generation and corruption; by the addition of many parts they are
generated, that is, kneaded or gathered together, and become one huge heap of
earth; and by the detraction, falling and crumbling off, or taking away of
these parts, they are removed again. Thus we may expound that (Job 14.18.) And
surely the mountain falling comes to naught.

Yet this cannot be the meaning of Job here. For though we grant that doctrine
of the Philosophers, that there is a generation of mountains, and so a
corruption of them, yet that corruption is so insensible, that it cannot be put
among those works of God, which raise up the name of his glorious power. Divina
pote^tia in ^a^^longa and segni montium remotione non se praebet vald^
mirabile^, cu^ remo fere (...), qui eam rem videat. Pined.
That which falls not under observation, cannot cause admiration. Slow and
imperceptible motions make small impressions either upon the fancy or
understanding.

That here spoken of, is quick and violent, and by it is easy representation to
the eye, causes wonder and astonishment in the beholders.

And so it imports a removing them by some violent motion. Thus the Lord is
able to remove, and has removed mountains, sometimes by earthquakes: sometimes
by storms and tempests, sometime those mighty bulwarks are battered with
thunder-bals discharged from the clouds (Psalm. 97.5.) The hills melted like wax
at the presence of the Lord. Hills melt down when he appears as a consuming fire
(Psalm. 104.32.) He looks upon the earth, and it trembles, and he touches the
hills, and they smoke. Those rocky mountains are as ready to take fire, as
tinder or touch-wood, if but a spark of Gods anger fall upon them, God by a
cast of his eye (as we may speak) can cast the earth into an ague-fit, he makes
it shake and more, tremble with a look; He by a touch of his mighty arm, hurls
mountains which way he pleases, as man does a Tennis-ball. We read ( Isa.
64.1.) How earnestly the Prophet prays, O that thou would rent the heavens
and come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence: Where he is
conceived to allude to Gods coming down upon Mount Sinai at the giving of the
Law, Exodus 19. which is said, To melt from before the Lord God of Israel, Judge.
5.3. Some understand it of that day of Christ, when he shall come to judge the
world; others of that day when Christ came in the flesh to save the world; then
the mountains were levelled according to the preaching of the Baptist; but
rather, the Prophet being affected with the calamitous condition, which he
foresaw the Jews falling into, entreats the Lord to put forth himself in some
notable works of his providence, which should as clearly manifest his presence,
as if they saw the heavens (speaking as of solid bodies) renting, and God
visibly coming down; then, those difficulties which lay in the way of their
deliverance, and looked like huge mountains of iron, or of adamant, would
presently dissolve like wax, or ice before the Sun or fire. The Prophet
Micah describes the effects of Gods power in the same style (Chap. 1.3, 4.)
Behold, the Lord comes forth out of his place, and will come down and tread
upon the high places of the earth, and the mountains shall be molten under him,
Ex quo and hoc loco non absurd colligitur fuisse proverbium ad significandum
maximam olique Deo convenietem potentiam. Bold.
and the valleys shall be cleft: as wax before the fire, and as the waters
which are poured down a steep place. So, to remove mountains is used
proverbially, Job 18.4. Shall the earth be forsaken for thee, or shall the rock
be removed out of his place; that is, shall God work wonders for thee? or, God
will alter the course of nature, as soon as the course of his providence. To
say God can remove mountains, is as much as to say, he has power to do what
he will: and the reason is, because mountains are exceeding great and weighty
bodies: mountains are firmly settled, now, to remove a thing, which is mighty in
bulk, and strongly founded, is an argument of greatest strength. The stability
of the Church is compared to the stability of mountains, Psalm. 125.1. They that
trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but stands
fast for ever. The righteousness of God is compared to a great mountain (
Psalm. 36.6.) because his righteousness is firm and unmovable, Thy
righteousness is like the great mountains, or the mountains of God. And (
Psalm. 46.2.) the doing of the greatest things, Isa. 54.10. the mountains.
and the making of the greatest changes that possibly can happen in any Nation,
or in the whole world are expressed by the removing of mountains, Though the
earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the
Sea, yet will we not fear, etc. That is things which carry the greatest
impossibility to be done, or which are seldomest done, shall be done, before we
will do this. As men, when they would show how far they are from submitting
to such a thing, say, We will die first, etc. So here, Who, we fear? No,
mountains shall be removed first. He breaths out the highest confidence of the
Church, in the lowest, not only of her present, but possible dangers. As faith
can represent to us better things then any we enjoy, to raise our joy: so it
can represent to us worse things (and put us harder cases) then any we feel,
and yet carry us above fear. A faith removing mountains, is put for the
strongest faith, Though I had all faith, so that I could remove mountains (1
Cor. 13.2.) that is, though I had the strongest faith, the faith of miracles.
When Christ ( Mat. 21.21.) would show to the utmost what faith can do, he
faith, If ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done
to the fig tree, but also, if ye shall say to this mountain, be thou removed,
and be thou cast into the sea, and it shall be done. As if he had said, if you
have faith, ye may do the greatest things imaginable or desirable, ye shall
remove mountains. A mountain is immovable by the mere power of a creature.
Faith takes that in hand, because faith acts in the power of the Creator. And
as the faith of man removing mountains, notes a faith of miracles; so the power
of God removing mountains, notes a miraculous power.

So then, taking this speech either for the removing of natural mountains, or
taking it proverbially, as it notes the doing of the greatest things, and
putting forth of the greatest power, it proves the point, which Job has here
in hand, viz. That God is mighty in strength; Why? He is able to remove
mountains. Observe from hence,

First, That the Lord if he pleases can alter and remove the parts of the
earth, and change the frame and fabrique of nature.

He that made the mountains unmovable to us, can himself remove them. The
Histories and Records of former times, tell us how God has miraculously tossed
mountains out of their places. Josephus in his ninth book of Antiquities, Mons
in Burgundia a proximo monte dehi^cens, vallesque proximas co^rcta^s, multa
agricolarum millia oppressit, etc. Vvernerus in fasciculo Josephus Ant. l 9. c
12. Vide Sen^cam, l. 5. c 15 and l. l. ^ 15. Nature. Quest. Plinium Not. Hist l.
8. c 38. Cum in agro Mutinensi montes duo inter se concurreha^t crep^tu maximo
ossultantes, etc. Eo concursau villae omnes ^lisae sunt, etc.
cap. 11. mentions the removing of a mountain; and Pliny in the eighth book of
his natural History, Cap. 30. A later writer reports that in Burgundy, in the
year, 1230. there were mountains seen moving, which overthrew many houses, to
the great terror of all the inhabitants of those countries. Josephus also
reports the like done by an earthquake. And another tells us of Mount Ossa
joined to Olympus by an earthquake. So that take it in the letter, the Lord is
able to remove mountains.

It should make us fear before the Lord, and give him glory while we remember
that even the outward frame of the world, is subject to sudden changes; there
is no mountain, no rock, but the little finger of God can move or pull it down.
As David spoke of his metaphorical mountain, his great outward estate. Lord,
thou had made it stand strong, yet thou did hide away thy face, and I was
troubled, Psalm. 30.6. his mountain began to shake, and became a very molehill,
useless to him, when God was displeased. If the Lord withdraw himself from
our civil mountains, we are troubled, and if he touch the natural mountains
they are troubled. Our mountains will skip like Rams; and the little hills like
Lambs, (Psalm. 114.4.) when he is displeased.

Secondly, observe, That the power of God is made visible to us in the changes
which he works in the creature, as well as in the constitution of the creature.

The power of God made the mountains and created the hills; the same power
removes mountains, and turns them upside down. It argues as great a power to
destroy the world as to settle the world. As the Apostle shows what divinity
the Gentiles might have learned in that great book of the worlds creation (
Romans 1.20.) The invisible things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things which are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead; So we may say on the other side, The invisible things of him
from the confusions which are in the world, are clearly seen; or, they may be
understood by the things which are removed and changed, in these you may read
his eternal power and Godhead. When God breaks the laws and course of nature,
he shows his power as well as when he settled the laws and course of nature. He
shows his power when he lets the sea out of it is place to overflow the earth,
as well as when he bounded the sea, that it shall not overflow the earth. Some
things are with far less power destroyed, then made, removed then settled,
but no power can destroy the world, but that which made it, or suddenly remove
a mountain, but that which settled it. The power of God must be acknowledged in
altering as well as in ordering the natural course or constitution of the
creature.

And if we look to the change of Metaphorical mountains, it is a truth, an
illustrious truth, that the Lord displaies his mighty power, in removing and
over-turning the great estates and establishments of men or kingdoms. When God
removes the mountain of our peace, of our riches, the mountain of outward
prosperity, and of civil power, it becomes us to say, He is mighty in power,
who does all these things.

God has given us great tokens and testimonies of his power in this. How many
mountains, great mountains, men who were mountains, and things which stood like
mountains in our way, how many (I say) of these has the Lord removed? Our eyes
have seen mountains removing, and mighty hills melting: the power of God, and
the faith of his people have wrought such miracles in our days, He removes
the mountains.

And they know it not. They, who? who or what is the antecedent to this, They?
Necesciunt, scil. montes, tribuitur rei inanimatae sensus. Merc.
are the mountains? So some understand it, and then the word know, or the act
of knowing is by a figure ascribed (as many times in Scripture to creatures
without reason, so) to creatures without life, Psalm. 58.8. before your pots can
feel the thorns; the Hebrew is, before your pots can understand or know the
thorns, that is, before they are sensible of the heat of the fire to make them
boil, etc. An act of sense, and is ascribed to pots, Puto esse modu^ loquendi
inde terminatum, cui supplen^um est subjectum homines. Bold.
which are things insensible.

But others take the antecedent to be man, He removes the mountains, and they
know it not; that is, men know it not. So Master Broughton translates, He
removes the mountains that men cannot mark how he has removed them out of
their place in his anger.

Vatabius suppositum verbi ne scie^unt, ita supplet, nec agnoscunt ( sc.
homines imperiti) quis subvertit eos furore suo.
Supposing men to be the antecedent, there is yet a difference about the
interpretation. Men, that is, say some, unskilful men, ignorant men, they know
not the meaning of this, they cannot give a reason why or how mountains are
removed; if God does it they know it not. Others restrain it to men, inhabiting
the mountains, they were secure, and thought their dwellings so safe, that God
removed their mountain before they dreamed of, much less feared any such
thing; they had no thought that God would remove their mountain. Places
strongly fortified either by art or nature, make men secure, and dangers
unsuspected. The deluge in Noah's time prevailed over the highest mountains;
Locus sive ab art, sive a natura munitus, reddit homines ab omni belloru^ aut
ruinae suspicione securos. Sanct.
but his sinful posterity hoped to make an artificial mountain, wherein they
might even dare a second deluge. Come, let us build us a City and a Tower,
whose top may reach to heaven (Genesis 11.4.) and then (except the stars and
firmament be flouded) we shall be dry, how much or how long so ever it rains.
Such towering thoughts, as these, were (surely) laid in the foundation of that
intended Tower.

Take the text either of natural or of figurative mountains, and to remove
them, so, that man knows it not, may have a double meaning.

First, That it is done with great speed.

Secondly, That it is done with great secrecy.

God is able to do great things in a little time, in so little time, that men
shall not know he is doing them, till they are done. He can do great things
secretly, so secretly, that the way of their dispatch shall not be visible to
the eye, or open to the understanding of man, till they are di^patcht.

Again, this clause [And they know it not] notes not only the security of men
before the hand of God is upon them, but their stupidity, while it is upon
them. So (Prove. 23.35.) They have stricken me, shall thou say, and I was not
sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not; the Hebrew is, and I knew it not.
Hence observe,

The works and judgments of God, are often unsuspected and unobserved by men.

He removes mountains, even their mountains, and they know it not.

It Is true in reference to natural, but especially to civil mountains. The
rich, the mighty are cast down from their seats, or their seats are cast down
before they saw any hand touching them; the whore of Babylon, and mother of
fornications, who sits upon seven mountains (Revel. 17.9.) says in her heart,
I sit a Queen and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow, (Revel. 18.7.)
Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death and mourning and famine,
etc. (ver. 8.) If her plagues come in one day, she (doubtless) thought not of
them a day before. Babylons seven mountains shall be removed, she not knowing
it; and as Babylons mountains shall be removed, when she shall not know, that
is, suspect it; so, which is more strange, Jerusalems mountain was removed, and
she did not know, that is, perceive it. The Prophets are express (Isa. 42.25.)
Therefore he has poured upon him (namely, Jacob or Israel) the fury of his
anger, and the strength of battle, and it has set him on fire round about,
yet he knew it not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. They were
unobservent of those terrible things the Lord did among them. Some little anger
passes often without notice, but here was the fury of anger; some slight
skirmishes make no great noise, but here was the strength of battle; and not
some few drops of both these, but either of them poured upon him, by whole
bucket fuls, and these buckets of burning fury set him on fire, and that not in
some one corner or out-house, but round about, yet he knew it not. Which is
expounded in the next words, It burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.

The Prophet Hosea (Chap. 7.9.) speaks as much of Jerusalem under the name of
Ephraim. Strangers have devoured his strength, and be knows it not, gray
hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows it not. Strangers devour his
strength, that is, according to the language of Job, the mountains wherein his
strength did consist, were devoured and overthrown by strangers, and yet he
knew it not, he did not observe the hand of God in the hand of man against him.
Gray hairs are here and there upon him; gray hairs are a great change; gray
hairs note the most discernable change of a man's life. There are two states of
a man, easily distinguished, Youth, and old age, and gray hairs make the most
visible distinction between these two; so that to say, Gray hairs are upon him,
is to say there is such a change upon his estate, as is between a young man and
an old man, and yet he knows, he observes it not. Of all things a man is most
apt to take notice of his own natural gray hairs: and many are so troubled at
the first sight of them (because they tell us we begin to be old) that they
will pick them out; but such is the senslesnesse of many about the dealings of
God with them, that when great changes are upon them, changes like that of
youth into old age, they are not affected with it; providentiall or judiciary
gray hairs are not often known.

Surely many of these gray hairs are upon us at this day: it will be sad if
England be like Ephraim, and know it not. It is worse not to know we have gray
hairs, then to have them. The one is but our affliction, the other is our
sin. Gray hairs are upon us, strangers have devoured our strength; as many
oppressing mountains are removed (for which we ought to bless God, and admire
his power) so some supporting mountains have been removed, and others shake
terribly, for which we ought to mourn, and be humbled under the mighty hand of
God. If we know not what God has done, he can quickly do enough to make
himself known. They who will not see the hand of God, when it is lifted up
(that they may be humbled) shall see it and be ashamed (Isa. 26.11.) if the
removing and shaking of our mountains do not awaken us, the overturning of
them shall; That Is the next act of divine power in this noble description.

And overturneth them in his anger. (...) Vertit, subvertit significat
versionem, vel in nibilum, vel in formam, aut qualitatem aliam, vel in locu^
alium.
The word signifies to over-turn a thing, so, as to change the form and fashion
of it, yea, to bring it to nothing; not only to remove a thing out of its
place, but to take away the very being of it, and to remove it out of the
world. He not only turns mountains into mole-hils, but into plains, yea into
pits, they shall not be mountains any longer, nor any thing like a mountain.

It is much to remove a mountain, and set it in another place: but more to
crumble it in a moment all to dust, that you shall not find a piece or a clod
of it. The Prophet threatens the obstinate Jews in such a language (Isa. 30.13,
14.) Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall,
swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant, and
he shall break it as the breaking of the Potters vessel, etc. So that there
shall not be found in the bursting of it, a sheard to take fire from the
hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit.

He overturneth them in his anger. Anger in man is a mixed affection made up
chiefly of these two ingredients, sorrow and revenge. Some call anger the
boiling of the blood about the heart, or the boiling of the heart in blood; The
fumes whereof rise so fast into the brain, Ira suror brevis.
that anger sometimes dislodges reason, and is therefore called by others a
short madness.

The word in the text signifies the Nostrils; and the Scripture frequently
applies that to anger, (...) Ira, inde transfertur a l nasum, qui est
instrumentum trae and in quo ira precipue apparet. Fames and morabilem in nasum
conciunt. Plaut.
because anger is seen and made visible in the nostrils. Quick breathing is a
sign of anger. God is without parts and passions, he is not angry as man: but
is said to be angry when he does like man in his anger. The Lord is not moved
or stirred by anger, but he is angry, when he makes motions and stirrings in
the creature; he lets out the effects of anger, but himself has not the
affection, much less the perturbation of anger. Hence observe,

That the troubles and confusions which are in the creature, are tokens and
effects of the anger of God.

As the settling and establishment of the creature, is an effect or sign of his
goodness, or as these tell us, that God is pleased: So when the Lord hurls the
creature this way and that way, when he tosses it up and down, as if he cared
not how, this is an argument of his anger; when Moses came down from the Mount,
and saw what the people of Israel had done, how they had made a golden calf and
polluted themselves with idols, such a passion of anger came upon him, that he
threw the Tables of the Law out of his hand, and brake them. So, when the Lord
would signify his displeasure, he throws the creature out of his hand, and
breaks man against man, Nation against Nation (as a Potters vessel) one
against another. The comfort and well-being of the creature, consist in this,
that God holds it in his hand; if he do but let it go out of his hand it
perishes, much more when he casts it with violence out of his hand. The Prophet
( Hab. 3.8.) describing the great confusions which God made in the world,
questions thus, Was thine anger against the rivers? Was thy wrath against the
sea, that thou did ride upon thine horses, and thy chariots of salvation? God
being angry with the enemies of his people, made strange work amongst them;
Rather then his people shall not be delivered, the world shall be confounded,
Was the Lord angry with the sea? when he compelled the rivers to change their
courses, and discover the bottom of their channels, as in the passage of his
Israel through the red sea? No, God was not angry with the sea, but with Pharaoh
and his host, with the oppressors and troublers of his Israel; and when he was
thus angry, he checked the course of nature, and turned things up-side-down.
When David was in a distress, and his enemies encompast him round about: what
then? Then the earth struck and trembled, Tanta extiti^ divinae irae vis pro
Davide contra hosts defendendo, ut videbatur orbe^ invertere, omnia miscere,
etc. Pined.
the foundations of the hills were moved and were shaken, because he was wrath
(Psalm. 18.7.) That, God might rescue David out of the hand of trouble, he
troubled the foundations of the earth; he made the world shake and Kingdoms
tremble, that his David might be settled upon his throne. The Lord threatens (
Hag. 2.6.) that he will shake the heaven and the earth, and the sea and the dry
land; he will move all creatures, why so? He shakes them for the settling of his
Zion (verse. 7.) I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall
come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts. When the
Lord comes against the superstition, and idolatry, and profaneness, and
wickednesses of the world in anger, no wonder if Kingdoms shake: yea, he
therefore shakes Kingdoms, that he may establish Jerusalem a quiet habitation,
a tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the stakes thereof shall
ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken, Isa. 33.20.
We are waiting when God will shake Babylon, and in his anger overturn the seven
mountains thereof; Babylon is built upon mountains, upon seven mountains, to
note the strength and power of it, yet the Lord will remove Babylon out of her
place, and overturn those mountains in the fierceness of his anger, and in
jealousy poured out, Then every Island shall flee away, and the mountains
shall not be found, Revel. 16.20. That is, the remotest and strongest places
which owned and maintained Babylon, shall either be converted or confounded;
they shall appear no more under that spiritual notion, though in a natural
and civil they do remain. That which is not as it was, is spoken of, as if it
were not: A great change in our condition, is called a change of our very
being. The anger of God overturns things, as if it did annihilate them. Job
goes on.

Verse 6. Which shakes the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
tremble.
This is a second instance, but in higher expressions of the same power of God.

(...), i.e terram universam. Sept.
Which shakes the earth out of her place. He had said before, God removes
mountains. Mountains are great bulky bodies, but no mountain is so great as the
Globe of the whole earth. Now (says he) the Lord does not only shake
mountains, some great parts of the earth, but if he pleases he can take up the
whole earth, and throw it out of its place, as a man would take up a little
ball, and throw it into the air, He shakes the earth out of her place.

The word which we translate to shake, (...) Non significat motum naturalem,
sed commotionem quanda^ ex metu, trepidationem, tremorem. Didacus Astunica
putat hunc locum illustrari posse ex sententia Pythagoricorum, existi mantium
terra^ moveri natura sua. Copernieus.
signifies a violent motion of the mind, caused either by fear ( Deuteronomy. 2.25.)
or grief (2 Samuel 18.33.) we read of a trembling heart from both ( Deuteronomy. 28.25.)
It is also applied to civil shakings and commotions by the troublesome spirits
of men ( Prove. 30.21.) For three things the earth is disquieted. And to
unnatural shakings of the earth by the power of God (2 Samuel 22.8, etc.) So in
the text.

Some expound this of a natural motion. Those men have (surely) a motion and
turning in their brains, who tell us that there is a continued motion of the
earth, that it turns and never stands still; they would ground the motion of
the earth upon this Scripture, translating thus, Which moves the earth in her
place. But the text tells us, that the earth has pillars and not wheels.
Pillars are made for rest, not for motion.

Further, This text speaks of it, as of an act of Gods anger, therefore no
ordinary act appointed in nature; and the word notes a violent motion, not a
natural. But we need not stand to refute this motion. As when some denied all
motion, a Philosopher to prove it, rose up and walked: So when any affirm or
give reason for this motion, we may show their senses that the earth stands.

This shaking then is extraordinary, the Lord who made the earth firm upon
pillars, can make the earth move, as if it went on wheels.

This he does, first, by earthquakes, these shake the earth (as it were) out of
her place, and make it tremble. Histories are full, and many men's experience
can give instances of such terrible shakings of the earth. This earthquake is
not meant here, for there is a reason in nature for that. Philosophers dispute
much about it, and tell us, when there is a strong vapor included or
imprisoned in the bowels of the earth, that vapor seeking vent makes a
combustion there, and so the earth shakes. This, indeed, shows the mighty power
of God, but it is in a natural way, whereas the text seems to imply somewhat
more, somewhat beyond the learning of Philosophers and Naturalists.

Besides, the text says, He shakes the earth [out] of her place.

Whereas an earthquake shakes the earth in her place, and causes it to tremble
upon the pillars thereof.

But did God ever shake the earth out of her place? We must understand the text
conditionally. We have not any instance that the Lord has actually done so,
but this supposition may be put. The Lord can remove mountains and shake the
earth, not only in, but out of her place. We find such conditional
expressions often put in Scripture, not as if the things ever had been, or ever
should be done, but if the Lord will, he is able to do them ( Amos 9.5.) The
Lord God of Hosts is he that touches the land, Terrificam capitis concussit
terque quaterque; Caesariem cum qua terra^ mare sidera mo^it. Ovid. Met.
and it shall melt; that is, if the Lord do but touch the land he can melt it.
As the three children cast into a fiery furnace, had not so much as a garment,
or a thread about them touched with it, because the Lord forbad the fire to
burn: So, if the Lord bid a spark but touch us, it shall melt and consume us,
as if we were cast into and continued in a fiery furnace. As a word made, so a
touch shall mar the world, when God will; yet he has not done thus unto this
day. So in the text, He shakes the earth out of her place, imports what God
can, not what he has or will do. Note from it,

That the Lord is able to do greater things, then ever he actually has done.

He has not put the earth out of her place, the earth is where it was, but he
can displace it. God has never acted any of his attributes to the height, for
they are infinite; he never acted power so high, but he is able to act it
higher: He has never acted mercy in pardoning so far, but he is able to act
it further, a greater sinner then ever yet was pardoned, may be pardoned. A
greater enemy then ever was overcome, may be overcome. He has run with
footmen, and they have not wearied him, and he is able to contend with horses:
in a land of peace he was never wearied, and he knows how to wade through the
swellings of Jordan. It is comfortable to consider, that the Lord cannot only
do the same things again, which he has done, but he has never done to the
utmost of what he is able to do: he can out-doe all that he has done, as much
as the shaking of the whole earth out of her place, is more, then to remove a
mountain, yea, or a molehill of earth.

And the pillars thereof tremble. We have the pillars of heaven, Chap. 26.11.
here of the earth.

The pillars. (...) Columna erecta, a stando dicta.
The word in the original signifies to stand upright, to be erect, because
pillars do so. There are two sorts of pillars, upon which there is a different
interpretation of the word.

There are, first, Supporting pillars. And

Secondly, Supported pillars. Or, there are pillars for ornament; and pillars
for strength. We set up pillars or pinacles upon the tops of great buildings
for ornament, and they are supported pillars. We may call mountains such
pillars: for, as when some stately palace is built, great pillars or pinacles
are set upon the towers and battlements: so the Lord having framed the earth,
has set up mountains, as great pillars for the adorning of it, He shakes the
earth, and the pillars thereof tremble; it is true of these upper pillars, the
mountains they tremble. But I take it rather to be meant of supporting pillars,
under-pillars, which bear the frame above, and are as the bases or under-props
of the earth ( Psalm. 105.) Who laid the foundation of the earth; the earth has
a foundation; the Hebrew is, He has founded the earth upon her basis, alluding
to a building. Most buildings have their foundations in the earth; but some
upon it, being raised upon pillars. So Hannah (1 Samuel 2.8.) in her Song, The
pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world upon them.

What are these pillars that the Lord has set the world upon? or where shall
we find them?

David shows us ( Psalm. 24.1, 2.) The earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein: for he has founded it upon
the seas, and established it upon the floods. It is strange that pillars of
liquid water should bear up the massy earth; the earth seems rather to be the
pillar and foundation of the waters. Some interpret (super) which signifies,
upon, by prope or juxta near, he has founded it upon the seas, that is, He
has founded it by, or near the seas. But take it in the letter, and it is a
truth: for the sea is as much the pillar of the earth, as the earth is the
pillar of the sea; earth and sea being a globe and round, the sea is as much
under the earth, as the earth is under the sea. Thus the pillars of the earth
are waters, And the earth is established upon the floods.

Further, If you would know what these pillars are, hear what Job says, (
Chap. 26.7.) where he assures us that God hangs the earth upon nothing. We
are not to think that the Lord in framing and building the earth did first set
up pillars, and then set the earth upon them, for the earth hangs as a ball
in the midst of the air, without any pillars under it. Hence Jobs Philosophy
teaches us, That he hangs the earth upon nothing; there are no material or
visible pillars to sustain it.

What is then the pillar of the earth? What is it that supports and bears it
up? The real pillar of the earth it is the power of God. But the power of God
cannot tremble? How then does he say, When he shakes the earth, the pillars
thereof tremble?

Terrae columnae, infimas terrae parts significant, quae reliquam terrae molem
impositam sustineat; haec sunt veluti fundamenta and fulcra terrae.
In this place therefore we may expound the pillars of the earth, for the lower
parts of the earth, and so, though the whole globe of the earth taken together
be neither higher nor lower, yet in the parts of it from any point, some are
higher, and some are lower, some above, and some beneath; upon what superficies
soever we are, the under parts thereof are (to us) the pillars of the earth. So
the meaning is, He shakes the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
tremble; that is, he shakes it so terribly, that if it had any outward visible
pillars, those pillars must needs tremble.

Quo pacto terra firma and immota consistit? quidna^ pro vehiculo habet? cujus
rei adminiculo fulcitur? rationi nihil occurrit cui innitatur, si divinam
voluntatem exceperis Greg Nazianz Orat. 34. Suis l brata ponderibus fixa manet.
In this we may observe, the great power of God in upholding the earth. We see
what the pillars of the earth are, the supposed pillars are no other then the
lower parts of the earth; and the true pillar of the earth is no other, but the
power of God: there are no other buttresses or pillars upon which the earth is
set, or by which it is sustained; This huge weight of the whole earth and seas,
is borne up by the thin air. Is not this an argument of the mighty power of
God, that the air which is a body so weak, that if you throw a feather up into
it, it will not stay there, but descend, yet the whole mass or globe of earth
and waters hangs there? God poiseth it merely by its own weight: For he weighed
the mountains in scales, and the hills in balances, Isa. 40.12. He upholds all
things by the word of his power, And has built this great Castle in the air.
Could we enter into the secrets of nature, and set our faith a work by our
senses about these things, we should be raised above all fear in the greatest
difficulties. If we saw but a bullet, or a piece of lead of a pound, yea of a
penny weight, lifted up and hang in the air without any thing to support it, we
would conclude it a miracle. What think you, when all the lead, and iron, and
brass, and stone that is in the world hang in the air without any visible stay?

I find some interpreting this clause as the former, in a figurative sense, He
shakes the earth, that is, States, Kingdoms and Commonwealths; And the
pillars thereof tremble; that is, they who seemed to be their strongest
supporters tremble and shake. This is a truth, and a profitable one for our
meditation. To clear this,

First, We find the earth in Scripture often put for States and Kingdoms (Isa.
24.20.) The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed
like a cottage, and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it, and it
shall fall and not rise again. The earth shall do this: what earth? He does
not mean the natural earth
upon which men tread, but the people who tread upon the earth, or that
Commonwealth, wherein people are united and governed, these shall reel to and
fro, and be removed like a cottage: As if he had said, you thought your State
and Kingdom was settled like a strong Castle, but I will take it down, as a man
takes down a little cottage, raddl'd only with a few sticks and reeds. Or the
meaning of it is, your Commonwealth that has been founded by the wisdom of
so many Lawgivers, Fundavit legibus urbes.
and is established in so much riches and power, shall be removed as a poor
cottage, through which every puff of wind finds a passage. The strongest
Kingdoms and Bulwarks of the earth, are but as thatcht cottages, when God takes
them in hand.

Secondly, Pillars are as often taken in a political sense, Psalm. 75.3. The
earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved. How comes it then to pass
that they are not utterly destroyed? It follows, I bear up the pillars of it;
that is, I maintain Governors and Magistrates, some in places of power and
authority, by whom shaking, tottering Kingdoms are upheld. Our experience
teaches us this; We live in a Nation, of which we may say, Our earth with the
inhabitants thereof are dissolved, we are a broken and a shattered people; yet
the Lord bears up our Pillar, * the Parliament, the politic pillar of our
Nation; we had long ago lain in the dust, if God had not borne up this pillar.
The chief counsels of the adversary have been to weaken and undermine, to ruin
and pull down this pillar. They (like Samson) have taken hold of our two
pillars, and bowed themselves with all their might ( Judge. 16.28.) but neither
have they proved Samsons, nor proved us Philistines.

Further, There are Church-pillars as well as State-pillars; men of eminency in
knowledge and learning, in parts and piety; These are pillars of the Church of
God. So the Apostle calls James and Peter, (...).
Gal. 2.9. As the Church it self is the pillar of truth: so some particular
members are pillars of truth, bearing it up, and holding it forth, as pillars
do the Laws or edicts of Princes and Commonwealths. As these pillars are of
Gods setting up, so of Gods bearing up. In great shakings of the earth,
Common-wealth-pillars tremble, and Church-pillars tremble, yea they would fall,
did not the Lord sustain them with his hand.

From all, learn the instability of the creature. If that which is the basis or
foundation of all outward comforts be so easily shaken and tossed up and down,
what are the comforts themselves? If Kingdoms and Commonwealths totter, who
can stand fast? When the Saints feel the world shake and tremble under them,
their comfort is, They have received a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. Neither
man nor devils have any power to shake it, and God will not shake it: nay, with
reverence we may speak it, the Lord cannot shake that Kingdom, for it is his
own: he cannot do any thing to his own wrong or dishonor. Earth may, but
heaven shakes not, neither shall any of the pillars thereof tremble for ever.

We have seen two acts of the mighty power of God; first, in removing those
mountains, those great massy parts of the earth. Secondly, In shaking the
whole mass of the earth.

Now the thoughts of Job grow higher, and he ascends from earth to heaven, and
brings an instance of the power of God there, in the 7th verse.

Verse 7. Which commands the Sun, and it rises not, and seals up the
stars.
And the instance which he makes in the heaven, stands (as heaven does to
earth) in a direct line of opposition to that which he gave about the earth.
The earth in all the parts of it, is a settled, fixed body, ^^cut de natura
terrae est immobolitas and q^^es, ita de natura coeli ut semper moveatur Aquin.
and therefore the power of God is clearly seen in causing it to move: but, the
Sun is a moveable body, a creature in continual motion; and therefore the
power of God is clearly seen in checking and stopping the motion of it. It calls
for as strong a hand to make the Sun stand still, as to shake and remove the
earth. The staying of that which naturally cannot but move, and the moving of
that which naturally cannot but stand still, require a like power: and that
which stands as the earth does, or moves as the Sun does, requires an
Almighty power to move or stay it.

Which commands the Sun, and it rises not. Which commands the Sunne] He
describes God in the posture and language of a King, giving out commands. He
commands, (...) Dixi^, illud dicere est cum potestate imperandi.
God is the Sovereign of the Sun. Yet the word in the Hebrew is no more, but
he says, or he speaks to the Sun; so Mr Broughton translates, He speaks to
the Sun that it rises not: We, clearly to the sense, He commands the Sun,
because the Word of God to the creature, is a Law or a Command upon the
creature.

He commands the Sun, and it rises not. The phrase implies an ordinary, or
a common event. But when was there such a thing as this? How rare are such
events? I may ask, Did the Lord ever command the Sun that it should not rise?
Or did ever any day appear, when the Sun did not appear? we may answer four or
five ways.

First, Non ad factum, sed ad Dei potentiam refertur, qui, si velit, possit
vicissitudinem ortus and occasus solis tollere. Olymp.
Some conceive Job speaks only of what God can do (as in the former instance)
not of what he ever did: He never actually gave out his command to the Sun
that it should not rise, but he has power to do it, if he pleases. Many
things are spoken of the power of God, as presently done, which only are
things possible for him to do. That Is a good interpretation of the place.

Secondly, We may carry it further, for when he says, It rises not, we need
not take it strictly, as if the Sun were staid from making day at all; but,
it may note any stop or sudden disappearing of the Sun. The Suns rising is
the Suns appearing; Non oritur sol. tantum est non apparet, nam and v^tas solis
apparitio quedam est. Bold.
and when the Sun disappeareth, or is hidden, it is to us, as if the Sun were
not risen. Thus God has actually more then once, given out a command to the
Sun, not to rise. Lavater (in his comment upon this place) reports, that in the
year 1585. March 12th, such a darkness fell upon the earth, that the fowls
went to roost at noon, as if it had been Sun setting, and all the common
people thought the day of judgment was come. That of the Prophet is true in
the letter, as well as in the figure (Amos 4.13.) He makes the morning
darkness: And (Chap. 5.8.) He turns the shadow of death into the morning,
and makes the day dark with night. The holy story records one famous act of
God commanding the Sun to stand still ( Josh. 10.12.) When Joshua was in
pursuit of his enemies, he prayed that the day might not hasten down: Sun,
stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou moon in the valley of Ajalon, And the
Sun stood still, etc. Joshua speaks as if himself could command the Sun,
Sun, stand thou still; he talks to the Sun, as to his servant, or child,
stand still. It was indeed at the voice of Joshua, but by the word and power of
God, that the Sun stood still. So the Text resolves, There was no day like
that before it, or after it (no day so long as that) that the Lord hearkened to
the voice of a man. So then, the Lord hearkened to the voice of a man, and then
the S^^^^ hearkened to the voice of a man: First, the Lord hearkened, and then
the Sun hearkened, that is, by a command from God at the request of a man the
Sun stood still.

Thirdly, It may be understood of ordinary eclipses, which are disappearings of
the Sun: and though they come in a course of nature, and are by natural
light foreseen many years before they come, yet there is somewhat in them,
which should fill us with high thoughts of the power of God. And though an
eclipse of the Sun be no miracle, yet God once made, and can again make a
miraculous eclipse. When Christ the Sun of righteousness was shamefully
crucified, the Sun in the heavens (as ashamed to look upon that act (as from
man) of prodigious cruelty and injustice) hid his face; and from the sixth hour
(that is, Dionysius Areopagita.
from high-noon) there was darkness over all the Land unto the ninth hour;
that is, till three in the afternoon, Matthew. 27.45. This eclipse was
miraculous; first, because it was the full of the moon. Which (as we receive
from Antiquity) caused a great Philosopher (not knowing what was doing, or who
was suffering at Jerusalem) to cry out, Either the God of nature suffers, or
the frame of nature dissolves.

2. Because it was universal (as some affirm) over all the world, or as others
(which makes it more strange) that it was only in the Land of Judea, all the
world besides enjoying the light of the Sun at that time. Which miracle
stands opposite to that in Egypt, which was plagued with darkness, when the
Israelites in Goshen enjoyed light; whereas then Judea, where the Israelites
dwelt, was covered with darkness, the rest of the world enjoying light.

Fourthly, Some refer this speech of Jobs to that particular plague of
darkness, for three days in Egypt (last mentioned) which they conceive was
then fresh in memory, and so Job had reference especially unto that, when he
says, He commands the Sun, and it rises not. For though God at that time
did not give a command to stop the Sun from rising upon all parts of the
earth, yet he commanded the Sun not to rise upon that part; when his own
people had light in Goshen, the Lord charged the Sun not to rise upon the
Egyptians; This is a more distinct act of the power of God. For, as he speaks,
Amos 4.7. (to note the accuratenesse as well as the power of God in his
judgments) concerning the rain, I commanded the clouds (says he) and I caused
it to rain upon one City, and caused it not to rain upon another City: So the
Lord can cause the Sun, if he please, to rise upon one Country, and not upon
another; upon one Nation, and not upon another; upon one City, and not upon
another. Thus we may understand it, He commands the Sun, and it rises not
upon one people, though it shines upon others, according to the manner of that
Egyptian plague.

Lastly, We may interpret it of any extraordinary tempestuous time, He
commands the Sun, and it rises not; that is, he makes such storms and
tempests, and causes such vapors and clouds in the air, that the Sun is
mufled up, and is, as if it did not rise. Such a day (he means it of any
troubles and afflictions) we have described in the Prophet Joel (Chap. 2.2.) A
day of darkness, and of gloominesse, a day of clouds and thick darkness, as
the morning upon the mountains. But how is a day of darkness as the morning?
etc. The speech intends thus much, that this darkness shall spread it self, as
suddenly as the morning light spreads it self upon the mountains, which being
highest, are blessed and gilded with the first issuing rays of the rising Sun.
God is said to command the Sun not to rise, when he vails and masks the face
of the Sun with sudden clouds, as if there were no Sun at all but clouds.
Paul in his voyage to Rome, was under such a tempest, and the Text says, That
neither Sun nor star for many days appeared (Act. 27.20.) they were as if
the Sun had not risen for many days. Such stormy gloomy weather God can
make, ( Ezekiel. 32.7.) When I shall put thee out, I will cover the heaven, and
make the stars thereof dark, I will cover the Sun with a cloud; that is, I
will put a black vail or cloak upon the heavens, that the Sun shall not put
out any light, when I put them out; when I extinguish thee, I will (for a time)
extinguish the Sun also. The constellations of heaven are often expressed
sympathizing with the dispensations of God on earth, Isa. 13.10. Joel 2.31.
Mat. 24.29. He commands or speaks to the Sun. Observe hence.

First, The bare word of God is a command.

Os in Scriptura pro voluntate saepe accipitur, significat enim locutionem,
locutione enim homines quid volunt manifestant. (...).
He speaks to the Sun, and it rises not. The Apostle uses that word about
the creation of light, 2 Cor. 4.6. The Lord who commanded light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts: the Greek is, The Lord who spoke light
out of darkness, which we translate, The Lord who commanded the light out of
darkness. The words of God are Laws, and therefore the ten Commandments, that
part of the word which carries the name of commands from all the rest, is yet
called, The ten words of God. The Greeks call the ten Commandments, the
Decalogue, or the ten words; so many words, so many commands. The devil seems
to acknowledge this great power of God (only that he might abuse it) in Christ,
that his word was a command, If thou be the Son of God (Mat. 4.3.) command
that these stones be made bread: The Greek is, If thou be the Son of God
speak to these stones that they become bread, or speak these stones into bread:
he would take that as a proof of his Divinity, If thou be the Son of God; do
this; God can do this, his Word is a command to all creatures, for whatsoever
he imposes upon them, they must submit to it, therefore do thou so likewise,
speak to these stones, or command these stones to become bread.

It should be matter of comfort to us, while we remember that every word of God
is a command upon all creatures, He has made a decree which shall not pass
(Psalm. 148.6.) The Hebrew is only, a word which shall not pass, his word is a
decree, which none shall reverse.

Secondly, As from the former clause [He commands the Sun] we learn, that
every word of God is a command: so from that which follows [and it rises
not.] We may learn,

That, every creature obeies the command, and submits to the will of God.

Men often speak, and speak in the highest language of commanding, and yet the
thing is not done; but whatsoever the Lord speaks, is done. Every thing has an
ear to hear his voice, who made both voice and ear, Psalm. 148.8. Fire and hail,
snow and vapor, stormy wind fulfilling his Word. Senseless creatures act at
Gods command, and go upon his errand, They fulfill his Word. The Lord sent a
message unto Hezekiah, to assure him that his sickness was at his command,
because the Sun was, (2 King. 20.9, 10.) Shall the shadow go forward ten
degrees, or go backward ten degrees in the dial of Ahaz? either way (says
the Lord) I can do it; either way, as thou shall ask a sign, it shall be done.
And Hezekiah answered, It is a light thing for the shadow to go down ten
degrees, but let the shadow return backward ten degrees. Yet he knew the Lord
did not offer him a light thing in either, when he said, Shall the Sun go
forward or backward. The Suns going forward was within a degree, as great a
matter as it is going backward; but Hezekiah calls it a light matter, in regard
of common apprehension and observation. The Suns motion is naturally forward,
and though it should mend it is pace, many would not much regard it; but all
would stand and wonder at a retrograde motion, or at the Sun going backward.
Hence Hezekiah calls it a light matter for the Sun to go forward
comparatively to it is going backward. And from either the Lord would teach
Hezekiah that the creatures will do what he bids them, even the Sun will
move miraculously at his Word. How great a rebuke will it be to man, if he move
not at the command of God, and as God commands? Shall the Lord say to the
Sun, Rise not, and it rises not; and shall he say to man, Swear not, and he
will swear, pray, and he will not pray: shall the Lord have better obedience
from creatures without life then from man, who has not only life but reason?
or from Saints, who have not only reason but grace? They who have grace give
not such universal obedience as things without life: for though there be a part
in them active to obey, yet there is a part in them backward to all obedience.
Let it shame us that there should be any thing in us (who have life, reason and
grace) resisting, or not readily complying with all the commands of God, when
the Sun, which has not so much as life, obeies his voice, He commands the
Sun, and it rises not.

Thirdly, Observe from the manner of this speech.

That, The Lord has a negative voice upon the motion of all creatures.

He commands the Sun, and it rises not. It is a royal Prerogative that
the Lord commands the Sun to rise, but that the Lord has a power to stay the
Sun from rising, lifts up his Prerogative to the highest. In all disputes about
power, his is resolved to be greatest, who has the negative voice, which checks
and supersedeats all others. This is the Prerogative of God; he can stay the
motion of the Sun, and of man. The Sun dares not do his office to the day, nor
the stars to the night, if the Lord say, No. The Sun is described, Psalm. 19.5.
like a bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, dressed and prepared, and as a
Giant rejoicing to run his race; but though the Sun be thus prepared, and
dressed, and ready, yet if the Lord send a writ, and a prohibition to the Sun
to keep within his chamber, he cannot come forth, his journey is stopped. Thus
also he stops man in his nearest preparations for any action. If the Lord will
work, who shall let it? Isa. 43.13. That is, there is no power in heaven or
earth which can hinder him. But if the Lord will let, who shall work? neither
Sun, nor stars, nor men, nor devils can work, if he forbid them. The point is
full of comfort. God tells Abimelech in the case of Sarah, Abraham's wife, whom
he took into his house, I know that thou did it in the integrity of thy
heart, but I with held thee, and I suffered thee not to touch her (Genesis 20.6.)
And when Laban pursued Jacob with hard thoughts against him, and strong
resolutions to deal harshly with him; The Lord gave a negative voice, ( Genesis
31.24.) Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad. Laban had
not the use of his own tongue; He could not speak either good or bad. Not good
or bad! Was there any hurt for Laban to speak good to Jacob? And the story tells
us, that Laban spoke many words, and some bad enough to Jacob, charging him
with a double theft. First, for stealing himself away (verse. 27.) Wherefore
did thou steal away from me? Secondly, for stealing his Idols (verse. 30.) And
now though thou would needs be gone, because thou longest sore after thy
fathers house, yet wherefore have thou stolen away my gods? Foul language all,
though God charged him not to speak a bad word to Jacob. For answer know, We
must restrain that restraint to the point of bringing Jacob back again, Thou
shall not speak either good or bad to him, to stop or turn him from his way,
thou shall use no threatenings to bring him back to thee, no, nor any promises
or allurements: thou shall make no offers of better entertainment to win him
to thy service, which was the thing he so much desired. Good and bad are the
two terms of all that can be spoken, and where the utmost extremes of speaking
are forbidden, all speaking to that purpose is forbidden. When the ancient
people of God were few in number, yea, very few, and strangers in the land,
when they went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another people,
one would think, that all the world would have been upon them; but here was
their protection, God had a negative voice (Psalm. 105.15.) He suffered no man
to do them wrong. Many had (as we say) an aching tooth at the people of God,
their fingers itcht to be dealing with them, and the text shows four advantages
the world had against them: First, They were few. Secondly, Very few. Thirdly,
Strangers. Fourthly, Unsettled. What hindered their enemies? It was the Lords
negative voice. He reproved Kings for their sake, saying, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. We see an instance of this ( Genesis 35.5.)
when Jacob and his family journeyed, the terror of God was upon the Cities
that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob:
They had a mind to pursue after them, to revenge the slaughter of the
Sichemites, but God said, Pursue not, and then they could not pursue, they must
stay at home. And when his people the Jews were safe in Canaan, he encourages
them to come up freely to worship at Jerusalem, by this assurance, No man shall
desire thy Land, when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord thy God,
thrice in the year ( Exodus 24.34.) God can stop not only hands from spoiling,
but hearts from desiring. Our appetite, whether concupiscible or irascible, is
under his command, as well as our actions. The Prophet asserts this by way of
question (Lam. 3.37.) Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the
Lord commands it not? That is, if the Lord does not concur, if the Lord
vote against the saying or command of any man in the world, what he says shall
never come to pass.

We should consider this to help our faith in these times. God has a negative
voice upon those counsels and conclusions, which are carried with one consent
of men, And the wrath of man shall either turn to his praise, or all that is
beyond that, he will stop, the remainder of wrath (namely, so much as remains
over and above what turns to the praise of God) shall thou restrain, Psalm.
76.6. The sword is in motion amongst us, even as the Sun, and the sword
seems to have received a charge to pass from one end of the Land to the
other; yet a counter-command from God will stop this sword from going on. If he
speak to the sword, the sword shall wound no more. We may entreat the sword to
wound no more, as they ( Jer. 47.6.) cried out, O thou sword of the Lord, how
long will it be ere thou be quiet? put thy self into thy scabbard, rest and be
still. The answer was, How can it be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a
charge against Askelon? etc. Our answer might be (changing place) the same, How
can it be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against England? A word
from God draws, and a word from God sheaths the sword. He that commands the
Sun, and it rises not, can command the sword, and it smites not, the fire
and it burns not, the water and it drowns not, the Lions and they devour not.
How happy are they who serve the Lord over all!

Observe fourthly; seeing, He commands the Sun, and it rises not.

That, The daily rising of the Sun, is an act of grace and favor to the
world.

The Sun does not rise alone of it self, it is the Lord (as we may say) that
helps it up every morning. Therefore it is said ( Mat. 5.45.) He makes his
Sun to rise; His Sun, mark how Christ speaks of the Sun, as Gods own,
that Sun which he can either cause to rise, or not to rise, cause to rise
upon one people, and not upon another, He makes his Sun to rise; there is an
act of common grace in making it to rise upon any, especially in making it to
rise upon all, upon the evil, and upon the good, Mat. 5.41. That God makes the
Sun rise to give them light, who use their eyes only to rebel against the
light, how admirable is it?

Lastly, As to the special aim of Job, we see what a proof we have of the
omnipotency of God, He is great in power, and mighty in strength; Why, because
he can stop the Sun? He that can stay the Sun, what can he not do? We say
to men that attempt impossibilities, Climb up to the Moon; it is more to stay
the Sun, than to climb the moon. And if the Lord be able to overcome this
difficulty, what difficulty can he not overcome? Here Is a clear proof of the
infinite power and wisdom of God, Qui efficit noctem and diem, nam donec
oritur sol est, nox and adveniente die quasi obsignatae occultantur stellae Ju^.
He speaks to the Sun, and it rises not. And He seals up the stars.

The Sun is the light of the day, the stars the light of the night. He
seals up the stars. Some take it to be a Periphrasis, or a description of
night and day, because till the Sun rises it is night, and when day appears,
the stars are sealed up, or disappear: The Sun rises, and the stars are
obscured, we see them not: So the former clause, He commands the Sun, and it
rises not, is a description of the night; and this later, he seals up the
stars, is a description of the day. The plain sense of both being this, He
makes both night and day.

Secondly (say others) This seal is set upon the Sun, in behalf of the stars,
He seals up the Sun for the stars; that is, Pro stellis signavit (^^solem)
signaculo, quasi in favorem stellarum Deus continet solis splendorem in altero
Haemispherto. Cajet.
in favor of the stars; that the stars might sometime appear in their
luster and glory to the world; he keeps the Sun from appearing.

But (as we translate) we may better keep the seal upon the stars, He seals
up the stars.

And so, sealing may import either of those two things.

First, The safe custody of the stars, He seals up the stars; that is, he
preserves the stars in their orbs, in the places where he has set them, they
shall never drop out. Sealing is often used for assurance and safe-keeping.
Darius (Dan. 6. Anrulos non tam o^natus quam custodiae gratia olim inventos
di^it. Macrobius l. 7. Saturn. c. 3.
) sealed the stone upon the den of Lions, that so Daniel might not be rescued
or fetched out from the danger. The Jews, that they might keep Christ fast
enough, sealed the stone of the sepulcher, wherein his body was laid ( Mat.
27.) And in a spiritual sense, the sealing of the Spirit, is to make the soul
safe in the love and favor of God. A soul that is sealed by the Spirit of God,
is secured of the love of God, and shall never drop out of his heart. So, He
seals up the stars, is, He makes the stars firm and fast in their Spears.
But rather,

Secondly, Sealing is for secrecy, or for the hiding of a thing from the sight
of others: So in the sealing of letters, that they be not seen, and of
treasures, that they be not stolen or taken away, Deuteronomy. 32.34. Job 14.17. Thus
the Lord seals up the stars, Clausae videntur, cum non videntur. Stellae and
omnia coeli lumina, vetur characteres quidam efficient librum. Pined.
when he clouds or obscures the stars, and will not let them be seen. Some make
it an allusion to a book. The heavens are a great volume, wherein many truths
of God are written, his name is there; and the stars are as so many characters
or letters of his Name. He often seals up this great volume, and so blots these
letters that no man can read or distinguish them.

Thirdly, The meaning of, He seals up the stars, may be taken thus, He keeps
in, and closes up the virtue and influences of the stars; he stops those
treasures, which usually come down from the stars upon the earth. Natural
Philosophy teaches us, that all the fatness and fruitfulness of the earth, is
convaied from the heavens. Heaven nurses and suckles the earth: and if the Lord
please he can dry up those breasts, seal up those influences, stop those secret
workings which the heavenly bodies have upon the earth. Observe hence.

That the influences of the heavens are in the hand of God, to let them out, or
stay them as he pleases.

As he can seal up the spiritual treasures of heaven, that the soul shall
receive no light, comfort or refreshing from them in ordinances; so he seals up
the natural influences of the heavens, that the earth and the fruits of it
here below shall receive no quickening, no refreshing from them. And the earth
languishes when the Lord suspendeth and seals up the natural influences of
heaven, as the soul languisheth, when the Lord stops up the spiritual
influences of heaven, when he seals up that star of Jacob, that daystar from on
high, Jesus Christ.

What we hear of God in natural things, should keep us in continual
dependence upon him for spirituals; he seals with the comforts of his own
Spirit, and he seals up all comforts from our spirits.

Verse 8. Which alone spreads out the heavens, and treads upon the waves of
the sea.
This verse gives us a further argument of the mighty power of God. See how
Jobs discourse moves from earth to heaven, and from the heavens down to the
sea. He searches for the wonders of Gods power and wisdom, in heaven and
earth, and in the waters. Before he shows God stopping the course of the Sun,
and sealing up the stars; now spreading out of the heavens, and treading upon
the sea.

He spreads out the heavens. The heavens in reference to the earth, are the
upper part of the world. The heavens are (as it were) the roof of the great
house, which God made, or as a spangled Canopy over our heads, He spreads out
the heavens; The word is of the Duall number in the Hebrew, and has diverse
derivations, which are considerable to enlighten us in the point.

(...) a
He spreads out the heavens. Some derive it from Shem, which signifies a name,
a name of honor and dignity, Men of Name are men of renown ( Genesis 6.4. Nomen,
gloria, decus, quia coelum est nominatissima pars mundi M^rtin. in Lex ^bilos.
Anshi Hashem
) the heavens are the most glorious, beautiful and renowned part of the
Creation; Their name is above every name of inanimate creatures.

Others, because there are waters above in these heavens, derive the word from
(Sham) which is an adverb of place, and (Majim) which signifies waters; as much
as to say, there are waters, or there is the place where God has fountains and
stores of water. All his waters are not upon the earth, he has waters and
springs in heaven.

A third takes it for a simple, not a compound word, Paulus Fagius in Genesis 1.
being near the Ishmaelitish word Shama, noting only superiority in place, high
or above.

A fourth opinion derives it from Schamem, which signifies, to be amazed, or to
make one at a stand with wonder: And the reason is given, because the heavens
are such a vast, stupendous body, (...) a (...) Obstupuit, propter insignem
vastitatem istius corporis, quae ipsa nos aspicientes in stuporem rapit. Pisc.
in Genesis 1.
that if a man look upon them exactly, they will amaze him. Who can observe the
Sun, Moon and Stars, and not wonder, and be transported, at their vastness
and beauty, at the swiftness and regularity of their motions, it is above the
reach and apprehension of natural reason, how the Lord should fashion and
spread out such heavens.

But, what are these heavens which he spreads forth?

Heaven is sometimes expressed with an addition, the highest heavens, the third
heavens, in 2 Cor. 12.12. The heaven of heavens, 1 King. 8.27. Paul was rapt up
to the third heavens, that is, in visions and revelations he was brought as
near to God himself, as a creature possibly can. Of this heaven we are to
understand that, Genesis 1.1. where Moses says, In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth, and the earth was without form and void. He does not say,
the heaven which God created at first, was without form and void, but the earth
was without form and void; for that heaven was a perfect creature. We read
further of the creating of those heavens which we see, of the visible heavens,
which are the continent of the Sun, Moon and Stars. But, In the beginning
God created the heaven; that heaven which by way of eminency is called, The
habitation of his holiness, and of his glory, Isa. 63.15. This was created in
the beginning, and then, it is conceived the Angels were likewise created; but
the earth which was then made was an imperfect creature, and all other
corporeal creatures with their several forms and fullness were extracted out
of that earth, which was without form and void. The very heavens (which we see)
were made out of that first earth, the Sun, Moon, and the Stars, yea, the
very light it self was made out of that earth, that general heap of matter
which the Lord created at first, and is said to have been without form and
void. But the heaven, which we call the heaven of heavens, the third heaven, or
the highest heaven, was a perfect creature the first day, made without any
pre-existent matter whatsoever by the power of God. This heaven is the largest
of all the heavens which God spread out.

Secondly, Take heavens for the visible heavens. I intend not to stay upon
philosophical considerations, only what the Scripture holds forth; we find
heavens put, first for the starry heavens or the firmament, where the stars
have their motion, that is the heaven meant ( Genesis 1.17. Psalm. 8.7. Psalm. 19.1.)
This, a^cording to the doctrine of Astronomers, is distinguished into several
orbs and spears, in seven of which seven special stars are said to move,
and all the rest to be fixed in the eighth.

The Apostle Jude seems to give a hint of those planeticall orbs ( Jude v. 13.)
where he justly reproacheth unsettled spirits by the name of wandering stars or
planets, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

Thirdly, Heaven is taken in Scripture for a nearer heaven, for all that, which
is below the Moon, for the air and the clouds. Hence the birds are said to fly
in the heavens; and ( Genesis 8.2.) the rain from heaven was restrained, that is,
the rain from the clouds, for there is no rain in that heaven above the clouds.

Triplex est coelum aerium, sidereum ac aliud his superius, invisible and
divinum. Dam. l. ^ de orthodoxa fide.
Heaven is a building of three stories. The first story is the air and the
clouds, up to the moon. The second story reaches all the planets and stars. The
third story is also called, the third heaven, or the heaven of heavens, the
place of his most glorious residence, who fills heaven and earth.

All these heavens the Lord spreads out.

There is a threefold spreading forth of a thing.

First, By contusion or beating with hammers, as a mass of gold or silver,
etc. is spread into thin plates and leaves.

Secondly, By way of rarefaction or attenuation; water is rarefied by fire, and
so are metals, when they are melted or caused to run with extreme heat. In
allusion to which, Elihu speaks in his challenge to Job (Chap. 37.18.) Have
thou with him spread out the sky which is strong, and as a molten
looking-glass. The sky is of a weak, slight matter, not hard, massy, or
elementall, yet it is strong; the nature of it being incorruptible, the figure
of it round and indissoluble. And it is compared to a looking-glass, for the
clearness of it; those instruments were made, some of glass, some of steel or
brass, molten and polisht for that purpose.

Thirdly, A thing is spread forth by unfolding the parts, (...) Extendit,
diste^dit, sicut tentori^m.
as a tent or a curtain is spread: and thus the spreading of the heavens is
described, Psalm. 104.1, 2. O Lord, thou art clothed with honor and majesty,
thou stretchest out the heavens like a curtain. God took the vast matter folded
together, and spread it as a curtain, tabernacle or tent. And the Hic Dolapum
manu^, hic saevus tendebat Achillis. Virg 2. Aeneiad. Iuxta hortos tend^bat.
Suct. in Galb c 12. de German^rum Cohorte. Et milites tendere omnes extra
vallum jussit. Tac l 13.
Latin word which carries the interpretation of this in the Hebrew, is
frequently applied by ancient Authors, to the pitching of tents in war. In
this third sense we are specially to understand the Text, Alone spreads out
the Heavens.

And so this spreading is either an exposition of the nature of the heavens (
Genesis 1.8.) The Lord said, Let there be a firmament; the Hebrew is, Coelu^ sive
firmamentum voca^ur (...) eo quid est expansum and extensum super terram Solus
sine cujusquam auxilio.
Let there be an expansion, or a stretching forth. These heavens are so much
spread forth, that they are called, a thing spread forth; and so the text is a
description of the heavens in their first Creation. Or, it may refer to the
words going before, and so these are a reason to show that God can command the
Sun, and seal up the stars, why? He spreads forth the heavens; that is, the
heavens are all of his making, and at his disposing; he set the Sun there,
and put the stars there, he fashioned the orbs in which they are placed, and
therefore he can stay the Sun, and seal the stars.

And as he thus spreads out the heavens, so, which is more observable, He
spreads them out alone. When a piece of hangings, or the like of a large
extent is to be spread forth, one man cannot do it, many hands are put to that
work. Instrumentum creationis creatura esse non potest.
It is an axiom in Divinity, That no creature can be an instrument in
Creation: this stretching forth of the heavens is an act of Creation, therefore
he alone does it, there is none to help him.

Yet we find that God had some other with him, when he stretched out the
heavens, though it be here attributed to him alone: and though Elihu
expostulates with Job in this point (Chap. 37.18.) Have thou with him spread
out the sky which is strong, and as a molten looking-glass? Elihu would bring
down the thoughts of Job, which he conceived were too much lifted up, by
showing that God did this alone; Solus, quia nemo extra ipsum cu^ ipso, sed una
cu^ i^so illi qui in ipso per identitatem substantiae sunt: verbo enim Domini
firmati sunt coeli, and spiritu oris ejus omnis virtus eorum. Solum enim
divinitas sacit, quae ut una ita and sola
Job (says he) did thou hold one part of this great Curtain or Canopy of
heaven in thy hand, and God another, and was it so spread out between you? No,
neither man nor angel was his helper; who then was with God in this work?
Solomon tells us, ( Prove. 8.27.) When he prepared the heavens I was there, when
he set a compass upon the face of the depth. Who was that? I wisdom was
there. Jesus Christ was there. Christ was he by whom God prepared and stretched
forth the heavens. No creature was there, only the uncreated, creating Son of
God. God created alone, that is, without the help of any creature; but he
created all things by the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that
was made. Observe from hence,

First, The heavens are as the royal tent and pavilion of the Lord.

He spreads them out. The Lord is often expressed coming out of the heavens
with warlike preparations: There his tent is pitched, and he sits there, as a
great Commander in his pavilion, to give out Orders to his Armies. He has an
host in heaven, and therefore he has a tent in heaven; or rather heaven is his
tent. The Lord has his way in the whirlwinde, and in the storm, and the clouds
are the dust of his feet, Nah. 1.3. God pitches his battle in heaven; The
stars in their courses fought against Sisera. He fought from heaven; from
thence he discharged his great Artillery, his Cannons thundered and lightened
against the enemies of his people. He has also his storehouses for
ammunition, his Magazines there (Job 38.22. Est all^so ad armamentaria publica,
ubi armorum, ma hinarum and tormentorum ingens apparatus reconditur. B l.
Quicquid habe^t telorum armamentaria coeli. Juven. Sat. 13.
) Have thou (says God to Job) entered into the treasures of the snow? Or have
thou seen the treasures of the hail, which I have reserved against the time of
trouble, the day of battle and war? He speaks of heaven as of a great
storehouse, where he has his arms, his powder and ball, all his warlike
provision laid up against the day of battle. Heathens have spoken such
language, calling storms and tempest, hail and thunder, The weapons and engines
of the Armory of heaven.

Secondly, In that he says, He stretches out the heavens alone; observe,

That the Lord needs not the help of any treature to do his greatest works.

He has power, and he has power in himself to do what he has a will should
be done; let all the creatures in the world stand still yet God can carry his
work forward. What work is like this, the stretching forth the heavens: There
cannot be a work of so much difficulty under heaven, as the spreading forth of
the heavens. He, who did that alone, what can he not do alone? Though men will
not, though men cannot help, the Lord can and will alone. Isa. 59.16. He saw
that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessour; no man to
do, no man to speak in that business, not a man appeared: what then? Does the
Lord say, well, seeing there is no man to do, I also will let it lie? No,
Therefore his arm brought salvation unto him, and his power sustained him; he
did it alone. Paul speaks of himself, that at his first appearing before Nero,
all men forsook him, not a man would own him, but (says he) The Lord stood by
me (2 Timothy 4.15.) This is a great encouragement to us in great affairs and
businesses, in the greatest straits and difficulties of the times; if men
forsake and desert, the Lord alone can do all for us; if men have not power to
do what they have will to do, nor will to do what they have power; then
remember, He that stretches out the heavens alone, can order our works alone,
compose our differences alone, conquer our enemies alone. God alone is
infinite, greater, stronger, wiser, then all creatures together. God can be now
as he will be hereafter, all in all unto us. God is enough for us without any
creature; yea, God and all that he has made cannot do more than God, without
any thing that he has made.

And treads upon the waves of the sea. The sea is a fluid body; to sail or
swim in the waters is ordinary, but to tread upon the waters, that is another
act of wonder, He treads upon the waves of the sea; or, he walks on them as
upon a pavement.

To tread upon the waves imports, that God has a command over the sea, and the
waves of it. Verbum Dorac aliquando est ducis praeltantis and debellantis
hosts Quasi jure belli subjicere.
To tread upon a thing is to have it under our power, or in subjection to us (
Psalm. 91.13.) the promise is, Thou shall tread upon the Lion, and upon the Asp;
that is, thou shall prevail and triumph over the greatest evils, over enemies
as strong and fierce as Lions, as poisonous and stinging as the Asp, Psalm.
108.9. Over Edom will I cast out my shoe; which notes either contempt of them;
as if he had said, I look upon them as worthy only to scrape and make clean my
shoes. Or secondly, Conquest over them; I will walk through Edom and subdue it.
Deuteronomy. 11.24. Every place whereon the sole of your feet shall tread shall be
yours; that is, yours shall be conquering feet, you shall tread as lords upon
all lands. Yours shall be all the ground you go on, that is, it shall be
subject to you, Jud. 5.21. O my soul, thou have trodden down strength; and Mic.
1.3. The Lord shall tread upon the high places of the earth; that is, the Lord
shall subject the highest things that are upon the earth to his power. That
place is very observable, Numb. 24.17. Where Balaam prophesying of Christ,
says (as we translate) A star shall come out of Jacob; Calcabit stella e
Jacob.
the Hebrew is, A star shall tread out of Jacob, noting Christ a victorious,
a triumphing star, who should come treading and trampling upon the world as
conqueror; though the world in regard of his outside, trod and trampled upon
him: So it is explained in the later words of the verse, He shall smite the
corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth. A star shall tread
out of Jacob. A treading star is a triumphing star.

(...) Excelsa maris. Ambulat super alti^udinem to bo^is maris. Tar. Robur
maris dicit vehementia^ maris, quando a ventis turbatur and commovetur. Dorsum
immare summo mari attribuit. Virg. Aeneiad l. 1.
The Hebrew is, He treads upon the high places of the sea; the word (Bamoth)
is used frequently for the places where idolatrous worship was set up, their
high places. Mr Broughton translates, the high waves of the sea; because
sea-waves rise high, so high, that the Psalmist describes them, mounting up to
the heaven (Psalm. 107.26.) When these high waves threaten to swallow all, then
the Lord treads upon them, that is, his power is above them, and he makes them
submit to his command. As to ride upon the high places of the earth (Deuteronomy.
32.13. Isa. 58.14.) is to have highest command, and to be a chief upon the
earth, or to dwell safely and free from anoiance upon the earth: So to tread
upon the high places or high waves of the sea, implies Gods Empire or
Sovereignty over the Sea.

Hence observe, first,

That the sea in its highest rage is at the beck, and under the treadings of
God.

When the waves are most stirring and raging, he speaks them quiet, Psalm. 89.9.
Thou rulest the raging of the sea, when the waves thereof arise thou stillest
them. As to walk upon the sea, is an argument of a divine power; so to command
the sea. When Christ ( Mat. 8.26.) rebuked the sea, and said, as another Gospel
has it ( Mark 4.38.) Peace and be still, as if one should hush a child; The
men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the
sea obey him? Winds and waves seem the most disobedient, stubborn and
unteachable creatures in the world, yet a word from God calms the one, and
smooths the other. Egyptij ut rem prorsus impossisibilem demonstrarent, hominem
pedibus super aquas ambulan^em in suis Hieroglyphicis depingebant. Ver^res cum
suum Neptunum super aquas ambulantem pingere non auderent, a nando ei nomen
dederunt. Herod. l. 1. Delectat Canuti regis Anglorum exemplum, qui
assentationis procellam, procella maris in se adm^ssa, compescuit. Bold. ex
Camb. Brit. Ex alto incitatum fl^ctum, ita alloquutus est, unda tibi jubeo, ut
ne pedes meas tangas.
When the old Egyptians would by their Hieroglyphics express an
impossibility, they did it by the picture of a man treading upon the waves; as
if they should say, this is as impossible as for a man to walk upon the waves.
The Heathen Poets describe Neptune their Sea-god, swimming, not walking upon,
or treading the waters. To tread upon the waters is so much above man, that
mere Naturalists thought it too much for God. Man shows his pride and arrogance
to the height, when he pretends to lord it over the waves of the sea. When the
Hellespont a strait of the sea, by a sudden storm rising upon it, broke the
bridge of Boats, which Xerxes had made to pass into Greece, and so opposed the
project of that Persian Monarch, he cast fetters into it, as if he would teach
it to know it is Lord, and caused it to be beaten with 300. stripes, to chasten
its former disobedience. It is recorded in the history of this Nation,
concerning Canute an ancient Danish King, that when a mighty storm of flattery
rose upon him, he appeased it by showing he could not appease the storms of the
sea. One of his Courtiers told him in his progress, as he rode near the sea
side, that he was Lord not only of the land, but of the sea, and that all those
seas which he saw, were at his command. Well, says he, we shall see that by
and by, and so walks down to the shore, and pulling off his upper garment,
wraps it together, and sits upon it near the flowing of the waves, and with a
loud voice speaks thus, O ye seas and waves come no further, Touch not my feet,
etc. But the sea came up, notwithstanding his charge, and confuted that
flattery. God only has this Prerogative, He treads upon the high waves of
the sea.

There are also mystical waves, which the Lord treads upon: people and
Nations are called waters, and many waters, in the book of the Revelation. The
waves of the sea cannot be in a greater rage, then the Nations of the earth
sometimes are. And the same Hebrew word by which the rage of the sea is
properly expressed, expresses also the rage of men (Psalm. 2.1.) Why do the
Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? Why are the Gentiles, the
great waters up as high waves, threatening a deluge to the throne of Christ? The
power of Christ is as eminent in stilling the rage of the mystical, as of the
literal waters; yea, we find these two matched together ( Psalm. 65.7.) He
stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waters, and the tumult of
the people. Hence the Apostle Jude (verse. 13.) calls wicked men, raging waves of
the sea, foaming out their own shame. The Lord sits upon these floods; yea,
the Lord sits King for ever, Psalm. 29.10.

There are other mystical waves, even waves within us, which will not be
trodden upon by any foot, but Gods. There is a sea of wickedness in every man's
heart by nature. Every wicked man is nothing but a sea, he is a sea of
wickedness. The wicked (Isa. 57.20.) are like the troubled sea, when it cannot
rest. And as the winds blow from all quarters of the heavens, and strive upon
the seas: So there are diverse lusts, which as winds strive upon the face of
man's heart, the lust of pride, the lust of covetousnes, the lusts of ambition,
of envy, of malice, these enrage and swell the waters. The Lord treads upon the
high waves of this sea also, he restrains and keeps lust down by his power, it
would drown all else. These raging waves swell too high in his own people; it
is the work of his Spirit to tread these down; and when the winds of several
temptations raise those waves, he it is that commands them down. Who amongst us
is there, that one time or other finds not corruption raging, as the high
waves of the sea? How mighty and powerful is the Lord in that great work of
his effectual grace, treading upon the waves of this sea, remaining corruption
in his servants and children!

Verse 9. Which makes Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the
South.
In the verse immediately before, we heard of the power of God in stretching
out the heavens; and in this we have his excellent skill, and infinite wisdom
displaied in adorning, decking and beautifying those heavens which he had
stretched forth. He has not only drawn out a vast piece of work, In astroru^
pulchritudine, situ, ordine, vi, stupendiso in haec infortora operationibus,
admirabilis prorsus creatoris magnificentia and magnitudo plurimu^ clucet. Bold.
like a large Canopy (such are the heavens) but he has embroidered this
Canopy, and set it with rich sparkling stones; he has made several
engravings, images, figures, and representations upon it.

Or we may make the connection with the later clause of the former verse. Job
having said that the Lord treads upon the high waves of the sea; that when
the seas are most stormy and tempestuous, they are at his command, and that
their confusions are under his Empire and order; he adds this verse by way of
answer to a possible objection. For some might say, the motion of the seas is
from the power and influences of the stars, Cum multa sint astra hominibus and
fluctibus infensa, eorum praecipue mem^nit, quorum vis ad ciendas tempestates
hominibus magis est explorata. San.
from the rising and setting of the moon, with other planets and
constellations. True, says Job, yet the Lord is he that treads upon the
waves of the sea, it is the Lord that orders them, and not the stars: Though
the stars and constellations have a dominion over the seas in their ebbings and
flowings, motions and revolutions, yet there is a Lord who has power, not only
over the seas, but over that which over-powers the seas, even over the stars of
heaven. He makes Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades, and the chambers of the South;
which stars, according to the doctrine of Astronomy, have a special power upon
the seas.

Either of these ways we may make the connection.

First, That Job would express the adorning of the heavens, after he had
spoken of their making and stretching forth.

Or secondly, He would teach us, that though the heavens work upon the seas,
yet God works upon the heavens. He makes Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades, and the
chambers of the South.

I shall endeavor to speak of these distinctly; The holy Ghost giving us such
a Text, it is not lightly to be passed by: And though here are strange words
and uncouth expressions, yet we may (I hope) bring them down to an easy
meaning, and fit them to the understanding of the simplest.

I shall touch a little in the general before I come to every one in
particular.

Job under these names couches many of the stars of heaven. Stella est densior
pars orbis: ideo lucent astra, non coeli, quia hi diaphani sunt, and rari,
as^ra autem densa, eoque lucem retinentia, and reflectentia Migir. Phys.
A Star (according to Philosophy) is the thicker part of its orb ^r sphere; it
is thicker then other parts of the heavens; for otherwise as it could not hold
the light, so it could not reflect and send forth the light; It could not be a
vessel for light, or a conveiance for light. Light was created the first day (
Genesis 1.3.) but the lights were created the fourth day ( Genesis 1.14.) that is,
certain vessels were created to hold the light. And God said, Let there be
lights in the firmament of heaven; that is, let the light which is now
scattered through all, be gathered in certain receptacles, fit to keep, and yet
fitted to transmit and disperse it into all parts of the world, Let them be for
lights in the firmament of heaven to give light, verse. 15.

Of these lights or stars, some are called moving, and others fixed. That Is the
doctrine of Astronomers, and it is the doctrine of the Scripture. The Apostle
Jude (ver. 13.) calling some wandering stars, seems to admit of that
distinction of the stars, into wandering and fixed. The unfixt or wandering
stars are seven, known by their names and motions. These in the Text are none
of them; these are placed above them.

The seat of these Asterismes, is in the eighth sphere (to take that doctrine
for granted, though many dispute it) or story of the heavens (so the Prophet
Amos speaks, Chap. 9.2. He builds his stories in the heavens; we put in the
margent, spears, He build^th his spears in the heavens, which being one above
another, are elegantly called the stories of heaven.) And in the eight sphere
innumerable stars are fixed. Some of which fall under special observation and
numeration. Astronomers give us a Catalogue of a thousand three and twenty
stars, which they exactly distinguish; which is the ancient account. And since
that we have had many more discoveries by those noble Navigatours, who have
made thorow-lights to the world, that the East might look into the West, and
the South into the North: The travel, study and experiments of these Masters
in navigation have brought us in an additionall number of three hundred stars
more. And so we reckon a thousand three hundred, and twenty three fixed stars
known by name; of which these in the text are a part.

The other stars are both innumerable and unnameable, beyond number and without
name. Hence when the Lord showed Abraham how great his seed should be, he
carries him out, and bids him look toward heaven, and tell the stars, if he
were able to number them, Genesis 15.5.

The stars (to come a little nearer the Text) observed and numbered by Students
in this great volume of the heavens, are distinguished into forty and one
images or representations, whereof some (for learnings sake) are fancied the
images of men and women, others the images of beasts and fishes, Omnes hae
stellarum imagines non tantum ordine and situ, verum etiam certis nominibus
inter se distinctae sunt.
others the images of things without life. Of these images, twelve are in the
Zodiaque, commonly called the twelve signs. In the Southern part of the sphere
eleven of those signs are placed, and in the Northern eighteen, which added to
twelve in the Zodiaque, make up the number of forty and one.

Now, when it is said in the Text, That God makes Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades,
and the chambers of the South. We are not to take them for so many distinct and
particular stars, but for constellations, or configurations, because they stand
in such a form or figure: and so for the better knowledge of them they are
called by the names of such creatures as they seem to represent.

We have three of those special figures here in the Text, and one more
general. Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades are three figures, or starry
representations in the eighth sphere. I will open their Hebrew names. As also
the Latin and Greek names, used commonly in translations, by which we shall
get a clearer understanding in the nature of the things themselves.

Which makes Arcturus. The word Gnesh in Hebrew, (...) Congregare, conglobare,
huic respondet Graecum verbum (...), quod est, commeare, vel undiquaque
convenire. Arcturus stella est in cauda minoris ursae, and Septentrio dicitur,
(...), ab ursinae caudae similitudine. (...) Constantiam, robur, vel
inconstantiam significat, quod ejus ortus tempestatibus orbem vary turbat.
Bold.
signifies a meeting or congregating of many things together, because in that
one, many stars are joined. Arcturus in Greek is as much as to say, The tail of
the Bear, because the stars called Arcturus stand in a figure like the tail of
a Bear.

The second Asterisme, which we translate Orion, is called in the Hebrew
(Chesil) and that signifies either constancy or inconstancy (the sense runs
both ways) setlednesse or variableness. And it is applied to this star or
constellation in either sense.

First, For constancy or setlednesse, because there is much strength in the
influences of that constellation.

Or, secondly, For inconstancy and unsetlednes, Vnde November Haebraice dicitur
Chislu, ab ortu Orionis, quod eo mense magna fit Coeli inconstantia: Arabice
vocatur Algeuse, i. e bellator: a Chaldaeis Algebar, i. e. Gigas. (...). Audax,
vehemens, ardens Orion. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 25. (...) Graecis est turbo,
concito. Pagn. in These. Dum pelago desaevit hyems and aquosus Orion.
because it is observed, that upon the rising of this star, there is much
variety, changeableness and unsetlednesse in the weather. Hence the Jews call
that month which answers to our November, or the ninth month, Chislu (Zec.
7.1.) because that month was usually very stormy and the weather changeable,
Orion then arising in their Haemisphear. The Arabic word (Algeuse) by which
this Asterisme is named, signifies a warrior; and the Chaldee (Algebar) a
Giant, all aiming at the furious, boisterous winds which usually attend the
appearing of this constellation. And so the Greek word from which Orion
comes, Quida^ Pleiades dicta putant, quasi (...), i. e. plures, quod nunquam
singula apparent. Pleiades, (...), ^avigare
signifies to trouble or to disturb. And its usual Epithetes are bold,
vehement, impetuous Orion, all betraying its unquiet and various temper.

The third starry association we call Pleiades, the Hebrews, Chimah. This is a
very cold constellation. The Greeks express winter by this word, because it
brings in frost and cold with it. The derivation of the Hebrew name is very
obscure. Cur vocatur Chimah libenter fateor me nescire. Bold. Quidam deducunt a
(...) Chaldaicum, quod denotat re^ elevatam stabiliter and in sublime firmiter
erectam, quia est instar cardinis, quasi polus aut vertex mundi. Alij a (...)
quod est defiderare, in rem aliquam tendere, quia Nautae affectant videre hoc
signum.
Some professedly acknowledge their ignorance, that they cannot tell how to
derive it; yet some dig the root of it in the Chaldee, signifying firm. Others
in the Hebrew, signifying to desire, or earnestly to wish for a thing; and the
reason of it is (say they) because these stars (the Pleiades) the seven stars
we often speak of, are much desired by Seamen, for seeing them, they have a
perfect rule to guide and steer their course by. And it is an observation among
some of the Rabbis, that Noah had a little window in the top of his Ark, that
from thence he might (when the waters began to assuage, and the stresse of the
deluge was over) look up to the heavens, and know by those stars what course
his Ark made. Thus much we know, that the stars are the Sea-mens night-guide,
and the rising of some of them falls under their more special observation.

The fourth title of the stars is, (...) Interiora austri. Nam De^ ex ipsis
promptuariis, quasi de thesauris suis quosdam educit ventos, and per ipsos
mirabiles fiderum illorum influxus, intelligit aestiva si dera, ut est
Canicula, etc. Quae quia ad Polum Antarcticum sp^ctant (qu^ velut i^se rior
subest Hor^zonti no^ ropenetratium Austri sid ravocantur, quasi in penetralibus
mundi a nobis ab condita.
The chambers of the South. And why, The chambers of the South? The continent
is put for the things contained. The word which we translate Chambers,
signifies any thing that is very inward or retired, and therefore translated a
chamber, Judge. 15.1. and Cant. 3.4. Man's spirit is thus expressed, because it
lies so far inward (Prove. 24.4.) By knowledge shall the chambers be filled;
that is, the most secret parts of the soul shall be filled by knowledge. Prove.
18.8. The inward part of the belly. Prove. 7.27. They go down to the chambers
of death; that is, to the inmost and most retired ways of death, the grave.
Here, The chambers of the South are the most remote, hidden and secret parts of
the South. And the reason why after he had expressed the other constellations by
special names, he gives us these only in general [The chambers of the South]
is, because the stars which are under the Southern pole, are hidden from us,
and are enclosed and lodged as in a chamber: God locks them up in his treasury,
and they are secrets to this part of the world; the southern Pole being under
or below our Horizon. In the artificial spears of heaven we find few
Asterismes or descriptions of the stars about those parts; there are many,
but we perceive them not. And the virtue and operation of these chambered,
hidden stars, is as strong, as of those, which appear in greatest luster and
beauty.

Again, When he says, Which makes Arcturus etc. his meaning is, Which makes
them appear, or do their office. These stars were made when the heavens were
made, and Jobs discourse is not about creation, but providence. So that to make
Arcturus, etc. in the sense of this Text, is only this, to order the times of
their rising and setting, to distinguish the seasons of the year, and to
produce their several effects in every season, which providentiall acts are
here especially aimed at. Thus he makes Arcturus to rise, about the middle of
September, which is the time of the Equinox, when the civil day and night are
even, and share the hours of the natural day equally between them. Or, as
others account, this star rises about eleven days before the Equinox. So, by
Arcturus we may understand that season of the year: And he makes Arcturus, is,
he orders and disposes of the season, commonly called Autumn. Orion shines
forth in our Hemisphear, about the month of December, and by that, winter is
designed. The Pleiades begin at the spring, therefore called Vergiliae, because
they arise (vere) in the spring, and disappear or go down toward winter. The
chambers of the South, are fiery stars, which have their chief influence upon
us in heat of Summer.

And so we may put the Text into these plain expressions, He makes Arcturus,
Orion and Pleiades, and the chambers of the South. That is,

First, He makes and orders Summer and winter, spring and harvest, because
these stars divide the four seasons of the year.

Or, secondly, thus, He makes hot and cold, wet and dry, storm and calm.

Or, thirdly, as these fo^^ constellations are assigned to the four chief
points of heaven. Arcturus is known by all, who know any thing in the heavens,
to be seated about the Northern Pole, whose opposites are those stars in the
chambers of the South. Orion dwells in the East, and the Pleiades in the West.

So the plain English of the words is this, That the Lord by his mighty power
and wisdom orders and appoints the motions of heaven, from East to West,
from North to South.

Lastly, To clear up the sense of this Text, we must understand these four
constellations Synecdochically, these being put for all the rest; For as God
orders these, so every star in the firmament; the least are under his eye, and
at his dispose, as well as the greatest. But because these are the most
eminent, useful and efficacious in their appearances, motions and influences,
therefore these are named, He makes Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades, and the
chambers of the South.

We may observe from the words thus opened diverse profitable instructions.

First, All the stars are placed in the heavens by the special designment of
God for the use and good of man.

Moses (Deuteronomy. 4.19.) gives a caution to Israel from the Lord, that they should
take heed of imitating the Heathens in their abominations, and this is one
particular, Lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou see the
Sun, and the Moon, and the stars, even all the host of heaven, should be
driven to worship them, which the Lord thy God has divided unto all Nations
under the whole heaven. Observe that, The Lord thy God has divided them unto
all Nations under heaven; Therefore take heed that thou do not worship them.
They are the work of God, they are creatures; and worship, which is proper to
the Creator, must not be given to them. It is a remarkable Text, Lest (says
he) thou should be driven to worship them. How driven? Not by external
force and power, but driven by the strong inclination of thine heart, ravished
with such beautiful objects. The excellency that is in the works of God has
power to draw, yea to drive the heart of man to commit idolatry. Job shows
this, while he acquits himself so industriously from it (Chap. 31.26, 27.) If I
beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, and my
heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth had kissed my hand; this also
were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, etc. Some translate that ( Deuteronomy.
4.) in this language of Job, Lest thou be deceived t^ worship the Sun, Moon
and stars, and host of heaven: this is very considerable: but the thing I
chiefly note in that Scripture to the point in hand, is this, That the Lord
has made and appointed the stars to the several parts of the heavens, he has
divided them to all Nations under the whole heaven. Some stars are the portion
of one people, others of another. As the earth is an inheritance divided among
the children of men; so also are the stars and heavens. Per hanc divisionem
intelligit ordinem and morum planetaru^, qui in suis orbibus ita disponuntur,
ut unaquaeque regio suo tempore eorum gaudeat influxibus. Pined.
We seldom consider what riches we receive from that part of our inheritance;
most think they live by the earth only; No, says Moses, The Lord has divided
the heavens, the Sun, Moon and Stars, unto all Nations under heaven. He has
settled it, what star such a Land shall have, and in what seasons, as also
what proportions of the Sun and Moon, for light, heat and influence. He has
made them for the children of men. Man is fed and clothed, warmed and
cherished from heaven more then from the earth: and the lot and divisions which
we have of the earth, are naturally and usually good or bad, rich or barren,
pleasant or unpleasant, healthy or unwholesome, according as the aspects of the
heaven and stars, are more or less benign, or favorable unto them. Moses
(Deuteronomy. 29.26.) reproves the ingratitude of the Jews by this argument, Because
they went and served other gods, and worshipped them, gods whom they knew not,
and whom he had not given to them. So we translate. But the letter of the
Hebrew gives it thus; who had not given to them, or divided among them any
portion. As if Moses had said, The Lord divided and gave the heavens and the
stars among you, and these base dunghill-gods never gave you so much as a clod
of earth, and will ye depart from Jehovah to serve them?

Secondly, Observe, God knows the number, the names and the nature of all the
stars.

He gives them special names. These in the translation are names of man's
imposition. Yet the holy Ghost uses Heathenish names in the new Testament (
Act. 28.11.) we read of a Ship, in which Paul sailed to Rome, whose sign was
Castor and Pollux, two Pagan Sea-gods. It is said, that God brought all the
beasts of the earth to Adam, that he should give them names; but he brought not
the host of heaven to Adam, that he should give them names, he named them
himself, Psalm. 147.4. He tells the number of the stars, he calls them all
by their names. Men are not able to tell the number of the stars; they tell
distinctly but to a thousand three hundred, or a few more, and they are not
able to tell all these by distinct names, but they are constrained to reckon
them by constellations, where a whole family of stars are called by one name.
The Lord has made it his special privilege to tell the number of the stars,
and to call them all by their names. And these are named in the Text for all
the rest. Observe,

Thirdly, Some stars are more excellent, of greater virtue and name then
others; when these are named, it is for special reason. The Lord names these,
as stars of more then ordinary dignity. These are in degree next to the Sun
and Moon: when a few are named for many, we usually name the chiefest: as the
whole people of the Jews are set forth by the heads of their Tribes, by the
Chiefs; and when a Nation is spoken of, it is by those greater names, the
Magistrates and the Ministers. These are named, because they have most to do,
and the greatest business in a Nation. So these stars are here named, because
they are of special use and influence. The Apostle gives us this clearly (1
Cor. 15.41.) There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another
glory of the Stars; for one star differs from another star in glory. One
star has a more honorable name then another. Some stars God does not
vouchsafe to name particularly to us, when others, which are of greater glory,
are. As in a building, some parts of it are chief, The foundation, the top
stone, the corner stone; the strength and beauty of the whole building are
comprehended under these. God has made differences and degrees in all
creatures; in the heavenly as well as earthly. The names of most stars are
concealed, as being of a lower degree. And we find that whenever in
Scriptare stars are spoken of, scarce any are named but these, and these are
often named, which implies their superiority and dignity. The Prophet urges
this as an argument of humblest addresses unto, and dependence upon God. (Amos
5.8.) Seek him that makes the seven stars (that is, Pleiades) and Orion, and
turns the shadow of death into the morning, etc. He does not say, Seek him
that makes all the stars, the Lord made all. But because he has given so much
virtue and excellency to these, these only are reported as of his making. Here,
Which makes Arcturus: (there) Seek him which makes the seven stars; As if he
had said, In those stars God has laid out much of himself, and made his power
and wisdom most visible: How much has God in himself, who has communicated
so much to one senseless creature?

And though stars differ thus one from another, yet they envy not one another.
Which lessons us to be content, though God make our names less named in the
world, than the names of many of our brethren; though he trust more talents to,
or put more light into others, than into our selves. One star differs from
another star in glory, but no star envies another glory.

Fourthly, Job being about to declare the power and wisdom of God, gives
instance (among other things) in this, He makes Arcturus, Orion, etc. Then
observe,

The power and wisdom of God shine eminently in the stars.

The power and wisdom of God shine in every grass that grows out of the
ground, yea in every clod of earth much more then in the stars of heaven. Much
of God is seen in those works of God; yea, so much, that many have been drawn
to make them gods. There is so much of God seen in the heavens, that not only
Heathens, who had not the true knowledge of God: but his Vovenant People, who
knew him, and whom he knew above all the Families of the earth, have been drawn
away to worship the host of heaven. That place before cited ( Deuteronomy. 4.) hinteth
as much, Take heed, lest when thou liftest up thine eyes to heaven, and see
the Sun, and the Moon, and the stars, even all the host of heaven, thou
should be driven to worship them and serve them. If thou lift up thine eyes
to the stars, and not higher, even to God who made the stars, thou will quickly
mistake the stars for God, or make the stars thy god; the heart of man is mad
upon idolatry. Read how often the Jews are taxed with this sin, 2 King. 21.3.
and in 2 King. 17.16. and in Amos 5.26. which clears this truth, that much of
the power and wisdom of God is stamped upon the stars; if God did not much
appear in the stars, so many had not taken the stars for God, or given them,
which is proper and peculiar to God, religious worship.

There are five or six things which show the power of God and his wisdom in
making of the stars.

First, The greatness of the Stars; such vast bodies show an infinite power in
their constitution. It is incredible to ordinary reason (unless men have skill
and learning to make it out, and to lay the course of nature together) that the
stars are so great. The Sun is reckoned by Astronomers to be one hundred
sixty six times bigger than all the earth. The Moon indeed, which is called a
great light, is thirty nine times less then the earth, yet that magnitude is
far beyond common apprehension. Some other of the planets are almost an
hundred times bigger then the earth. And whereas the fixed stars are
distinguished into six magnitudes, or differences of greatness. Those of the
first magnitude (which are many) are conceived to be one hundred and seven
times bigger then the whole earth. We look upon a star, as if it were no bigger
then the blaze of a Candle, and the Countryman wonders if the Moon be bigger
then his bushel, or broader then his Cart-wheel. If the most judicious enter
the consideration of these things, they may soon come to amazement, that so
many stars in the heavens should be more then an hundred times bigger then all
the earth. And if there are such vast bodies in heaven, what a vast body is
heaven? That continent must needs be exceedingly exceeding vast, which contains
so many exceeding vast bodies in it. If we get but a nook or a corner of the
earth for our portion, we presently think our selves great men: yet what is
all the earth to the heavens? And what are the heavens we see to that heaven
which is unseen, to which these are but a pavement? The heavens which are to us
a roof, are but a floor to the highest heavens.

A second thing which shows the mighty power and wisdom of God in the stars,
is the multitude of them, they are innumerable: Man cannot tell them (only God
can) they are like the sand of the sea for number. A multitude of little sands
make a huge body; then how great a body do a multitude of great bodies make?

Thirdly, The swiftness of their motion, that these mighty vast bodies should
be carried about every day, so long a journey, and never tire or wear, shows
infinite power and wisdom.

Fourthly, This is more admirable, the exact order of their motion. That
innumerable stars should move continually in the heavens, and yet not one of
them move out of course: this regularity of their motion is settled by an
ordinance of heaven (Jer. 31.35.) where the Lord, to assure his people that he
would be steady and steadfast in the ways of his love to them, and that he
would not cast them off, tells them that he would be as firm to them in his
Covenant, as he is in the ordinances of heaven: Thus says the Lord, which
gives the Sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the Moon and of the
stars, for a light by night, etc. As if he had said, I have made a statute and
a decree which is irrepealable and irrevocable concerning the motion of the
stars. There is an ordinance of heaven for it: so that as the celestial bodies
cannot but continue the course I have assigned them for the enlightening of
these inferior parts, while the world lasts: So the Covenant which I have made
with you shall not fail to give you light. Thus he infers in the next verse, If
these ordinances depart from before me, says the Lord, then shall the seed of
Israel also cease from being a Nation before me for ever; but that cannot be, I
have established these stars by a firm and perpetual decree; therefore you
are much more established.

And such is the exactness of their order and motion, that the stars of heaven
are frequently in Scripture called an host or an army: Now an army, as it
consists of many persons (which is one reason why the stars are called an host)
so an army rightly marshalled is cast into an exact form, and so regular for
motion, that it is one of the good lie sights in the world. Now the stars are
the host of heaven, they stand (as it were) in battalia, they keep rank and
file; there is not so much as one of that great multitude out of place;
therefore, Judge. 5.20. where they are said to fight against Sisera, they are
described fighting in courses, The stars in their courses fought against
Sisera; as if the stars had been drawn up, now one regiment, then another
regiment of them, to charge upon Sisera and his host: the heavens fought, and
the stars fought, that is, the Lord by an heavenly power and influence of the
stars confounded Sisera, and all the enemies of Israel.

Fifthly, There is a most efficacious virtue in the stars. It is a secret
virtue, and it is a strong irresistible virtue, no power in the creature can
stop it: Therefore God challenges Job, in the 38. of this book of Job, v. 31.
Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?
There are influences in the stars, and can thou bind them? Is it in the
power of any creature to stop the issues and out-flowings of the stars? Their
influences are so efficacious, that none can bind them, but he that loses
them; none can bind them, but the hand and power which made them; there is so
much efficacy in them, that if God let them go on in their natural vigor,
their effects are wonderful. I (says the Lord, Hos. 2.21, 22.) will hear the
heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and
the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel; As if he had said, The
heavens are next in power to me, they are second to my self in working,
Therefore I will hear the heavens, the heavens cannot do it, unles I give them
a commission, but I will hear the heavens. I will leave a power in the heavens,
And the heavens shall hear the earth, (...)
and the earth shall hear the corn, etc. There is a gradation, a descent from
God to us, and the heavens are the next receptacle, the immediate vessel,
receiving and taking in power and virtue from God to defuse and send down upon
the creatures here below, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the
earth.

Sixthly, Observe, That the stars and constellations of heaven, can do nothing
of themselves, but as they receive order and commission from the Lord.

He makes Arcturus and Orion, etc. They have great power, but it is the Lord
that makes them. (...) Non tantum facere, sed etiam aptare, disponere,
dirigere, and praeparare significat.
That word [He maketh] does not so much signify the Creation, as the
providentiall disposition of the stars, as was noted in the Exposition of it.
He makes them, that is, he orders and disposes them, or he acts the stars, he
trims up those lamps of heaven; the word is so used (2 Samuel 19.24.)
Mephibosheth, while David was in trouble, had not dressed his feet; the Hebrew
is, He had not made his feet, that is, he had neglected his body; now (says
Job) the Lord is he that makes, dresses, or trims up those lamps of heaven:
though they have a natural virtue, yet that virtue is quickened by providence.
Providence is a continued creation. He makes Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades.

The stars are the servants of God, they receive orders and directions from him
for all they do. And the reason why the Lord did so often call his people off
from gazing upon the stars, and reproved star-gazers, was, because they looked
no further than the stars, they thought the stars did all, they did not eye God
that made Arcturus, Orion, etc. but they only eied Arcturus, etc. Therefore he
threatens the star-gazers and monthly prognosticatours, who took upon them to
resolve future events by the conjunction of planets, and planetary aspects;
placing an uncontrolable power in the hands of the heavens, and stars, whereas
I (says the Lord) make Arcturus: I made him, and I make him do what I command,
not what you foretell. Therefore ( Isa. 44.24, 25.) the Prophet speaking of
Gods work in making the heavens and the stars, presently adds, how he befools
men, that will prophecy from the stars, as if they could tell infallibly what
shall come to pass. I am the Lord that makes all things, that stretches
forth the heavens alone, that spreads abroad the earth by my self: What
follows? That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes diviners mad. I
stretch out the heavens: some will needs prophecy out of the heavens, I have
set the stars in the heavens, and they are for signs ( Genesis 1.14.) but I have
not set them for Prophets: If any presume to declare or resolve what shall be
done, I resolve to punish their presumption. I take delight to frustrate men,
who delight in this, and to befool them, who would be thus wise. This is my
name, The God that stretches out the heavens alone, and that makes diviners
mad. Great disappointments enrage: and some men lose their reason, when they
lose the credit of doing things above reason. Because they cannot be as Gods to
foretell good or evil, they will not be so much as men, He makes the diviners
mad. The Law was peremptory and severe against them ( Deuteronomy. 18.9.) There shall
not be found amongst you any one that uses divination, or is an observer of
times; why not an observer of times? may we not observe times and seasons? May
we not look up to the heavens and consider their motions? Yes, we may observe
times holily, but not superstitiously, as if some times were good, others bad,
some lucky, others unlucky, as if the power of God were shut up in, or
overruled by his own instruments and inferior causes, this is dishonorable
unto God, and thus the Jews were forbidden to use any divination, or to observe
times.

The heavens and stars are for signs, but they are not infallible signs. They
are ordinary signs of the change of weather, Mat. 16.2, 3. They are ordinary
signs of the seasons of the year, Spring and Summer, and harvest and winter;
they are ordinary signs of a fit time to till and manure the ground, to plow,
sow and reap. The earth is fitted and prepared for culture by the motion of
the heavens. The heavens are at once the Alphabet of the power and wisdom of
God, and of our works: we may read there when to do many businesses. Genesis 8.22.
While the earth remains, seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer
and winter, and day and night shall not cease. Those seasons shall continually
return according to the time of the year, measured by the Sun, Moon and Stars.
Thus, they are signs of ordinary events. And God sometimes puts the sign of an
extraordinary event in them, Mat. 24.29. Immediately after the tribulation of
those days shall the Sun be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light,
and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be
shaken; which, some understand allegorically; others literally of strange
apparitions and impressions in heaven, either before the destruction of
Jerusalem, or the day of judgment. So Act. 2.19, 20, etc. Thus God puts a sign
in them of extraordinary events.

But shall man from them prognosticate and foretell extraordinary events? as
when there shall be famine and pestilence, war and trouble in Nations? This the
Lord abhors. The counsels of God about these things are written in his own
heart; what is man that he should transcribe them from the heavens? But if men
will say, they are written there; God will blot out what they say, and prove
theirs to be but humane divinations, yea, that they were received from hell,
not written in heaven. (Isa. 47.13.) I will destroy the signs of them that
divine, let now the Astrologers, the star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticatours
stand up and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee: Behold,
they shall be as stubble, they shall not be able to deliver themselves. It is
good to be a starre-beholder, but a wicked thing to be a starre-gazer; that is,
to look upon the stars, so, as if we could spell out the secret providence of
God, and read future events in the book of those creatures. It is our duty to
look upon the heavens, as they declare the glory of God; but it is a sin to
look upon the heavens, as if they could declare the destinies, fates and
fortunes of men. All which vanities are largely and learnedly confuted by M
Perkins, in his book called, The resolution of the Countryman about
Prognostications.

Now, that the success of every creature is in God, not in the stars, we may
see; first, in the order of the creation; God created the earth, and commanded
it to bring forth fruit upon the third day, but the lights in the firmament
were made the fourth day: The earth can bring forth without the midwifery or
help of the heavens. God himself made the earth fruitful without, yea, before
the stars were made. Philo Judaers de opificio mun^i.
Upon which one of the Ancients gives this observation, Surely (says he) the
Lord in his providence made the earth fruitful in all its glory, before he put
the stars in the heavens, to the intent to make men see that the fruitfulness
of the earth does not depend upon the heavens or stars; God needs neither the
rain of the clouds, nor the warmth of the Sun to produce these effects. He that
made all second causes to work in their ranks, can work without the
intervention of any second cause. And because the Lord foresaw men would dote
much upon second causes, and venture to prognosticate by the heavens the fates
of men, and the fruitfulness of the earth, therefore he made the earth
fruitful before he made Arcturus, or placed those constellations in the
heavens.

Secondly, The providence of God works under the decree of God. His providence
is the execution of his decree. Therefore we must not bring the decrees down to
providence, but we must raise providence up to the decrees.

Thirdly, The heavens and those heavenly bodies, Arcturus etc. are but general
causes, there are special causes besides of the earths barrenness or
fruitfulness, of tempests at sea and troubles at land; and the Lord is able to
invert all causes, to work beyond causes, without causes and against causes: So
that nothing can be infallibly foretold from the positions, conjunctions or
revolutions of those heavenly bodies.

Lastly, Observe, That it is our duty to study the heavens, and be acquainted
with the stars.

In them the wonderful works of God are seen, and a sober knowledge in nature
may be an advantage unto grace. Holy David was such a student (Psalm. 8.3.) When
I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the Moon and the Stars which
thou have ordained. Consideration is not a transient or accidental, but a
resolved and a deliberate act. Shall we think that God has made those mighty
bodies, the stars, to be past by without consideration? Shall men only pore
upon a lump of earth, and not have their hearts lifted up to consider those
lamps of light? Shall man make no more use of the stars then the beasts of the
earth do, namely to see by them? When I consider thy heavens, says David.
Heaven is the most considerable of all inanimate creatures, and more
considerable then most of the animate: and, David's, when, when I consider the
heavens, notes not only a certainty, that he did it, but frequency in doing it.
Some of the Rabbis tell us, that when Isaac went out into the field to
meditate (Genesis 24.63.) The subject of his meditation was the stars, or the
heavens. It is good to take field-room sometimes to view and contemplate the
works of God round about. Only take heed of the former folly, of Astrologicall
curiosities, confining the providence of God to secondary causes; avoid that,
and the heart may have admirable elevations unto God, from the meditation of
the works of God. ( Psalm. 19.1.) The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament shows his handy work; if the heavens declare the glory of God, we
should observe what that glory is which they declare. The heavens preach to us
every day. Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the
end of the world, Psalm. 19.4. Sun, Moon and Stars are Preachers, they are
universal preachers, they are natural Apostles; the world is their charge,
their words, says the Psalm, go to the ends of the earth. We may have good
doctrine from them, especially this doctrine in the text, of the wisdom and
power of God. And it is very observable that the Apostle alludes to this text
in the Psalm, for a proof of Gospel-preaching to the whole world, Romans 10.18.
So then, faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. But I say,
have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their
words unto the end of the world. The Gospel like the Sun casts his beams over,
and sheds his light into all the world. David in the Psalm says, Their line is
gone out, etc. By which word he shows, that the heavens being so curious a
fabric, made (as it were) by line and level, do clearly, though silently
preach the skill and perfections of God. Or, that we may read divine truths in
them, as in a line formed by a pen into words and sentences (the original
signifies both a measuring line, (...) Significat lineam, non modo extensam,
hoc est, funiculum, sed etiam scriptam, hoc est scripturam. Par. in Romans 10
and a written line.) Letters and words in writing being nothing but lines
drawn into several forms or figures. But the Septuagint, whose translation the
Apostle cites, for (Kavam) their line, read (Kolam) their sound; either
mis-reading the word, or studiously mollifying the sense into a nearer
compliance with the later clause of the verse, And their words into the ends of
the world.

Pro (...)
Thus I have endeavored to make those things plain, which are here represented
(to vulgar ears) under strange, unusual, and hidden expressions.

Job is full of Philosophy and Astronomy, he was a great student in the
heavens, doubtless, and a holy student. Job having given these several
instances, gathers them all into a general conclusion in the tenth verse.

Verse 10. Which does great things past finding out, yea, and wonders without
number.
These words are repeated from the discourse of Eliphaz, in the 5th Chap. v. 9.
I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause, which does great
things and unsearchable, mavelous things without number. I will not stay in a
particular disoussion of them, but refer the Reader to the place before cited,
where the text is opened at large, and particular observations given from it.
Take only this observation in general.

That, A godly man labors to exalt God, both in his thoughts and in his words,
with heart and tongue, when God depresses and humbles him most.

Mark in what a condition Job was, when he speaks thus honorably of the name
and power of God. One would think, Job had little reason to extol the power of
God, which he felt to his own smart; Job was stripped of all he had, his outward
comforts were taken from him, and the arrows of the Almighty wounded his very
spirit. Now when he had wounded Job through and through, through flesh and through
spirit, even at this time, when God appeared, making no use of his power but to
undo Job, Job is in his Encomium, all in the praise and commendation of God. He
endites a Chapter on purpose to set forth the power and wisdom of God, while he
employed both to make his afflictions both great and accurate. This shows the
admirable frame of his spirit; in all his distempers his heart stood right, and
he would speak good of God, what evil soever befell him from Gods hand. Let God
afflict with his power, yet a gracious heart rejoices in it. A gracious heart
will lift up that power which weakens and throws it down. Let the Lord employ
his wisdom to undo, to impoverish such a man, to bring him into such straits
that he cannot get out, yet he has enlarged thoughts of that wisdom, He sees
God is as wise in troubling us, as he is in delivering. That language of Spira,
is the right language of hell (I judge not his person, but his speech) who in a
great temptation spoke thus, I would I had more power then God, or, O that I
were above God. He was angry that God had so much power, because God used his
power against him. A carnal man would be above God: especially, if God at any
time puts forth his power against him. When he is hard bestead and hungry, he
frets himself and curses his King and his God, looking upward (Isa. 8.21.) to
murmur at God, not to pray unto him, or speak good of him. Tertullian. Illud
est impiorum ingenium, ut Deum non ulterius celebrent, quam cum benefacit. Fer.
It is observed by one of the Ancients concerning the Heathen, That if God did
not please them, he should be no longer God. Such are our hearts by nature, if
God do not use his power, wisdom, mercy for us, we presently wish he had no
power, wisdom, nor mercy for any in the world; we would be above God, unles God
will serve us: but an holy heart says thus, Let God improve his power and
wisdom which way he pleases, if to afflict and chasten me, yea to destroy and
cast me to hell, his be the power for ever, I extol his power. Nature can only
praise God, and speak good of him, when he is doing of us good: But grace
prompts the heart to indite a good matter, and bids the tongue be as the pen of
a ready writer to advance God, when sense feels nothing but smart, and sees
nothing but sorrow round about. Then grace is in her heights, when she can lift
up God highest, while he is casting us down, and laying us lowest: When we can
honor God frowning, as well as smiling upon us; smiting and wounding, as well
as kissing and embracing us, then we have learned to honor God indeed.

JOB Chap. 9. Verse. 11, 12, 13. Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not; he
passes on also, but I perceive him not.

Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? who shall say unto him, What do
thou?

If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him.


JOB having in the former context exalted the power and wisdom of God in many
instances, and closed all with an admiring sentence, He does great things and
unsearchable, mavelous things without number. He, in these words seems to
give a proof of those attributes of Gods works, that they are innumerable and
unsearchable, etc.

Verse 11. For lo, he goes by me and I see him not; he passes on also, but I
perceive him not.
As if he had said, I am not able to reckon how often he works, for I cannot
always perceive when he works, I am not able to search out all his great and
wonderful actings, for I cannot see him in many of his actings.

He goes by me, and I see him not. The Lord is said to go by us, not in
regard of any local motion: for, he that fills all places, moves to none,
Do not I fill heaven and earth? is the Lords query of himself to those who
thought to play least in sight with him. And he convinces them that they could
not be hid from him in secret places, because he fills all places. There is no
place to be found beyond the line of heaven and earth, both which God fills (
Jer. 23.24.) Then his motion is not local, (...) Mutavit, variavit, rem vel
locum, denotat mutationem conditionis vel loci Mol. in Ps. 90. 6.
but providentiall, God does not move to act, but his acting is his moving. He
goes by us, doing mavelous things for us, and we see not when he is doing,
or what he is doing.

The other word here used [He passes on] is of the same sense: yet more
peculiar and proper to the motion of spirits, we had it in the fourth Chapter,
verse. 15. A spirit passed before me, says Eliphaz, when he speaks of the
vision that appeared. It signifies to change and vary, either place or
condition. The transitory changablenesse of the creature, is expressed by it (
Psalm. 102.27.) Thou do change them, and they shall be changed; the creatures
pass on, as from place to place, so from condition to condition, The fashion
of them passes away (1 Cor. 7.31.) They have not only a perfective change, but
a corruptive change; but of the Lord he says, Thou art the same, and thy years
shall have no end. The word is used for changing by oppressive destruction
(Prove. 31.8.) Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all such as are
appointed to destruction, or death. Such as are appointed to that great change,
are called, (...) Filij excidij, i. e. qui tra^untur excidio. Jun. in loc.
The Sons of change or destruction: Thus the Original. So that the word
signifies any change or motion, whether perfective or corruptive. The Lord
(says Job) passes on, he makes changes, he works sometimes to perfect,
sometimes to destroy, but I perceive him not, I am not able to make out what he
does.

Here are two words, one referring to sense, the other to understanding, He
goes by me, and I see him not; that is, my senses cannot find him: He passes
on also, and I perceive him not; that is, he destroieth, he builds, he
planteth, he rooteth up, but I am not able to apprehend him, or unriddle the
meaning of his wonderful works, He does great things, and things unsearchable.

No^ est una interpretatio hujus divini ac cessu^ and recessus, Pined.
There is much variety of opinion about the meaning of these words, though I
think the meaning is clear in that general I have now given. Yet I will touch
a little.

First, Some interpret Jobs discourse conversing still, in and about the Multa
sunt naturalia quorum suprenum auctorem Deum, vel opus inchoantem, vel ab opere
cessantem no^ observamus, atque ita praecedenti sententiae haec innectitur,
tanquam illius subjecta ratio. Id. Quemadmodum sit in omnibus extra omnia and
supra omnia sciri non potest. Olymp.
natural works of God, the earth, the heavens, the waters and the air, (of
which he had spoken before) as also about the body of man (Act. 17.28.) In him
we live, and move, and have our being. God is about us, he is ever with us, and
yet we observe not, either when he begins to work, or rests from working. How
he is in all things, without all things, and above all things is not known.

Secondly, Others take his going and passing for the acts of his Deum venire
miserentis est, discedere punientis. Phil. Presb. Aquinas ad beneficia
praestita vel denegata refert. Transit eum, quem impunitu^ relinquit. Drus.
favor or dis-favour, He goes by me in bestowing favors, and He passes on,
in taking them away: his accesses or recesses in mercy or judgment, his love
and his wrath are often indiscernable, He goes by me, he passes on, he
varieth his workings, and I perceive him not. To pass by is taken sometimes
for sparing, pardoning, or showing mercy. The Lord by his Prophet ( Amos 7.8.)
reports several judgments, from a full execution of which he was taken off,
yet at last he resolves, I will not pass by them any more (it is the word
here) that is, I will not have mercy on them any more, I will not spare them
any more, the next time I come with my drawn sword in my hand, I will be sure
to smite and wound before I put it up, I will not pass by them any more. So
[He passes by me] may note here the sparing mercy of God. The Lord spares man
many times and pardons him, not suffering his whole displeasure to arise, when
man takes no notice, but is insensible of it. The word is used in this sense (
Prove. 19.11.) It is the glory of man to pass by an offense; that is, to spare
a man that has offended, not to punish him or take revenge: and it is ordinary
in our phrase of speech to say, I will pass you by for this time, that is, I
will not take any severe notice, or strict account of what you have done. And
we find in the same prophecy of Amos, that to pass through, notes judgment
and wrath, in the opposite sense; In the fifth Chapter, verse. 17. In all
vineyards shall be wailing; Why? For I will pass through thee, (...) In
interiori tuo
or I will pass into thy bowels or inwards: So the letter of the original;
that is, I will come to judge thee, I will pass through thee as a revenger, and
wound thee deeply, insomuch that in all vineyards there shall be wailing; why
in all vineyards? When he says, There shall be wailing in all vineyards, it
implies there should be wailing every where: for if there were joy in any
place, it would be in the vineyards; vineyards are places of mirth and
refreshing, grapes make the wine, which makes glad the heart of man. Therefore
when he threatens, That in all vineyards there shall be wailing; it is as much
as if he had said, There shall be sorrow in those places where usually the
greatest joy was found, or there shall be sorrow in every place. Joy shall
dislodge and give place to sorrow, for, I will pass through thee says the
Lord. So that as the work of providence in sparing, and the work of providence
in punishing, may be understood by this word, with a little varying of the
construction. He passes by me in the ways of mercy, and I see him not; Deus
simplicissimus est spiritus and invisibilis, itaque neque nos adorientem cum
venit, neque cum obis pedem referentem senti^e possumus.
and he passes through me in the ways of judgment, and I see him not. I
cannot see or understand him as I ought, either in ways of judgment, or of
mercy.

Thirdly, we may take the words, as they are an argument to prove the power and
wisdom of God to be such, as man is no way able to match or to deal withal,
which is the subject Job is upon. He would set the Lord infinitely above all
that is in the creature, and he does it there by an argument drawn from his
nature. What is his nature? Why, he is most simple, he is a spirit without any
mixture, without any composition, without any materiality, he is invisible,
bodily eyes cannot behold him, therefore certainly bodies are not able to
overcome him. Man being a material substance, is not able to see the Lord,
then surely he is not able to contend with, much less to conquer the Lord;
What then does he meddling with him? It was said at the 4th verse of this
Chapter, Who ever hardened himself against him, and has prospered? Is flesh
and blood any match for a spirit? If man would strive with God, where should he
have him? He goes by me, and I see him not; he passes on also, and I perceive
him not; I know not where to meet him, he can come upon me on every side, he
may take me at all advantages, and destroy me, for I know not how to guard or
defend my self. If a man were to fight with an enemy, whom he could not see,
and yet his enemy saw him; what an advantage had his enemy against him? Does
any man harden himself against God? He goes by, and we see him not; How then
can we deal with him, or stand against him? Thus (I say) it may be an argument
to make good that great assertion, That there is no contending with God; flesh
and blood are too weak for a spirit. It is the argument which the Apostle uses,
to show that the devil is too hard for man, We wrestle not with flesh and
blood, but with principalities and powers, with spiritual wickednesses, etc.
Ephesians. 6. They pass by us, and we understand it not, they are now here amongst
us, and we take no notice of it: We are no matches for evil spirits, much less
are we able to match the most holy Spirit. Est invicti hostis descriptio.
Spiritual wickednesses are strong, but spiritual holinesses are stronger.
This third interpretation renders the words a description of an invincible
enemy.

Fourthly, It may be understood in the general, Significatur hic summa
distantia inter Deum and homines: Deus omnia videt, and rebus omnibus
praesentia and efficaci^ sua intervenit, homo suo affixus loco Deum non videt
nisi in effectis. Coc.
to note the infinite distance which is between God and man, or the dignity of
God above man, The Lord is omnipresent, he is going by, and he is passing on,
he is in all places, and he acts his power and wisdom where he pleases. Poor
man is confined to a place, to a spot of earth; when he is here, he cannot be
there; but God is every where: And though God be every where, yet he cannot be
seen any where, where he is. God sees all, himself being unseen, and fills all
places, his presence being is unperceived; nothing is hid from him, yet he is
hid to every thing, but the faith of his own people. Thus He goes, and we see
him not; he passes on, and we perceive him not.

And so the whole is a confirmation and proof of the general assertion, that
the Lord is infinite in power and wisdom, and that man is an ignorant
narrow-room'd and narrow-hearted weak creature compared unto him. We may form
up the Argument thus: Si quod documentum potentiae and sapientiae suae ^e dat
Deus ob oculos meos, non sum is qui id pervestigare possum, adeo inscrutabilia
sun^ judicia ejus. Ju^. Transeundi and transmeandi verbis concinne significat
ea documenta sapie^tiae quae Deus exh bet, quasi praesens prae^entes erudiret.
He is weak and ignorant in comparison of God, who cannot see or comprehend
where God is, or what God does.

But man is not able to comprehend, or see where God is, or what God does.

Therefore man i^ weak and ignorant in comparison of God.



The ground is this, He that cannot comprehend or see what another does, is not
able to hinder or match him in what he does: But such is the state and
condition of man, he is so far from being able to equal God in dignity, or
hinder what he does, that he cannot find out or know what God does.

Yet this is not to be taken strictly, as if man did not at all perceive or
understand what God does. Job in the former context gave us a large account of
the works of God, what wonders he had done. The Saints find out some of Gods
doings in the world, though the blind world see not any thing he does. But he
speaks comparatively; The Lord passes on, and we perceive it not; that is, it
is little of God that we perceive; it is little of the workings of God that we
see at the best. There are many persons who do not see him at all, and many
works that are not seen at all by any person. Ita significat, ex ioperibus Dei
vix centissimum quodque ut par est ab hominibus expendi. ^ined.
And they, the eyes of whose understandings are anointed to see most clearly,
are not able to see all that God does, None can see all, some will not see what
they may (Isa. 26.10.) Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see it;
and in the former verse, In the land of uprightness, will he deal unjustly,
and will not behold the Majesty of the Lord. That which good men see is but
little, and evil men see nothing. So that, as the Lord goes altogether
invisibly in his essence, so mostly in his actions; man sees but few things of
the many, and little of the great things which God does. Nemo potest scire an
Deum habeat in se habitantem and in se manentem. J^cob. Janson in loc.


I meet with a gross exposition of this text given by some Papists. No man
(says one of them) can know whether God dwell or abide in him or no. And
Bellarmine in his 5th book, and 5th Chapter concerning justification cites it
to prove, That a believer cannot know that he is justified, but must believe
blinde-fold, or take the work of justification by grace in the dark, For (says
he) God goes by us, and we see him not; he passes on, and we perceive him
not: Allen^ssi ^e hu^c locum citat Bellar^inus, ut probet nu^u^ fid^lem scire
an justificatus sit. Coc.
That is (as his gloss speaks) God comes in favor to justify, or he
leaves under wrath, and yet man remains ignorant both of the one, and of the
other state. Surely he was at a great pinch to find a proof for his point,
when he was forced to repair to this Scripture to seek one. Providence toward
mankind (not the justification of a sinner) is the proper subject of this
text. And as there is nothing for a blinde-fold justification here, so many
other Scriptures are expressly against it. To say that a man cannot know when
God loves him, or shines upon him, is to contradict what our Savior asserts,
Joh. 14.17. I will send the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive,
because it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye know him, for he dwells
with you, and shall be in you. Ye know him, says Christ to his people, the
Saints see God in a spiritual sense, or in his workings upon their spirits.
And though God works much upon our spirits, which we know not, yet we have a
promise of the Spirit, by whom we know God in his workings. Few know when God
is nigh, or when he is a far off, what his goings away mean, or what his
commings. But when he comes to the Saints, they know he comes; and when he
hides or departs from them, they know his hidings and departures. Hence
their joies and over-flowings of comfort, when he manifests his presence; and
hence their bitter complainings and cryings after him, where he seems to absent
himself and hide his face: yet this Text has a truth in it, in reference to
the inward and spiritual, as well as the outward and providentiall dealings of
God, that sometimes, He goes by us, and we see him not; he passes on also,
and we perceive him not.

Hence learn; First, That

God is invisible in his essence, and incomprehensible in many of his actions.
Man's eye cannot see him: Man's understanding cannot comprehend what he does.

But why speaks Job this, as a matter of wonder, if it be the common condition
of mankind? Behold, he passes by, and I see him not; who can see him? who
can perceive or comprehend him? When Moses (Exodus 33.20.) desired to see his
face, the Lord answers, No man can see my face and live; God spoke to Moses
face to face, that is, familiarly, as a man speaks to his friend, yet Moses
did not, could not see the face of God. No man can see God in his essence or
nature: A sight of God would astonish, yea, swallow up the creature, It is
death to see the living God; and man must die before he can see God so fully as
he may, and know as he is known. But (though the face of God be invisible) yet
his back-parts may be seen. Behold (says the Lord to Moses) there is a place
by me, stand thou there upon a rock, and thou shall see my back-parts; thou
shall see much of my glory shining forth, as much as thou can bear, as much
as will satisfy thy desire (were it a thousand times larger then it is) though
not so much as thou have (not knowing what thou ask) desired of me. My Name
shall be proclaimed, Gracious and merciful etc. the back-parts of God may be
seen; the invisible God discovers much of himself to man: and shows us a
shadow of that substance which cannot be seen.

Some may object that of the Prophet Isaias, crying out, Woe unto me, for mine
eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts, Chap. 6.5. Seen him? could Isaias
see him, whom Job and Moses could not? Isaias did not see him in his essence
and nature, but in the manifestations and breakings forth of his glory. His
train filled the Temple, says the Text ( verse. 1.) or his skirts. It is an
allusion to great Kings, who when they walk in State, have their trains, or the
skirt of their royal robe held up. It Was this train, which Isaias saw. He saw
not God who was present, but he saw the manifest signs of his presence. That
speech of Isaiah seemed to savor of, and border upon highest blasphemy, and
was therefore charged as an article of accusation against him; he was indicted
of blasphemy for speaking those words, I have seen the Lord; his enemies taking
or wresting it, as if he had made the Lord corporeal and visible with the eye
of the body. And it is conceived he was put to death upon that, and one other
passage in his prophecy, Cha. 1.10. calling the Princes of Judah, Princes of
Sodom, and the people thereof, the people of Gomorrah.

But though God be thus invisible in his essence, yet there is a way by which
the essence of God may be seen. And of that Moses, to whom the Lord said, Thou
can not see my face, the Author to the Hebrews says ( Heb. 11.24.) That he
saw him who was invisible; the letter of the text carries a contradiction in
the adjunct, it is as much as if one should say, He saw that which could not be
seen. The meaning is, He saw him by the eye of faith, who could not be seen by
the eye of sense; faith sees not only the back-parts, but the face of Jehovah:
the essence of God is as clear to that eye, as any of his attributes, yea his
essence is as plain to faith, as any of his works are to sense. Thus he is
seen, Whom no man has seen nor can see (1 Timothy 6.16.) not the Saints in
heaven: they are not able to see the Lord in his essence, He passes by them
there, and they see him not; in heaven we are promised a sight of him, yet not
that fight, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for they shall see God: and without
holiness no man shall see the Lord, then holy men shall see him; the state of
the Saints in glory is vision, as here it is faith (2 Cor. 13.12.) We shall see
him face to face, and as he is (1 John 3.2.) These Scriptures which speak of
the estate of the Saints, beholding God in glory, are not to be understood, as
if the nature and essence of God could be seen, for no man has seen that, nor
ever shall; but they are meant of a more full and glorious manifestation of
God; We shall see then face to face; that is, more plainly, for it is opposed
to seeing him in a glass; we see him now in a glass, that is, darkly, in
ordinances, in duties, in his word, and in his works, but there shall be no
need of these glasses in heaven. We shall have so direct and full manifestation
of God, that these glasses which reflect him shall be out of use. The Saints on
earth have sometimes a sight of God without a glass, that is, out of all
ordinances, promises and works either wrought in them or for them. God comes
near to their spirits, and lifts them above means, and shows them his love, and
their interest in him by an immediate witness of the Spirit, (1 John 5.8.) For
although the water and the blood (justification and sanctification) never
witness without the Spirit; and though the Spirit never witnesses against
them, or where they are not; yet the Spirit does often witness above them, and
without them, that is, they not being called forth to give their witness. This
is next door to heaven: only, the vision in heaven will be exceedingly
heightened and raised, not only above our vision by ordinances, but above our
vision by immediate revelation or witness.

Further consider, The sight we have of God is in Christ. God is seen in every
creature ( Romans 1.) much more in ordinances, but Christ is the express image
of his person, and the brightness of his glory, Heb. 1.3. He is the medium by
which we see God now, and some have thought we shall see him only in Christ for
ever. But it is out of doubt that in this life God is seen only in Christ
savingly. We of our selves, are so far off from God, that we cannot see him.
There must be a due distance between the organ and the object; we are afar
off from God, until Christ bring us near; we come to, and see the Father
through the Son. And how near soever we are to any object, we cannot see it
without an eye. We are naturally blind, the eyes of our mind must be
enlightened before we see him, Christ clears our understandings, and cures our
blindness, He is made to us of God wisdom (to see our need of him to be made)
righteousness to us, and sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Again,
The medium must be light; if the eye be clear, yet while the air is dark we
cannot see. There must be an outward light, as well as an inward light to see
by; that Jesus Christ makes also; for He is the light of the world, as well as
the enlightner of every one that comes into the world. He sends the means of
knowledge, as well as gives an ability to know. He sends light to the eyes of
our mind, and he is light in the eyes of our mind. What we ought to know
comes from him, and how to know as we ought comes from him. Without him, God
goes by us in the Gospel, and we see him not, he may pass on for ever, and we
never perceive him.

Secondly, Observe, That as the Lord in his nature cannot be seen at all: So
(such is the weakness of man, that) we cannot see him fully in his word, or
works.

How little is it that we see, that we know of God in either? What admirable
operations are there in the course of natural things, in the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, in the growth of herbs and plants, and in our own bodies, which we see
not? What admirable administrations are there in the course of civil things?
The beginnings, growths and declinings of Commonwealths, the transplantations
of people from Country to Country, their oppressions by injustice, their
confusions by war, their establishments by peace, their consumptions by
plague and famine, their increase by health and abundance are little minded by
the most of men. How does God turn Nations up-side-down, and hurl Kingdoms
together, and we perceive him not. Some take no notice at all of God, as doing
such things, none taking such notice as they ought. We observe creatures, what
this man did, and what the other, such men were malicious and unfaithful, such
were valiant and wise, such were self-seekers, such self-deniers, such constant
Patriots, and such were Apostates. Thus we see men, but we seldom see God in
the great transactions and motions of Kingdoms. And we see him least of all in
the course of spiritual things, in his working upon our hearts; God works
wonders in us, and we perceive him not! We regard not his commings or goings,
his comfortings or with-drawings, when our spirits are heated, or when they are
cold, when we are strong, or when we are weak: There are continual varieties
and changes in our spirits, had we a clearness to make observation. The work
of God in the heart of a believer moving it, ordering it, preserving it,
comforting it, purging it, is as wonderful, and more, then any of his works in
the whole world.

Thirdly, Note, Man is not fit to fit as a Judge upon the works and dealings of
God.

Shall we judge God in what he does, when we cannot apprehend what he does? A
Judge must have the full cognizance of the matter before him, how else can he
pass sentence about it? Shall man be so bold as to get up into the throne, and
pass sentence upon what God does, when he cannot apprehend or take in evidence
of what he does? He goes by thee, and thou see him not; he passes on also,
and thou perceivest him not; And will thou censure what thou can not perceive?

Fourthly, Which is Jobs scope,

It should be matter of great humiliation to us that we see so little of God.

God works round about us and in us, and yet we know little of him. Our
blindness should abase us in our own eyes: God is all eye, and all hand, and
we so blind that we cannot see what his hand does; It must lay man low in his
own sight, to consider how little he sees of God.

Verse 12. Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? who shall say unto him,
What do thou?
This and the next verse contain a proof of man's weakness, as the former does
of man's ignorance and blindness, He passes by, and I see him not. There is
man's blindness: He takes away, and who can hinder him? There is man's
weakness. Suppose a man should see God in his works, and apprehend what he is
about, yet though he has so much light, as to see God, he has not so much
strength, as to hinder God; Is not this an argument of man's weakness? What!
contend with God? God does many things, and thou can not see him, or if thou
see him, yet it is not in thy power to stop him, Behold, he takes away, and
who can hinder him? Yea, man is so far from being able to stop or hinder God,
in what he is about to do, that man has not right to question God, or to ask
him what he is about to do. Man is neither strong enough to stop him from what
he will do, nor righteous enough to question him for what he does. This is the
total denying of any possibility in man to deal with God. How can he stop God
in what he does, who cannot so much as ask him, what he does? Who shall say
unto him, What do thou?

(...)
Behold, he takes away. Rapuit more latronum, Significat velocitatem rapinae.
Rab Mord Raptim auferre Tigur.
The word signifies to take away by violence and force, to take away as a robber
takes, to steal away: As if he had said, suppose the Lord come by open violence
to take a thing from thee, or secretly, and as it were by stealth, to bereave
thee of thy estate, or of thy life, if he take all from thee, and strip thee
naked, What can thou do? So the word is used ( Prove. 23.28.) speaking of a
wicked woman, an harlot, She lies in wait as for a prey; the Hebrew is, She
lies in wait as a robber, to take away the estate, yea, and the life of those
whom she shall entangle. Si rapuerit hominem e mu^do. Targ. Si morti tradiderit
August. Quo^ies ipsi visum fuerit (ut mihi nunc eve nit) ^uempiam vel bonis
ipsis spoliare, quis illumut raptorem ad restitutionem coge^? imo quis illum
jure in disquisitionem vocarit? voluntas enim ipsius est ju^tl^iae norma. Bez
(...) e ralice (...)
Some understand this more specially of taking away life. If he will stop thy
breath, and deliver thee up to death, so Augustine upon the place; or as the
Chaldee, If he take one out of the world, who can hinder him? As if Job had
said, The Lord may not only take away so much as he has taken from me, but
more, without wrong to me. He has taken away my goods, and my estate, my
children and friends, he has fetched away my health and strength, my beauty
and outward comforts; if he come and take away my life also at next bout, I
cannot hinder him; I can neither compel him to restore, nor call him to an
account; I can neither urge him to restitution, nor charge him with oppression.
He plainly intimates the rapine of his goods by the Chaldeans, etc. Of which he
spoke positively (Chap. 1.21.) The Lord has taken, and here by way of general
supposition, If he take away, Who shall hinder him?

Mr Broughton translates, Who shall make him restore? So he carries it in
allusion unto men, who violently take away the goods and estate of another. If
a man come with force and take away my goods, Vertere aut reducere, quis re^^
uere eum faciet, quis recuperabit aut redu^et praedam?
I may make him restore them again by a greater force; but if the Lord take
away and ask me no leave, I cannot make him restore. The word signifies to stop
or turn a thing, and because in recovering of a prey, or in making a man
restore, we stop and stay his course, therefore the word is indifferently
applied to both.

Others understand it in this sense, If he takes away, who shall hinder him?
That is, who can turn him from his purpose? Who can stop him in the thing he
has a mind to do? Quidam non de praeca, sed d^ ipso Deo intelligunt. Quu
revocabit eum a proposito? Si repent interroget quis respondebit ei. Vulg. Vel
quod respondens convertit se ad interroga^tem: vel quod responsum regera^ur,
restituaturque tanquam debitum interroganti.
The Vulgar translation varies much, If he suddenly ask a man a question, who
shall be able to answer him? The Hebrew word which signifies to return,
signifies to answer, answering is the return of a word ( Prove. 8.13.) He that
answers (or returns a word) before he hears a matter. But I shall lay
that by, though the abettours of the Vulgar make great store of it;
interpreting their meaning thus, if the Lord cite a man to judgment, and bring
him to trial, man is not able to answer him, or to plead his own cause. Man
cannot stand before the Lord. Observe hence,

First, That, All our comforts are in the power of God.

If he takes away, supposes he can take away, and he can take all away, and
do us no wrong. It is no robbery if God rob us, his robbery is no wrong: why?
because he comes not as a thief, but as a Lord and Master of our estates; he
may come and take them away as he pleases, and when he pleases.

Secondly, Note this from it, He takes away.

That which God does by the hand of the creature, is to be re^koned as his own
act.

He takes away when creatures take away. It is seldom that God deals
immediately with us in these outward providence; he sends men, stirs
instruments to do what is done. But that which man does, the Lord does (Isa.
42.24.) Who gave Jacob to the spoilers, and Israel to the robbers? Did not I
the Lord? Men spoiled and robbed them, yet it was the Lords act to send those
spoilers, Did not I the Lord? As that which man does in spirituals is the Lords
act, when man converteth and saves, it is the Lord that saves and converteth;
when man comfort and refreshes by applying the promises, it is the Lord
that comfort and refreshes; when man gives resolution in doubts, it is the
Lord that resolves doubts; man's act is the Lords. So here, when man robs
and spoileth us, the act is from the Lord, though the wickedness of the act is
from the man. The Lord suffers men to spoil and undo us, yea the Lord orders
them to spoil us: it is done not only by his permission, but by his commission;
not only with his leave, but by his appointment, I will send him against an
hypocritical Nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a
charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like
the mire of the streets, Isa. 10.

Observe thirdly, What the Lord will do, either by himself or by instruments,
no man can stop or prevent.

If he takes away, who shall hinder him? The Lord has absolute power, if he
will overthrow men, or families, or whole Kingdoms, none can stay him. There
have been four great Monarchies in the world, and the Lord coming in judgment
against them, has taken all away. The united strength of all creatures cannot
stand before him, when he is angry and resolved. The Babylonian could not say
and perform it, I will keep my throne: The Persian could not say and do it, I
will keep my State: The Grecian could not say and maintain it, I will keep my
glory: The Roman could not say and make it good, I will keep my empire. When
the Lord had a mind to it, he came and fetch away the power and glory, the
crown and dignity of those Monarchs, he threw down their thrones, brake their
states, darkened their glory, dissipated their empires, no man could hinder him.
How are ye fallen from heaven O Lucifers, sons of the morning, how are ye cut
down to the ground, which did weaken the Nations? Though ye said in your
hearts, We will ascend into heaven, we will exalt our thrones above the stars
of God: We will ascend above the heights of the clouds, we will be like the
most high; yet how are ye brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit? All
that look upon you say, Are these the men that made the earth to tremble, that
did shake Kingdoms? Thus the Lord has taken away the thrones of Princes, and
none could hinder; he has also removed the Candlesticks of Churches, and none
could hinder. Christ threatened the seven Churches in Asia, that he would come
and take away their Candlesticks: which of these hindered him? Both Crowns and
Candlesticks must down, if he speak the word. It is said, when David kept his
fathers Sheep, there came a Lion and a Bear, and took a Lamb and a Sheep out of
the flock, but he arose and went out after them, and rescued both Lamb and
Sheep, taking the prey out of their teeth: When the Lord Christ, the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah will come, and tear and take away, no David can rescue out
of his hand. The five Kings that came against Sodom, took away Lot, Abraham
went with his army and made them restore, made them bring back again; it is
ordinary with man, when one has robbed another, for a stronger to make him
restore and vomit up the sweet morsels, which he has swallowed. It is not thus
with God.

First, Power cannot do it: though the instruments which he uses to take away
from us be weak, yet the strong shall not be able to make the weak restore. A
weak Nation may destroy a strong Nation, and the stronger shall not be able to
make the weaker restore, if the Lord send them. When the Babylonians encamped
about Jerusalem, he warns them by his Prophet, do not think you shall deliver
your selves by your great strength, I have sent them to take your City and your
State, And though they were all wounded me^, yet they shall rise up and take
your City (Isa. 43.13.) I will work (says the Lord) and who shall let it? Who
shall let it? Why, they might say, We will have some that shall let it: No
(says the Lord) none shall let it; Behold, I have sent to Babylon, and
destroyed all their Princes, those that fought to hinder me in my work by their
power and counsel, are broken, though they seemed as strong as iron bars (so
the word is,) These bars of iron cannot keep me from entering, I will break all
opposition raised against my work.

Secondly, As power cannot hinder him, so policy cannot; no counsel shall stop
him: They ( Isa. 7.6.) took counsel and resolved strongly, We will go up
against Judah, and destroy it, and set a King in the midst of it, even the
son of Tabeal; The Lord answers in the next words, It shall not stand,
neither shall it come to pass: You resolve to do it, you make it out in your
counsels, how to hinder mine, but it shall not be, it shall not come to pass.
As no counsel against us shall stand, if the Lord be with us ( Isa. 8.10.) So
no counsel for us shall stand, if the Lord be against us.

Thirdly, When the Lord is resolved to take away the peace and glory of a
Nation, or of a Church, he will do it, and no spiritual means shall hinder
him, prayer it self shall not hinder him. If any thing in the world can move
the Lord to restore, when he takes away the peace of a people, it is prayer
and the cry of his people. Prayer has often met the Lord, as Abigail did David
(1 Samuel 25.) and prevailed with him to put up his sword, which was ready to
destroy. At the voice of prayer the Lord has restored that which he took away,
and has stayed from doing that which he seemed fully resolved to do, Psalm.
106.23. The Lord would have destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stood
before him in the breach. Did Moses out-power the Lord? did he out-wit, or
out-policy the Lord? No, but Moses prayed, and prayed so strongly that the Lord
was hindered, that is, he, as if he had been hindered, did not effect the
thing, he restored their comforts again, when he had arested but some of them,
and seemed to come armed with resolution to take all away. Yet sometimes we
find the Lord will come and take away, and prayer it self, prayer and fasting,
cries and tears shall not hinder, God will trample upon all these. God was
resolved to take away the glory of Israel; and to assure them that he would, he
takes away that wherein their chief assurance lay, that he would not (Jer.
15.1.) Thus says the Lord, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my
mind could not be toward this people, etc. As if he had said, Ye think to
hinder me now, ye will stop me, ye will send out prayer, your old friend, which
has helped you heretofore at many a dead lift. And if you cannot pray enough
your selves, you will procure prayers, and pray in the aid of prayer from all
the favorites that I have in the world, ye will get Moseses and Samuels, such
as they, to pray for you; ye may do so, if ye will, but it shall not profit
you, they and ye shall lose your labor, even these labors will not quit cost
or be worth the while, to the end ye aim at, for, Though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, and entreated for this people, yet my mind could not be toward
them: cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth, such as are for the
sword, to the sword, and such as are for death, to death, and such as are for
captivity, to captivity. Thus, I say, sometimes the Lord is so resolved to take
away life, riches, glory, peace, the all both of persons and Nations, that
nothing shall help us, or hinder him, no, not the prayers and cries, not the
supplications and tears of his own people, which are the strongest stops of all
in the way of provoked justice. If prayer cannot stay destruction, and obtain a
reprieve from death, if the prayers of a Moses and a Samuel cannot, nothing
can; it is, as if God had said, The best means shall fail you, therefore all
means shall fail you: if when prayer cannot hinder God, we resort to other
means, it is as if we should think to fasten an Anchor with a twined thread,
which has broken a cable; or to conquer an enemy with a pot-gun and a
bull-rush, whom we could not with sword and Cannon, And as God will not
sometimes be entreated, so he ought not at any time time to be questioned;
which is the next point.

Who shall say unto him, What do thou? That Is further considerable; man is
not only not able to stop the Lord from what he would do, Supremus ju lex est a
quo non potest esse provocatio.
but he has no right to put in a plea against what he has done, no nor to ask
him what he has been doing, or why he did it. The superior may ask the
inferior, and call him to an account: Every infer^our Judge and Court, is
accountable to those above; that is the highest Court, and he the highest
Judge, to whom no man can say, What do thou? The Parliament of England is
therefore the highest Judicatory in this Kingdom, because their actions are not
questionable in any other Court; one Parliament may say to another, What have
thou done? This Parliament has said to Parliaments that have gone before, What
have ye done in making such and such Laws? No power of man besides their own
can question some men, much less can any man question God, and say to him,
What do thou? He is supreme, there is no appeal to any other higher Judge,
or higher Court. Hence observe,

Whatsoever God resolves and determines concerning us, we must bear it, and
quietly submit.

No man may say unto him, What do thou? Quicquid de nobis Deus statuit
libenter ferendum est.
Why do ye sit still (says the Prophet, Jer. 8.14.) Assemble your selves, and
let us enter into the defenced Cities, and let us be silent there, for the Lord
has put us to silence, and given us waters of gall to drink, because we have
sinned against him. The Lord has put us to silence; that is, the Lord has
done these things, and we are not to question him about them, or to ask him
what he has done, or why he has done thus? Therefore let us be silent, say
they. Let us not murmr at, and complain over our own sufferings, much less
tax and charge God for his doings. It becomes us to obey Gods suspension; to be
silent, when he puts us to silence. The Lord never silences any (unless in
wrath to those who would not hear) from speaking in his name, and publishing
his word. But he has silenced all from speaking against his works; and it
will be ill with us, if our passions (how much soever God seems to act against
us) shall take off this suspension. The Lord is uncontrollable in all his
works. When Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. 4.35.) came to himself, and began to think and
speak like a man, after he had been among the beasts: see what an humble
acknowledgement he makes concerning God: All the inhabitants of the earth
(says he) are reputed as nothing, and he does according to his will in the
army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his
hand, or say unto him, What do thou? Here, we have both parts of Jobs
speech; none can stay his hand, which is the former; and none can say unto him,
What do thou? which is the later. That great Monarch acknowledged he had no
power to question God, though he at that time had power to question all the men
upon the earth. Nebuchadnezzar speaks like Job. A wicked man may make a true
report of God. Many speak right of the Lord, whose hearts are not right with
him. Nebuchadnezzar was converted from beastliness, but I find not that he
was converted to holiness. He came home to his own Court, but I see no proof
that he came home to the Church of God; yet, see how divinely he speaks, and
how humbly he walks, not so much as offering to ask God (who had changed him
from a Commander of men to a companion of beasts) What do thou?

We may ask the Lord (in one sense) what he does? Yea, the Lord does nothing in
the world, but his Saints and servants are enquiring of him about it. He
invites them to petition for what they would have, Ask of me things to come
concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command ye me, (Isa.
45.11.) Though man cannot order or enjoin the least thing upon God, yet at the
entreaty of his people, he is as ready to do, as if he were at their command.
And as we are thus envited to ask things to come, so we are not totally denied
to ask about things already done. We may ask him in an humble way for
information, not in a bold way of contradiction. We may in zeal to his glory,
not in discontent with our own condition, expostulate with him about what he
has done. So Joshua (Chap. 7.7, 8.) Alas O Lord God, wherefore have thou at
all brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the
Amorites to destroy us? Would to God we had been content, and dwelt on the
other side Jordan, etc. but how durst Joshua speak thus? What if God would
destroy them, was it not his dury to bear it, and let God alone? Yes
doubtless, and such I doubt not was the frame of Joshuas spirit. If Israel
only had been to suffer, Joshua had held his peace, at least from such
language; but he saw a further matter in it; the glory of God was like to
suffer in their sufferings: the close of his prayer betraies this holy
disposition of his heart, verse. 9. And what will thou do unto thy great name?
As if he had said, Lord, the matter were not much, though the name of Israel
were blotted out from under heaven, so thy Name were written in fairer
characters. But I fear a blow to Israel will be a blot to thy name, and
therefore I have taken upon me to pray this prayer unto thee, and I have prayed
rather for thee, than to thee. All prayers are made to God, and yet some are
made for him. Not that he has any want, or is in any the remotest possibility
of any danger, but only for the promoting of his glory, and that the world may
not have occasion of a dishonorable thought of him, whose honor never abates
in it self, or in the eyes of his own people. Thus we may ask him what he has
done, and why he has brought such desolations upon his people. But we may not
ask him what he has done, either to question his right to do it, or to
question his righteousness in doing of it. No creature may put the question
upon either of these terms, What have thou done? much less conclude, Thou have
done that which thou have no right to do, or, thou have been unrighteous in
doing it. Either of these is highest blasphemy: for, whatsoever the Lord does,
he has right to do, and whatsoever the Lord does, he is righteous in doing it.

Hence it follows by way of corollary, That

The Lord is of absolute power.

He is the Sovereign Lord, Lord over all; there is no appeal from him, no
questioning of him. Solomon speaks of the power of a King, in this language
(Eccles. 8.4.) Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say
unto him, What do thou? But is there nothing which a King does, about which
it may be said unto him, What do thou? And what is this word of a King? The
word of a King, is the Law of his Kingdom: all that a King does or speaks
besides the Law, he speaks as a man, not as a King; and that is the meaning of
Solomon's text; which Court-flatterers have corrupted with their unsound
glosses, as if every word of a King were of absolute power, and must have
peremptory obedience. A King is for his Kingdom; and while he commands
according to the rules and laws of his Kingdom, no Subject may question him, or
say unto him, What do thou? There is no power above his power, as he is
armed with the power of his Laws. And because wheresoever the Word of God is,
there is his Law, therefore wheresoever the Word of God is, there is power, and
no man may say unto him, What do thou? Every word of direction, spoken by
God is a Law, because his will is the Law of all things and persons. As the
will of man by nature is not subject (by obeying) to the righteous Law of God,
neither indeed can be; so the will of God by nature is the subject, containing
all righteous Laws, neither indeed can it not be: for though God be
voluntarily, and with highest freeness righteous, yet he is righteous
necessarily, and with greatest undeclinablenesse; As he is freely what he is,
so it is impossible for him, not to be what he is. And therefore no man ought
to say to God, What do thou? seeing God can do nothing, but what he ought.
In vain then is God either attempted by power, or solicited by prayer against
his own mind; For,

Verse 13. If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop
under him.
Though, If God takes away none can hinder him; though none ought to say unto
him, What do thou? whatsoever he does: yet possibly some will be venturing
upon this hard task, and undertake this impossible adventure, attempting to
recover Gods booty, and his prisoners out of his hand: but see the issue, If
God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him. Suppose
any should come to help, protect and patronize those whom God has a mind to
take away and destroy, shall they prosper or speed? No, not only they
themselves whom the Lord has taken away, but their assistants, and their
seconds, all that appear for them (except God call in his anger) shall fall
before him.

If God will not withdraw his anger. (...) Non revocabit nasum, non redibit a
furere.
The letter of the Hebrew is, If the Lord will not turn away his nostrils, or
his face. Nostrils or face are taken here, as in many other Scriptures, for
anger, because there is such an appearance of anger in the face and nostrils,
acted passion is seated there, as was noted ( Chap. 4.9.) Therefore to turn
away the face or nostrill, is to turn away from anger, Psalm. 78.38. Many a time
turned be away his anger; ^vertit nasum suum, quasi se vinci permittat, and ab
hu mil^ante se peccatore fugeret.
it is this word. When the Lord is angry, the turning of his face toward a man
shows he is reconciled; and when he is angry, the not turning away of his
face, shows that he is unreconciled, or resolved to continue angry. And while
God is so resolved, man is in a sad case, his helpers must stoop, The strength
of Israel will not lie or repent (1 Samuel 15.29. Ipsamet victo^ia vinci ne^cit.
) The Hebrew is, The victory of Israel, The Lords strength is victory;
victorious persons can hardly be overcome, but victory cannot; therefore except
himself will withdraw, except himself overcome himself, it is not in the power
of all creatures to overcome him ( Job 23.13,) He is in one mind, and who can
turn him? As if he had said, except the Lord will turn himself, and alter what
he himself has determined, it is not in men to cause him to alter, He is in
one mind, and who can turn him? And what his soul desires, even that he does;
which is the highest expression of power imaginable. How many things do our
souls desire which we cannot do? We are desiring and desiring, yet our hands
are not able to bring it to pass, The desires of the slothful (always) slay
them, because (says Solomon, Prove. 21.25.) their hands refuse to labor; and
the desires of the diligent slay them, sometimes, because they cannot compass
the thing desired, with all their labor; but as for the Lord, What his soul
desires, even that he does. And as his desires are irresistible, so is his
anger, his irascible appetite is as victorious as his concupiscible, unless
God withdraw his anger.

The proud helpers do stoop under him. The word is, Helpers of pride, that
is, (...)
such as think themselves most powerful and able to help, The helpers of
pride, Invaluit robore, insolen^ suit. Freti superbia. Fagn. Auxiliatores
superbiae. Regia
or the strong helpers. The same word (note that by the way) signifies
strength and pride, because we are so apt to be proud of our strength. If a man
have a little strength in the world, strength of friends, or of riches,
strength of body or of mind, strength of understanding, strength of memory,
strong parts, he is under a strong temptation to pride. Pride is one of the
greatest weaknesses of man, but it is always grounded upon supposed strength.

But who are these proud, these strong helpers?

Some understand it of the good angels, who are the strongest, the highest of
created helpers; Angels stoop under the power of God as well as men.

Others expound these strong helpers to be devils, who are evil angels, to whom
evil men seek sometimes for help. If the Lord will not turn away his anger,
though men seek to the devil for help (as Saul did) that helper shall stoop
under him. Saul consulted with a witch (the devils oracle) yet he could not be
delivered by a witch.

Others understand by these strong helpers, godly men; if the Lord will not
turn away his anger, the righteous shall stoop under him, that is, they shall
not be able to rescue a person or a Nation from the anger of God by prayer, or
by the utmost improvements of their interest with God. Some places have fallen,
because they wanted godly men to support them; and some places have fallen,
though they had godly men to support them. Qui portant orbem. Vulg.
The Vulgar Latin translation renders, They that bear up the pillars of the
world shall fall. Godly men bear up the pillars of the world. Though the
Hebrew will not bear their translation, yet the sense is good. Godly men are
the worlds supporters. It is said, ( Revel. 12.16.) That the earth helped the
woman, that is, vvorldly men for carnal ends helped the Church, when a flood
of persecution, cast out of the mouth of the dragon, was ready to swallow her
up. But the Church continually helps the world, and swallows up many of those
floods of Gods displeasure, which else would drown the world. And because
the Church was so thin, and there were so few godly men in the old world,
therefore it was drowned, Genesis 7. And because ten righteous persons were not
found in Sodom; fire from heaven consumed it ( Genesis 18.) God seeks for Saints
many times to stand in the gap, and save a Kingdom ( Ezekiel. 22.30. Jer. 5.1.)
and yet sometimes Kingdoms are not saved, though many such stand in the gap.
Except the Lord turn away his anger; these Porters of the world shall not
support it, these spiritual Atlasses shall faint and fall under him. The
Heathens had a fiction of a mighty Gigantine man, whom they called Atlas, him
they fancied bearing up the frame of nature: it is most true in a spiritual
sense, the Saints bear up the world; yet if the Lord turn not away his anger,
the world must totter and fall too, notwithstanding these helpers. For the
Saints do not bear up the world, or save Kingdoms from wrath, by giving the
least satisfaction to the justice of God (that is the sole Prerogative of Jesus
Christ) but only by imploring the mercy of God. Or they are therefore said to
turn away the wrath of God from a people, because God will not pour out his
wrath upon that people, while his Saints are mingled with them. The tares
are let grow, lest in pulling them up, the wheat should be pulled up also. It
is good for the vvorst to have the neighborhood of those who are good.

Rab Sol. Ei succumbent conspiratores potentissi^^i. Illi scilicet qui cum
arrogantia and superbia alijs autcilium pollicentur. V^tabl.
Further, More generally these proud helpers are supposed to be Kings and
Commonwealths, joined in strongest confederacies; and then the sense is, If
God come against a Nation, though it join with other Nations, though hand join
in hand, the hand of one King in the hand of another, yet it shall not escape
or go unpunished.

The proud helpers shall stoop under him. There is yet another interpretation,
which restrains and limits the word Rahab particularly to Egypt, Superbi and
eoru^ patroni. Appellatur Aegypt^^ hoc nomine, propter summam suam superbiam.
Unless the Lord turn away his anger, helpers out of Egypt shall stoop under
him, or Egypt helping shall stoop under him. We find frequently in the
Scriptures of the old Testament, that Egypt is called Rahab. And that name did
well suit with Egypt, which was both a strong and a proud Kingdom, Psalm. 87.4.
We will remember Rahab and Babylon, that is, Egypt and Babylon. Egypt and
Babylon are matched together for pride, and for oppression, persecuting the
people of God. And Isa. 51.9. Art not thou it that has cut Rahab, and wounded
the dragon? That is, Art not thou (O Lord) he that did cut Egypt in pieces,
when they opposed thy people, and woundedst Pharaoh in the midst of the red
sea. In the 26th of this book of Job, verse 12. some translate Rahab, Egypt:
Ex circumstantijs horum locorum non valde incongruum est, hanc vocem sumi pro
Aegypto and prophaarone in mare dem^rso. Bold. and Rab. Sol.
we render the Text thus, He divides the sea with his power, and by his
understanding he smites through the proud; so we, By his understanding he
strikes through Rahab, that is, through Egypt, say others. And so they make that
Text and this an argument, that the book of Job was penned after the
deliverance of the people of Israel out of Egypt, and that in these passages
Job had reference to the mighty work of God, in destroying the Egyptians at
the red sea. Taking the word thus, the Text is, Unless the Lord turn away his
anger, Egypt shall stoop under him; as if he had said, Do you not remember a
late instance of Gods power? Egypt thought to contend with God, to hold his
people in bondage whether he would or no, when he had a mind to bring them
forth; but you know Egypt stooped: God brought down the pride, and abated the
strength of it.

And that other place ( Chap. 26.12.) may be glossed thus, He divided the sea
by his power, that is, the red sea, and by his understanding he struck through
Rahab; that is, Loquitur prophetice Bold. Adju^ores Aegypti, i. e. angeli eju^
gentis. Vt in prophetia^ Danielis, princeps Persidu. Drus.
when the Egyptians pursued his people, he destroyed them. Which
interpretation carries a very clear proof that Job alludes to the deliverance
of Israel out of Egypt, and therefore lived after the time of that
deliverance; though others who grant the exposition, deny the inference,
maintain that Job spoke this prophetically, not historically. This we know,
that Egypt was a place much sought to for help, and therefore it is elegantly
said, If the Lord turn not away his anger, Egypt shall stoop; that Nation
which has bin so often called out to help and relive other Nations, that
Nation which has so often helped and relieved other Nations, shall not be able
to help, Isa. 31.1. They go down to Egypt for help, as if Egypt had been as
a City of refuge, or the place of common resort for help. And Isa. 30.7. The
Egyptians shall help in vain; the Text is very appliable to this point; we
read it thus, The Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose, therefore
have I cried concerning this, their strength is to sit still. Their strength
shall not deliver you, they shall help in vain, therefore I have warned you
(says the Prophet) to sit still, to be quiet with your own strength, and it is
better to do so than to go down thither for help. But the word which we
translate strength, Superbia tantu^ est qu^esce: fortasse vult dicere, nihil
aliud esse in ea quam superbiam.
is, that in the Text, Rahab; and we may render the whole thus, The Egyptians
shall help in vain, and to no purpose, therefore I cried to them in this thing,
They are proud, or only pride, Therefore sit still. As if he had said, Will ye
go to Egypt for help? Ye go but to a proud people for help, and ye had better
have no helpers, then proud helpers, ye had better be quiet and sit still at
home, for they shall help you in vain. So it is an elegant allusion to their
nature and disposition. The truth is, proud helpers are very unsafe helpers,
for the Lord resists the proud, and I wonder how they can help us to resist
our enemies, who are resisted by the Lord himself? They will prove but ill
friends to us, who have the Lord for their enemy.

(...)
They shall stoop under him. Est valde dejici and penitus humiliari, hoc loco
servilem potissimum conditionem designat.
The word is often used for worshipping, it imports likewise any casting down or
abasement, because we in the worship of God ought to be exceedingly abased and
humbled before him. Psalm. 38.6. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly. So
Habak. 3.6. The perpetual hills did bow, that is, the power (for it is
conceived to be a continued Allegory) of the great Monarchs, who were as the
mountains and hills of the world, bowed under the Lord. The word is used to the
same sense ( Isa. 49.23.) where the Lord promises his people, That Kings shall
be their nursing Fathers, and Queens their nursing Mothers, they shall bow
down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick the dust of thy feet.
The Church shall have the honor to be honored by the Kings and Princes of the
world, they being converted shall bow down so low to the Scepter of Jesus
Christ, held forth by the Church, as if they would lick up the very dust, and
shall employ their power and authority for the good and protection of the
Church. The speech of Israel (Genesis 27.29.) in his prophetic blessing upon
Jacob, Let thy mothers sons bow down to thee, and of Jacob, in his, upon Judah
(Genesis 49.8.) Thy fathers children shall bow down before thee, note greatest
honor and subjection to them both.

The meaning of all is plainly this, That except the Lord himself suspend his
own act, and restrain his anger, no power in heaven or earth, how strong, how
proud, how confident of success soever, is able to force him, or to alter him.
Helpers shall not help themselves, much less those to whose help they come,
against the mind and purpose of God. Observe here, first,

Those passions which are ascribed to God, are fully under the command of God.

The passion of anger is ascribed to God, yet the anger which we say is in God,
has no power over God: Man's anger usually masters him; but God is always
master of his anger; that is, he can turn and withdraw his anger when he
pleases. There is no perturbation in God; when he is offended, he is not
moved; his motions are all without upon the creatures, he has none in his own
bosom. The passions of the Lord are his most serious counsels and
determinations; and we therefore say, he is angry, because those counsels of
his acted, look like the effects of anger. Secondly, observe,

That, It is not in the power of man to turn away the anger of God.

He does not say, except men by prayer or other means stop the anger of God,
but, Except the Lord withdraw his anger all help is vain. Prayer is said to
appease the wrath of God, and to stay his anger; Moses stood in the gap, and
Aaron came out with incense to turn away his wrath, yet it is an act of Gods
will, which turns away his anger, not the force of our prayer; prayer therefore
prevails with God, because he has said, it shall. He is infinitely free when
himself acknowledges that we laythe powerfullest restraint upon him: when the
Lord is turned by prayer, it is his will to be turned; it was his counsel, and
is his command that prayer should be made as a means to turn him; and it is his
promise, that he will turn to us when we pray. Then it appears to us that the
Lord has decreed to do a thing, when he stirs up the hearts of his people to
pray for the doing of it, and that he is purposed to withdraw his anger, when
he draws out their hearts strongly to entreat his favor. Thirdly, observe,

That, until God be appeased toward a person or a people, there is no remedy
for them in the world.

The proud helpers shall stoop under him. If the helpers themselves fall, who
can rise by these helpers? if they are cast down, how shall we be upheld by
them? What if the people of a provoking Nation associate themselves together,
or associate themselves with other Nations, or call in help and aid from all
that are round about them, shall they therefore escape in their wickedness?
they shall not escape. Unless God help our helpers, they are helpless to us.
When many companies, and great Commanders repaired to David at Ziklag, David
went out to meet them ( Chron. 12.17.) and said, If ye be come peaceably to
help me, mine heart shall be knit to you, but if ye be come to betray me, etc.
Amasai who was chief of the Captains, answers ( v. 18.) Thine are we, David,
and on thy side, thou son of Jesse: peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to
thy helpers, for thy God helps thee! Our helpers cannot give us peace,
unless God give them peace; our helpers must be helped by God, before they can
give us help. The anger of God breaks all the staves we lean on, and makes them
as reeds, which wound rather then support; till God is quiet all is unquiet,
and when he is unpacified, men shall be unpacified, or their peace shall be to
our loss. As if he withdraw his anger, enemies shall oppose in vain: so
except he withdraw his anger, friends shall help in vain.

Lastly, They who strive to deliver those whom God will destroy, shall fall
themselves before God.

If God be resolved upon the thing, not only they that are helped, but the
helpers also shall stoop under him: helpers cannot help themselves when he is
angry; they shall be like Idols, which have eyes and see not, hands and cannot
act, either to save themselves, or those that trust upon them. The greatest
strength in the world without God, it is no better then an Idol, which is
nothing in the world. Strength cannot be strong for it self, and help cannot
help it self. Our help stands in the Name of the Lord, which made heaven and
earth, and not in the name of any creature under any part of heaven, or upon
the face of the whole earth.

JOB Chap. 9. Verse. 14, 15. How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my
words to reason with him?

Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, I would make
supplication to my Judge.


JOB having in the former passages of this Chapter lifted up the glory and
majesty of God, in his power and justice, and showed the utter insufficiency of
creatures to implead his justice, or to rescue themselves out of the hand of
his power; he now draws his speech nearer home, and calling his thoughts from
those remoter journies up to the heavens, and among the stars, over the
mountains and hills, down to the depths of the sea, and foundations of the
earth, about all which he had discoursed; I say, calling his thoughts from
these remoter travels, he comes now closer to the matter, and from all those
premises deduces a conclusion i^ the words of the Text, to vindicate himself
from that charge, which his friends laid upon him, as if he were a contender
with the power, or an accuser of the wisdom and justice of God: From the folly
and blasphemy of both which imputations, he disasperseth himself in these two
verses, by an argument taken from the greater to the less, and we may form it
up thus: He who is so strong, wise and just, that all the powers in heaven and
earth are not able to oppose or stay him; surely I I alone, or single I, a poor
weak creature, am not able to oppose or stay him.

But (as I have cleared by those former instances) God is so strong, wise and
just, that all the powers of heaven, Cum robust issimae illae creaturae,
mo^tes, mare, coeli, ei ceda^t, et quaecunque rohore efferuntur and praestant
quanto minus eg^^ Merl.
the sea, the mountains, and the pillars of the earth, the Sun, Moon and
Stars, together with the greatest and mightiest of the children of men, are not
able to resist him.

Therefore I a poor weak creature, lying here in this sad condition, am not
able (nor have I any design) to do it.



Only the conclusion of this syllogism is expressed, in the fourteenth and
fifteenth verses, the premises are couched in the foregoing context.

Here take notice in general, that Job falls in the conclusion somewhat below
the premises. There the intendment was to demonstrate strongest creatures
unable to resist the power of God; But Job speaks lower of himself, I am so
far from being able to set my strength against the strength of God, that I
acknowledge I am not able to hold discourse with him, or to speak with him
about these things, I have not only no power to oppose, but I have no words to
oppose him.

Verse 14. How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to reason
with him?
Si robusti nihil valent contra illum, quanto minus ego debi lis and infirmus
homuncio? D^u
How much less,] The word is used in the fourth Chapter, How much less in
them that dwell in houses of clay? Both Texts bear the same sense. If he charge
his angels with folly, and put no trust in those his servants, then, how much
less in them who dwell in houses of clay? So the argument lies here, If those
mighty and powerful creatures, and the mightiest of the children of men, are
not able to contend with God, Nunquam animo finxi quod vos de me fingitis, me
posse aut velle illi ex aequo respondere. p^ned.
How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to reason with him?
As if he had said, It never so much as can^^ into my thoughts to contend with
God, I confess I have complained grievously about my troubles, and have spoken
some things unadvisedly, but it never entered into my heart to quarrel with
God, or stand in battle array against him, no not so much as in a battle of
words.

How much less shall I answer? Shall I answer] There is a twofold answering,
both appliable to this Text.

First, There is an answering by way of fact, a real answer, or answering to a
condition. Thus one man answers another that is of equal power and strength,
of the same measure in abilities and gifts with him. Thus also, as Solomon
speaks ( Prove. 27.19.) Face answers face in the water, that is, the face seen
in the water is of the same feature and complexion, with that which looks upon
the water. Thus bodies and buildings answer one another, when they carry the
same dimensions: and thus money answers all things, because it bears value with
every thing.

Secondly, There is answering by word, which is twofold: First, Contradictory.
Secondly, Satisfactory. The former is, that which the Apostle forbids servants
to use (Tit. 2.9.). Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and
to please them well in all things, not answering again. Servants cannot plaase
their masters, unless they answer to what they are demanded, and they cannot
please their masters, if they oppose what is duly commanded, this answering
again is unseemly in servants.

The later kind of answering, is that which the Apostle Peter charges upon all
Christians (1 Epist. 3.15.) Be always ready to give an answer to every man
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear.
To answer thus is every man's duty, both to God and man. To answer by
contradicting the command of God, is rebellion. To answer by satisfying the
demands of God, is a duty. To answer by a proportion to the power or wisdom of
God, is infinitely beyond man's ability; Job abhorred the first, he was ready (as
well as he could) to perform the second; and therefore Job is chiefly to be
understood of the third, How much less shall I answer him? That is, I do not
look upon my self as a match for God, as if I had strength proportionable to
his strength, or wisdom suitable to his, as if I could thunder like him. I do
not think that I am able to answer his reason by my reason, no, I am so far
from an ability to answer him with reason, that I know not how to choose out
words to reason with him, How much less shall answer him etc.

From the whole observe before I come to particulars,

A godly man's t^oughts are lowest of himself.

Job had gone through the several series of the creatures; and finding them
unable to contend with God, concludes himself more unable then they. Doubtless
he might have answered God as well as any. If any are able to contend with God,
godly men are, they have the greatest strength. Such of them especially as Job,
a man of that height and elevation of spirit in holiness, of whom God had
given his word, That there was none like him in the earth. What creature
(except an Angel) came so nigh the Creator as Job? and yet when he had looked
over them all, he says, How much less shall I? He thought any one might enter
the lists, and contend with the Lord better then he. Man (having reason) is
more able then all the irrational creatures, and amongst men, godly men, and
among godly men, they who reach the highest degrees of godliness, are most
able, and yet Job a man set upon the top and pinnacle of all perfection
attainable in this life, says, How much less shall I?

They of whom God has the highest thoughts, have the meanest thoughts of, and
put the lowest rates upon themselves. No man ever received a fairer or more
valuable certificate from God then Job did, and yet no man could speak more
undervaluingly of himself then Job did.

Secondly, Observe, The more we know God, the more humble we are before him.

Job having much knowledge of God, quickly found out his own utter
insufficiency to deal with God; How much less shall I answer him? Not, that he
had less ability to answer God then others, but being more acquainted with
God, and living nearer God then others, he saw his own insufficiency more then
others. The more communion we have with God, the more knowledge we have of God,
the less and the lower we are in our own eyes. The reason why men are so full
of pride, is, because they are strangers from God, they know nothing of him as
they ought. And proportionably, as any one is further distant from, or more
ignorant of God, the more does pride prevail upon him, even as humility grows
more humble in proportion to his nearer approaches. When Job was yet brought
nearer to God, he was more humbled, Chapter 42.5, 6. I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee; that is, I have a clearer and
more glorious manifestation of thee to my soul then ever, I now perceive thy
power, thy holiness, thy wisdom, thy faithfulness, thy goodness, as if they
were corporeal objects, as if I saw them with mine eye, Wherefore I abhor my
self in dust and ashes; he could not go lower in his thoughts of himself, then
this expression laid him. Abhorrence is a perturbation of the mind, arising
from vehement dislike, or extremest dis-esteem. Abhorrence, strictly taken, is
hatred wound up to the height. As exulting is the highest act of joy, and
delighting the highest act of love, so abhorring is the deepest act of hatred,
and to abhor, repenting in dust and ashes, is the deepest act of abhorrence:
Thus low Job goes, not only to a dislike, but to the furthest degree of it,
abhorrence of himself, when he saw the Lord. So Isaiah (in the 6th of his
Prophecy) when God came near him, and he saw so much of God, cries out, I am
undone, for I am a man of polluted lips; but did not Isaiah know he was a
sinful man, a man of polluted lips till then? Yes, but he was never so
sensible of it, as then. He saw his own pollution more then ever by the light
of the glory of God that shone round about him. He never saw himself so
clearly, as when the majesty of God dazel'd his eyes. When the Sun shines
bright into a room, we may see the least mote in the air; so when the glory of
God irradiates the soul, we see all the motes and atoms of sin, the least
spot and unevenness of our hearts or lives; this brings the soul low, and will
keep it so. The more we know of God, the more we honor him, and our selves the
less. These two are eminent effects of knowing God. As God rises in our
thoughts, so we fall. Paul, who had been wrapped up into the third heavens, and
had a multitude of divine revelations, calls himself, The least of the Apostles
(1 Cor. 15.9.) and less then the least of all Saints (Ephesians. 3.8.) not that
any thing can be less then the least. The Apostles holy rhetoric, does not
cross Aristotle's philosophy. But (the original being a double diminutive) his
meaning is, (...).
he was as little as could be, therefore he puts himself down, so little, as
could not be, less then the least. Job speaks near him, How much less shall I
answer him?

The Question imports an inability in him for resolution. He thought himself so
much less able to answer then they, that he could not tell how much less. And
therefore leaves others to cast it up, and take the account how short he was of
that business; he knew it was much, but how much it was he knew not, How much
less shall I answer him?

And choose out my words to reason with him. The word signifies choice upon
exact trial; (...) Elegit. LXX. vertunt per (...). Exodus 17.9 cap. 18.25.
(...) (^ob 34 4) and (...). Deuteronomy. 7.^. Hinc (...) juvenis a^ militiam and
neg^^ia electus and idoneus. Loqui selectis verbis ornata^ and composita,
oratione.
It is used in that sense, Exodus 17.9. Moses bids Joshua choose out men to
go and fight with Amalek; he did not take them as they came to hand, or lay his
hand violently upon them to press them, but he advisedly took his choice, he
had picked men for that service. David gathered all the children of Israel; he
had a select company to fetch up the Ark (2 Samuel 6.1.) and when he undertook
the duel with Goliath, the Text says, he went to the brook, and chose him out
five smooth stones, they were choice stones fittest for his sling. As it is
among persons and things, so among words, there are choice words: some are but
rubbish, refuse words; others are precious, wise, suitable words: How should I
choose out my words to reason with him? Shall I think by setting words in a
curious frame to prevail with God? or shall I by speaking rhetorically and
elegantly overcome him? There is much power in oratory, in choice of words, and
therefore the holy Ghost forbids the Ministers of the Gospel to speak with
choice words, in that sense, namely, with rhetorical and artificial strained
eloquence, which naturally pleases the ear, and takes the heart: which kind
of speech, is called, wisdom of words (1 Cor. 2.17.) and the enticing words of
man's wisdom (Chap. 2.4.) They, having an aptness in them to entice or
persuade, are called enticing or persuasive words. And because he would have
little or nothing of the creature seen in winning souls, therefore the Apostle
professes he used not such eloquence of words. Great Orators have carried
whole Assemblies by the ears. And lest it should be thought that the Ministers
of the Gospel convert men with oratory, therefore they must not use such choice
words. It becomes them not, like Rhetoricians and Orators, to polish their
style with an affected curiosity, and exactness of language. But as affected
language is sinful, so neglect or rudeness of speech is not without blame. We
should labor to speak properly and weightily: so it becomes us to choose our
words, and not to speak till we have heard what our selves would say. And thus
Job knew he ought to choose his words, when he spoke to God, but he knew also he
could not make any such choice, either of rhetorical and persuasive words, or
of logical and argumentative words, as might fit him to answer God, or reason
with him. He was assured that neither the eloquence of his style could persuade
him, nor the strength of his arguments convince him, How shall I choose out
words to reason with God?

In the Original the word [reason] is not found; only thus, Shall I choose out
words with him? To choose out words with another bears this elegancy, as if Job
had said, If I should set my self to choose words with God, he would choose
better words then I, more forcible words then I; he is more able infinitely to
make choice of words and matter to convince me, (...)
then I to convince him: Significat causam aut ratio nem, and sic eligere verba
est novas in ve^re rations vel argumenta ad sua^ causam su^ciendam.
For the word which we translate [words] may signify not only words with which
matter is clothed, but the matter it self clothed with those words. The sum
of all is, I can neither choose matter nor words to discourse and argue with
God, his invention and judgment about both, infinitely exceeds mine.

M. Broughton refers the word [choosing] to Job, and not to words, thus, Shall
I choose to word it with God? to plead and debate the business with God?
Surely of all elections I would not make that, I will not choose to make many
words with God: silence and submission becomes me better. That Is a good sense.

But here a doubt may arise from a passage ( Chap. 13.3.) where Job speaks
thus, Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with God;
how then does he here say, Shall I choose out words to reason with God? As if
he had said, by no means, I will not do this thing; and yet there he seems
very ambitious of the attempt, and confident of the success, I desire to
reason with God.

I answer, there is a twofold reasoning with God. There is a reasoning of
declaration, and a reasoning of contestation. When Job says, I desire to
reason with God, his meaning is only this, I desire to declare and set forth my
case and condition before him. We may reason with God by way of narrative; He
allows us to tell him how it is with us.

Furth^r, Job speaks in that 13th Chapter comparatively, showing how much he
had rather declare his case to God, then to his friends: God was a better
friend to unbosome himself to, then any of, or all his three friends; for he
says of them in the very next words, Ye are forgers of lies, ye are all
physicians of no value; to what purpose would it be for me longer to make known
my case, and show my grief to you? I had rather reason with God then man. But
as for that other reasoning, by way of contestation and quarrelling with the
providence or works of God, Job professes in this place, he had no mind to
it: he would never choose that task, or set himself to choose out words for
that end, it was too high for him. He saw it was neither wisdom nor duty to
deal with and undertake God, either with an open, or a closed hand, either with
logical subtilties, or rhetorical flourishes.

Again, Whereas Job says, he would not reason with God; it will be queried,
May we not reason with God at all? The Lord himself says (Isa. 1.18.) Come,
let us reason together. If the Lord calls us to reason with him, may we not
then reason with him? Is it not sinful modesty to refuse what God offers? To
clear that,

I answer, There are two ways wherein we may not reason with God.

1. We must not reason with him in our own strength. 2. We must not reason with
him upon our own worth.
And that is the full meaning of Job, I would not choose to reason with God,
that is, to reason with God in my own strength, as if I had power to deal with
him. Or secondly, I would not reason with God upon my own worth, as if there
were any thing in me upon which I were able to make it out that God ought not
to deal thus with me; and that is clear by the words which follow, Though I were
righteous, yet would I not answer; that is, I would not at all speak with God
standing upon this bottom, or under the title of my own worthiness. In either
of these ways it is sinful to reason with God. But we may reason with God in
the way of declaration before spoken of.

In prayer there is a reasoning with God; and the reasonings and pleadings that
are in prayer, are the life and strength of prayer. Prayer is not only a bare
manifestation of our mind to God, by such a suit or petition; but in prayer
there is, or ought to be a holy arguing with God about the matter which we
declare, w^^ch is a bringing out and urging of reasons and motives, whereby the
Lord may be moved to grant what we pray for. The prayers of the Saints recorded
in Scripture are full of arguments.

I shall show it in one example, as a taste for the rest; Jacob in his
distress at the approach of his brother Esau, flees to God in prayer ( Genesis
32.) and he does more then speak in prayer, he argues, yea, he wrestles with
God in prayer. The sum of it is set down ( verse. 11.) Deliver me, I pray
thee; to the undertaking of this deliverance he urges the Lord by no fewer
then seven arguments. First, From Gods Covenant with his Ancestors, O God of
my father Abraham etc. As if he had said, Remember those names with whom thou
made solemn Covenants of protection both to them and their posterity. The
second is from Gods particular command for this journey, Thou saidest unto me,
Return, I departed not on my own head, but by thy direction; and therefore thou
can not for thy honor, but free me from danger, seeing at thy word I am
fallen into it. Thou, O Lord, art even engaged to give me defense, while I
yield thee obedience. Thirdly, He puts him in mind of his promises, thou
said, I will deal well with thee, and that includes all other promises made
unto him, these he makes as a Bulwark to defend him, or as his anchor in the
storm. This anchor must fail, and this bulwark be broken down before the danger
comes to me. If thy promise stand, I cannot fall. The fourth is the confession
of his own unworthiness. Faith is always humble, and while we are most
confident in Gods word, we are most distrustful of our own desert, I am not
worthy of the least of thy mercies. Though I am thus bold to urge thy Covenant,
yet I am as ready to acknowledge my own undesert: Thou art a debtor by the
promise thou have made to me, not by any performance of mine to thee. Fifthly,
He seeks to continue the current of Gods favor, by showing how plentifully it
had already streamed unto him; which he does by way of Antithesis, setting his
former poverty in opposition to his present riches, With my staff I passed this
Jordan, and now I am become two bands; That is, thou have blessed me
abundantly, and shall my brothers malice blast all? am I increased only to make
him abound? The sixth argument is, the greatness and eminence of his peril,
verse. 11. I fear lest he will come and slay the mother upon the children; a
proverbiall speech in the holy language, like that of cutting off branch and
root in one day, both denoting total excision, or an utter overthrow.
Seventhly, He shuts up, by re-enforcing the mention of the promise, which he
urges more strongly then before; there it was only, Thou said, I will deal
well with thee; but here it is, Thou saidest, in doing good, I will do thee
good, that is, as it is rendered in our translation, I will surely do thee
good, and therefore let not my brother do me evil. We see Jacobs praying was a
reasoning with God, and himself in the issue got not only a new blessing, but
a new name, Israel, a Prince with God, a prevailer both with God and men.

And thus we may reason with God in the strength, and for the sake of Christ in
all our prayers. For as when God calls for our obedience, he usually adds
persuasion to his precept, and reasons with us, as well as directs us; His
commands are not always barely authoritative, and the resolves of his
prerogative: So, when we call upon God for audience, we should add persuasions
to our petitions, and reason with him, as well as entreat him. Only we should
be careful to reason from right Topics, and heads of argument, such as these,

First, From the freeness of the grace of God.

Secondly, From the firmness of his promise.

Thirdly, From the greatness of our need, or of the Churches misery.

Fourthly, From all the concernments of his own glory, etc. Thus we may reason
with God for the doing of any thing we ask according to his will; and in these
reasonings, the spirit, life and strength of prayer consists.

So then, the only thing which Job declineth, as sinful and unbecomming, is,
to reason with God as a contender, he might humbly reason with him as a
Petitioner, or as a remembrancer, Put me in remembrance (says the Lord, Isa.
43.26.) Let us plead together: declare thou that thou may be justified. We
may declare our cause, and we need not fear to declare our sins, that God may
justify us; but we must not presume to declare our righteousness, that we may
justify our selves: this Job disclaims.

How much less shall I answer him, and choose out words to reason with him?
Toward the further clearing of these words, we may take notice that Job puts
himself under a double relation. In the former part of the verse he puts
himself in the Respondents place, How much less shall I answer him? And in the
later part of the verse he puts himself in the Opponents place, and choose out
words to reason with him. His meaning is, If the Lord will object against me, I
am not the man who dares, or is able to answer him. And if I should take upon
me to object against the Lord, the Lord may, and can easily answer me. From
which notion of the words, two points may be observed.

First, No man can answer what God has to object against him.

The Lord has a thousand arguments which we are not able to give him
satisfaction in (as was touched in the beginning of this Chapter, verse. 3.) We
cannot answer him one of a thousand. If God should cast a man to hell, what
has he to say for himself, as from himself, when God objects, Thou have
sinned. If God afflict a man and lay him low, giving him this argument for what
he does, I am thy Creator; I formed and made thee; if I break thee to pieces,
what can thou say against me? If the Lord should say, I am thy Sovereign, I
have supreme power over thee, may I not do with thee what I will? What has
man to answer? Man must be silent, and lay his hand upon his mouth: he has not
a word of reason or holiness to reason against God in any of his dispensations.

Let man (on the other side) gather as many arguments as he can to object
against God, he is able to wipe them all off presently, to blow them away with
a breath. All the shifts and apologies, the excuses and arguings which any make
for their sins, or which they make for themselves against the justice and
wisdom of God, are answered with a word. So that, put man in the opponents, or
in the respondents place, he can make no work of it.

Secondly, Observe from this phrase, Shall I choose out words to reason with
him?

God is not taken with words.

Fine phrases and eloquent speeches will not carry it with him, If we would
prevail with God, we must speak our hearts to him, rather then our words; yet
we ought to choose out words (as was touched before) when we speak to God. As we
must take heed how we hear, while he speaks; so we have need to take heed what
we speak in his hearing. That Is Solomon's advice, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with
thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God. That
is, speak not vainly and unadvisedly, thy tongue running before thy wit. Let
wisdom guide thy tongue, and let thy heart show thee wisdom; Let not thy
heart be hasty to utter, when it is office is to conceive, not to utter. But how
can the heart be hasty to utter? Utterance is the business of the tongue. The
heart is then hasty to utter, when it suffers the tongue to utter what it self
has not thoroughly concocted by meditation, and made it is own. As in the body,
so in the mind, the third concoction is that which nourishes and assimilates.
So then, Solomon's meaning is; Let not raw, unboiled, undigested thoughts, pass
out into discourses, or be stamped into words before the Lord. As there is a
sin of curiosity, so there may be a sin of neglect. Extremes are equally
dangerous. The distance that is between God and us, proclaims this duty of our
most reverent addresses to him. He is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore
let thy words be few; and yet the fewness of words pleases God no more then
the multitude of them does. We say, In many words, there can hardly be a
scarcity of errors; and in a few words there may be not a few errors,
possibly more errors then words. Fewness, simply taken, is not the grace of
words. But because they who speak but little, do usually think the more, and
so their words are steept long in their hearts, therefore few words are usually
choice words. It is sin, if we are well conceited of our words. And it is
sin, if our words be not our best conceptions. How shall I choose out words
to reason with him?

Verse 15. Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer; but I would
make supplication to my Judge.
(...)
This brings the matter to the height; Who? I reason and plead with God? I
answer him? No, Though I were righteous, yet would I not answer him. The
strength of the argument lies thus, as if Job had said, I am so far from
entering a contest with God, that I profess I would not do it, though I had
the greatest advantage and fitness to do it of any man in the world: though I
were righteous I would not do it. I do not say, that the reason why I would
not plead with God, is because I am wicked, sinful and abominable, more guilty
and unrighteous then my neighbors, or then you, my friends, but how righteous
soever I were, I would not do it. Job speaks as a man who would show how much
he dreads the power and strength of another; What? I fight with such a man? I
contend with such a man? No, I profess I would not fight with him, though I
were as well weapon'd, armed and prepared, as any man in the world, I would not
come near him. If there be any armor or weapon, any furniture or preparations
which may enable man to contend with God, it is the armor of righteousness,
and the furnitures of grace. Now, says Job, though I had that armor, Though I
were righteous I would not contend with him. The Apostle argues much after this
rate (1 Cor. 13.) about that great point of Gospel-charity, where he tells
us, that all things are as nothing without charity: and he instanceth in those
things which stand highest in the thoughts of man, to commend him to the
acceptance both of God and man, verse. 2, 3. Though I have the gift of
prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and though I have all
faith, so that I could remove mountains; and though I should give my body to be
burned, and have not love; what would it advantage me? Though I should give all
my goods to the poor, and have not love, etc. It is possible for a man to give
away abundance to the poor, and yet have a dearth of love both to them and to
God in his heart: all the love that moves him may be love to himself;
therefore (says he) Though I give my goods to the poor, it profits me nothing;
he puts all these suppositions, which are the greatest advantages for heaven
(except Christ) imaginable, and yet concludes all, but as sounding brass, or a
^inkling Cymbal, nothing but noise without charity. So here, to show how
impossible a thing it is for creatures in their own strength to contend with
God, he puts a supposition upon that which is most probable to carry us through
it, Righteousness, Though I were righteous, I were not able to answer him, no
not I.

Though I were righteous. It is, as if Job had further expressed himself to this
sense, I am so far from justifying my self in all my complainings (which was
the thing his friends taxed him with) as if God could find nothing amiss in
what I have spoken, that I freely confess there is not the most considerate,
righteous or holy action that ever I did in my life, which I durst bring to the
touchstone, to the balance, to justify my self before God by, no, but in stead
of that I would fall down and abase my self, as knowing I am before him, whose
eyes (being ten thousand times brighter then the Sun) are able to see
unrighteousness, where I see nothing but righteousness: Do not think I am
justifying my self as a righteous man in what I have spoken or done, for though
I were righteous, yet I would not (upon that ground) go about to plead my
cause or stand it out with God. Or thus, I know I am unrighteous and unclean,
but if I were righteous, I would not answer him.

Here a Question or two must be resolved: As,

First, Was not Job righteous? He puts the Question, Whom, though I were
righteous; was Job an unrighteous man? Does not he himself say (Chap. 29.14.) I
put on righteousness, and it clothed me? Why then does he here only make a
supposition of it, Whom, though I were righteous, when as there he makes it a
position, that he was clothed with righteousness.

I answer (to clear this Scripture) Man is righteous in a double opposition.
Righteous; first, in opposition to the wicked: and these may be taken in three
ranks, either, First, the abominable and profane: Or, secondly, hypocrites and
unsincere: Or thirdly, oppressors, and such as are unjust in their dealings
toward men. As righteous is opposed to wicked in these three, profane,
hypocrites, or oppressors, so Job was a righteous man. Job was not profane, he
feared God: Job was not an hypocrite, he was perfect and upright: Job was not
an oppressor, the loins of the poor blessed him. And that is the peculiar sense
of the 29th Chapter, I put on righteousness, that is, righteousness in all my
dealings with men.

Secondly, Righteous is opposed to imperfect, or that which has any failing or
want in it. And in this sense Job was not righteous; and that is his meaning
here, Though I were righteous; that is, though I had the uttermost perfe^tions
which a creature is capable of, yet I would not stand upon them, and plead it
out with God. The testimony which the Lord gave concerning Job (Chap. 1.1.) is
in words of an inferior sense: this in the text is above them both. The Lord
there certifies, that Job was perfect and upright. But though he was perfect
and upright, yet he was not righteous. He was perfect in opposition to
insincerity, and he was upright in opposition to injustice, but he was not
righteous in opposition to imperfection, If I were righteous; as I know I am
not.

Iustu^ in judicio oppanitur improbo reo, qui causa cadit. D^us.
Further, Righteousness is twofold. There is a righteousness of the person,
and a righteousness of the cause, Though I were righteous: Job does not
forsake the righteousness of his cause, he only disclaimeth the righteousness
of his person. I acknowledge I am not righteous in my self, and I will not
yield that my afflictions and sufferings argue me unrighteous.

Here another Question arises, for if we take Jobs supposition of a man
righteous, Cum hic justitiam sibi tribuit, non de ea agit, quae ad legis normam
possit subsistere: Solu^ enim De^ tribunal severissimu^ Christi justitia non
reformidat. sed agit de justitia^ inchoata, quae quantu^ vis Deo grata sit, non
tamen ad amussim respondet perfectioni illi, quam lex requirit. Merl.
it will be demanded, May not a righteous person answer God?

I answer, There is no created righteousness can answer God. God charge his
Angels with folly; he saw evil in them, compared to himself. A righteous Angel
cannot stand it out with God, much less the most righteous man. God indeed
would have accepted man in the righteousness of works, had he continued in
innocence; and yet he might have seen folly in man abiding in innocence, as he
does in those Angels, which continue innocent. No created righteousness can
answer God.

But there is a righteousness in which we may answer God; Jobs supposition
excludes not that; namely, the righteousness of faith which we have by Christ.
Man righteous by faith, or by imputed righteousness may answer God; but man
righteous by works, or inherent righteousness cannot. He that is righteous by
the righteousness of faith, has to answer God, because he has somewhat of
God to answer God with; faith does not bring man to answer God, but God to
answer God; Christ answers God for every believer: and Christ can answer God
fully to all the demands of justice, without abatement. Christ has not
compounded with our creditour, for our debts, but paid them to the utmost
farthing. A believer is able to answer God, and does answer him every day: when
he asks the pardon of sin, he offers the righteousness of Jesus Christ. And
that which he offers by faith, he will stand to and plead with God upon; God
has what he can desire, or his justice expect; the believer bids him try to
the uttermost, if there be any imperfection or flaw in it, he will venture his
soul upon it. In this sense man answers God. But Job speaks about inherent
personal righteousness, the righteousness of his ways. Upon this he will
not venture a hair of his head, much less his soul and everlasting peace.

Though I were righteous I would not answer him. Respondere, verbum est
forense, etc. Sanct. Si ille me arguet aut in me sententiam feret, etsi causa
mea justa fit, non audebo illi respondere aliquid objicienti, aut in me
pronuncianti: me enim rationibus obr^et, and sua opprimet majestate. M^rc.
There is somewhat further considerable, for as [righteous] is a judiciary
word, so likewise is [answer.] And it implies, that Job would not only not
answer God objecting or reasoning, but that he would not answer him, accusing
or charging him, judging or sentencing him. I must acknowledge my self to be,
what God judges me to be, and that I am worthy to suffer what he judges me to
suffer.

Hence observe, First, Job having showed the weakness and ignorance of the
creature in his former discourse, here you see whither it tended, namely, to
prove man to be sinful and unrighteous. This teaches us,

That all the failings, infirmities and weaknesses which are in man, are the
issues and effects of the sin of man.

Man is an unrighteous creature, therefore a weak creature. Job argues from the
effect to the cause, from the fruit to the root: Ex effectis causam declarat,
unde enim tanta in mentibus hominum caligo and inscitia, unde tanta infirmitas
corporum and animorum, nisi ex peccato? M^r^.
man has infirmities upon him, therefore he has sin in him. Where there is
no sin, there is strength, and where there is no sin, there is knowledge.
Perfect holiness scatters all the clouds of darkness and ignorance.

Secondly, Though I were righteous I would not answer him; then it follows,
Unrighteous men cannot answer God.

If a righteous man cannot, can an unrighteous? No marvel if David says in
the first Psalm, The wicked shall not stand in judgment, for (in a sense) the
righteous cannot stand in judgment, that is, they cannot plead their own
righteousness before God. Wicked men have nothing to help them, no help
without, and none within, they have nothing but sin in them, and they have
no Savior without them. Hence the Apostle Peter argues (1 Pet. 4.18.) If the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? If Abel
be not able to answer God, how shall Cain? If David cannot, how can Saul? They
who have not the righteousness of Christ, have nothing but unrighteousness
of their own.

Thirdly, Observe the vast difference that is between the spirit and temper of
a godly man, and of a wicked man. O the humility of Jobs spirit! Job will not
justify his own righteousness, or justify himself in his righteousness. A
wicked man will justify his sin, or justify himself in his sin. A Saul
will justify his disobedience, but a Job will not justify his obedience.
Job will not take upon him to be a righteous man; though God had told him he
was perfect and upright. A wicked man will take upon him to be righteous,
though God tell him to his face a thousand times, that he is vile and filthy.
How do wicked men seek for pleas and covers to make themselves appear
righteous! How do they gild the base metal of their hearts, and paint over
those rotten posts to make them appear beautiful! Christ tells the Pharisees
that they were like filthy sepulchers, full of dead men's bones, yet they
would be painted over with the notion of a righteous generation. Job who had
much righteousness and faithfulness in him, would not own them, and modestly
blushes at the praise of God, Though I were righteous, yet I would not answer.

Fourthly, Observe, The righteousness of man is not pleadable before the
righteous God.

Though I were righteous, yet I would not answer him. The Apostle (1 Cor. 4.4.)
gives a parallel testimony, Though I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
hereby justified. Paul knew nothing by himself, that is, he had not any guilt
upon him that he knew of; he did not allow himself in any sin, but kept his
conscience void of offense, both toward God and toward man; yet (though it was
thus with him) he disclaims all opinion of himself, I am not hereby justified,
this is not the plea I have to make before God; he is able to find out
failings where I find none, he knows better then I, what I am.

Fifthly, Observe, A godly man looks upon his own righteousness, as no
righteousness.

Whom, though I were righteous, I would not answer. His supposition has a
negation in it, I am not righteous. Job did not deny the work of the Spirit,
or the grace of God in him; but he would not own them in his pleadings with
God. He could stand upon his terms with men, and let them know who he was,
and what he had done (and it was reason he should) but before God he had
nothing to mention but Christ: In reference to the higher degree, of grace for
sanctification we must forget all that is behind, and press on to that which
is before: And in reference to the whole grace of justification, we must forget
all our sanctification. The less we remember our own righteousness, the more
righteous we are in Christ. As we abate in our selves, we increase in him.
Christ draws the picture of an hypocrite to the life ( Luke 18.) in that
parable of a Pharisee and a Publican, going up to the Temple to pray; and the
design of Christ in that Parable, is held forth at the ninth verse, to be the
conviction of such as trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and
despised others. Now what did this Pharisee? He thanks God he was not as other
men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or as that Publican, and then he minds
God that he gave tithes, and kept fasts twice a week, and so makes a goodly
report of himself, both in the negative and in the affirmative, what he was,
and what he was not. Never did any good man tell God such a story of his own
life, as this Pharisee told. The Saints love to do well, more then to hear
well from others, much more, then to hear well from themselves; they love to
do good, more then to receive good, much more, then to speak good of
themselves. When Christ is represented sitting in judgment ( Mat. 25.35.) he
tells the faithful of all their good deeds, or acts of charity, I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a
stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me. etc. Hear how the
Saints answer, as if they had done no such thing; when was this Lord? when saw
we thee hungry and fed thee? etc. We have forgot the time. They did so little
mind the good they had done, that they remembered not they ever did it. The
Lord keeps a faithful record of what his people do, but themselves do not.
It is our duty to remember to do good, but let God alone to remember the good
we have done. The Lord is not unrighteous to forget our labor of love (Heb.
6.10.) but we lose our righteousness, unless we forget it. If we much
remember what we do, God will remember it but little: The servants of God know
well enough when they do good (to do good ignorantly, is a degree of doing
evil) They know when they do good, and they know what good they do; but
when it is done, it is to them as unknown.

Hezekiah (Isa. 38.3.) put God in mind of his good deeds, Lord (says he)
remember how I walked before thee with an upright heart etc. Hezekiah desired
the Lord to remember his uprightnes. So Nehemiah in diverse passages of that
book ( Chap. 13.14.22.29.31.) puts the Lord in remembrance of his
righteousness. But it is one thing to put the Lord in remembrance of what we
have done historically; and another thing to plead what we have done legally.
Its one thing to show to the Lord the work of his own grace in us; and another
thing mind the Lord of our works to obtain his grace. Hezekiah would have
God to take notice of what he was to pity him in his sickness, Lord, I am
thus, remember the work of thy hands, as I am thy creature; remember the work
of thy Spirit, as I am a new creature, as I am thy servant. And Nehemiah puts
all upon the score of mercy: He did not say, Lord, remember me for what I have
done, answer me according to what I have done, but, Remember me, O my God,
concerning this, and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy (Chap.
13.22.) If Saints at any time remember God of their works, it is not to ground
an argument of merit upon their works, but to show God the workings of his
grace and spirit.

Though I were righteous I would not answer him; What then? What will Job do?
What course will he take for himself, if he will not answer the Lord? What?
This course he takes, and it is the best.

I would make supplication to my Judge. (...), Sept.
The Septuagint render it thus, I would deprecate his judgment; that is, I
would sue for mercy. As if he had said, I am not without hope, because I have
none in my self: I am not lost, because I am lost to my self: I have a sure way
yet left, I will make supplication to my Judge; or as M. Broughton reads it, I
would crave pity of my Judge: as if he had said, Though justice cast me, yet
mercy will relieve me. Mercy will help me as well, and honor God more.

(...) Ad facientem judicareme. Mont.
The word notes humblest submission, as when a man begs for his life. Jacob
(Hos. 12.4.) wept and made supplication. The brethren of Joseph (Genesis 42.21.)
were exceedingly afflicted at the remembrance of their hard usage toward him
their brother, when they sold him to the Egyptians, Fum qui me judecare facit.
Pagn.
We would not hearken when he besought us; it is this word, Think with how
much submission, Joseph, being ready to be sold unto strangers, supplicated his
brethren for pity: Or how a man will lie begging at an enemies feet, who is
ready to kill him. With such submissive language Job resolved to crave pardon
and pity at the hands of God.

Thus he obeys the counsel of Bildad in the 8th Chapter, If thou seek unto
God, and make thy supplication unto him betimes. Job seems to answer, Your
counsel is good, friend Bildad, Though I were righteous, I would not answer
him; but (according to your advice) I would make supplication to my Judge. The
prayers of the Church in greatest straits and distresses, are usually expressed
by this word [supplications] All petitionary Prayer is supplication; but
because we are much abased, and laid very low at such times, therefore prayer
then put up, is specially called supplication. Hence Solomon at the dedication
of the Temple, putting cases and suppositions of many afflictions incident to
that people, still concludes, At what time they shall confess their sins,
and pray, and make supplication, then, etc. (1 King. 8.) And ( Esth. 4.8.)
Mordecai sends to Esther, charging her to go in to the King, What to do? To
make supplication unto him. The lives of the Jews being given away to satisfy
the malice of Haman, it was time for her to supplicate in the lowliest posture.
Thus Job had it in the thoughts of his heart to make supplications to his
Judge; as if he had said, If I were to stand at the tribunal of an earthly
Judge, I would not supplicate, but plead; I would not petition his favor, but
stand upon my right; I would not crave his pity, but expect his justice; I
would bring forth my reasons and arguments, my proofs and witnesses, this
course would I run with an earthly Judge: but my cause being with God, I will
only put a petition into the Court, and submit unto him, let him do with me
what he pleases. Hence we may observe,

First, That there is no weapon can prevail with God, but only prayer and
supplication.

Jobs thoughts had traveled through all the creatures, and found not one of them
could stand before God; Etsi opus virtutis exercuero ad vitam, non ex meritis,
sed ad veniam convalesco. Preci itaque innitendu^ est cum recta agimus, ut omne
quod just vivimus, humilitare condiamus. Greg.
therefore he resolves to fall down before him. I will make supplication.
Prayer overcomes when nothing else can. Christ conquered by dying, and we
conquer by submitting. And yet, it is not supplication, as an act of ours; but
supplication, as it is an ordinance of Gods that prevails with him: he looks
upon prayer, as having the stamp of his own institution; otherwise our greatest
humblings could prevail no more then our proudest contendings. The Word
preached prevails upon the heart, not as it is the act of a man, who dispenceth
it (there is no strength in that) but as it is an ordinance of God, who has
appointed it: So humble supplication obtains much with God, because he has
said it shall.

Secondly, To make supplication is to crave pity.

As prayer prevails, so no plea in prayer can prevail, unless we plead pity,
pity, mercy, mercy; a suppliant looks for all good at the hand of free grace.
We at any time have sin enough to procure us evil (Jer. 4.18.) Thy sins
have procured these things unto thee: But we never have goodness enough to
procure us any mercy. Mercy comes for mercies sake.

Thirdly, In that he says, I would make supplication to my Judge. Observe,

God is the Judge of all our actions and intentions.

Job was in a great contest with men, but (says he) men are not my Judges, God
is my Judge, It is a comfort to the Saints to remember that God is their Judge.
Job was not afraid of God in that relation; no, it was a rich consolation to
think that God was his Judge. He is a righteous Judge, a merciful Judge, a
pitiful Judge; we need not be afraid to speak to him under that notion. Job
says not, I will make supplications to my father (which is a sweet relation)
but (which is most dreadful to wicked men) he considers God as a Judge: The
Saints are enabled by faith to look upon God as a Judge, with assurances of
mercy.

Lastly, Observe, The whole world stands guilty before God.

(Romans 3.19.) Every mouth must be stopped: Job will only make supplication, he
had nothing else to do or say, We do not present our supplications unto thee
for our righteousness, but for thy great mercy (Dan. 9.8.) We can get nothing
from God by opening our mouths in any other style, or upon any other title then
this, of an humble acknowledgement of our unworthiness: the lower we go in
our own thoughts, the higher we are in the thoughts of God; and we find the
more acceptance with him, by how much the less acceptance we think we
deserve. Nothing is gained from God, either by disputing or by boasting. All
our victory is humility.

JOB Chap. 9. Verse. 16, 17, 18. If I had called, and he had answered me, yet
would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice.

For he breaks me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without cause.

He will not suffer me to take my breath, but fills me with bitterness.


THis holy man having abased himself in the sense of his own inability and
unrighteousness before the Lord, and disclaimed the least intendment of
contending or disputing with him (as was seen in the former context) now
confirms it by a further supposition, in the 16, 17, 18. verses, and so
forward. As if he had said, Ye shall find I am so far from vvording it with
God, or standing upon mine own justification with him (though I have pleaded
mine integrity before you my friends) that I here make this hypothesis or
supposition, If I had called, and he had answered, yet would I not believe that
he had hearkened unto my voice.

There is much variety in making out the sense of these words. (...), Sept.
The Septuagint read it negatively, If I had called, and he had not answered
me, I would not believe, etc. Most of the Hebrew vvriters fall very foul upon
Job, and tax him harshly for this speech. What? Would he not believe that God
hearkened unto him, when he had answered him? Is not this unbelief a plain
denial of providence, Atrae. loliginis succum hic aspergit. Rab. Levi.
Asserons Jobu^ n^gare provident tam sivecuram particularium. Coc. Verba
diffi^entis and desperantis de divina misericordia. Opinio Rab. Moses and R.
Levi. apudi. Merc.
or at least of special providence? I would not believe that he had hearkened
unto my voice, is (in their sense) as if he had said, I think God takes no
care, or makes no account of particulars, he looks not after this or that man,
what he speaks, or for what he prays. I can scarce believe that my condition
is under the care of God, or that he will take notice of me, if I should call
upon him; or if I plead before him, what shall I get by it? Do ye think he
will descend to the relief of such a one as I am? Why then do ye move me to
call upon him? etc. If I should pray, and if he should answer me, I can hardly
be persuaded that he will pity me, and do me good.

A second opinion casts him into the deeps of despair; as if Job had altogether
laid aside hope of receiving any favor by calling upon God, or of comfort by
putting his case to him.

Iudaicum commentum, atque Jobi sanctitate indignissimum. Pined.
But all these aspersions are unworthily cast upon Job, a man full of humility
and submission to the will of God: his frequent prayers and applications of
himself to God do abundantly confute all such unsavory conjectures. But the
Jewish Commentatours carry on their former strain, being all along very rigid
toward this holy man, very apt to put the vvorst constructions upon doubtful
passages, and sometimes ill ones upon those which are plainly good.

More distinctly.

There is a difficulty about the Grammatical meaning of one word in the text,
which carries the sense two ways.

If I had called, and he had answered me.
(...) Alij invocare, alij provocare vertunt.
The Hebrew word, which we translate [call] signifies sometimes to pray, and
sometimes to plead or challenge: An act of invocation, or an act of
provocation: it is rendered both ways here. By most, as we, If I had called
upon him; that is, if I had prayed or made my suit unto him. By some, If I had
sent in my plea (as to begin a suit of law with him) or my challenge, as to
enter the combat with him, etc.

As it is taken for a challenge, so the sense lies thus, If I should stand upon
terms with God, and call him to an account to make good what he has done; And
he had answered me; that is, if he had condescended to give me an account of
his ways; yet I would not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice, that
is, that he had yielded to me, or acknowledged that he had done me wrong. Shall
I, who am but dust and ashes, prevail in my suit, and get the day by pleading
and contending with the great God of heaven and earth?

Take the word as it signifies invocation, or calling by way of petition
(Psalm. 50.15.) Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. And
so two or three interpretations are offered.

Tam infirma est caro, ut etia^ propositis divinis promissionibus nolit
credere, Isidor. Clar.
First, Some in favor of Job conceive that he speaks this only through the
infirmity of his flesh, that it was sin within him that spoke, and not Job;
according to that of the Apostle, Romans 7. Not I, but sin that dwells in me:
So Job speaks, as if he did not believe that God would hear him when he praid;
but whose voice was this? Not Jobs, but his sins, the corruption, the
infirmity of Job gave out such language, not he. As we may say in reference to
an action, I did it not, but sin that dwells in me, so to a word, I spoke
it not, but sin and corruption that dwells in me, gave out such language.

Secondly, I would not believe that God had hearkened to me, Plerique Latini ad
eas conditiones referunt quas oration efficax requirit; quarum defectus non
exaudimur, atque ea ratione sibi timere Jobum.
though he had answered me, may refer to the manner of his prayer or
invocation, as not coming up to the height and measure of the duty, as not
fulfilling that Law of prayer which the Lord requires; and so, because his
prayers were imperfect and weak, therefore he would not believe that ever God
had taken notice of him, or hearkened to his voice: As if he had said, You bid
me make my supplication; if I do, yet I will not believe that God takes notice
of my prayers. Why? because mine are but cold and unbelieving prayers, weak and
distracted prayers, the prayers of a distempered heart, the prayers of a
confused spirit, such I confess mine are; therefore I cannot believe God will
hearken to my voice.

But rather in the last place, take the sense thus, Videtur hoc esse animi
mirabiliter demiss^, atque sibi su^eq, orationi diffidentis, fidentis vero de
sola divina bonitate. Pined.
that Job in these words, breaths out the humility of his spirit; as if he had
said, I am so far from standing upon my terms with God (as was showed before)
as if I had hopes to carry it with him by contending, that though I come in the
humblest manner to invocate and call upon his Name, and I find him so gracious
and merciful to me, as that he does answer me in my requests, and grant the
thing I desire, yet I will not believe that he has hearkened to My voice, that
is, that he has done this for any worthiness in me, in my services, or
prayers, I will not believe that the answer I receive from heaven is obtained
by any value which my person has with God.

Such is the coldness and deadnes, the languishment and unbelief of my heart in
prayer, such are my prayers, that, the truth is, Non ex diffidentia hoc dicit,
sed ex timore, Dei reveritus judicium. Drus.
I cannot believe I am heard, when I am heard, I cannot think my petition
granted, when I see it is granted. Thus it sets forth the exceeding humility
and lowliness of his spirit, he would give all the glory unto God in granting
his petitions, and take nothing at all to himself in making those petitions, I
would not believe that he has hearkened to my voice.

What voice was it then that he believed God hearkened unto? He hearkened to
the voice of the Mediator, to the voice of Christ: He hearkened to the voice
of his own free grace: He hearkened to the sounding of his own bowels: He
hearkened to the motions and intercessions of his Spirit in me: to the motions
and intercessions of his Son for me. It is not my voice that has got the
answer; he alone that has granted it of his good pleasure in Christ.

I would not believe that he had hearkened to my voice. (...) Credere, stabile
esse.
The word signifies both believing and establishing, or to believe and
establish; and the reason of it is, because faith settles the heart, Faith is
the establishment of the soul. An unbeliever has no bottom, he is built
without a foundation, his spirit is unfixed.

And that act of believing [I would not believe] is the general act of faith,
namely, a firm assent to the truth of what another speaks. An assent to the
truth of it two ways. To the truth of it: First, Historically, that such a
thing was spoken or done; (...) Graece (...),
and then Logically, that the thing is true which is spoken. When he says, I
would not believe that God has done this, his meaning is, I would not assent
to it, as done for my sake, or for my voice; not that he would not believe the
thing was done at all. He assented to the word and answer of God, when he did
receive it; but in that restriction, he would not believe it, namely in
reference to himself, that he has hearkened to his voice.

To hearken is more then to hear; Auscultare, inclinationem animi denot at ad
alterius dicta Cujus oppositum est, auret claudere and obturare ad alicuj^s
sermonem. Hinc proverb^um. Surdo natras fabulam Haec verba exactam demissi
animi significationem contine^t. Tunc cum arriserit gratia, time, cum abierit,
time. Bernard. Providentia Deisaepe nobis be^evo^a est, cum nulla benevolentiae
externa praebet argumenta, imo aliquardo quem exaudit turbine conterit malorum.
it notes the inclination of the mind, rather then the attention of the ear.
As to stop the ear notes the shutting of the heart against obedience, rather
than of the ear against audience. To tell a tale to a deaf man, is to speak to
one that hears, but will not grant.

From all it appears,

First, That, Job speaks very highly of the goodness of God, namely, that God
answers prayer, though he has not respect to the voice of him that prays;
Though he had answered me yet would I not believe that he had hearkened to my
voice.

Secondly, That, he speaks exceeding humbly and submissively of himself, my
voice; what am I, a poor creature, that I should think I had carried the matter
with God?

Thirdly, That, he speaks very wisely and understandingly concerning the nature
and efficacy of prayer, and the means procuring answers of prayer. When man
prays, God answers; but he does not answer, because man prays.

Fourthly, That, he speaks very highly and gloriously of the providence of God,
though providence act darkly toward man. We pray, God answers, and does us
good, yet things may go quite contrary in appearance, If I had called, and he
had answered me, yet would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice;
why? He breaks me with a tempest. God was breaking him, and hearing him at
the same time. God may be doing us good, when the signs he gives speak evil, he
hears and answers us praying to him, when we think we hear him thundering
terribly against us.

Hence, First, We learn, That

Prayer is calling upon God.

Then, the heart should be very attentive upon God in prayer. How can we expect
God should hear us, when we do not hear our selves! In prayer we call upon
God, therefore we should call upon our selves to consider how and what we pray.

Secondly, Note, Prayer granted is prayer answered.

If I had called, and he had answ^red me. The Lord from heaven speaks to us in
every act of his providence; his speaking to us, is in doing for us. The works
of God are answers to man. God does not answer audibly or sensibly; there is a
voice in his dispensations. As men ( Prove. 6.13.) So the Lord speaks to us with
his feet, and answers our prayers with his fingers, that is, his works and
ways are demonstrations of his will in answer to our prayers.

Thirdly, In that Job tells us, He would not believe, etc. we are taught,

That faith is a necessary ingredient in prayer.

This negation of his faith in prayer, implies the need of faith in prayer.
When I pray I should believe, but as my case stands I cannot believe, clouds
and darkness are upon me. Faith is the strength of prayer, Whatsoever ye ask
in prayer believing, ye shall receive, Mat. 21.22. Prayer without faith, it is
like a Gun discharged without a bullet, which makes a noise, but does no
execution; we may put out a voice in speaking, but except we put out faith in
speaking, we do but speak, we do not pray. As the Word of God coming upon us
does us no good, prevails not upon our hearts, unless it be mixed with faith
(Heb. 4.2.) The word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith
in them that heard it. So the word that goes out from us, the word of prayer,
prevails not at all with God, obtains nothing from him, unless it be mixed
with faith; All the promises are made to believers, All things are possible to
them that believe (Mar. 9.23.) Ask in faith, nothing wavering, for he that
wavereth is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed (Jam.
1.6.) To ask in faith, is to ask, resting upon the power of God, whereby he is
able, upon his truth, whereby he is faithful, and upon his goodness in Christ,
whereby he is ready to make good his promises. He that asks thus does not
waver. Few are without doubting, but all sound believers are without wavering.
The Greek word signifies to question, or dispute a thing, a degree beyond
doubting; as when a man is at no certainty with himself, being sometime of one
mind, sometime of another. The judgment being so carried, that the man is at
variance with his own breast, or is between two ways, not knowing which to
take. We translate the word (in the 4th of the Romans, verse. 20.) by
staggering. Abraham staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief. The
similitude which the Apostle James uses, illustrates this sense, He that
wavereth is like a wave of the sea, which by tempestuous vvindes is sometimes
carried up to heaven, and anon down to the deep. A man who is tossed with such
waves of unbelief, staggers like a drunken man, in his practice and
profession; he is now on this side, to morrow on that; he does not only stagger
or halt in his way, but he staggers and halts between two ways, and is
therefore called (verse. 8th) A double minded man; The prayers of such a man are
faithless prayers, and therefore fruitless prayers, Let not that man think he
shall receive any thing (unless a rebuke, and a denial) of the Lord (verse.
7.) There are no promises made to such, and therefore no mercies convaied to
such. Believing prayer is gaining prayer; yet they who believe least, presume
most. Hence the Apostles check, Let not that man think; as if he had said, I
know such will flatter themselves into a persuasion of great matters; They
will have high thoughts, but they shall receive nothing.

Observe, Fourthly, That how strongly soever a godly man acts faith, for the
answer of his prayers, yet he has no faith that his prayer deserves an answer.

I would not believe that he had hearkened to [my] voice. Christ calls the
Spouse to prayer (Can. 2.14.) Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy
voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance comely. Christ loves prayer.
The prayers of the Saints upon earth, are music in heaven. That invitation to
the Spouse, Let me hear thy voice, seems to be an allusion to those, who
loving music, call upon a friend who has a good voice, or exquisite skill to
play upon an instrument, Come, sing us a song, play us a lesson, let us have a
fit of mirth. Thus, I say, Christ speaks to the Church, Come, let me hear thy
voice, it is sweet, I know thou have a sweet one. But the Saints judge their own
voices harsh and unharmonicall, they are apt to think their prayers, jarrings
and discords, at the best but a rude noise, not a composed air in the ear of
God. Faith makes our prayers melodious, because it carries us out of our
selves. A believer lives not in the sound of his own prayers, but of Christ's
intercession. What are we that we should expect any acceptance upon our own
account? or say this We have gained, this We have obtained, thus God has heard
us, or thus we have vvrestled it out with God? As when we have performed all
our duties, we must say, We are unprofitable servants; so when we have obtained
all our suits, we must say, We are unprofitable petitioners; I will not believe
that God had hearkened unto My voice. What Is man's voice, that God should hear it?

Observe, Fifthly, That a godly man sometimes cannot believe his prayer is
heard, when it is heard.

Though he calls and God answers, yet (like Job) he believes not that God has
hearkened to his voice; He cannot think his prayer is heard, though one should
come and tell him it is heard. When the Jews returned from Babylon, the mercy
was so great, Forsan hoc dicit, quia saepe prae nimia laetitia non credimus
verum esse quod maxim verum esse optamus. Drus.
that they could not believe they had it, when they had it; When thou did
turn our captivity, we were as them that dream (Psalm. 126.2.) The deliverance
was incredible, they could not think they were delivered. Their return to
Jerusalem was suspected for a dream of it in Babylon. The Church prayed
without ceasing for Peter, when he was in prison ( Act. 12.5.) yet when the
Lord brought him out of prison, and he was knocking at the door of the house
where they were assembled, while they were knocking at the door of heaven for
his deliverance, yet they would not believe the report of the damsel, who
said he stood before the gate; They tell her she is mad, and when she affirmed
it with sobriety, as well as vehemence, then, they have another help for their
unbelief, It was not Peter, but his Angel. Thus it is to this day with the
Saints, in their great personal suits and petitions, both about spiritual
things and temporal, they are so overcome, astonished and amazed at the
goodness of God, that though they see the thing done, yet they can scarce
believe it is done. As if a Prince should send a message to a poor man by some
great Lord, and tell him he has bestowed honor and favor upon him, the poor
man is ready to say, I cannot believe it: the blessing is too big for him to
digest, and let down into his narrow heart; no, says he, sure it is not so.
Though the people of God ever preserve a high respect and esteem of the works
of God toward them, yet their faith is often below his workings, and they
cannot receive or take in mercy so fast as it comes; faith widens the vessels
of the soul to receive much, but God can pour in faster then faith can widen
the soul to receive.

Sixthly, Observe, Faith has it is decaies.

Faith does not keep up always at the same height, in the same plight and
degree: There is a faith which believes that God does answer before he answers;
and there is a faith that cannot believe God will answer, when he has
answered. Faith in strength prevents the answer of God. As God in answering
sometimes prevents our askings (Isa. 65.24.) Before they call I will answer,
and while they are yet speaking I will hear: So faith says, Before the Lord
gives, I know I have it, before the Lord does this thing, I see it is done.
Faith in it is strength realizes the mercies of God before they have a being,
and is an evidence to us of what we see not. When mercies are but in their
principles, in their conception and birth, or at most when they are but in
their cradle and swadling-clouts, faith speaks as gloriously of them, as if
they were fully acted and grown up before the eye. Strong faith in God (like
God himself) quickens the dead, and calls those things which be not, as
though they were. Weak faith deadens the quick, and calls those things which
are, as if they were not. The Israelites were no sooner over the red sea, but
they believed themselves in the land of Canaan (Exodus 15.13, 14, 15.) and in
their Song tell the story of the submission and fears of the uncircumcised
Nations round about, which yet their after unbelief kept off forty years.

There is a further understanding of the words, which I shall clear in
connection with that which follows;

I would not believe that he had hearkened to my voice; For he breaks me with
a tempest; as if the reason why he doubted his [voice] was not heard, Etiamsi
De^ ^o peccantem exaudierit, minime credo cum malorum ni^bo me obiuat.
lay in this, because of those continual breakings which were upon him, I
would not believe that he had hearkened to my voice, for he breaks me with a
tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without a cause: As if Job had said, the
dealings of God are such toward me, that I know not how to make it out that I
am heard: For though the Lord in some things carries it so graciously toward
me, that I have great assurance I am heard, yet many things appear, reporting
that I am not heard. Afflictions continued are no evidence that prayer is not
heard, yet usually it is very inevident to an afflicted person, that his prayer
is heard.

I shall now examine the 16, and 17. verse, as holding a reason why Jobs faith
was thus weakened.

Verse 17. For he breaks me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without
cause.
Jobs sorrows put him to his rhetoric still, (...) Turbo.
He breaks me with a tempest. An expression raising his afflictions to the
height, yet, not beyond the reality of them, He breaks me with a tempest.

The word we translate [break] signifies an utter contusion, (...)
or the total ruining of a thing or person, Contudit, contrivit, obminuit.
the dashing of either to pieces. The word is used reciprocally of Christ and
the devil, in that great and first promise of Christ, The seed of the woman. (
Genesis 13.16.) It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Christ
having infinite power, utterly destroyed the serpents power; he spoiled and
ruined him for ever: the Apostle phrases it so (Coloss. 2.15.) He spoiled
principalities and powers; he took away the prey or booty of souls, which they
had got, and led them disarmed like prisoners of war. And the devil did what
he could to ruin and spoil Christ, to break Christ to pieces. Thus Christ and
Satan strove and contended one with another. And the word (Shuph) has an
elegant neernesse in sound to our English. We call that noise which is made by
the ruder motion of the feet, shufling, and when men contend much, we hear the
shufling of their feet. Job was striving and shufling with God in prayer, and
God was striving and shufling with Job in storms and tempests.

He breaks me with a tempest. The word signifies not only storms and
tempests, but likewise, Chaldaeus legit, usque ad filum lineu^, vel adfila
pi^orum subtiliter disputat mecum. (...) Filum significat.
A little hair or twined thread. So the Chaldee Paraphrast translates it here,
He disputes or contends with me to a hair, or to a thread; making the sense out
thus, I will not believe that God has answered me; why? He stands with me
upon the smallest matters; he disputes with me to a hair, and debates every
thing to a thread. As Abraham said to the King of Sodom, (Genesis 14.23.) I will
not take any thing that is thine from a thread even to a shoe-latchet; that is,
I will not make the smallest gain by thee: So to dispute to a hair, or to a
thread, notes contending upon or about the smallest differences.

But generally the word is rendered a Tempest; and thus God is often described
contending with man, (Nah. 1.3.) His way is in the whirlwinde, and in the
storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet; that is, He sends storms and
whirlwindes, by these he afflicts the children of men; and as an army of
horsemen, raises clouds of dust from the earth with their feet: so the Lord
raises the dust of clouds with his, Behold, a whirlwinde, or a tempest of the
Lord is gone forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwinde; it shall fall
grievously upon the head of the wicked, Jer. 23.19.

To break with a tempest, or with a whirlwinde, implies two things.

1. A sudden and an unexpected affliction. Tempests are never welcome, and but
seldom looked for: When the sea is so calm and smooth that you may throw a die
upon it, a storm arises in a moment, and the vessel in danger of a wreck.

2. It notes the fierceness and violence of an affliction. Tempests are the
most violent motions, they come with power. A tempest is irresistible, Who can
stand before it? Who can contend with storms and winds? When the Lord made
total conquests of his enemies, he contended (in the letter) by storms and
tempests. As in the 10th of Joshua, and in the first of Samuel (Chap. 7.10.)
When the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel, the Lord thundered
with a great thunder that day upon the Philistines and discomfited them. The
story is famous of a legion of Christian soldiers, called the thundering
legion, because by prayer they obtained a refreshing rain for the army in which
they were commanded, and a terrible storm of thunder and lightning, etc. upon
the enemy. The word is used figuratively in war, when besiegers coming to a
Town or Fort are resolved to carry it presently what ever it cost them, they
are said to storm the place, or to get it by storm. The Prophet alludes to this
(Isa. 25.4.) When the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the
wall; that is, when their rage shall be at the highest, most violent and
impetuous, then the Lord will be a refuge from the storm. The same God who
saves many from the storms of man, did himself storm Job.

He breaks me with a tempest. Job was stormed, yet supposes his prayer was
answered. Hence observe,

Prayers may be heard and answered, when greatest afflictions are upon us.

Do not think your prayers are lost, because your afflictions are not
removed, or that God does not hear you, Quaedam non negantur, sed ut congruo
tempore dentur, differuntur. Aug.
because he does not presently relieve you. God forbears, when he does not
deny. He answers to our profit, when he answers not to our feeling. He
answers to our spiritual interest, when not to our corporal. The sick man
calls to the Physician to take away the bitter, loathsome potion; Exaudit
saepe ad profectum, licet non ad votum. Aquin. in loc, Saevitur in vulnus, ut
homo sanetur. Aug.
and the wounded man calls to the Chyrurgion to take away those corroding
plasters, and to forbear those torturing operations. But the one gives him his
potion, and the other lances his sores, and lays corrosives to his flesh; both
these, while they vex the patient, answer him: for what is the reason, why the
patient would have his bitter potion taken away? is it not because he would be
better? And why would he have those painful operations forborne? is it not
because he would have ease: Now, for those very reasons the Masters of those
professions keep him to both; neither could they give him his desire, but by
doing contrary to his will. Thus also the Lord is healing us, when we think he
is only wounding us, and fulfilling our desires, while we cry out he is
crossing them.

Secondly, Observe, Even while we are praying, the Lord may be thundering, he
may be breaking us when we are beseeching him.

We must learn to keep to our duty, whatsoever the dealings of God be; whether
it be fowl weather or fair, pray still; whether it be storm or calm, go on in
prayer still. Pray still, though God break still. It is our duty to pray, and
it is Gods privilege to break.

Thirdly, Observe from the loftiness of the language.

That the Lord lays very sore afflictions upon those that are very dear to
him.

Job expresses his afflictions by breaking with a tempest. Strokes from the
clouds are most terrible. The same afflictions and scourges which he lays upon
his enemies, he lays (in the matter, yea, and often in degree) upon his best
friends. What can the Lord do to his greatest enemies, but break them with a
tempest? He does not only chasten with a rod, but sometimes scatter with a
storm; He has not only a sword, but a thunderbolt for his servants, He has
terrible strokes and blows for them, who lie in his arms, and live in his
embraces. Therefore we cannot distinguish men by the matter, no nor by the
measure of their afflictions; That which is a judgment to one, is but a
chastening to another, with the same weapon he wounds a friend and destroies an
enemy.

Fourthly, Observe, That afflictions continued cause us to suspect that our
prayers are not answered.

Why does Job think that God hearkened not to him? I would not believe (says
he) that God had hearkened unto my voice; why? because still he continues to
break me. Faith is put hard to it at such a time; Licet Deus vere exaudiat,
tamen homo in miseriu constitutu^ se exaudiri non credit. Aquin.
and this is the thing which stumbled Job, he could not tell how to make it
out, that God had heard his prayer for him, because he heard so great a noise
of tempests and storms against him. It is very difficult for faith to see mercy
through clouds of trouble. It is a hard thing for faith to look upon the pleased
face of God through a lowering tempest, or to believe the calmnes of Gods heart
to us in troublesome dispensations. Therefore he speaks here as if his faith
were even mastered. The providence of God are often too hard for man. And with
this temptation Satan helps on unbelief. If he come to a soul in affliction,
which keeps close to his interests in Christ; Yea (says he) you may do so
though afflictions were upon you, but yours are more then afflictions, yours
are tempests and storms: God deals with you as with an enemy, yours are no
ordinary matters, yours are like the portion he gives to those he hates; I
would not weaken your faith, because of a chastening rod, but you are beaten
with scorpions, and will you still believe? Can God love you and deal thus with
you? Thus the serpent whispers in those louder tempests of affliction.

Fifthly, Observe, That

Afflictions continued cause us to suspect that our prayers shall not be
answered.

And so I find some rendering the former verse in connection with this, If I
have called, and he has answered me, yet will I not believe that he will
hearken to my voice. As if he had said, I know God has heard me heretofore,
but I fear he will hear me no more; because I find his hand so heavy upon me.
Surely then, he has forgotten to be gracious, and has shut up his tender
mercies. Former experiences can hardly keep faith whole, while we are under
present breakings.

Lastly, If we take the words, as importing a calling to God for answer in a
way of provocation (as was showed before) then the sense is; If I had an
ambition to contend with God, and he had answered me, by condescending to that
course, yet I could not believe he had hearkened to my voice, that is, I could
not believe that he had yielded the cause to me; why? because he goes on still
to break me with tempests; he follows me with trouble still; he shows he has
done me no wrong in my former afflictions, by his going on to afflict me still,
he is so far from acknowledging the least injustice, in what is past of my
sufferings, that I suffer more, He breaks me with a tempest, and Multiplies my
wounds without cause.

But is not this injustice to multiply wounds without cause? (...) Gratis.
Is not this a charge of blasphemy upon God? May we not think that now Satan
had his wish, and that Job cursed God indeed?

The Hebrew word which we translate, Vulnera sine causa sunt mala and flagella,
quae non ob aliquod mittuntur peccatum.
without cause has been opened, Chap. 1.9. and Chap. 2.3. and it has occurred
elsewhere. Here, He multiplies my wounds without cause, is not a charge of
injustice upon God, Jobs heart was far from the least thought of that, as you
may see in all the dispute: But it is an acknowledgement of the sovereignty and
power of God, Though he has wounded me already, yet he may wound me still,
without giving me a reason; or though I have given him no cause. What? Do ye
think God would yield to me, if I should contend with him? He multiplieth, or,
He has multiplied my wounds without cause, that is, His verbis evidenter
exponit, quae supra occulte dixerat; si venerit adme, non video. Hoc enim
ubique fere in dictis Jobi observanaum, quod obscure dicta per aliqua
consequentia exponuntur. Aquin.
without giving me any account hitherto; and do you think that now I shall have
liberty to call him to an account; or that he will give me one? He wounds
without cause, is, Sine causa manifesta, et ab homine affl^cto perceptibili.
Aquin.
without cause manifested. God has not told me the reason of his chastenings.
And I do not perceive the reason. I know not why he contendeth with me. And so
he expounds what he spoke at the 12th verse, Lo, he passes by me, and I see
him not. There are mysteries in providence. Man's eye is not clear enough to see
all that God does before his eyes. Job is his own Expositour. This later
expression gives us a comment upon the former. And it is observable, that both
in this book, and in the whole body of the Scripture, easier texts may be found
to interpret the harder, and clear ones to enlighten those which are darker and
more obscure. The Word of God is not only a light and a rule to us, but to it
self.

Or, He multiplieth my wounds without cause] is, Haec a Job dicta sunt, quod
intell gat se non tam flagellari quam probari.
as if Job had said, I know the Lord deals not with me as with a guilty person,
nor does he judge me as a malefactor; mine is a probation, not a punishment:
God does only try me, to see what is in my heart, and how I can stand in an
evil day. He multiplieth my wounds without cause; that is, without the cause
which you have so often objected against me, namely, that I am an hypocrite and
wicked. I know God looks upon me as a child, Animus in Deu^ praeclare
affectus, sed tamen affectus doloribus. Sanct.
or a friend, not as an enemy. Therefore I have no cause to multiply words with
God, though God go on to multiply my wounds without cause.

To multiply wounds] notes, numerous and manifold afflictions; many in number,
and many in kind. Jobs were deep, deadly wounds, and he had many of them, he
was all over wound, body and soul were wounds, he was smitten within and
without; as to multiply to pardon, is to pardon abundantly ( Isa. 55.7.) So to
multiply wounds, or to multiply to wound, is to wound abundantly.

Here a Question would be resolved, How the justice of God may be acquitted, in
laying on and multiplying afflictions without cause?

I shall refer the Reader for further light about this point to the third
verse of the second Chapter, where those words are opened; Thou movedst me
against him to destroy him without cause; yet take here three considerations
more, by way of answer to the doubt.

First, Whatsoever the Lord wounds and takes from any man, he wounds and takes
his own. He is Lord over all. Our health and strength are his, our riches are
his; The world is his and the fullness of it (Psalm. 50.) If he be hungry he
needs not tell us; he can go to his own store. It is no wrong to dispose what
is our own, wheresoever we find it. That rule is as true in revocations, as
distributions: Friend, I do thee no wrong (Mat. 20.15.) Is it not lawful for
me to do what I will with mine own? Though there were no sin in man, yet
there were no injustice in God, because he takes nothing from us, but what he
gave us, and has full power to recall, and take away.

Secondly, Suppose man could say, that, what he had were his own, that, his
riches were his own, that, health and strength of body were his own, yet God
may take them away, and do no wrong. It is so among men, Kings and States call
out their Subjects to war, and in that war their wounds are multiplied
without any cause given by them: They gave no occasion why they should be
appointed to such hazards of life and limb, to such hardships of hunger and
cold; yet there is no injustice in this. When God casts man into trouble, he
calls him out to his service, he has a war, some noble enterprise and design
to send him upon. To you it is given to suffer for his sake (says the Apostle,
Phil. 1.29.) he puts it among the special privileges, which some Saints are
graced with, not only above the world, but above many of the Saints, To whom
it is given (and that is a royal gift) only to believe. Now, if in prosecuting
this suffering task, whether for Christ, or from Christ, a believer lays out
his estate, credit, liberty, or life, he is so far from being wronged, that
he is honored. Thousands are slain in public imploiments, who have given no
cause to be so slain. If according to the line of men, this be no injustice,
much less is it injustice in God, who is without line, himself being the only
line and rule to himself, and to all besides himself.

Thirdly, I may answer it thus, Though the Lord multiply wounds without cause;
yet he does it without wrong to the wounded, because he wounds with an intent
to heal, and takes away with a purpose to give more; as in the present case,
God made Job an amends for all the wounds, whether of his body or goods, good
name or spirit. Now, though it be a truth in respect of man, that we may not
break another head, and say we will give him a plaster, or take away from a
man his possession, and say we will give it him again, yet God may. Man must
not be so bold with man, because he has no right to take away and vvound, nor
is he sure that he can restore and heal; but it is no boldness, but a due
right in God to do thus, for he as Lord has power to take away, and ability
to restore. And he restores sometimes in temporals, as to Job, but always to
his people in spirituals and eternals. Hence the Apostle argues (2 Cor. 4.17.)
Our light afflictions which are but for a moment, work for us an eternal
weight of glory. Afflictions work glory for us, not in a way of meriting
glory, but in a tendency to the receiving of glory, and in preparations for it.
There is no wrong in those losses by which we are made gainers: Those losses
being sent that we may gain, and the sender of the loss being able effectually
to make us gainers.

He multiplieth my wounds without cause. Hence observe, First,

Afflictions are no argument that God does not love us.

As the Lord has a multitude of mercies in his heart, so a multitude of
afflictions in his hand; and a multitude of afflictions may consist with a
multitude of mercies. At the same time when we are visibly encompast about,
and besieged with an army of sorrows and opposers, an army of invisible
comforts, and protectours may be encamping round about us: As Elisha assured
his servant, 2 King. 6.17.

Secondly, (Which I shall but only name, because I have met it heretofore.)

The Lord is not accountable to any creature for his actions.

He multiplieth my wounds without cause, or, He multiplieth my wounds without
showing cause. God is the only Judge, who may give sentence without hearing
parties, or showing cause. It is unrighteous in an earthly Judge to do so; he
must not judge a man to any suffering, and not show reason of his judgment.
But the first cause needs not show second causes. God has the reason of all
things in himself, and therefore we cannot call him to give his reason. Where
the will of the Agent may lawfully be all the reason of his actions, there is
no reason he should give any account of his actions, but what himself wills.

The next verse is of the same tenor in sense with the former, the difference
is only in expression.

Verse 18. He will not suffer me to take my breath, but fills me with
bitterness.
He not only breaks me with a tempest, and multiplies my wounds, but He will
not suffer me to take my breath. This implies the unintermittednesse of
afflictions; as if he had said, I have not only many afflictions, Non dedit
mihi retrahere spiritum.
and great afflictions, but continual afflictions. The Hebrew is, He will not
give me to draw back my breath, or suffer my breath to return: The words are
of the same importance with those of the 7th Chapter, ver. 19. How long will thou not depart from me? Nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle? That
is, vvilt thou not give me so much respite as to swallow down my spittle? Here
(which is more) he affirms, He will not give me so much as a breathing time.

Some interpret this of a bodily distemper or disease: that God had brought a
sickness upon him, which did even stop his breath, as if Job had been
troubled with hardness of breathing, Quidam ad morbum referu^t, quasi Job
Astmate laborasset. Beda.
with the Tissick (as Physicians call it) or a stopping in the lungs. But we
may rather take it figuratively, my sorrows put me out of breath, the Lord does
not only afflict me without giving me any account, but I have uncessant
afflictions, which cannot be counted. No man can tell how often he does or
suffers that which he always does or suffers. I am so far from seeing a
period of my troubles, that I have not so much as any pause or stop. He speaks
in that high strain of rhetoric, called hyperbole, for in strictness of the
letter, not to suffer a man to take his breath, is to kill and quite destroy
him: but when he says, God will not suffer me to breathe, it notes the
continuation of his sorrows, not the expiration of his days.

Again, Not to suffer a man to take his breath, before he has done such a
thing, is a Fortosse proverb^^n erat, ad significandu^ facere aliquid
indesinenter and absque ulla vel minima morula aut intermissione Vna saliva.
Hieron. in ep. (...), i. e. uno spiritu aliquid facere est diligenter facere.
Theoph. in Charact. Clivum istum uno si potes, spiritu exupera Se^.
Proverb, for speedy doing. Like that used by some of the Ancients, to do a
thing with one spit, that is, in as little time as a man may spit. When the Va
presto, and non fietare, q. d. uno halitu egressum and regressum perfice.
Italians would express acting without delay, they say, Go about this
business, and do not fetch a breath till you are here again, go and come
with a breath. That direction given by Elisha to his servant Gehezi, when he
sent him to restore the Shunammites son (2 King. 4.29.) Take my staff in thine
hand, and go thy way, if thou meet any man, salute him not, and if any salute
thee, answer him not again, etc. And that of Christ to his Disciples, when he
gave them their Commission to preach the Gospel ( Luke 10.4.) Salute no man by
the way, are of the same intendment. Christ did not mean that his Disciples
should be uncivil (nor Elisha his) he did not forbid them to use common
courtesies to men, when they went to call men to special grace. No, but his
meaning is, Go speedily about the work, do not stand complementing and talking
with, How do you, and how do you? by the way: do not entertain the time, or
trifle it away with Ceremonies, having an imploiment of such infinite
concernment put into your hands. So he seems to allude to, and reprove that ill
custom of idle servants, who when they are sent forth upon business, will yet
stand and talk with every one they meet. Now, as not to suffer a man to talk a
word while he is upon a service, imports sudden dispatch: So when Job says, He
will not suffer me to take my breath in these my sufferings, his meaning is,
mine are no lazy, dull sufferings, I am forced to be active at them, I cannot
stand breathing and cooling my self, I have no leisure, no vacation at all from
this passive service; He will not suffer me to take my breath.

But ( or, for) he fills me with bitterness, or with bitternesses. I have
opened this word before, c. 3.10. As in Scripture, sweetness implies all
comfort: so bitterness all trouble and sorrow. When God complains about the
services of his people ( Ier. 6.20. Sicut dulcedo omnia jucunda and amica
naturae significat, sic nomine amaritudinis, praesertim in numero multitudinis,
gravissimae quaeque offlictiones intelliguntur Bold. Victimae non dulcuerunt.
Hos. 9.4.
Hose. 9.) he says, Your Sacrifices are not sweet to me; So the Original;
that is, your Sacrifices are not acceptable to me, or pleasing to me. Sweet
things are pleasing things, bitter things are unpleasing. Afflictions are
unpleasant to flesh and blood (Heb. 12.11.) No affliction for the present is
joyous, but grievous.

Bitterness is put for the extremest affliction, and in the plural (as here)
for all afflictions; Surely the bitterness of death is past, says Agag (1 Samuel 15.32.) that is, I have escaped bitter death at this time; the soldier
spared me in the heat of the battle, surely then a Prophet will not slay me in
cold blood. To be filled with bitterness notes abundance of afflictions. As to
be filled with the Spirit, to be filled with the fullness of Christ, etc. note
the plentiful receiving of the Spirit, and of the grace of Christ. To taste of
a bitter cup, to sip a little of it is unpleasant, but to drink large
draughts, to be filled with bitterness, who can abide it? When Christ was come
to Golgotha, They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall; but (though he
drank up that cup of his fathers wrath to the very bottom, though he drank up
all the gall and wormwood of sin, for the salvation of men, yet) when he had
tasted thereof, He would not drink (Mat. 27.34.) If it be grievous to taste but
a little of a bitter cup, then judge how grievous Jobs sufferings were, who was
filled with bitterness; he had his belly full of trouble, his belly full of Gall
and Wormwood, his stomach could hold no more, bitterness was both his meat and
drink.

Note, First, Afflictions may come uncessantly.

Not so much as a breathing time between, then while thou art assaulted prepare
for fresh assaults.

Observe, Secondly, The Lord sometimes mixes a very bitter cup for his own
people.

Yea, they have not only a bitter cup, but bitterness is their cup, and they
have not only a taste of it, but are filled with it. The Psalmist shows us a
bitter cup, which is the proper portion of wicked men; There is a cup in the
hand of the Lord, and it is full of mixture, the wine is red, and the dregs
thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them (Psalm.
75.8.) The Lord has a cup of red wine, that is, a cup filled with wrath, fury
and indignation. Wicked men (how much soever their stomachs loath it, and turn
against it) shall drink it up to the bottom, or he will pour it down their
throats, whether they will or no. They shall be filled with bitterness after
all their sweet morsels and pleasant draughts. The Saints are filled with
bitterness from God, but not with the wrath of God; many sorrows may be
mingled in their cup, but everlasting love is ever mingled in it. Saints never
drink pure wrath, as wicked men never taste pure love.

To conclude, we may observe here a Climax, or gradation of four steps.

First ( Verse. 14.) Job acknowledged that he was unable to answer the Lord.

And secondly, He professed that if he could, he would not, no, he would humble
himself (verse. 15.)

Thirdly, If in mercy God should answer his petition, yet he would not be
confident at all (in regard of himself) that God had heard him, or hearkened
unto his voice.

Lastly, He acknowledged that God might go on to afflict him still; for some
read this text in the future tense, He will multiply my wounds, and afflict me
without cause; He will fill me with bitterness. A godly man reckons up his
afflictions as well as his comforts to the praise and honor of God. And the
more God afflicts him, the more he abases himself, though he does not think
the worse of himself, because God does afflict him.

JOB Chap. 9. Verse. 19, 20, 21. If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong; and
if of judgment, Who shall set me a time to plead?

If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me; If I say, I am
perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.

Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my own soul, I would despise my
life.


JOB goes on to lay himself yet lower before God: and having in the three
former verses proved that weak man is not able to contend with the Almighty; he
gives an additionall proof in this 19th verse, from the consideration of a
twofold adjunct in God. First, his strength. And secondly, his justice. From
both he concludes according to the former argument given upon the whole matter
in the 10th verse, seeing God is so strong and just, Surely, if I justify my
self my own mouth shall condemn me; and if I say, I am perfect, it shall also
prove me perverse.

If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong.
There are two ways whereby a man makes his part good against another man.

First, By the strength of his arm and dint of his sword.

Secondly, By the equity of his cause, and the goodness of his conscience. Job
declares his inability to deal with God in either, If I speak of strength,
lo, he is strong, etc.

M. Broughton translates thus, As for force he is valiant; if I think to carry
it by force with God, He is a God of valor, or, as Moses in his Song (Exodus
15.3.) describes him, The Lord is a man of war, I cannot deal with him upon
that point.

In originali indifferens est, na^ tantum habetur, si ad potentiam: ut suppleri
possit, venero, aut respexero, vel aliquid simile.
The original speaks only thus much, If of strength, he strong; we supply the
word [speak] If men talk of strength, or boast of strength, or show forth their
strength (we may supply it with any of those words) Lo, he is strong. As it is
usual with us when we would set a man up, in the perfections of any quality,
we say, What do ye speak of knowledge, why, There Is a learned man! What do ye
speak of riches, why, there is a rich man! etc. Such an emphasis is carried in
this expression, If I speak of strength, why, here is one that is strong indeed!

There are five words in the Hebrew which signify strength. (...)
The first notes strength in general: The second, Prevalens, vincens, invicto
quodam and obfirmato animo praeditus, dici solet de eo qui viribus superior
est. (...) Vis generali^er, (...) connotat proportionem ad efficentiam, vel
content onem virium, (...) Est durabilitas in agenti and action. (...)
strength to endure labor: The third, efficacy: The fourth, vigor: the fifth,
which is that of the text, superiority of strength, or prevailing strength. It
is one thing to be strong, and another thing to prevail. The Lord is not only
strong, but strongest; he has a strength above all strength, he is strong
overcommingly, strong prevailingly. Christ in the Gospel speaks of a strong man
(he means the devil) that kept the house; but he was not strong prevailingly,
for there came a stronger then he, that spoiled him, and took away all his
armor from him, wherein he trusted ( Luke 11.22.) but when the holy Ghost
says, That the Lord is strong, the meaning is, that he is stronger then all:
and so generally the positive is expounded by the superlative, If we speak of
strength, lo, he is strong, that is, he is most strong. Thus we find the word
used, 2 Samuel 22.18. He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them that
hated me, for they were too strong for me: Efficaciam. (...) Vigorem
significat. Coc.
they were prevailingly strong for me, and therefore unless I had found a
supply of help, unless some auxiliaries had come from heaven to take my part,
they had h^^^ too hard for me, I had been overmat^ht, they were prevailingly
strong, or too strong for me. We have the word in the same sense. ( Genesis
25.23.) in that resolution which the unerring oracle of heaven gave Rebekah
enquiring about the children striving in her womb, the Lord answers thus, Two
Nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people; and then adds, The one
people shall be stronger then the other people; it is this word, Regnum regno
praevalebit, sc. populu^ prae populo robustior.
the one people shall be prevailingly strong, and shall overcome the other;
both people shall be strong, mighty and potent, but there is one of them shall
have the rule, and shall conquer and subdue the other. If I speak of strength,
he is strong. The sum is, If the Question be about strength and power, then
the Lord carries the day and the honor, he is most powerful, he is strong
above all. Hence observe, That

God is of infinite and insuperable strength.

He has strength: many have malice and wickedness, boldness and presumption
enough to oppose, but none have power enough to overcome him. He has force
which none can subdue; and he has authority which none ought to resist. These
two must concur wheresoever there is full determining power. A man may have
authority or right to do a thing, and yet have no strength to execute and
effect it. And many have strength to do those things (as to oppress a man, to
take his goods or his life from him) for which they have no authority: both
meet in the Lord, therefore he is the Sovereign Lord; he has authority to do
as much as he can, and he has strength to do as much as he will. Some men
would make strange work in the world, if they had strength suitable to their
authority: and others would make a good world by their works, if they had
authority suitable to their strength: both these meet in God, who can contend
with him? If we speak of strength, lo, he is strong!

There are three things wherein this insuperablenesse of the strength of God
appears.

1. He has strength to do whatsoever he will, There is nothing not fecible or
too hard for him.

2. He has strength to do what he wills not, the Lord is able to do more
then ever he will do; he could presently take vengeance upon all the wicked,
but he will not; he is patient and good toward them, who look not at all
toward repentance, to which his goodness and patience lead them, Romans 2.5.

3. He is so strong that he can do whatsoeve^ imports strength, because he
only does what he will do. To do^^ ^at which is not our will to d^e, is a note
of disability. It argues a want of power to be forced to do a thing, as well
as not to be able to it. He that does what he would not, is not able to do
what he would. God is therefore able to do whatsoever he wills, because he
never did, nor can be drawn to do any thing against his will. It follows then,
That the Lord is so strong that he can do whatsoever names him strong, and
only cannot do those things, which if he did, he must be weak, as was further
showed at the fourth verse of this Chapter.

Secondly, Hence it appears, That

No creature is able to grapple with God.

He is strongest. The Apostle gives that admonition (1 Cor. 10.22.) Do we
provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger then he? Surely, except man
thought he were able to match God, he would not be so foolhardy, so vain, to
throw down the Gauntlet, or enter the lists with God: The weakness of God is
stronger then men (1 Cor. 1.25.) not that there is any weakness in God, but
take that which men conceive to be weakness, or weakest in him, that is
stronger then man. Or, The weakness of God, that is, the weakest instruments
which God uses are stronger, scil. in their effects, then the strongest which
men use. God can do more with ten men, then man can do with an hundred. The
most stammering tongue and flattest language shall persuade more, if God speak
with it, then the most fluent tongue and sparkling Oratory spoken merely by
man, If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong!

And if of judgment, Who shall set me a time to plead? If I cannot by force
and power, may I not by subtilty and wit, by reason and argument, by eloquence
and rhetoric prevail against him? No, If of judgment, Who shall set me a time
to plead? As I cannot deal with God at the sword, or in the field; so neither
can I deal with him at the bar, or at the judgment seat.

There are two words in the Hebrew which are used for judging. (...) Iudicium,
jus, ratio.
The first is, Dan, the name of one of the twelve Patriarks, and from him of a
Tribe in Israel; Dan shall judge his people (Genesis 49.16.) And that word (in
strictness) signifies to give doom or sentence in a cause. The other word is
that in the text, Shaphat, which signifies more especially the doing of right,
or the righting of a man in any controversy. The Greek word takes in both.
(...).
Now, while Job says, If of judgment, or if we speak of judgment, the
Question is, What judgment does he mean?

Judgment is taken three ways.

First, For the rule of judging, or for the Law whereby we judge. It is said (1 Samuel 10.25.) that Samuel (after he had anointed Saul for King) told the people
the manner of the Kingdom, and wrote it in a book: this manner of the Kingdom
was not the common practice and custom of the Kingdom, but (it is the word of
the text) the judgments of the Kingdom, that is, those rules and laws by which
the Kingdo^^ ought to be governed and judged.

Secondly, Judgment is put for an ability or fitness to judge, to discern and
weigh things, to scan a cause, and try out the uttermost truth of every
circumstance: judgment is the ability of the person judging. And

Thirdly, Judgment is taken for the sentence given upon the person judged,
after the evidence of his cause is heard and taken. Judgment in this third
sense is the result of the former two. For when by judgment, as it is the rule
of judging, and an ability to judge, the Judge has wrought and tried out what
the merit of a man's cause, and the truth of a business in controversy is,
then the issue of both is, Judgment in this third sense; that is, an act which
is passed, or a sentence pronounced upon the person that stands in, or the
cause which is brought to judgment.

So, If of judgment, is, If I bring forth my cause to be tried by the
abilities of the Judge, and by the rule of the Law, this will be no relief to
me, I shall be in as ill a case, as if I were to deal with God by plain
strength.

There is an opinion that takes in a fourth sense about this word judgment, as
if judgment were not a forensicall, or a judicial term in this text, but
signified only afflictions or punishments upon a people or person. Iulicium
sumitur hoc loco pro divinis operibus, humarum captum excede^ tibus, non pro
forensi and judiciali actu. Olymp.
These are called the judgments of God, Romans 11.33. How unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out? that is, the several acts which he
passes upon men, his providence and outward dispensations (for he speaks of
casting off of the Jews, and laying them aside for so long a time, which is one
of the greatest, if not the greatest judgment which God ever burdened his own
Covenant people with) These (says he) are past finding out. And then, If I
come to speak of judgment, is, If I speak with God about his judgments showed
in those terrible providentiall acts upon others, or upon my self, and cite him
to answer for what he has done toward me or them; Who is able to plead? Who
will undertake this cause against the Lord?

Who shall set me a time to plead? (...) In suo Kal condicere, conven^re and
tempus constituere proprie significat. In H^phil (sicut hi^) convenire facere.
(...) Conventus statis horis and lo cis aggregari solitu^. Caetus, Collegium,
Ecclesia, Congregatio.
It is but one word which we translate, [To set a time to plead] but the sense
is very large and various, it signifies to appoint, constitute or prescribe
either time, place or persons, any or all the circumstantials of action. It is
here translated by diverse in reference to the time, and by some in reference to
the place. And because the people of God are to meet at appointed times and
places for solemn and public worship, therefore this word signifies the Church
or the Congregation, which is always to meet by public appointment at such a
time, or in such a place, lest there should be scatterings and confusions
amongst those who should be most unanimous and harmonious. It is taken also for
any meeting, Psalm. 48 4. Lo^, the Kings were assembled or gathered together.
And Amos 3.3. Can two walk together except they be agreed? That is, except they
be friends, They who have not one heart, seldom have one way. Or, except they
be agreed, that is, upon time and place; two men cannot converse or have any
business one with another, unless they consent and appoint where and when; if
one be for this time and place, and the other for that, they can never walk
together. It is put for a set time, 2 Samuel 24.15. the Lord having sent the
pestilence upon Jerusalem for the sin of David in numbering the people, it is
said, the pestilence destroyed from the morning even to the time appointed, the
Lord had set the pestilence a time, it wrought to that time, and no longer.

Further, The word is applied to any Covenant, pact, Ohel-Mogred. Taberna^ulum
testimonij, i. e. publicae fidei in Deu^ and homines contestatae, etc. Pined.
or mutual agreement: Hence the Tabernacle is indifferently called, The
Tabernacle of the testimony, or, The Tabernacle of the Congregation, because
there God confirmed and settled his Covenant, and made an agreement with his
people, and his people resorted to the Tabernacle to have the articles of that
Covenant made good to them by his own appointment. Hence (I say) it was called,
The Tabernacle of witness The Tabernacle of the Testament, or, The Tabernacle
of the Covenant. Upon this ground also all the solemn feasts of the Jews were
expressed by this general word, they being all observed at set times and places.
And for this reason the word is used for the grave. So in the 30th of this book
of Job, ver. 23. which we translate thus, The house appointed for all living;
Beth. Mogned.
there is a time when, and a place appointed where all that live shall be laid
down when they die, or where their bodies shall be housed after they are
dissolved; therefore it is called, The house of appointment, the house which
the Lord has settled both for time and place where it shall be made, and when
we shall be carried to it. No man goes to his grave by accident; The Lord has
appointed man his place, and bounded his habitation, when he is dead, as well
as while he lived.

Again, For a clearer understanding of this, it may have an allusion to that
course which is observed in Courts of Justice, where, when either Plaintiff or
defendant wants counsel to plead for him, the Court assigns counsel; and it
is observed by the learned, Praetor dicere solebat, Si advocatum non habet, ego
dab^.
that among the Romans, the Praetor would say, What, Is there none to plead for
him? I will appoint one to take his cause into consideration, and to plead for
him. It is ordinary with our Judges to appoint counsel, as also time and
place, when and where to hear causes. The words may have an allusion to this
course of Judges, If I come to judgment, who will assign me counsel? Where
shall I get any one to plead this cause, and to stand up for me against the
Lord?

Nemo audet pro me testimonium dicere. Vulg.
There is yet another understanding of the word, as having reference to the
testimony or witness which is brought in. So the Vulgar reads it, No man will
be so bold as to give in evidence for me, or be a witness on my behalf.

Take all these senses, If I come to judgment, who, etc. I shall get none to
give in evidence for me, none to plead for me, I shall get none to assign
counsel for me, none to appoint time and place for a hearing; Therefore I may
as well contend with God by strength, as by judgment. The sum of all is, Job
confesses, in case he had a mind to go this way, he should not find any in
the world to assist or help him in it.

We have had diverse passages of like nature with this, wherein Job declared his
utter inability to plead with God; therefore I shall but briefly note one thing
from it.

There is no standing before God in judgment, by the help of any creature.

Who shall set me a time to plead? Or, Who shall be my pleader? One man cannot
do it for another; all the Angels in heaven are not able to do it for any
man. If man enter into judgment with God, men and angels cannot help him. As
the Apostle speaks in another case about the want of love, If I speak with the
tongue of men and Angels, and have not charity, it profits me nothing: So, if
we should speak for our selves, or others for us, with the tongues of men, that
is, with the tongues of the most excellent Orators or pleaders, yea, with the
tongues of angels, with tongues that exceed all that men can speak, yet in
judgment with God these will be but sounding brass, and tinkling Cymbals.

Job goes yet a step further. If I should undertake to manage my cause my self
(some clients will desire their counsel to stand by, and they will argue their
own cause) why, says Job, if I should do so, if I should be my own advocate,
or attorney, and appear my self in my own cause, it would be all one, If I
justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me, I shall be as bad, if not
worse then before. I can get none to plead for me, and if I plead for my self,
I am sure to be cast, I cannot mend my self by speaking in my own cause; That Is
the meaning of this 20th verse, which is but a continuation, with a further
illustration, of what he had spoken before, therefore I shall but touch upon it.

Verse 20. If I justify my self.
That is, If witness fail, and counsel fail, if all help and succors fail
me, and then I resolve to go to work with my own strength and wit, if I go
about to make or declare my self just before God (for so the word is to be
understood, as in the doctrine of justification) What shall I gain? The profit
will not countervail the charge, or pay for the expense of one breath; For Mine
own mouth shall condemn me.

My tongue would cut my own throat; The sentence or words which I should bring
forth to plead my cause before God, Os meum, i, e. ^eum testimonium, mea oration
Exibo ex hujusmodi judi^io condemnatus, and oration mea fiet in peccatum.
would be found against me; the Lord would turn all my arguments back upon me,
and wound me with mine own weapons. I should go out condemned, and my plea
would be turned into sin. I shall certainly spoil my cause, if I handle it.
As, if I should put it into the hands of angels or men, they could make nothing
of it, so neither can I make any thing of it, if I manage it my self.

There are three things which evince that if man undertake the matter with God,
he shall be condemned by his own mouth.

First, Man is unsufficient. How can he, who is ignorant, weak and unrighteous,
plead his cause with God, who is infinite in wisdom, righteousness and
holiness? And therefore man's own mouth will condemn him, his words will speak
him guilty, while he pleads, Not guilty.

Secondly, He that justifies himself must appear in his own commendation, he
must bring forth all his good works, and show the Lord how he has fasted,
prayed and mourned, how humble, how liberal he has been, what alms he has
given, he must (as it were) paint and adorn himself in all his excellencies,
and stand before the Lord in this array. Now man's own mouth must condemn him, if
he do thus. Vt laus sic testimonium proprio sorde scit in ore.
The Heathen could say by the light of nature, That a man's praises are sullied
by passing through his own lips. To sound our own praise, sounds our own shame.
If a man have never so much worth in him, he dishonours himself by being the
trumpet of it.

Thirdly, A man's own testimony is not legal in his own cause. The same person
must not be a witness and a party. He that justifies himself condemns himself,
for his very justification is an accusation. If a man's own witness may be
taken, who shall be condemned? Who will not acquit himself? The witness of our
own hearts is much (1 John 3.21.) but not enough, If our own hearts condemn us
not, then have we confidence toward God. But the reason of this confidence is
not in the bare, single witness of our own hearts, but in the co-witnesse of
God, Hominis innocentia duobus testibus constare debet (...) Deo. 2
Conscientia. Ergo si tibi videris habere bonum conscientiae testimonium, bid
quidem, sed divinum adhuc de tua innocentia expectandum est.
with our hearts. Conscience is therefore a thousand witnesses, because God who
is more then a thousand consciences, joins with conscience both in accusing and
in acquitting. The Pharisees said unto Christ, Thou bear record of thy self,
thy record is not true (Joh. 8.13, 16.) They spoke upon a legal ground or
maxim, Christ answers, Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is
true. Christ does not deny the rule, but shows that he was above it, and
therefore adds, It is said in your Law, that the testimony of two men is true,
I am not alone, for the Father is with me: As if he had said, I alone bear not
witness of my self, I have another, even the Father that sent me, he bears
witness of me, therefore mine is not a single testimony; in that case indeed I
were to be reproved, and my witness were insufficient, My own mouth would
condemn me, If there were no mouth to testify for me, but only mine; If I were
but as an ordinary man, I might be kept to the ordinary rule. God only is a
sufficient witness to himself.

Mine own mouth shall condemn me. But of what? Surely of folly (2 Cor. 12.11.)
I am become a fool in glorying, says Paul to his Corinthians; but I am not a
fool of my own making, ye have compelled me, for I ought to have been commended
of you. That is, ye ought to have given a testimony of me; if ye had been just
to me, I had been condemned in justifying my self. Then it is a duty to
witness for our selves, when others neglect that duty.

(...)
The original word which we translate condemn, is directly opposite to that
which we translate justifi^; Proprie sonat impijficare, ut (...) justificare.
Merc. In forma Hiphil non effectionem ^enotat, sed declarationem.
and some render it by a new-coyn'd word in Latin, which we cannot put
literally into English, but by coining a word for it, thus; If I justify my
self, my own mouth would ungodlifie me, or declare me to be ungodly.

Here two Questions arise, the one is, Why may not Job justify himself? The
Lord had justified him, the Lord said that he was a perfect man (that is the
next expression, If I say, I am perfect, it shall prove me perverse.) The Lord
had said of Job, Chap. 1. That he was perfect and upright, one that feared God
and eschewed evil; Why may not Job say as much of himself, as the Lord had done?

Solomon resolves this Query (Prove. 27.2.) Let another man praise thee, and not
thine own mouth, a stranger, and not thine own lips. Man must not speak the
evil he knows by others, unless called, nor the good he knows by himself. To
speak good of our selves with our own mouths, is much like doing good by other
men's hands. We must not act things praise-vvorthy by proxy but it is best to
be praised by proxy for our good acts. Now as man may not praise himself,
though other men may praise him: So he must not praise himself, though God
praises him. Not he that commends himself is approved, but he whom the Lord
commends, 2 Cor. 10.18.

Secondly, Why does Job say here, I will not justify my self, I will not say
I am perfect? Whereas in other places he justifies himself, and says that he
was perfect; if you read the 29th and 30th Chapters of this book, you shall
find them to be but a continued justification of himself, or a manifest of his
own innocence. There he proclaims how holy he had been, and how righteous in
all his ways, that he had put on judgment as a robe, and justice as a diadem,
that he had delivered the oppressed, and distributed of his fullness to the
necessities of the poor. Those two Chapters being a professed Catalogue of his
good deeds, why is he so shie and modest here?

I answer, In this and the like expressions, Pius sensus pulchre expressus in
hac Jobi disputatione, nunc peccatum suum dimisse confite^ it is, nu^c justitia^
suam acerrime defende^tis. Merl.
while Job says, He will not justify himself, or say, he is perfect, he
declines the plea of personal righteousness, or perfection in the sight of
God, as has frequently appeared in this argument. But in those Chapters and in
other places where he is upon his defense; he speaks only in reference to the
charge of his friends; As if he had said, Ye accuse me for an hypocrite, and
censure me deeply, I can justify my self, and plead my innocence with you,
though I have not a word to say for my self before the Lord; I will bear any
thing at his hands, let him say of me, and do with me what he pleases, I will
take shame to my self, and give him glory; but as for you my friends, I will
justify my self in your sight, I am not the man ye take me for.

These speakings are not cross to each other, but helps us to understand Jobs
sense in this argument. He stands much upon his integrity, but it is to his
friends; he humbles himself in the sight of his own vileness, but it is to
God. Paul (Romans 7.24.) bewails his sinfulness, O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of sin and of death! I find a law in my
members, rebelling against the law of my mind: Yet, when he answers false
Apostles about his personal carriage, and the discharge of his Apostleship,
then he says, I know nothing by my self (1 Cor. 4.4.) I am charged thus and
thus, I am slandered so and so, but my conscience acquits me, I know nothing by
my self; The sinfulness of his nature made him groan and sigh out, O wretched
man that I am; The sincerity of his heart made him boast and sing out like a
happy man, as sorrowful, but always rejoicing. A man may be conscious of his
own natural corruption, and yet confident of his own practical integrity.

If I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. (...) and (...)
These words in strictness of sense refer to the inward purpose of his heart,
ad facta (...) and (...) ad animu^ referuntur.
or bent of his mind, as the former did to the outward way of his life, If I
say I am perfect, that is, if I say there is no meditated obliquity in my
heart, no intended goings astray, or wanderings, no close hypocrisy or
falsenesse there; if I should say, I am perfect in the bent and purposes of my
heart, yet this is not such as I dare appear before God in. As if I justify my
self by the actings and puttings forth of my life, My mouth will condemn me: So
if I say I am perfect in the thinkings and secret motions of my spirit, it will
prove me perverse.

(...)
The word which we translate [perverse] signifies to wander, as a man uncertain
of his way ( Prove. 28.18.) Who so walks uprightly (having the frame of his
inward man right) he shall be saved, Qui certo est proposito (...) qui vago and
diverso, qui se dividit and distorquet in duas vias. Coc. In Hebra^o simplex
est perversuaevit me.
but he that is perverse in his ways) having a wandering, vagrant mind, going
sometime this way, and sometime that, holding somewhat of this, and somewhat of
that, but nothing to purpose or steadily of any thing, this man) shall fall at
once; a man of an uncertain spirit, shall have a certain downfall. But was Job
thus perverse? No, Job was perfect and not perverse: yet a boast of his
perfection had been a proof of his perverseness. Nothing discovers an evil
heart more then a profession of it is own goodness.

It shall prove me perverse. What shall prove me perverse? Some refer it to
the former clause, My mouth (or the speaking of those words, I am perfect)
shall prove me perverse. Penversus evada^.
Others refer it to God, God will prove me perverse, if I justify my self.
The Seventy leave it without restriction to any antecedent, If I say I am
perfect, I shall go away perverse, or I shall appear perverse.

Observe hence that famous Gospel-doctrine, No man can be justified before God
by the works of the law. Nobilis locus clarissime ostendens neminem ex lege
justificari. Coc.
It is as noble a proof of free justification in the old Testament, as any in
the new. The Saints have been acquainted with this truth from the beginning,
That man is nothing in himself, and that free grace does all. The doctrine of
free grace is no new doctrine: the doctrine of free will is. (Prove. 20.9.) Who
can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? And that he must
say, who justifies himself before God. Every legal justiciary takes up this
language, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin. It is a task too
hard for men, yea, for all the Angels in heaven to make one heart clean: only
Jesus Christ is able to fetch out the filth and rubbish that lodges in, and
pollutes our spirits. To be a heart cleanser is the peculiar work and honor of
Christ. Quot tenebrae, quot nubes, quot maculae? quem non pudebit, si fidem
suam and innocentiam ad illustre illud legis speculum contempletur? Coc.
A man that knows himself and sees his face in the glass of the word (which
flatters no man) will never say, I am clean: nor will he say, I can cleanse my
self. How many spots and blots, how many defects and deformities will that
glass represent unto him, which he is not able to heal or fetch out? Every
man's face will blush, who sees his heart or his life in that glass, unless
he, Who beholding himself goes his way, and straight way forgets what
manner of man he was (Jam. 1.24.)

Secondly, Observe, Job had received testimony from God. He could produce
Letters testimonial, subscribed by the hand of heaven, that he was a just and
a perfect man, one that feared God and eschewed evil. Yet this Job (let God
speak as well as he will of him) will not speak well of himself to God: Let God
report him perfect to men, he will not report himself perfect before God.
Though Job had a free and a full certificate of his innocence (not one bought,
begged, or got with flattery) yet he forbears in this case to bring it forth,
and read it to his friends. They who have most real worth and holiness in
them, are least in their own eyes, and lowest in their own thoughts: they of
whom God gives the fairest testimony, give the meanest of themselves; he cares
not much to appear to be, what God assures him, he is God was positive (without
Ifs or Ands) in his opinion of him, Thou art perfect, but he puts it into a
supposition, and concludes with an if, If I were perfect, etc.

In the 21. verse Job carries on the same business, and bewraies a more humble
and self denying frame of mind then before.

Though I were perfect, yet, etc. There is a contention among Interpreters, to
which part of the Chapter this 21. verse belongs, whether to that which went
before, or to that which follows after. I shall open it first, as the sense of
it may be connected with the matter preceding.

Verse 21. Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my own soul; I would
despise my life.


Though I were perfect.

Observe the gradation. He had said before, If I plead with God, and justify
my self, I shall be condemned and proved perverse. But put my case at the best,
that I justifying my self, the Lord should accept my justification, and should
concur with my vote, that I am perfect, yet I could take no joy in this. If
the Lord should condescend to know me under that notion, I would not adventure
to know my own soul under the notion of my perfections. The thing is an
abhorring to me.

I would not know my soul. Why not? There are two senses given: first, thus, If
I were perfect, that is, if upon debate and pleading with God I should come off
perfect in my own judgment, certainly then I did not know my own soul. That Is
one sense, and so it falls in well with the former words; If I should justify
my self, my mouth would prove me perverse. And so the point that I shall note
from it, is,

That ignorance of our selves is the cause of proud and high thoughts of our
selves.

He that knows himself must know himself to be imperfect, seeing our greatest
perfection in this life, is, to know our own imperfections. When we see any
standing upon their own bottoms, and crying up themselves, poor souls, how are
they benighted! How little do they know of their own hearts or lives! How
little do they know of God! They are in darkness, therefore they see not
their own spots. If a man, whose face is foul or deformed should boast of his
beauty, would you not say, this man knows not his own face? Or surely, he has
not looked in a glass to day; May we not much rather say to him, who justifies
himself, and says, He is perfect? Sure you never saw your face in the glass,
in that pure Crystal glass of the Word. He that is in Gospel Light sees
himself, and as light increases, so does his sight of himself. And the more he
sees himself, the more evil he sees in himself. In a cloudy day we think the
air is clear, but the shining of the Sun, shows us millions of motes in the
air: if a man sees no motes in his life (some see not beams there) it is,
because he walks in darkness, and has not the light. He does not know his own
soul. That Is a useful interpretation of the words, and the first sense.

Secondly, If I were perfect; Talem de me cogitationem non admittam, sed omnino
contemnam and de monte mea penitus excutiam. Quantum vis, been, recteque
vixerim, hac penitus despiciam. Bold. Admirabili and omni acceptatione
dignissima doctrina, ac si ess^t ex purissimis evangelij fontibus hausta E
coelo descendit, Nosce teipsum. Noverim me, noverim te. August.
If it should be told me I were perfect, I would not know my own soul; that is,
I would not take notice of my self, as perfect, I would be a stranger to my
self under that title, I would shake the thoughts of such a perfection out of
my mind, as much as I would shake the thoughts of sinful corruption out of my
mind. It is as dangerous to lodge or nourish thoughts of our own perfection,
as to lodge thoughts of the most sinful corruptions. A holy heart loves good
thoughts, but it loves not thoughts of its own goodness.

So then, I would not know my soul] imports not affected ignorance, but elected
knowledge. Job was no stranger to his own soul, he had studied himself, and was
well verst in his own bosom. Self-knowledge is a duty. And self-knowledge may
be a sin. Christians should read themselves more then books, and yet they may
pore too much upon themselves. Heathens gave us this lesson, and they say it
came from heaven, Know thy self. Augustine is quick upon it, Lord I know ME,
and I know THEE. To know God and our selves is the sum of all knowledge. God
does not know him, who knows not himself. There is a double knowledge of our
selves.

First, Of sinful self, or of our sins and failings.

Secondly, Of renewed self, or of our virtues and graces. Not to know how frail
we are, how sinful we are, to what corruptions and temptations we are most
subject, is a sinful and corrupt ignorance. To know our imperfections, is a
part of our perfection.

Secondly, Not to know our graces and virtues, Talis ignorans a Deo ignoratur.
what the work of the Spirit, and the new nature within us is, this also is a
sinful ignorance. It is no honor to be what we do not know our selves to be;
it is to be in the state of a beast, not to reflect upon our own estate. The
new creature is light, and carries a light for it is own discovery. The
reprovable knowledge of our own souls, is not the knowledge of intuition,
whereby we apprehend what we are, but the knowledge of ostentation, whereby we
are proud of, or trust upon what we are. Non noscere animam, phrasis est
Hebraea, quae tantum rei despectum prae se fert, ut illam etiam respicere aut
aliquo modo noscere quis renuat.
We have an ordinary saying amongst us, which reaches this sense fully, Such a
woman is beautiful, and she knows it; Such a one is a proper man, and he knows
it; Such a one has many good parts, a very fine wit, and he knows it; that is,
such persons pride and lift themselves up in their perfections. You shall have
a soul that will know it self into I know not how much pride; many stand
reflecting upon their own perfections, either external, how proper, strong and
beautiful they are; or internal, how vvitty and eloquent they are, what
excellent parts and gifts, what a nimble tongue, what sound judgments they
have, till they lose Christ in this crowd of themselves. This is a dangerous
knowledge, a knowledge worse then ignorance. Better be without knowledge, then
know our knowledge thus. As to reflect upon sin, to know our selves in our
unbelief, vanity and passions etc. humble us: And a soul in confessing of sin
before God, looks long upon his dark part, upon his wants and failings, for
this end, that he may be humbled: So to reflect upon our good deeds or graces,
to know our selves in those adornings of love, patience, humility, faith, etc.
hazards us upon pride, and some stand gazing so long upon these excellencies,
that they are lifted up and become very proud.

Thus all men who are proud in spirituals, Know their own souls, So Job would
not know his own soul.

Hence observe, That

A gracious heart rejoices in nothing but in the righteousness of Christ
alone.

He will not know his soul in his own perfections. A godly man would have God
know him in the worst, but he will not know himself in the best. He would not
have a sin hid from God, but he would hide all his goodness from himself.
He will know every good thing before he does it, but when it is done he cares
not to know it any more. So the Apostle (Phil. 3.8, 9,). I account, all things
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom
I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I
may win Christ, and may be found in him, not having mine own righteousness,
which is of the law, etc. Paul the Apostle would not know Paul the Pharisee.
Legal righteousness was loss to him, when he had found Christ: Legal
righteousness was dung to him, when he had a sight of righteousness by
Christ. The Pharisee ( Luke 18.) had all upon account, and he hoped to make
good gain upon his accounts: he knew how many alms he had given, how well he
paid his tithes, and how often he had fasted. He made a stock of those things,
and put them among his treasures, which Paul made his loss, and put among the
dung. He that thus knows his own soul, has no true knowledge of Jesus Christ.

So much of this 21th verse, as it is a supposition, and has connection with
the words foregoing. As it refers to what follows,

The words are rendered in the form of a position, I am perfect, I know not my
soul, I despise my life. And so diverse interpretations are given of it.

First, Thus, I am perfect, etc. that is, my heart is upright, and I have ever
prized and valued mine own integrity at such a rate, Non novi animam prae
integritate mea, i. e. ea integritate sum, ut nunqua^ animae aut vitae meae
ratione abduci potue rim ab integritate mea.
that in comparison thereof, I have not at all regarded, or prized my own life
or soul, that is, the greatest comforts and sweetest enjoyments of my life. My
life is but a trifle to my conscience. And so the meaning is, like that ( Deuteronomy.
33.9.) where the word know, is used in this sense, concerning Levi, Who said
to his father and mother I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his
brethren, nor know his own children. Levi slighted all relations, when they
stood in competition with the discharge of that duty, which the Lord called
him to, he knew neither father, nor mother, nor brother, nor child, one nor
other, he had no regard at all to them, so he might do the will of God. This
was the commendation of Levi, and the privilege of the Priesthood was
assigned to that Tribe upon this service. Grace will not hearken to the cry of
nature, when it hears the call of God. Job is conceived to speak here at the
same rate, as Levi did, or higher, I am upright and perfect in heart toward
God, and such has my perfection and uprightness been, that I have not known
my own soul, I have not regarded any self-interests, which have stood in the
way of my obedience unto God, or justice toward man. His friends charged him,
as if he had been a corrupt Judge, or an oppressor of the poor; I (says he)
am so far from valuing vvorldly goods or riches beyond my own integrity, that I
do not value my life to my integrity. The Apostle Paul makes a like profession
( Act. 20.24.) His spirit was never so free and royal, as when he was going
bound in spirit to Jerusalem; The Spirit witnessing to him, that bonds and
afflictions did abide him in every City. None of these things (says he) move
me, neither count I my life dear (I will not know my life, let it go which
way it will) so I may finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I
have received of the Lord Jesus. Paul was none of your poor merchants, who are
afraid of their skins. Paul's life was cheap in his thoughts, when he was to
make an adventure for Christ; he (as Job here) would not know his life, for the
omission of a necessary known duty, or the commission of a known sin.

This first sense yields this profitable meditation.

He whose heart is upright prefers his uprightness before all worldly
commodities, and before his own life.

Christ calls his Disciples to this height of resolution ( Luke 14.26.) If any
man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and children, yea and his
own life he cannot be my Disciple: That is, the service of Christ, and his life
being put into the balance; life must be a light thing weighed with the
service of Christ. (...) Absumor dolor and sic (...) aliter sumetur quam
priore versiculo Nescio animam, i. e. meipsum prae dolor, ideo aversor vitam
meam. Rab. Levi.


A second interpretation gives this sense, I am perfect, yet I know not my own
soul; that is, I am so pressed and overwhelmed with these afflictions, that I
cannot feel my self, I scarce know whether I am alive or dead: I know not
where I am, my soul does not act it is offices, my soul is (as it were) benumbed
in me, or asleep; there is not that vigor or activity in my spirit, which I
have found heretofore; I despise such a life as this is, who would live a
life which is a continued death? There is a truth in this. For as extreme and
excessive joys carry a man so far beyond himself, that he scarce knows
whether he be alive or no (some have had experience of such raptures and
ecstasies of joy, in commuion with God) It Was so with Paul in a case somewhat
like (2 Cor. 12.) Whether in the body, I cannot tell, or whether out of the
body, I cannot tell (says he) for my part, I could not tell what to make of
my self, or what became of my body: As (I say) it is thus in the excesses of
spiritual joy and consolation; so somet^mes in the excesses of anguish and
sorrow, a man scarce knows whether he be alive or dead, what his state is,
whether in the body or out of the body: he regards neither hot nor cold,
friend or foe, wife or children, he forgets to eat his bread.

A third expounds the words as an admiration, I am perfect, and do ye think I
know not my own soul? Do ye think I am not acquainted with my self? Am I a
stranger at home? Have I so despised my life (think ye) that I take no notice
of it, and am either careless or insensible how things go with me? As if he
had said, I am perfect, and this is the work of a man, whose ways are perfect
before the Lord, he knows and considers his own soul, and grows assured how
matters are with him: Ye, my friends, charge me with these and these failings,
and will force them upon me, whether I will or no: though I deny your charge,
yet ye re-joyn and re-affirm it upon me, as though I knew not my own soul, or
as if ye knew me better then me, self. But I am perfect in heart, and I know my
own soul, I do not so despise my lif^, as if it were not worth the looking
after, or as if I were not worth the ground I go upon.

Lastly, Integer sum, rec s cio animam meam, i. e. quicquam perversi in anima
mea.
Others understand it thus (which appears the fairest and most suitable
interpretation of these later ones) I am perfect, neither do I know my own
soul; that is, I am not conscious of any evil in my soul, I know of no secret
guilt or corruption hidden there: and so science is put for conscience, I know
not, is, I am not privy to any evil that my soul delights in, and keeps close,
either against God or man, yet such evils are upon me that I despise my life.
The spirit of a man (says Solomon) will bear his infirmity. Then, what a load
of infirmity presses that man whose life is a burden to him, though no sin
burden his spirit. Troubles of conscience do often make the most peaceable
outward estate of this life troublesome. And troubles in the outward estate may
make those who have great peace of conscience weary of their lives. What it is
to despise life, and that afflictions make this life burdensome, has been
showed in the third and sixth Chapters, and will come more fully to be
considered at the first verse of the tenth Chapter, whither I refer the
Reader, and forbear to insist upon it here.

I shall only add, that Job makes these words as a transition to the second
part of his answer to the charge of Bildad. Ingreditur in alteram suae
respo^sionis parte^ qua justitiam suam defendit a gravi and libera integritatis
suae and animi be^e conscij assertione. Merl.
For having before given glory to God by acknowledging his justice, wisdom,
power and sovereignty in all his actings, he passes to an apology for himself,
or a defense of his own integrity against the insultations, suspicions and
accusations of his friends; As if he had said, I have desired to save the
honor of God from the least touch of an uncomely thought, much more then do I
abhor proud and rude contendings with him: But as for you, my friends, ye
must give me leave to be plain with you, I am not the man ye take me for, I
have none of that baseness of spirit with which ye charge me, I am no
hypocrite, I am perfect in heart with God, and upright in my dealings with men.
And yet I cannot but complain of my sad afflictions, and renew my desires, that
the Lord would give me ease by death, and acquit me from the bands of these
calamities, by cutting the thread of my life. I know ye judge these outward
evils, as the brand of a wicked man, of a man hated by God. But I Will maintain a
proposition contradictory to that your opinion: ye shall never prove me wicked,
because afflicted; for thus I hold and I will hold it against you all, as long
as I am able to speak, that the Lord destroieth the perfect and the wicked. The
argument may be formed up thus: That cannot be made a clear proof of man's
impiety, which falls alike upon the good and bad.

But great and destroying outward afflictions fall equally upon good and bad.

Therefore great and destroying afflictions cannot be made a clear proof of
man's impiety.



The proof of the minor proposition or assumption, is contained in the three
verses immediately following. The discussion and opening of which will give
both light and strength to this argument.

JOB Chap. 9. Verse. 22, 23, 24. This is one thing, therefore I said it, he
destroieth the perfect and the wicked.

If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the innocent.

The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covers the faces of the
Judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he?


Videtur hic loc^ impictatem in^ludere, quasi apud Job, unum and idem sit
piorum and improboru^ judiciu^, quo^que Deus haec inferiora non curet. Isid.
Cla^.
THis speech of Job caused a learned interpreter to tremble, when he read it,
conceiving, that it savoured strongly of impiety and blasphemy, as if Job had
mingled the state of the wicked and of the righteous in one; or, as if his
mind were, that the Lord did not distinctively order the affairs of the world
by the dictates of his wife providence, but left them to be hudled together by
inexorable fate or blind fortune; therefore he concludes that Job rather
personates a man void of the true knowledge and fear of God, than speaks his
own opinion. Thus he censures: but let Job be well weighed, and his discourse
will appear full of truth and holiness.

This is one thing, therefore I said it.
This is one thing.] As if he had said, You have spoken many things to me about
the power, greatness, justice and wisdom of God, in all which I agree with
you, ye and I have no difference about those points, I have always thought
highly of God, and I desire to think humbly of my self; but here is one thing,
wherein I must for ever disagree from you, here we must part.

So that this verse is as the limit-stone between Jobs opinion, Hoc una^ est
meae assertionis caput.
and that of his friends. Here he speaks out the special tenet which he holds
in opposition to them. As if he had said, I yield and subscribe to your
judgment in all but this one, and in this one thing I must be your adversary,
though I will not be your enemy, I say it, and say it again, He destroieth both
the righteous and the wicked.

This is one thing.] This is uniform: So Mr Broughton reads it, and in this
thing I am uniform, or of the same mind and judgment, I am not at all moved
from my hold, or shaken by any thing ye have said.

Therefore I said it.] That is, because I am of this opinion and judgment,
therefore I will not conceal, but bring it forth, and tell you plainly what my
thoughts are. The manner of speech, I said it, signifies a vehement
asseveration, a liberty and boldness of speech, or a constant adhering and
sticking to what has been asserted, I will abide by this position as long as I
live, I cannot be beaten from it, not because it is my opinion, but because it
is a truth.

Before I come to the assertion it self, observe from the preface, This is one
thing,

That truth is ever the same, and we should be the same in maintaining truth.

When a man speaks a thing, of which he is very sure and resolved to hold, he
says, in our language, That Is once, that is, I have said it, and I will not
unsay it, or eat my words. As Pilate when he was desired to change the
inscription which he had put upon the cross of Christ, answered, What I have
written, I have written, I will not alter a letter or a title: So a confident
assertour answers, What I have said, I have said; This is one thing, therefore
I said it. Truth changes not, why then should I, who have born witness to this
truth. Truth must be stood to. We have reason to stick to truth, for truth will
stick to us; we may say it, and say it again, for it will do us good again and
again. The declarative truth of God is like Christ, the essential truth, The
same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Though it be very old, yet, it waxes
not old.

And because this in the text was a great truth, the very hinge upon which the
whole dispute between Job and his friends turned, therefore he is so resolute
in it. Whence note further,

That great and fundamental truths are to be maintained with much boldness
and strength of resolution.

As it is a good bargain to buy a little truth with the expense of much peace:
So it is our wisdom, as well as our duty, to maintain it with the expense of
our peace. They are the worst sort of cowards who render up the Holds of truth
upon composition. No terms honorable enough can be given for the giving up of
that. I grant that our peace and lives are richer commodities, then should be
hazarded about trifling niceties, and the crochets of Schoolmen: but we ought
to contend earnestly (and we cannot contend too resolutely) for the faith which
was once delivered to the Saints (Jude v. 3.)

Observe thirdly, A man that has got one sound principle about any point, will
from that refute and repel all objections that can come against him.

Super hec axioma tanquam super firmissi ^u^ fundamentum, quicquid ad suae
innucentiae contra eos defensionem alla^^rus est, stab^l^at. Bold.
Job bottoms himself upon this principle, That God destroies both good and bad
alike with outward destruction. This is his great Axiom, the very foundation
upon which he builds all he holds contradictory to his friends; the
Fort-Royall in which he defends himself against all their oppositions and
assaults. One truth well manned and managed scatters and foils a whole Army of
errors. One text thoroughly understood, gives answer to all objections, and
unties all the knots of a controversy.

But what is this one thing upon which Job makes his boast, and cries victoria?
It Is this, He destroieth the perfect and the wicked. A harsh doctrine, yet a
good one. God is to be honored destroying, as well as saving, killing, as well
as making alive.

(...)
The word which we translate to destroy, signifies an utter blotting out or
consumption of a thing, noting that the outward dispensations of God may be
severe and terrible to the perfect, Proprie delet, disperdit, frequenter ad
extrema^ consummationem and consumptionem refertur.
as well as to the wicked. He does not say, the Lord afflicts the one, and
destroies the other; chastens the one, and consumes the other; but he consumes
and destroies the one, as well as the other, He destroies.

The perfect. Who is a perfect man in the language of Scripture, (...)
and wherein this perfection consists, has been opened more then once already,
and therefore I shall not stay upon it here. Only in general, The perfect man
is the man in the highest form of holiness; a man full of knowledge, faith and
good works, one of the first three in grace, yea he may be the first of the
three, yet all this is no security against the forest affliction, against
affliction to destruction temporal, He destroieth the perfect, And the wicked.

Or the unquiet and tumultuous man. (...) Inquietum per multas hujus saeculi
curas solicitudinesque vagantem.
Every wicked man is an unsettled, and an unquiet man. He has no where to rest,
who has not Christ to rest upon: He is always out of the way, who is not in
him, who is the way. Wicked men rest only in doing evil, they are never quiet
but in motions unto sin. God shows us their nature in their name. Unquiet is
their name, and unquietness is with them. Wicked men trouble and vex others as
much as they can, but they trouble and vex themselves most of all.

By these wicked ones the Septuagint understand mighty and rich men. Riches are
so often got by wickedness, LXX. Impium pro potente and locuplete sumunt. Qui
pietate insignis and vita clarus. Polychr. Olymp.
and are occasions to so many of making them wicked, that wicked and rich may
sometimes change names, or signify the same person.

One of the Greek Expositors understands the text, of those who are great in
goodness, and strong in faith, He destroies the perfect, and he destroies him
that is most perfect, even the most eminent in holiness, the tallest Cedars in
grace. As if the words implied only a gradation of good men, and not a
distinction of good and bad.

But the letter of the text has no show of reason at all for such an
interpretation, and therefore I shall pass it by, and take the words as our
translation renders them, holding forth that grand dichotomy of mankind, He
destroieth the perfect and the wicked.

This Job affirms against Bildads assertion ( Chap. 8.20.) who there gives his
judgment thus. God will not cast away a righteous man; which (though it may
have a true sense, yet Bildads meaning being, that God will not cast a godly
man away in this life, or totally destroy him in temporals) Job denies,
affirming that a godly man may not only be afflicted, but afflicted all his
life, and die under that affliction, which in Bildads sense is to be cast away.
For though Bildad did not hold (as Eliphaz) that every man who is afflicted, is
afflicted for wickedness (he thought a good man might be afflicted for the
trial and exercise of his graces) yet he was very confident, that God never
suffered a righteous man to be overwhelmed with affliction: but after foam
short, though sharp assaults restored him again. And therefore Bildad numbered
them also with the wicked, who were destroyed as well as afflicted. This Job
refutes and argues against all along, constantly holding the contrary
principle, that a godly man maybe so afflicted, as to be destroyed, that he may
be utterly and for ever stripped of worldly comforts. Hence observe,

Good and bad, righteous and wicked are often involved in the same outward
evils.

The spiritual estate of a righteous man is so strong, and ordered in all
things, that he can neither totally nor finally fall from it, or lose it, Grace
is above these hazards. But the temporal estate of a righteous man may be
lost, both totally and finally. Riches, and health and honor, are like
themselves, whosoever is their master, fading and perishing. A righteous man
has a higher tenure of things below, and holds them upon better terms then a
wicked man does; yet he holds them but for a term, they are not enduring
substance to him, as not to others. A little that a righteous man has is
better then the riches of many wicked (Psalm. 37.16.) But the righteous may be
deprived of what he has, as soon as any of the wicked. (Eccles. 9.1.) No man
knows either love or hatred by all that is before him; all things come alike
to all, there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked; as is the good
so is the sinner, and he that swears as he that fears an oath. Externals
distinguish not internals. No man's spiritual estate is knowable by the view of
his temporal. Say to the land of Israel, Thus says the Lord, Behold, I am
against thee, and I will draw forth my sword out of his sheath, (Ezekiel. 21.3.)
And what will the Lord do with it? Will he not bath it in the blood of his
enemies, and sheath it in the bowels of wicked men? he will: but shall it be
bathed in the blood of none else? The next words resolve the doubt, And I will
cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked. It is a terrible sentence:
sword, famine, pestilence make no difference of men or manners; they know
neither faces nor hearts. The best in a Nation may taste the bloody cup, and
feel the cold iron in their bowels, together with the worst. The green tree,
and the dry tree may be devoured by the same fire, as the Prophet shadows good
and bad, or, as some think, good and better, falling into the same calamity (
Ezekiel. 20.47.) with which that of Christ ( Luke 23.31.) seems more agreeable.
The basket of good figs goes into captivity with the basket of evil figs, under
which the good and bad among the Jews were typed, Jer. 24.1, 2, 3.

But though they fall under the same destruction, yet their case under it is as
different, as the persons are. Faith and holy reason distinguish where sense
cannot.

Judgments upon (...) wicked men, Poena satisfactoria and medicinalis.
are for fatisfaction to the justice of God. They who are heirs of eternal
death receive part of their inheritance in this life. All their punishments are
paiments. The fore-tastes and beginnings of further sorrows. These judgments
upon the Saints are only corrective or purgative. Their hopes are not
destroyed, when their bodies or estates are. Their afflictions are medicinable,
and heal while they kill. We must not wrap up the dispensation of God to
different persons in the same apprehensions; though his act be the same to
both, yet his meaning is not. How the afflictions of the wicked and righteous
differ, the Reader shall find more distinctly opened, Chap. 5.17.

Job goes on to confirm his opinion by a further argument, in the 23th verse.
For if any should deny his minor proposition, That the Lord destroies the
righteous and the wicked, he proves it thus, If the scourge slay suddenly, he
laugheth at the trial of the innocent, that is, he carries himself (so far
as the eye can judge) toward the innocent in their trials, as he does toward
the wicked under greatest judgments, He laugheth at the one, and he laugheth
at the other; which words are at once a confirmation and an aggravation of what
he spoke before.

Verse 23. If the scourge slay suddenly, he laugheth at the trial of the
innocent.
The former words gave offense to some minds, conceiving them inconsistent
with grace and holiness. Others are more offended with these. And in the
letter it is strange language to say, Nullum est ver bum hac sententia and
illa, elegit anima mea suspendiu^, durius atque asperius in hoc libro. Philip.
The Lord laughs at the trial of the innocent. This verse, with the fifteenth
of the 7th Chapter: So that my soul chooses strangling, are concluded by a
learned Writer, the sharpest and most questionable passages in the whole book.
Hence his conceit, that in the 40th Chapter, verse. 5. Job aims at these two
speeches, Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; that is, I will never
speak such a word again, that, I choose strangling, yea twice, but I will
proceed no further, I said also, That thou laughest at the trial of the
innocent, but I will never say so any more. I am ashamed that ever I opened my
lips so unadvisedly; it is too too much that I have spoken twice so sinfully, I
will not speak so thrice. The conceit is witty, but the charg lies too heavy.
The sense of the former has been made out fair for Job, and I doubt not but
his meaning may be so cleared in this later, that he will need neither reproof
nor apology for saying, If the scourge slay suddenly, etc.

(...) Plagedum a circumeundo vel circumdando dicitur, quod videatur
circumcingere hominem.
The verb signifies to encompasse or incircle a thing, to twine round about it.
And so it alludes to the fashion of a scourge, which begirts the offender, and
at every blow winds about his body.

The scourge in Scripture is put for any affliction, plague, sword or famine
are called scourges, Isa. 10.26. The Lord of hosts shall stir up a scourge
for him; what scourge? the next words expound it, a scourge, not of cords or
wiers, but of swords and spears, a scourge, according to the slaughter of
Midian at the rock Oreb, that is, the Lord will send a sword upon him: So
Gideon slew the Midianites, Judge. 7. commanding his soldiers to make that
terrible shout, when they fell on upon their Camp, The sword of the Lord and of
Gideon. That great warrior Attila king of the Hunnes, who harassed a great
part of Christendom with fire and sword, was called, Flagellum Dei, Flagellum
inundans, i. e. omnes sine delectu involvens and proculcans.
The scourge of God. The unbelieving Jews having made a Covenant with death,
and an agreement with hell, were very full of faith, such as it was ( Isa.
28.15.) When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come
unto us. An overflowing scourge ('It Is an elegant metaphor taken from waters)
is a common, spreading, sweeping judgment, which like an overflowing river
encompasses, circles about, and fetches in all.

Slay suddenly. Every scourge does not slay, (...) Subito, statim, ita ut non
sentiatur donec res fiat.
and many which slay do not slay suddenly. We usually hear the clashing of the
scourge before we feel the smart of it. The Lord shows the scourge, and
threatens it before he smites with it, he lets judgment hang like a black
cloud over the heads of some, long, before it falls upon them. But others He
slaies suddenly.

Some take this suddenness of the scourge in slaying for a mittigation of the
judgment, and others for the heightning of it. In the former sense suddenness
does not imply the sudden coming of it, but the sudden killing of it, a
scourge which does it is work quickly; so that a man does not hang long as it
were upon the rack of an affliction. The Church of the Jews ( Lam. 4.6.)
complains of their afflictions, as if the judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah had
been more easy and eligible then that which the Lord brought upon Jerusalem;
not that they thought God had dealt worse with them then with Sodom and
Gomorrah, but as to this particular, because Sodom was overthrown in a moment,
but Jerusalem was pined away by degrees with famine. A sudden scourge is a
kind of mercy. Better die once then die always: Or, as the Apostle speaks
concerning the afflictions of the Saints ( Romans 8.36. To be killed all the day
long. When one under torture petitioned Tiberius the Roman Emperor, a bloody
cruel tyrant, that he might be quickly dispatched, he desired not life or
pardon, but a speedy death; the Emperor sent him word, Nondum tecum in gratia^
redij.
That as yet he was not reconciled to him, or become his friend. His cruelty
would neither suffer the man to live longer, nor to die speedily. And some
observe, that as the Prophet expresses his trouble at the prosperity of the
wicked in their lives, so at this kind of prosperity in their deaths, There
are no bands in their death, Non sunt nodi in morte eorum.
but they are lusty and strong, (Psalm. 73.4.) that is, when they die, they die
in their strength, they are not pined away with long and tedious sicknesses:
They live in pleasure, and die with ease. They are not bound to their beds, and
tied down with the cords of chronicall lingering diseases. It is some favor (if
the scourge must slay) to be slain, in this sense, suddenly.

But here the scourge slaying suddenly, is a judgment coming unexpectedly,
They who sleep in security, seldom dream of scourges. Observe hence,

God can send death and affliction in a moment.

When they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction comes upon
them, as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape (1 Thessalonians.
5.3.) Wicked men are never so near destruction, as when they are most secure.
And that (by the way) is the reason why we have least cause to fear those men,
who fear God least: Security springs from infidelity, and both from sleighting,
if not contemning the Word of God; no marvel then if the Lord hasten his wrath
to justify his truth, and slay them on a sudden, who would not believe, no not
at leisure. But to the point. The Prophet describes it elegantly (Isa. 30.13.)
This iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall; that is, this iniquity
shall produce a judgment, which shall be to you as a breach ready to fall,
Swelling out in an high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant. If
once a high built wall do but swell, down it comes. Such a swelling wall fell
upon, and slew twenty and seven thousand of Benhadads scattered Army (1 King.
20.30.) And such a tower in Siloe fell upon eighteen, and slew them (Luke
13.4.) The Prophet Jeremy at once imprecates and fore-tels a speedy scourge
upon the gainsaying Jews, Let a cry be heard from their houses, when thou
shall bring a troop suddenly upon them, Jer. 18.22. This has been the case of
many among us, who thinking of no danger have been surprised by a troop,
themselves made prisoners, and their houses spoiled in one hour. Such was the
condition of our Brethren in Ireland; it is almost incredible how suddenly that
scourge slew them: there was scarce a Protestant that had so much as a
suspicion of the danger; nay, some would not believe it, when a great part of
the country was on a flame, and the enemy had butchered thousands. That
scourge (if ever any) slew suddenly the perfect and the wicked. As mercies may
come so suddenly to our senses, that they overcome our faith, so may
judgments. Some have been surprised with mercy ( Psalm. 126.4.) When the Lord
turned our captivity as the streams in the South: that is, gave us sudden
deliverance (rivers in the South, rise not from a constant spring, but from
accidental raines, which make violent land-floods on a sudden.) At the
approach of this sudden mercy, the Jews were like to them that dream. So when
the Lord sends sudden judgments, rivers of calamity, rivers of blood, as
rivers in the South, when he brings in captivity, as rivers in the South, then
are we in a dream too, and are not only destroyed, but distracted and amazed.
But how fast soever judgments come, t^^y come not suddenly upon them, who are
awake, much less on them who are watching for them when they come.

If the scourge slay suddenly; what then? (...) Vel a radice (...) dissolvit.
Vel a (...) tentavit.


He will laugh at the trial of the innocent. M. Broughton reads it thus, He
scorneth at the melting away of the innocent. The reason of the different
reading is, because the Hebrew word may spring either from a root, signifying
to tempt and try, or from another, To melt and dissolve, He scorneth at the
melting away of the innocent. Afflictions are meltings, They dissolve our
comforts; yea, our very hearts, in the same sense that godly sorrow breaks our
hearts. Pity should be shown to him that is melted (Cha. 6.) but ye forsake
the fear of the Almighty; so M. Broughton translates there, The Lord tempted
Abraham (Genesis 22.1.) that is, the Lord tried his faith, to find out of what
strength it was, and how much he could trust him in that great business of
sacrificing his son.

He will laugh at the trial of the innocent] At their melting or trying by
afflictions. The difficulty is, (...) Ridere est irredere, subsannare, ut fit
ab hostibus, cum eos quos captivos detinent, diuturnis malis conficiunt. Pined.
Significat derisionem quae fit externo corporis gestu. LXX. vertunt per (...).
Pisc. in 1 Cor. 14.21.
How God laughs at this trial? The word notes derision or scorn (Psalm. 2.4.)
He that sits in heaven will laugh, there he uses the ordinary word for
laughter, and he will have them in derision, That Is the word in the text. So
that properly and strictly it signifies to scorn and deride, and that either by
words or gestures, as putting forth of the finger, shaking the head, or
gnashing the teeth, which are Scripture expressions of highest scorn by gesture.

But how shall we fit this to the business in hand? Will the Lord thus scorn
and deride at the trial and probation of the innocent?

The Vulgar was it seems so much straightened to make out the sense that he reads
it negatively, If the scourge slay suddenly, he will not laugh at the trial of
the innocent. Others, though they put not in a negation formally and in terms,
yet they do it equivalently, and therefore they render it by an interrogation,
If the scourge slay suddenly, Will he laugh at the trial of the innocent? No,
he will not, that is their meaning: the Lord will not slight or neglect the
trial of the innocent, though he destroies them, yet he will not deride them.
But we, and most of the learned Hebritians, keep close to the affirmative, If
the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the innocent.

Suppositum verbi ridendi demon est, qui gaudet videns homines diuturnis malis
cruciari. Cajet.
There is a di^^^te, whom we are to understand by this He, for some taking this
laughing and deriding in the broadest sense, think it too low and dishonorable
to be ascribed unto God, and therefore they carry it down low enough, ascribing
it to the devil, If the scourge slay suddenly, then the devil laugheth to see
the upright tried, He makes merry with the sorrows of the Saints: the devil
has no great cause (how much mind soever he has) to laugh, considering his
condition; but the meaning is, that which gives the devil most content, is to
see righteous persons vexed. And that is a truth. As there is joy in heaven,
when good men sorrow for sin; so there is a kind of joy in hell, when good
men are enwrapt with the sorrows of suffering.

Others make the antecedent to He, a wicked man (such are within one degree of
Satan his children) If the scourge slay suddenly, Impius justum subsannat malis
implicitum.
then the ungodly, who yet thrive and prosper, rejoice and make sport at the
trial of the innocent; See what these good, honest, innocent men have got,
they thought by their prayers and fastings, by their zeal and strictness to
exempt themselves from these common afflictions, they presumed they should be
spared, though all the world were consumed, but see they are destroyed as well
as others, they smart under the lash, as well as we their neighbors, whom they
looked upon, as the only whipping stocks, when a scourge should come, That,
wicked men laugh and deride the innocent under affliction, and jeer them with,
Where is your God now? what is become of all your praying and fasting? Where are
the hopes and confidences, the privileges and protections ye talked of? is a
truth.

But thirdly, We need not ease the text thus, nor relieve it out of this
difficulty, by fastening the interpretation upon wicked men. Let us take the
relative to be God himself, and see how we can make the sense out, with a
saving to his honor. If the scourge slay suddenly, He, that is, the most holy
and gracious God, laugheth at the trial of the innocent. How so?

First, I premise this, God does not laugh or deride properly at the
afflictions of his people. No, the Lord is a tender, a gracious and a merciful
father to his people at all times, and most tender of them, when they are in
their afflictions, when they are in their soreness, and in their sorrows: he
is more tender then the most tenderhearted mother ( Isa. 49.15.) Can a mother
forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of
her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Will a mother laugh
and deride a poor infant, when it lies sprawling and wants her help? No, much
less will God laugh at his people: therefore as laughing notes
hard-heartednesse, or unnatural harshnes of spirit, the Lord does not laugh at
his afflicted Saints, it is against his nature, against his practice and all
experience.

What is it then he laughs at?

First, Positively, thus, Job would here express that the Lord carries himself
in outward things, with an equal hand both to the good and to the bad, as was
touched before. The Lord laugheth at, and derideth the wicked ( Prove. 1.28.) I
will laugh at their destruction, and mock when their fear comes. The carriage
of God to his own people is such, as if he did mock and laugh at them also.
Dicitur ridere, quia sic judica^t hominum vulgus.
He that laugheth and derideth at a man's affliction, does not regard what he
suffers, he gives him no help, nor delivers him out of his sufferings. Nay, a
man that laugheth at another in affliction, will lay more affliction upon him.
Even thus in regard of outward dispensations, God deals with his own people,
that is, when innocent ones are in affliction and cry unto him, Ridere dicitur,
cum contemnere videtur orationem postulantis opem.
he makes as if he did not hear or regard them, but lets them lie crying it may
be day after day in their pains and wants, yea sometimes in stead of easing
them, he lays more afflictions upon them; poor souls, since they sought the
Lord they find an increase of their sorrows. God seems to deal with them, as
Pharaoh did with the Israelites in Egypt, who crying to him for release of
their burdens, are answered only with, Ye are idle, ye are idle; let more work
be laid upon these men, Exodus 5. Or like Rehoboam, who threatened his people to
make their yoke heavier, while they petitioned he would make it lighter, and
told them of scorpions, while they complained of whips. David gives us this in
his own experience ( Psalm. 77.2, 3.) In the day of my trouble I sought the
Lord, my sore ran in the night, and ceased not (or, my hand was stretched out
in prayer, and bedewed with tears) my soul refused to be comforted (David
sought for comfort, but his troubles increasing, he could not take in the
comforts administered) I remembered God, and was troubled, I complained, and my
spirit was overwhelmed. If any thing in the world can ease a troubled heart,
thoughts of God can. Thus David once relieved himself, When the people talked
of stoning him, he encouraged himself in the Lord his God (1 Samuel 30.6.) Yet
sometimes God seems to think of us least, when we think of him most. A soul
complaining may be overwhelmed, in stead of being helped. Now, he that lays
on further afflictions, Post orationes meas, ita me semper in miseriis
reliquit, ac si me derideret.
slights and laughs at the former. And this is the first way, in which it may
be made out, how God laughs at the trial of the innocent. When they complain
he does not presently relieve them, nay, he lays heavier burdens of affliction
upon them, and makes them more matter of complaining, before they have any
matter of rejoicing.

Deus ex viroru^ fortium, sc. piorum conflictu non levem capit voluptatem.
Secondly thus, The Lord is said to laugh, in regard of the pleasure He takes in
the fruits, effects and issues of those troubles, wherewith his people are
exercised: He laugheth, not at the affliction it self, but at the effects and
success of it: he knows the issue will be matter of high contentment to
himself, and benefit to the Saints. He laughs at their trial, because he knows
they will honor him in their trials. He laughs not because they are pained,
but because himself is glorified. As a father who puts a child upon a very
hard task, which yet he is assured the child is able to go through with, takes
content to see him sweat at it, to pant and blow at it: Or, as a Commander in
war, rejoices when he puts a party, of whose valor and skill he is
confident, upon some dangerous service: Though he knows many of them must bleed
for it, and some of them (perhaps) die for it, yet it pleases him to see such
engaged in it. Thus God laughs at the trials and most desperate adventures of
the innocent, for he sees they are men who will bide a trial, they will
neither shrink in the wetting, nor will their spirits consume in the burning.

And thus a believer is exhorted to laugh at his own trial, My brethren (says
the Apostle James, chap. 1.2.) count it all joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations or trials. The more trials, the more joys. And thus one believer
may laugh and rejoice at the trial of another, because he knows that the trial
of our faith, being much more precious then of gold that perishes, though it
be tried with fire, shall be found unto praise, and honor and glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7.

Hence observe,

First, The Lord may bear himself toward his own people in their affliction, as
if he mocked at their afflictions.

As he laughs at wicked men in earnest, and has them in derision: So he puts
out an appearance of derision in what he does to his own people.

Secondly, To see good men tried is a delight unto God.

Laughter is an expression of our inward content and joy. Though the word of
the text is scarce used for laughter in a good sense, yet here it may. The
Prophecy says of Christ (Isa. 53.10.) It pleased the Lord to bruise him; God
the father was delighted to bruise his Son, not that he delighted in
afflicting or striking him, he was tender and dear to him, as the apple of his
eye. But with respect to the issue and fruit of it, the Lord was pleased; His
father laughed to see him cast down and suffering, whom he foresaw conquering
and triumphing: So it is here. A man delights to see wrestlers show their
strength, as also to behold men striving for masteries in fencing or running a
race, which are but trials of activity, and contendings for honors. Thus when
the Lord brings his innocent servants into affliction, he does but bring them
to a wrestling, to a running or a fencing, to see how they can make use of
their hands and legs, how they can make use of their spiritual armor, how
they can weild the sword of the Spirit, how they can defend themselves with the
shield of faith, how they can bear a knock upon the helmet of salvation, how
they can walk upon thorns and sharp stones, himself having before shod their
feet with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. This is the spectacle which
God delights in and laughs at, and it is a glorious spectacle. The Roman
triumphs were but childish plays to these of the Saints, called out and clad
with the armor of righteousness, which makes them more then Conquerours, over
tribulations and distress, over persecution, famine, nakedness, peril and the
sword, yea over principalities and powers, over things present and to come; The
Saints in their trial conquer not only all present evils, but all that are
possible. Non video quid habeat in terris Jupiter pulchrius, si convertere
animum veli^, quam ut spectet ^atonem, jam pantibus non semel fractis, stamen
nihilominus inter rui^ra^ pu^ieas rectum. Sinec. l^ de provid.
They are real victours over those evils, which they shall never feel or see.
As in doing, so in suffering all is reckoned to us, which we are willing to
engage in, though actually we do not; no marvel if God laugh at the trial of
such Champions and Christian Hero's. It is the observation of Seneca, a Roman
Moralist and Philosopher, in his book of providence, speaking of some of the
ancient Worthies of Rome, I see not (says he) what Jupiter has on earth more
contentfull to him, or to which he would rather turn his eye, then to behold
Cato standing firm in the midst of public ruins, and that, though (after all
his wrestlings, as a noble Patriot for the saving of his Country) he found
both his honest counsels broken, and his unwearied labors lost, yet he did not
lose his Spirit, nor was his heart broken. Now, if an Heathen could say, that
to see such a man contest with all manner of troubles, was, he thought, a
delight for Jupiter, and laughter to the idol-gods: May not we changing the
persons make his sense the comment of this text, and a proof of this
observation? It is a holy delight to the holy God to see his faithful ones,
his Abraham's in a trial, to see his Jobs in a trial, his Paul's in a trial,
to see those Grandees in graces show such admirable skill, such courage, such
zeal, such faith, such patience, such submission of spirit, to see Saints play
the men thus in such spiritual trials and hottest services, is not this just
matter of laughing and rejoicing to the Lord?

And if the Lord take a kind of pleasure in the trials of his Saints, then
surely the Saints ought not to be displeased at their trials. Hence the holy
Ghost bids the Saints laugh, as well as the Lord laugheth, Jam. 1.2. My
brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. Christians,
never look upon a trial with such sad and sour faces; the face of God is full
of smiles to see you at it: shall that make you sad, which makes God rejoice?
Never grieve, but when ye fear ye have grieved God.

Further, note, That the afflictions of the Saints are trials of the Saints.

They are occasions to show forth their virtues and their graces. They give
proofs both to God and the world, what manner of men they are. Tried ones are
precious ones; many others are so, but these appear what they are, they have
showed their metal. All true faith is good, but tried faith is best (1 Pet.
1.7.) That the trial of your faith (that is, that your tried faith) being much
more precious then of gold that perishes, may be found unto praise, etc.

Prudens futuri temporis exitu^ Caliginosa nocte premit Deus. Ridetque si
mortalis ultra Fas trepidat, etc. Horat l 3. Car Od. 29.
Besides these two interpretations, I shall add, for a close, two more, which
may further illustrate the meaning of this laughter ascribed to God, at the
trial of the innocent. First, or

Thirdly, He laughs at the fears and sad fore-casts of his people, who not
being able to look through second causes, and see the ends of things in their
beginnings; presently judge all is lost, the Church must be ruined, and the
Saints undone, because thus tried. Now God knowing the end of all actions, not
only at their beginning, but from the beginning (yea, from eternity) he looking
through the blackest clouds and darkest nights, upon the issues of all things,
derides the simple conjectures of men about them. The very Heathens have given
us such a notion of God in laughter. Secondly, or

Fourthly, God laughs at the laughter, and derides the joies of wicked men, who
see his innocent ones tried. For they say in their hearts, and it may be with
their tongues, Happy we, who have escaped such a scouring, we would not have
been in their coats for a world: better die then live to bring our selves into
such troubles. Or thus, Now the day is ours, we have prevailed, These men are
caught and entangled, we shall do well enough with them now. The Lord hearing
such language at the trial of the innocent, laughs, to think how those
wretches shall see themselves deceived, when they see these who were fallen
rising again, or God by their fall raising others, and setting his King upon
his holy hill of Sion.

Lastly, As God laughs at the trial of the innocent; so let the nocent and
impenitent remember and tremble at it, that God will laugh at the approach of
their torments, and mock when their fear comes, when their fear comes as a
desolation, and their destruction as a whirlwinde.

Job having thus showed how the innocent are afflicted, shows in the next verse
how the wicked are exalted, from both he infers, that there can be no judgment
made of any man's inward state, whether he be innocent or wicked, upon his
outward state, whether he be prosperous or afflicted: The innocent are under
the scourge, and the wicked are upon the throne, and who does these things, but
God himself? that is the sum of this 24th verse.

Verse 24. The earth is given into the hand of the wicked, he covers the
faces of the Judges thereof; if not, where and who is he?


The earth is given into the hand of the wicked.

The earth,] Earth may be taken strictly for the element of earth, as it is
opposed to fire, water and air. Not so in this place; But more largely, earth
is put for all earthly things, as, Psalm. 115.6. The heaven of heavens is the
Lords, but the earth has he given unto the children of men, that is, he has
divided all earthly comforts as a portion or inheritance among men: their lot
falls there.

Thirdly, Earth is put for the inhabitants or people of the earth, Psalm. 100.1.
Praise him all ye earth; so the Hebrew, which we translate, Praise him all ye
people of the earth, Isa. 24.4. The earth mourns and fades away; that is,
they who dwell on the earth.

Fourthly, By the earth we may understand special Countries or Nations, tracts
or parts of the earth.

Fifthly, The earth is put for earthly minded men, and for the false Church,
Revel. 14.3. The Saints are redeemed from the earth; that is, God has fetched
them out from amongst false worshippers and impure ones, he has rescued them
from the world of Idolaters, and from the superstitious multitude.

In this place earth is to be understood in the second, third or fourth notion,
namely, for all earthly comforts; or for the Provinces and Kingdoms of the
earth; or for the inhabitants and people of the earth. These are given into the
hand of the wicked.

Given.] The Lord makes (as it were) a deed of gift of these things unto wicked
men. So in the 15th of this book, ver. 19. Unto whom, alone the earth was
given, and no stranger passed among them; which some expound of the righteous,
No stranger passed among them; that is, none came in to invade them: Or, as
others render it, No strange thing, that is, no unjust thing came in amongst
them, they had the earth in their own power and rightful possession.

Nihil alienum, sc. injustum. Jun.
To be given, notes two things; or there is a double act of giving.

There is a gift by providence, and a gift by promise. When the Lord is said to
give the earth into the hand of the wicked; we are to understand it of that
common providentiall gift, whereby he disposes of all things to all men; no
man has any thing but by the gift of God. Thus wicked Jeroboam had the
Kingdom of Israel given him, and so had hypocritical Jehu for four
generations, They served the providence of God, and the providence of God
exalted them. (Act. 17.26.) He has made of one blood all Nations of men, for
to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has determined the times before
appointed, and the bounds of their habitation; that is, he has (as it were)
chalked out, and drawn a line where the bounds and habitations, whither the
dominions and possessions of such men shall be extended, and where they shall
be confined. That Is a gift of providence.

There is a special gift of promise peculiar to believers ( To. 8.32) He that
spared not his own Son, but gave him to die for us, how shall he not with him
also freely give us all things? that is, all worldy things; or we may take in
whatsoever else concerns our spiritual estate, besides Christ: All the things
of Christ, yea and all worldly things come in to the Saints, as a gift by
Christ, who is himself the greatest gift that ever man received, or that God
could bestow. How shall he deny us any thing, when he has given us him who is
above all things? 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or the world, all
is yours (for) ye are Christ's. Believers enjoy earthly things by an heavenly
title. Christ is their conveiance. In this sense the earth is not given to the
wicked: the Lord gives them nothing in Christ, or for Christ as a Savior in
the Covenant of Grace, Christ as a Lord has bought the wicked (2 Pet. 2.1.)
and he gives them what they have, as they are his creatures: as he has given
them a subsistence, and a breathing in the world, so he allots them maintenance
in the world.

So then, to receive by donation from God, may note any way of possession. What
wicked men inherit by succession and descent from their ancestors, is a gift
of God.

Yea, what they get and hold by violence and oppression, is a gift of God. The
earth which wicked men tear out of the hands of the godly; the earth which they
stain with the blood of lawful owners, that they may enjoy it; even this is
said to be given unto them by God, in that common way of providence.
Nebuchadnezzar was a cruel oppressor, yet he had the earth given him by God,
Jer. 27.6. Now have I given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the
King of Babylon my servant, and the beasts of the field have I given him also
to serve him. God gave him the land, yet Nebuchadnezzar invaded it, and got it
by violence. God sent him ( Isa. 10.6.) but he went of his own errand, verse. 7.
He had no thought of serving the will and commands of God, but of serving his
own ambition and covetousness: yet of this cruel oppressor the Lord says, I
have given him all these lands etc. Thus, The earth is given, Into the hand of
the wicked.

There is a question, whom we are to understand by these Donees, or the
receivers of this gift? Some expound the text (with a speciality of the devil)
The earth is given into the hand of that wicked one, (...).
who is, us, the Prince of the air, so, the Prince of this world, and has
great power upon the earth. But take it of wicked men, who are the servants and
heirs of Satan; as the Saints are the heirs of Christ, and receive all things
from him; so wicked men are the heirs of Satan, his children, and what they
receive as a common gift from God, they receive by a special gift from Satan.
The devil boasted to Christ ( Mat. 4.) All these things will I give thee; if
thou will fall down and worship me. Though the devil be a very beggar, and has
not a shoe-latchet of his own to give, yet for such services and homages he
gives out large possessions of the world (common providence so ordering it) to
wicked men, his vassals.

Hence these words are interpreted, as a reason of that confusion before spoken
of. Si flagellatur innocens quid mirum, cum mundi judices corruptissimi sint?
Terrae potestas permissa est impiissimo daemoni, qui dicitur mundi rector, i would
efficit, ut reges, principes, judices quasi obvelatos haberent oculos caece and
sine discrimine de rebus judicantes. Eugub.
No wonder if innocent men are under the scourge, for the earth is given into
the hand of the wicked. When they have most power, who have least honesty,
things must needs be turned up-side-down, and all put into disorder. What can
be expected from such a tyrannous Prince as Satan, from such wicked instruments
as rule under him, but continual disturbance amongst the children of men:
especially that good men should go by the worst. Godly men are like to have
but little peace, while these have the preeminence. The devil clouds the
understandings and vails the eyes of those Princes and Judges, whom he (in this
sense) advances: And justice is equally wounded and distorted, when Judges
cannot see Things, as when they see Persons in judgment. The bounty of God to
the wicked, is an occasion of their injury to the righteous.

But rather take the words (which was hinted before) as an argument whereby Job
further proves, that there can be no ground of judgment upon any man's
spiritual estate by the appearances of his temporal; for as righteous and
innocent persons are under the scourge, and laid low in the world, so wicked
men have the earth given them, and are exalted.

I find some reading the text as an expostulation, Wherefore is the earth
given into the hand of the wicked? Wherefore does he cover the faces of the
Judges? As if Joh did chide with God about this unequal carriage of things in
the world, and called him to give a reason of it. But we have found Job (in
other places) acquitting himself from the suspicions of such a charge, and
therefore I cannot join with these in laying it upon him here.

Job does not complain, but affirm, That the earth is given into the hand of
the wicked. Whence observe,

First, Wicked men may abound in earthly things.

They may have the earth and the fullness of it; The earth, and all that is
earthly; their bellies are filled by God himself with hidden treasure (Psalm.
17.14.) Precious things are usually hidden, and all that is named treasure
(though it be but earthly) has a preciousnesse in it. Hidden treasures of the
earth fill their bellies who slight the treasures of heaven, and whose souls
shall never have so much as a taste of heavenly treasures: riches and honor
are the lot of their inheritance, who have no inheritance among those whose lot
is glory. They have the earth in their hands, who have nothing of heaven in
their hearts: they bear sway in the world, who are slaves to the world: they
govern and order others at their will, who are led captive by Satan at his
will. Be not offended and troubled to see the rains of government in their
hands, who know not how to govern themselves, or to see them rule the world,
who are unworthy to live in the world. Remember, the earth is given into the
hand of the wicked. We must submit to the judgment of God, though it leave us
under the injustice (...) men. And we have little reason to envy them a great
portion (...) his life, who have all their portion in this life.

The most wise God, who has all things to dispose, disposes them with infinite
wisdom: He gives good things to those that are evil, but he gives better things
to those who are good. He has a Benjamins mess, a rich portion for his own
children, after all these disbursments to the children of disobedience. Their
portion lies not in earth and dust, or in the rubbish of the world: Heaven is
given into the hand of the Saints: Spiritual blessings in heavenly things are
given into the hand of the Saints: The pardon of sin, the love and favor of
God, the blood of Jesus Christ, peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, are
gifts worth the having. These are given into the hand of the Saints. As for the
earth, He gives that into the hand of the wicked; and, yet all that is not
given into their hands. Wicked men have not all the earth, and some wicked men
have none of the earth. The Lord often makes the portion of his own people fat
and plenteous, and the portion of his enemies lean and poor. Heaven has not
all the earthly-poor, nor hell all the earthly-rich. God does not give wicked
men all the earth; but all the earth which they have, is of his giving. Most of
the earth is given to be their possession; and all the possession which is
given them, is of earth; therefore it is said, He gives the earth into the
hand of the wicked.

And seeing, God gives the earth into the hand of the wicked, we may observe
also,

That wicked men have a just title to the earthly things which they enjoy.

They are not mere usurpers, neither shall they be dealt with as mere usurpers.
They have no spiritual title, no title by Christ, they claim not by promise,
which the Saints do. They have forfeited their title by sin, all is lapsed
and escheated into the hand of the great Landlord. Their goods are forfeited,
and so are their lives into the hand of God, and he gives both back for a while
into their hands. He gives them their lives back, and reprieveth them, for
which time of their reprieve, he gives them the earth to live upon, or to
maintain their lives: and so far as they use earthly things for the
continuance of life, they shall not be accounted or reckoned with as usurpers.
They shall not be charged for using the creatur^ but for abusing it, for making
the earth serve their lusts, not (...) making it a support of their lives. And
seeing as the Lord has given them back their forfeited lives, so also their
forfeited lands by a deed of gift, sealed with general providence, this is
enough to secure them in those worldly possessions (which they have neither got
nor hold by injustice) from the brand of usurpation, Dominium non fundatur in
gratia.
and from the violence of dispossession. As what God has joined no man may put
asunder; So what God has given, no man must take away. Neither riches nor rule
are founded in grace. He has given the earth into the hand of the wicked.

He covers the faces of the Judges thereof. He covers.] There is some
Question whom we are to understand, as the antecedent to this relative. He, who
is, he that co-covereth? Tegit ne videant quod aequu^ and justum est. ^rus.
Some make the antecedent, a wicked man. Others say it is God. The earth is
given into the hand of the wicked, and he, that is, the wicked one covers the
faces of the Judges thereof. Or, He, that is, God covers the faces of the
Judges thereof. I shall a little open this expression, it needs some
uncovering, for it is dark in both relations.

First, Look upon that interpretation, which refers it to wicked men. He
covers, namely, That wicked man, who is preferred and exalted, covers the
faces of the Judges; that is, he stops the course of justice. And there are
four ways by which wicked men cover the faces of the Judges.

Munera caecos reddunt judices
First, By gifts and rewards. Bribes vail, yea put out the eyes of a Judge, that
he cannot see to give every one his due. Hence that charge (Exodus 23.8.) thou
shall take no gift: for the gift blinds the wise, and perverteth the words of
the righteous.

Secondly, The faces of the Judges are covered by threatenings; Fear of loss
blindes as well as hope of gain. Some send terrible messages to the judge; Will
not you do as we would have you? Will not you give your sentence and opinion
thus? at your peril be it. Now the Judges face is covered, his eyes are put out
by a threat; the mist and cloud of a Princes displeasure, of a great man's
indignation is before his eyes, His face is covered.

Thirdly, The Judges faces are covered by actual putting them to shame, by
casting them out of favor, and clouding them with disgrace, by taking away
their commissions, or sending them a Quietus est, laying them by as unfit for
service; any of these is, a covering of the Judges face.

There is a fourth way of covering the Judges face, to which the second and
third are often made a preparatory. And that is, by putting the judge to death.
So much that expression implies in the 40th of this book of Job, verse. 13.
where the Lord with infinite wisdom and holiness, insulting over Job to
humble him, bids him arise, and do some great thing, somewhat which might
speak him a man of might. Deck thy self now with majesty and excellency, and
array thy self with glory and beauty; cast abroad the rage of thy wrath, and
behold every one that is proud and abase him, look on every one that is proud,
and bring him low, and tread down the wicked in their place, Hide them in the
dust together, and bind their faces in secret; that is, cover their faces as
men prepared for death, as men ready to go out to execution. We may expound it
by that ( Esth. 7.8.) where as soon as ever the word went out of the Kings
mouth, They covered Hamans face. And by that ( Mark 14.65.) where when Christ
was judged worthy of death, the text says, They spit on him, and covered his
face: The covering of the face was a mark of a condemned man, held as unworthy
to behold and enjoy the light of the Sun, or the light of the Princes
countenance. Thus to cover the faces of the Judges is to condemn the Judges,
and to take them out of the world by sufferings, rather then suffer them to do
right. I find that of Elihu (Job 34.29.) interpreted to this sense, When he
gives quietness, who can make trouble? That is, when the Lord does absolve
and acquit a man, giving him a discharge, then he is free, no man can sue him
or trouble him, much less condemn him; but if he hide his face, who then can
behold him? So we translate it, meaning thus, If the Lord hide his own face.
But this exposition says, If the Lord hide the face of that man, that is, If
the Lord condemn that man, or pass sentence of death upon him (of which
covering or hiding the face was a symboll) then, Qu^ rei faciem poterit amplius
videre, quasi absolutus sit. Bold. I lictor, colliga manus, caput obnubito, in
foe lici arbori suspendito Cic. in orat. pro Rabir.
who can behold him? That is, who then can see his face, or have society with
him, whom God has separated to death? It was a custom also among the Romans,
when sentence was pronounced upon a malefactor, thus, to command the
executioner, Take him away, bind his hands, cover his face, hang him up. And
usually with us, malefactors, who are ready to suffer the pains of death, put
a covering upon their faces. This also may be a good sense of the words, He
covers the faces of the Judges, that is, a wicked Prince oppresses and
puts the Judges to death. And whereas good Princes say, Let justice be done,
though the world perish: he says, Let the Judges perish, rather then justice
should be done.

(...) Iudices vel officio, vel apti tudine. Nomen judicis apud Hebraeos latius
patet quam apud latinos, non enim ille tantum vocatur judex qui controvertiis
vacat, sed etia^ qui rempublica^ armis tuetur. Bold. Vidi servos, i. e. servire
dignos, and principes, i. e. dignos imperio.
Yet further, the word, Judges, in the original, notes not only such as are in
actual office to determine controversies, whether criminal or civil; but any
man that is worthy to be a Judge, or is fit to govern and manage public
affairs, whether in peace or war. And so it implies a suppressing and keeping
down of those that are most able, and best qualified to undertake any service
for States and Kingdoms (Eccles. 10.7.) I have seen servants upon horses, and
Princes walking as servants upon the earth; that is, I have seen men who are
worthy no better imploiment then that of a servant, to rub horse heels, or do
the meanest offices, such as these I have seen in the saddle, and in their
trappings. And, I have seen Princes walking upon the earth on foot; that is,
men who deserve to bear rule and to govern Kingdoms, who both for ability and
integrity, are worthy to have the rains of authority in their hand, and to sit
at the helm, these I have seen walking upon the earth, or tugging at an oar, as
common men: that is an evil which Solomon saw under the Sun: So here, He
covers the faces of the Judges, may have this meaning, Evil Princes keep down
and hold in obscurity men of parts and gifts, of spirit and courage, of honesty
and uprightness, and prefer only those who are base and corrupt, who will
serve turns, and comply with times.

Hence note, That it is the policy of wicked Princes to corrupt and blind
Judges, or to employ such as are blind and corrupt.

They take away power from those who would use power well, and give power to
them who are slaves to their wills.

Secondly, It is the character of a wicked man to bribe a Judge, to put out the
eyes, and cover the face of a Judge with gifts. A good cause fears not the eye
of the Judge, and a good man had rather lose his cause, then pervert the Judge.

So much of man's covering the faces of the Judges: now see how God covers them.
He who opens the eyes and uncovers the faces of the Judges, that they may
discern between cause and cause, does also cover the faces of Judges, Tegit, ne
videant quod bonum and aequum est. Drus.
that they cannot discern between cause and cause. As the Lord hardens the
heart and blindes the eye in spiritual things, so also in civil, not by taking
away the sight which man had, but by withdrawing or denying his own light. The
Lord covers the faces of the Judges, when he does not give them light, nor show
them the path of justice. If God suspend his light, the greatest lights are
presently in darkness. God does not hood-winke or muffle up the Judges by
putting any thing before their eyes, but by hiding his own eyes from them. The
Psalmist speaks of Judges thus covered ( Psalm. 82.5.) They know not, neither
will they understand, they walk on in darkness, all the foundations of the
earth are out of course. We have here the character of evil Judges, and what
the consequents of it are, They know not, neither will they understand, they
walk on in darkness (these three expressions explain this text) and what
follows? Then all the foundations of the earth are out of course; Law and
justice are out of course, no man knows where to have right, or by whom to be
protected against wrong.

Hence observe, Hinc elicimus malos judices etia^ a Deo esse. Drus.
Ignorant and evil Judges are sent by God as a scourge. I gave them a King in
mine anger, Hos. 13.11.

Lastly, (for the clearing of this) The covering of the faces of the Judges,
notes three things.

First, Ignorance and blindness, or an inability to judge. Iudex
oculatissimus esse debet.


Secondly, Inhumanity and cruelty, The faces of the Judges being covered, they
will not look upon the case of a poor man. Solebant judices intra cortinas se
co^tinere cum contra reum capitis sententiam pronunciabant. Fined.
It is usual for an oppressed petitioner to say to the Judge, Look upon me,
good my Lord, cast an eye upon me; the Judge who will not see, is covered with
incompassion.

Thirdly, Covering of the face imports the affected partiality of Judges; many
do as if they could not see, as if their faces were covered. Affection blindes
the judgment, and none are so blind as they that will not see. The reason why
the Heathen pictured their Fortune blind, was, because she distributed things,
as if she affected blindness, giving good to those that were evil, and evil
to those that were good; Antiqui fortunam caecam pingebant, quod malis bona ma
la bonis indiscriminatim conserrentur.
when Judges give rewards to those that should be punished, and punish those
that should be rewarded, their faces are covered, they are blind. Judges were
anciently pourtrai'd or pictured, without hands and without eyes; without
hands, as noting that Judges must not receive or take gifts: And without eyes,
because they must not see friend or neighbor, great or small, kinsman or
stranger; they were to distribute justice according unto every man's cause, and
not with respect to any man's state or relation. It is said of Christ ( Isa.
11.3.) where his Kingdom is described, that he shall not judge after the sight
of his eyes; that is, by what appears to the eye, but he shall judge righteous
judgment. In this sense it is the Judges duty and honor to have his face
covered. But the covering here meant, is either of ignorance and inability, or
of corruptnesse and partiality. All which hinder the Judge from doing his duty,
and are blemishes of his honor.

But some may object, Shall we attribute this to God? Does he cover the faces
of the Judges? God is pure from all sin, while he leaves men in their
impurity. He is just in giving man over to his own injustice. So we answer, and
the next words challenge all to make another answer.

If not, where, and who is he? (...) Si non, ubi ille? Dagn. Si non, ergo Quis
ille? lingua sancta concisa valde, Si non (supple, Deus qui hoc faciat) ergo
quis est, supple, qui faciat.
If it is not the Lord who does this, tell me who is it? as if he had said, Some
may be offended and scandalized at my doctrine, that I assert, The earth is
given into the hands of the wicked, that be covers the faces of the Judges;
If any man shall deny or scruple this, let him show me whence these things are,
and who is the cause of them?

There is a threefold understanding of these words: Some make the antecedent
to be the wicked; As if he had said, Who but a wicked man will cover the faces
of the Judges, and hinder the execution of justice? And so they acquit God,
accounting it blasphemy to attribute the act of covering unto him: The Lord is
a God of justice, he loves judgment, he opens the mind, and clears the eye,
he does not cast clouds and mists before it. It Is true, so far as the act is
sinful, God forbid we should ascribe it unto God. But (as was showed before)
we need not use this subterfuge, left we should lay any aspersion upon his
justice and holiness. God can leave men to their injustice without any thought
(...), or touch of injustice in himself.

Others interpret this Question as a challenge; It is thus, Si non, ubi est,
scil qui me falfi arguat? prodeat si quis me potest falfi arguere. Merc. Vbi
est, qui mentiri me censet? Pagn.
If it be not, where and who is he? Who and where is the man that will argue or
implead me of falsehood in what I have asserted? Who is it that undertakes to
convince me of error in the doctrine I have delivered? This is my opinion;
these positions I have laid down for truth, That the Lord destroieth the
perfect and the wicked, that he laugheth at the trial of the innocent, that he
gives the earth into ohe hand of the wicked, that he covers the faces of the
Judges; If it be not thus, if any one hold otherwise, Let me see the man, Let
him appear as my Antugonist, or Opponent. Where, and who is he that dares
charge me with error? I am ready to answer him.

But rather take it in the sense before given, If it be not the Lord who does
this, then show me who it is, Where, and who is he? There is an elegant
concisenesse in the Hebrew, which speaks only thus, If not, where he? or, who
he? The sense is, If it be not God who does this, show me, tell me, Who is it?
And so the words are an exclusion of any other power, ordering and disposing
the things of the world. When old Isaac was disappointed in his intention of
giving the blessing to Esau, he trembled exceedingly, and spoke in the language
of this Text, Who, where is he? (Genesis 27.33.) As if he had said, I thought thou
my son Esau had brought me venison before, and if it was not thou, I know
not who it should be, I was never so deceived in my life, if it was not thou.
Such a broken speech Job uses here, If it be not God who does these things, I
am much deceived, for I know not any in the world to whom I might probably
assign them, but only unto him. You must be wiser then I, if you find any thus
powerful besides God. If not, where, and who is he? Whence observe,

First, That, The greatest confusions in the world are ordered by God.

What greater confusion then this, to see the earth given to those who deserve
not to live upon the earth? that they should rule the world who are unworthy to
breathe in the world? Yet even these things are disposed of by the Lord, and
are the issues of his counsels, That wherein we see no order, receives order
from the Lord.

Secondly, Observe,

The very confusions that are in the world are an argument of the power of God.

For seeing the world continues in the midst of such confusions, it shows there
is a mighty power, balancing these confusions so exactly, that they cannot
ruin the world, If there were not an overruling power in God, wicked men
ruling would soon ruin all. There are mysteries of providence, as well as of
faith. And many are as much puzzled to enterpret what God does, as what he has
spoken. I find Heathens often stumbling at this stone, and ungodding their
Idol gods at the sight of such distributions among men. Cum rapiunt mala fata
bonos, ignoscite fasso, Solicitor nullos esse putare Deos. Ovid. Marmoreo
Licin^ tumulo jacet, and Cato parvo, Pompeius nullo: quis puter esse Deos?
When evil takes away good men, this is my next thought (says one of them) I
am solicited to think there are no gods. Another observing how unequally men
were buried, buries God in that observation. Licinus a cruel oppressor lies
interred in a stately monument. Cato, a sober, grave, wise, and just Senator
has a mean and poor sepulcher, scarce looking above the ground. Pompey the
great, that famous Commander and Conqueror had no tomb at all, he was buried
no man knows where. When we see (says he) things go thus, who would think
that there are any gods?

Thus they stumbled at the supposed uneven dispensations of their idol gods.
And we find great offense taken, and an horrible blasphemy belched out against
the true God, upon the same occasion, and almost in the same terms (Mal. 2.17.)
Ye have wearied the Lord with your words, yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied
him? When ye say, Every one that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord,
and he delights in them, or where is the God of judgment? Though they fell
not directly into the former blasphemy, to conclude there was no God, because
wicked men prospered; yet they fell into a blasphemous opinion, that God
delighted in, and loved wicked men, because they prospered; Wherein have we
wearied the Lord? Yes, ye have. Not that the Lord is at all moved or troubled
in himself with the contumelious speeches of men, but thus, if any thing would
tire, and weary him, this may, to hear himself arraigned and judged by the
world, as a lover of evil men, because he does not presently smite them with
the visible marks of his displeasure, that because the earth is given into the
hands of the wicked, therefore the Lord must needs be a friend to the wicked.

Thirdly, Observe, That

No creature is master of his own ways or ends.

The Lord gives the earth into the hand of the wicked. Man cannot get the
earth into his own hand, let him be as wicked as he will: The Lord covers the
faces of the Judges: If he enlighten them, no man can cloud them, if he open,
no man can shut.

No creature can do good without the directing and enabling hand of God.

No creature does any evil without the supporting and overruling hand of God.
(Isa. 41.23.) Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that
ye are gods, yea, do good or evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it
together. Let us see you do any mischief, if ye can. Man is set upon mischief,
but he cannot act mischief, unless God (at least) permit. We were in an ill
case, if man could do all the evil he has a mind to.

It is matter of comfort,
to consider that the ways and issues of good and evil, are in his hand, who
is good, and does no evil.

JOB Chap. 9. Verse. 25, 26. Now my days are swifter then a post, they flee
away, they see no good.

They are passed away as the swift ships, as the Eagle that hastes to the prey.


THese two verses are a confirmation of Jobs former argument; As he had showed
in general, that the wicked are exalted, and the innocent afflicted; so now he
shows the later branch from his own experience or example.

Verse 25. My days are swifter then a post, they flee away, they see no good,
etc.
We have here three similitudes, by which Job sets forth the uncertainty of his
prosperous estate, and how soon the time wherein he enjoyed it was blown over.

1. The similitude of a Post. 2. The similitude of a Ship. 3. The similitude of
a Eagle.
As in the seventh Chapter he used three similitudes, viz.

1. of A weavers shuttle. 2. of The wind. 3. of A dissolving cloud.
So here he brings in three more to clear the same point.

Jobs thoughts traveled through all parts of the world to find out
illustrations of man's frailty. In these two verses three of the four elements
are enquired into, The earth, The air, and the water. A post upon the earth, A
ship upon the water, an Eagle in the air, are called in as witnesses to this
truth.

Now my days are swifter then a post, etc. Now my days;] That is, my
prosperous days, so Mr Broughton glosses. Troublesome times are all night and
darkness, yet we may take it of days in general; They are swifter then a
post.

(...) Levitas and velocitas, tam ex Graeco quam Hebraeo etiam Latino pro eodem
accipiuntur. Levis armatuturae milites celeriter subveniunt. (...) Cursor, qui
ex una urbe in alteram, etc. proficiscitur cum literis aut nunciis.
The word which we translate swifter, signifies any thing that is light, because
light things are quick in motion. We call a man that is swift of foot, light of
foot. And here it is joined with that, which among men is most swift and
passing, a post, who rides or runs without any stop or stay, without the least
considerable stop or stay: So that it is grown into a proverb: To run post, or,
To ride post, is as much as to be in haste: To say, You are in post haste, is
to say, you are in great haste. My days (says Job) are swifter then a post,
they out-runne those curreers sent out upon the most important messages. The
post, whether sent to carry news, good or bad, or intelligence for the dispatch
of business, public or private, is engaged to ride hard; he must not spare
horseflesh, or (as we commonly speak) suffer the grass to grow under his
horse-heels. Hence observe,

First, Time is very swift, it is gone suddenly.

My days are swifter then a post. We seldom consider, or consider as we ought
this common truth. We live, for the most part, as if we could not tell how to
get rid of our time; or, as if we were weary of our time, and knew not how to
spend it out, as if time were rather chained to a standing post, then were like
a running post. The Ancients emblem'd Time with wings, as if it were not
running, but flying.

The next word in the text comes near that sense, They flee away. My days
(says Job) flee away. The word does not signify flying, as a fowl with wings,
but fleeing as a fugitive from hard bondage, or as a man from some imminent
danger, which, because it is done with speed, therefore the word imports any
speedy motion, especially that of a post. A post riding or running, is an
excellent emblem of Time. There are many considerations in post-riding, which
show how exceeding speedy time must be, to which it is here compared.

First, A post rides upon fleet or speedy horses.

Secondly, He rides his horses upon their speed; a man may have speedy horses,
and go softly, but a post spurs on.

Thirdly, A post has change of horses at every stage, that he may keep them
upon their speed.

Fourthly, He has horses standing ready for change, they are not to fetch out
of the field, or to make ready when he comes to his stage, it is but leaping
into the saddle and away.

Fifthly, He that rides post, makes no long meals, much less feasts, he takes
a bit and away.

Sixthly, He lies not long a bed, he scarce goes to bed till he comes to his
ways end.

Seventhly, A post has extraordinary pay for his service, and that will cause
him to make speed.

Eighthly, Sometimes he rides upon pain of death, with a halter about his neck.
No man will loiter, when his life lays on it.

Ninthly, If a man rides post, all must give him way, he picks and chooses his
path, and no man must hinder him.

Tenthly, He stays not to salute, much less like other travelers to gaze and
view the Country, the Towns, buildings, Gardens, etc.

All these things laid together, evince, that the Post makes speed. Yet, says
Job, My time out-runneth the post, my time goes faster then he: The post must
stay a little sometimes, but time will not stay at all: The post must stay for
change of horses, but the chariot of the Sun never staieth to change horses
(the Sun is the measure of time) and that makes no stop, has no stages or
baiting places, Our days are swifter then a post.

Further, Experiences speak this most true of that special time, the time of
prosperity. The best things of the world are in a moveable, in a passing,
posting condition. They scarce abide with us long enough to learn what they
are. If a man ride post, we can hardly discern who he is; the good things of
the world, the pleasures and profits, the form and fashion of it pass away so
fast, that none can perfectly report what they are, excepting this, Transitory
and vain: As the artificial fashions of the world, the fashions in building
and in apparel, pass so speedily, that few know what the fashion is, before
it is gone; a new one is abroad, before the greatest number are in the old: So
the natural fashions of worldly things (some in themselves, all as to our
enjoyment) the excellency and dignity, the luster and beauty of the creature
are out of sight, before we can well say of what color and shape, or what
manner of things they were. When the Painter takes the perfect feature of a
man's face, or the lineaments of his body, he must sit. The world sits not so
long with any man, as for him to take the picture of it. Creatures perish in
their using, while they are in our hands we know not what they are, for even
then they are perishing and declining from what they were. One said, when a
creature-comfort was taken from him, If I had it again, me thinks I could enjoy
it; we seldom enjoy what we have. And what we have is always in transitu,
passing from us, while we have it; it is in motion, while in possession. We can
scarce be acquainted with it, because it stays so little with us. Hence Job
concludes this similitude.

They see no good. My good days run so fast, that I cannot see the good of
them. Not to see good, is, not to have the least experience of good. For the
eye takes in it is objects, and judges of them (so much Philosophers teach)
sooner then any other sense. The eye is not long about it is business. It is
the sense of quickest dispatch. So that it is, as if Job had said, The good
things of this life are so transient, that I am so far from feeling or
tasting them, etc. that (which is done with the least delay, Omnia mihi
praerepta sunt priusquam ea senserim. Bez.
and expense of time) I have not time enough to see them. When men ride upon
speed, or when any thing passes swiftly before us, we have but a glimpse,
scarce a sight of those objects.

Besides, To see good is to enjoy good, as was showed, Chap. 7. verse. 7. And
when he says, they ( scil. his days) saw no good, his meaning is, that he saw
no good in his days. Till there is a consistency or a fixednesse of good,
there cannot be a full enjoyment of good. The reason why in heaven we shall
have so much happiness, is, because all the good in heaven is a fixed good.
Time passes, but eternity stands. Eternity is a fixed Now. The things of heaven
shall not perish in the using, nor shall the fashion of them pass away. In
heaven vision will be everlasting, we shall ever see good, and that ever-seeing
shall be an ever-enjoying of good. Here on earth we see God through a glass
darkly, and we see all good in such post-haste, passingly, that we rather see
it not, then see it. Especially while we remember that good passes by us in the
company, yea in a crowd of evils, our sight of it (as when we are called to
behold one man riding speedily among many) must needs be hindered. Yea
oftentimes evils stand so thick about us, while good posts by us, that we
cannot look through them to the good, which is before us. In heaven, as good
stands to our eye, so it stands alone, there is no interposition of evil to
eclipse the beauty, or darken the sight of it. There we shall see, and see
nothing but good. Here we see much besides, yea see either none at all, or very
little good, and that but a little.

They flee away, they see no good. From the Post, who runs upon the Land,
Jobs next comparison carries us to the motion of a ship at sea, and anon to
that swifter motion of an Eagle in the air.

Verse 26. They are passed away as the swift ships, as the Eagle that hasteneth
to the prey.


They are passed.

That is, my days are passed, and with them all the contents and comforts
which I had in those days: we are to take days, as clothed with all their
contentfull occurrences and circumstances.

They are passed away. (...)
Or, they are glided away insensibly.

As the swift ships. (...) Navis ab (...)
Not only as the ships, but as the swift ships. A ship is a fabrique for the
sea, In Pibil, obvenire, occurrere fecit; quae sic dicta est, quod remigum aut
ventorum impetu impedatur and seratur.
a house upon the sea, a moveable house; and as it moves variably; so it
moves swiftly: The inconstancy of the winds makes the motion of the ship
unconstant; and the strength of the winds makes the motion of the ship swift.
So that to say, His days passed as a ship, is an aggravation of their sudden
passage. A ship passes without any stop from it self: The ship needs not stay
to bait, to sleep or rest while it is upon it is journey; whatsoever they do
who are within the ship, the ship moves on, if they prepare it for motion.

Job puts an emphasis upon this comparison, His days were not only as a ship,
but as a swift ship, there is much in that addition.

The Hebrew is, My days are as the ships of Ebeh, which is diversely rendered.

Ebeh, flumen rapidissimum in Arabia, Rab. S^l. Bold.
1. Some take the word Ebeh to be the name of a river in the Eastern part of the
world, about Arabia, near the place where Job lived. A late traveller has
observed a river of a very swift motion, near Damascus, and not far from the
sepulcher of Job. Now a ship that moves in a swift river, besides that it may
have the wind, has also a great addition to the speed of it is motion from the
force and strength of such a current. Thus, says Job, My days move as the
ships upon Ebeh, as ships upon the streams of that fierce, swift river, which
go down with speed; as we see boats with the tide, and so proportionably
greater vessels, where there is a river and a current proportionably to bear
and carry them.

(...) Desideravit. Naves voluntary, vel desid rij. sc. summo desiderio ad
portum properantes.
2. Others conceive the word, not as a proper name, but as signifying desire,
from Abah, to desire with earnestness, and then the sense is rendered thus, My
days are passed away as ships of desire; that is, as ships, which being laden
with rich commodities, the Master and the Pilot desire earnestly to bring the
ship speedily to her port, that so they may put off the commodities, and make
sale of the rich lading that is in her. The wind does not so much fill the
sails of such a ship, as desire does the minds of her mariners. Vir
defiderioru^.
Thus Daniel was called a man of desires, because he was a man so precious and
desirable. A ship richly laden is much desired; such a ship is a great charge
to the owners and merchants, they therefore send to speed the ship home, as
fast as they can. Thus (says Job) My days pass as a ship that has the most
desired commodities.

3. The Chaldee and others, give a further note upon it, deriving the word from
Abah, whence Ebih, which signifies a stalk growing up early from the earth,
Fructus primitivus.
and bringing forth the first ripe fruit of any kind; and so it is put for any
early ripe Summer fruit, for early plums, apples, cherries, etc. Naves poma
portantes. Vul.
And then the sense is, My days are like to a ship which carries early fruit:
So the Vulgar, Like a ship carrying apples.

Now a ship that carries such fruit makes great haste, Pertranseunt cum navibus
fructus delicatos portantibus. Targ.
because the fruit will spoil and rot, if not speedily put off. Ripe fruit is a
commodity that will not keep; unless they have a quick passage, all is lost.
My days (says Job) pass even as a ship that carries ripe Summer fruit, which
are hasted away with all speed, lest they perish before they come to the port.

4. There is another sense given by those, (...) In micari, piratarum naves,
quae onerariae non sunt, sed tactumad capiendam praedam.
who derive the word from a root, which signifies, to hare and oppose, or to be
an adversary; and then it is thus rendered, My days pass away as a Pirates
ship; or as a ship that goes out to take a prey, as a ship that goes out to
take prizes upon the sea. Now we know, when ships go out either upon piracy,
which is robbery at sea, or upon any lawful way of taking prizes by public
authority: these ships of all others are the swiftest, they are prepared on
purpose to make way and overtake other ships; their lading is not burden but
ballast, that they may be swift of said; so says Job, My days pass away like
a swift ships; not like some great Merchant-ship deeply laden, which can make
no great way in the sea, but as a ship of piracy, that has nothing in her but
weapons, artillery and ammunition, to oppose those they meet, such are as your
nimble Frigots, Fly-boats, and Catches, which sail with every wind, or
Galleyes which pass without wind, carried with strength of arms and oars, all
being vessels used to run in upon, and surprise a booty. This also is a good
interpretation; and so M. Broughton translates it, My days do fleet away as
the Pirates ships. That Is the second similitude, My days are passed away as the
swift ships.

And as an Eagle hasteneth to the prey. This is the third similitude. A ship
moves swiftly, especially a ship upon a swift river; or a ship laden with
desirable commodities; or a ship laden with Summer fruit; or a pirates ship, a
man of war. But here is an instance implying greater speed then that of the
most speedy ship. As ^n Eagle hasteneth to the prey.

An Eagle of all the fowls in the air is the swiftest and strongest of wing: An
Eagle is the chief of birds. We find in Scripture, swiftness expressed by
this similitude of an Eagle ( Hab. 1.8.) the Chaldeans who invaded the people
of Israel, are thus described, Their hors-men shall come from far, they shall
flee as the Eagle that hastes to eat. See the like instances, Jer. 48. Jer.
49. Ezekiel. 17. And in Isa. 40.31. They shall renew their strength, they shall
mount up with wings as Eagles, etc. noting the exceeding swiftness of the
Saints in the ways of God, the speed they shall make in ways of holiness,
though the youths faint, and the young men utterly fall, yet they that wait
upon the Lord shall mount up with wings as Eagles, that is, they shall be swift
and strong.

But here is more expressed then the natural swiftness of the Eagle, here is
somewhat occasional, which adds wings to her wings. We had four
interpretations of the ships swiftness. Here is one expression exceeding all
those four, An Eagle hastening to the prey.

Quoniam avid^ssine appetit, ideo pernicissime volat. San.
An Eagle is a greedy fowl. Hence that of Christ ( Matthew. 24.) Where the carcass
is, there the Eagles gather together; that is, look where ever there is any
prey, there you shall have Eagles: if there be a carcass to be had, the Eagle
will be sure to make toward it, My days (says Job) are passed away, as the
Eagle hasteneth to the prey. The Naturalists observe, that the Eagle soars
aloft in the air, so high, that the eye of man cannot discern her, yet the
Eagle is of such a piercing eye (Eagle-eied is a proverb for quick-sighted)
that she can discern her prey upon the earth, yea in the water, and as soon as
the Eagle espies her prey, she pours or sowces down upon it like a thunderbolt,
Tanquam fulme^ se e sublimi in terram jaculatur.
like a bullet out of a gun, or an arrow out of a bow. Thus Jobs days passed
as an Eagle in her flight, and not in her ordinary flight, but as an Eagle that
hasteneth to the prey, when hunger adds swiftness to her wings; such was the
passage of his days.

There is somewhat further observable in this, from the translation of the
Seventy, who render it thus, Is there any sign or mark in the way of a ship, or
of an Eagle? So the meaning of Job should be, that his life, in respect of
former comforts and contentments, Numquid est navibus vestigium viae, aut
aquilae volantis etc. Sept.
was past away, and had left no mark, no sign behind it. The ship in the sea
passes away, and there is no rode, no tract left; and the Eagle in the air
passes, and you cannot see where the Eagle made her flight, the air closes
presently, there is no way to be seen: Solomon uses those similies, Prove.
30.19. There be three things which I know not, the way of an Eagle in the air,
the way of a Serpent upon a rock, and the way of a Ship in the Sea: Quae nullum
sui cursus signum relinquunt per aviu^ volatu^ and navium transmissionem
significantur. Sanct.
And it is frequent in Authors to express those things which pass away, not
leaving any tract or print behind them, by the motion of a ship in the sea,
and of an Eagle in the air.

Hence note, That

The best of worldly things when they are gone, are as if they had never been.

There are two motions which will certainly leave a mark behind them: First,
motions in sin. 2. In holiness: Every step we tread in the ways of sin, or of
holiness, leaves a print, a remembrance behind it; but when the riches and
honors, the pleasures and contentments of this life are past, nothing remains
of them. It is said, Dan. 8.5. (which may serve for the illustration of this
place) in the vision of the He-goat, that he touched not the ground: that
He-goat was a type of Alexander the great, who set up the Grecian Empire, and
he is compared to a He-goat, which did not touch the ground, because of his
speedy conquests. When man or beast runs upon the ground with extreme speed, we
say they do not touch the ground. When the Hare leaves a deep tract, the hunter
knows she runs slowly, and is almost spent. Alexander conquered the world sooner
then a man could well travel over it. And as Alexander came in, so he passed
out, both in his person and posterity: For within a short time no man could
tell what was become of the Grecian Monarchy; the conquests of Alexander could
not be found, no more then the way of a ship in the sea, or of an Eagle in the
air, or of a man running so fast that he leaves no print behind him.

Secondly, Taking both these similitudes in the ordinary notion, as they import
the swift passage of Jobs prosperity. It Is questioned, How Job can be excused
for speaking thus slightly and undervaluingly of his temporal estate, which
was so raised, and so enriched, that he was an eyesore to the devil; Job usque
ad Satanae invidiam, benedictam donium, benedicta^ familiam habebat.
Satan envied him, because of his abundance. And does he now make nothing of
it? Was it nothing to be the greatest man in the East? Is he not very
unthankful for, or very forgetful of the goodness and bounty of God to him?
Should he not rather have said, I have had my days of prosperity, my worldly
comforts, and I enjoyed these a long time?

I answer, Job speaks not this to obscure the favors of God to him, or
ungratefully to pass by his blessings; but he answers the objection of his
friends, and maintains the argument he brought against them. His argument was,
That the estate of a godly man in this life, is as transitory and as brittle,
as the estate of a wicked man, and that therefore there can be no distinction
made of men by outward dispensations: To clear which, he says, Look to my good
days, they are past away swiftly, and there is nothing remaining of them.
Whence observe,

That the outward estate of the best men in the world, is as transitory and
fading as that of the worst in the world.

My days (says Job) my comfortable days are passed away, Every man at his
best estate is altogether vanity Psalm. 39.5. It is not only a wicked man, whose
outward estate is vain, but every man's; David's crown and scepter were fading,
vanishing flowers. Abraham and all the Patriarchs said (Heb. 11.) We have here
no continuing City; neither City nor Citizens have long continuance here. The
Apostle (1 Cor. 7.31.) speaks to the Saints, and bids them take their hearts
off from the world, and not to drench or steep their spirits in things here
below; why? The fashion of this world passes away, the fashion of the world in
your hands; if you have the world in your hands, the fashion of it will perish
there, as soon as in the hands of other men. Do not think that the world is
put into an abiding state, or into an unalterable fashion for your sakes. A
godly man and a wicked man (though made of the most different fashion) live in
a world, and possess worldly things of the same fashion. Quemad modum qui
navigat, sive stet, five sedeat vidit quia impul^u navis ducitur: ita and nos,
sive vigilantes* sive dormientes, sive ta centes, sive toquentes, sive
nolentes, sive volentes, per momenta temporum quotidie in fi^em tendim^. Greg.


Secondly, As from the first similitude, so from these we learn, How transitory
our time is. See how Job multiplies comparisons, That if we will not learn by
the first, we might yet be convinced by a second and a third. Go to the land,
see time upon the spur, in the swift riding Post. Go to the sea, see time upon
the winds, in the swift sailing Ship. Go to the air, see time upon the wing,
in the swift flying Eagle. These all preach the speedy passage of time. How sad
is it to see men live, as if their days were snailp^c'd, not post-pac'd as if
time lay always at an anchor, or were winde-bound, and could not use her
sails? as if it had leaden heels and not wings, or were bound hand and foot,
and could not stir? The Apostles caution is, ^^deem the time; and now we have
the Apostles argument to enforce it, The days are evil. If time go out of
your hand, you cannot fetch it back again; there is no rhetoric can recall it,
or price redeem it: Time is such a commodity, as all the power in the world
cannot recover, if lest and let slip. If all the Crowns and Kingdoms of the
world should be laid down as a reward for the bringing back of one hour, yea of
one moment of time, they could not obtain it. Therefore improve the present
time: No time is yours, but the present, the time that is gone comes no more;
the time that is to come, may find you gone before it comes: your time is only
the present time, and that is past as soon as present.

But not to stay long upon that which moves so swiftly, our days and time: I
will pass to the other branch, wherein Job further clears the point in the
five following verses.

JOB Chap. 9. Verse. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. If I say I will forget my complaint, I
will leave off my heaviness and comfort my self:

I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know that thou will not hold me innocent.

If I be wicked, why then labor I in vain?

If I wash my self with snow-water, and make my hands never so clean;

Yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.


THese words contain a proof of the later part of Jobs assumption. He had
affirmed, That an innocent and righteous person may quickly lose all his
outward comforts; which he illustrated by three similitudes: now he proves that
he may be entangled and lime-twig'd with afflictions beyond hope of escape.
This he does in the 27, 28, 29. verses. Which he amplifies with hyperbolicall
strains, in the 30. and 31. verses. The highest rhetoric of his sorrows being
let out, to show how remediless his sorrows were. If I wash my self with
snow-water, and make my hands never so clean; Yet shall thou plunge me in the
ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me; Things are ill with me, and I see
not, which way to mend my self. I am so far from any probability of help by
contending and striving with God, that I have no hope of it by washing and
cleansing my self. As carnal and earthly succors fail me, so these heavenly
and spiritual duties will not succor me. I will give you the sum and
substance of these five verses, in a few words together, and then open the
particulars.

The general sense of the context may be thus conceived; As if Job said;

I poor man in this condition study to forget the troubles which are upon me;
and laying aside all anger, passion and discontentments with which ye charge
me, I labor to refresh and revive my self with hopes of some dawning or near
drawing deliverance; but while I am assaying to do this, my sorrows assault me
afresh, and even over-whelm my infant hopes, my beginning, budding comforts,
with mighty terrors; so that now I even despair of recovery out of the hand of
my affliction, and am persuaded that I shall not only not be delivered that I
may appear or be accounted pure and innocent, but if continued afflictions be
an argument of wickedness (as you affirm) I shall have the bonds of my present
trouble so fastened upon me, and such new ones, it may be stronger ones added,
that I shall still look in your eyes, and viewed in the glass of your opinion,
like a wicked man: Wherefore then should I deceive my self with hopes that I
shall be delivered? Or that God will awake for me, and make the habitation of
my righteousness prosperous? When as I believe and am very confident that how
pure and righteous so ever I am, or (by further washing and cleansing,
believing and repenting) shall appear to be, yet the Lord has an intent to try
me further, even to the uttermost, and will cast me into the ditch, mire and
dirt of further afflictions; so that they who make up their judgments by your
rule, though they were as near to me as the clothes upon my back, must yet
abhor, and loath me (as ye my friends now do) as a wicked person. He seems to
speak as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 4.9. I think that God has set forth us the
Apostles last, as it were men appointed unto death, for we are made a spectacle
to the world, and to Angels, and to men.

This is the sum and general sense of these five verses. The words are full
of difficulty, and there is much variety of judgments about them: but I hope
in the close to make out a sense upon every particular, which shall be matching
and suitable with this which has been given in general,

If I say, I will forget my complaint.
If I say.] In this Job answers directly to the charge of Bildad at the 8th
Chapter, ver. 2. How long will thou speak these things, and shall thy words be
like an East-winde? To which Job answers Bildad, If I should cease speaking (as
thou seem to chide me into silence) If I should say, I will not complain any
more, I will give over these mournful discourses, and bite in my strongest
pains, What then? will the event prove what thou have promised? surely, no, I
am afraid of all my sorrows, and almost assured, that they will return upon me.
If I say, I will forget my complaint.

I will forget. The word which we render [forget] may signify a threefold
forgetfulness. (...) Est oblivisoi, ut (...)


First, Forgetfulness coming from the neglect of our natural abilities, when
we are careless and take no heed to remember. Recordari cum cura and
diligentia.


Secondly, Forgetfulness arising from the weakness of our natural abilities;
when though we are careful, yet we cannot remember.

But Job means neither of these, he intends a third kind of forgetfulness,
even a studied and an affected forgetfulness; when how able soever we are, yet
we will not, or would not remember. If I say, I will forget my complaint; that
is, If I purposely set my self, or labor to forget my sorrows, yet I cannot
get off their remembrance. As the Hebrew (Zachar) signifies not only the
natural act of memory, but diligence in remembering: So does the Hebrew
(Sachah) to forget. It is sometimes as hard a work to forget, as it is at any
time to remember. How do the damned in hell strive to forget their pains and
complaints? they would count it a happiness, if they could put their misery
out of mind and memory one hour; but they cannot. And they can no more forget
what they have felt, then not be sensible of what they feel, If I say, I will
forget (...)
My complaint. Sapit hoc verbum meditabu^dum quendam sermonem, and anxium
intellecti^ vocisque discursum.


The word notes meditation, and here, a mournful meditation, a breathing forth
in mournful expressions. The same word is used, Chap. 7. verse. 13. When I say,
My bed shall comfort me, and my couch shall case my complaint (or my mournful
meditation) then thou scarest me with dreams. Miseriae memoriam omnem depo^am
Drus.
So then, Jobs meaning is, If I should set my self with greatest intention to
forget, that is, to lay aside the thought of my troubles and sorrows, and say,
I will leave off my heaviness, and complain no more, I will not pore upon my
afflictions, but resolve to be above them, yet it will not be. I find no case:
forgetfulness is a medicine for some diseases and pains, but I find no cure,
no remedy that way, for mine. Whence observe,

There are some things which man can very hardly forget, or get out of his
mind.

We may study their forgetfulness, and yet not be able to forget them. And
they are of two sorts. First, Worldly pleasures. Secondly, Worldly sorrows.
These will not fail to mind us. We need the art, or rather the grace of
forgetfulness to lay these aside. And there are two things which we are slow
to remember. First, Our own duties. And secondly, The mercies of God. About
these we need the art, or rather the grace of memory. And usually they who have
most neglected to remember duty, are most afflicted with the constrained
remembrance of their own sorrow. And they shall not be able at all to forget
the wrath of God, who would not remember the mercies of God. If I say, I will
forget my complaint.

I will leave off my heaviness, and comfort my self. (...)
Leave off my heaviness.] The Hebrew word for word, is, I will lay aside my
face; for that which strictly, and in the letter of that language, Notat
faciem, iram etiam and ^^istiti^m.
signifies the face or countenance of a man, does also signify, First, Anger
and wrath. Secondly, Sorrow and heaviness. It Is put for anger, Psalm. 34.16.
The face (or anger) of the Lord is against such as do evil. So ( Lam. 4.16.
Levit. 17.10.) I will set my face, that is, I will show my anger, and manifest
my displeasure against them.

And the reason why that word which signifies the countenance or face,
signifies also anger and wrath, sorrow and heaviness, is, because both anger
and sorrow break forth in the face. If a man be very angry, you shall see his
anger scribled in the uneven character of his countenance: If a man be very
heavy and sorrowful, you shall see the lines of sorrow drawn in his face.
Therefore it is said of Hannah (1 Samuel 1.18.) when she received a refreshing
and reviving answer from the Lord in prayer (the poor soul sat drooping and
mourning, as much as praying, but as soon as she had a hint of audience and
acceptance, it is said) She went away and did eat, and her countenance was no
more sad; the sadness of her heart appeared no more in her countenance, there
was fair weather in her face, and Sunshine in her forehead, the rain and
showers of her tears were blown over and dried up. As in some sinners, The show
of their countenance does testify against them (Isa. 3.9.) that is, they are
so grossly wicked, that you may see sin in their faces; whereas others can
keep sin close enough in their hearts, they can keep the disease in, and shut
themselves up, when they are sick of the plague of their hearts (1 King. 8.)
nothing but holiness is discernable in the face of their conversation, when
nothing but rottenness and corruption lies at the bottom of their spirits.
But as the corruption of many a man's heart breaks forth in botches upon the
face of his actions, and the rottenness of his spirit blisters upon his tongue
in unsavory speeches: so those passions and affections of the heart, joy and
sorrow, anger and heaviness appear in the face, and we may read the distempers
of the heart in the disguisednesse of a look. Cordis index vultus, totusque
homo est in facie. Nomen faciei in Scriptura s^gnificat exteriorem h^bitum,
sicut facies terrae, coeli reip. Bold. Latina vox facies significat non solum
os, ocutos genas, sed formam omnem, modum and facturam totius corporis, a
faciendo dicta^. Aul. Gel.
The face is the Index of the heart, that tells you, how things go within.
Therefore Job says, If I leave off my face, meaning as we translate, If I
leave off heaviness, which is so evident in my face, or which is as easy to
be seen as my face. If I resolve to appear cheerful and merry, and will not
let clouds darken my countenance any longer, yet, etc. The face is put
generally for the appearance or outside of any thing; as we say, the face of
the earth, the face of the heavens, the face of the Church or Commonwealth. So
that, To leave off heaviness, or the face, is to leave off all show of
heaviness. As Joseph left off his tears of joy ( Genesis 43.30, 31.) who, having
eased his heart of his joyful sorrows, by weeping secretly in his chamber,
Washed his face, went out and refrained himself. Thus Job would have washed his
mournful tears from his face, he attempted to refrain himself; but he could
not, his sorrows were too strong for him; and as he could not remove, so he
could not dissemble them. For this leaving off, is to be taken as the precedent
act of forgetting, for an affected, resolved laying aside. If I make it my
business to be cheerful and leave off my heaviness, yet, etc. Observe hence,

Sorrow is not easily shaken off.

Sorrow sticks close. It is very hard for a man to play the hypocrite with his
sorrow, or dissemble the sadness of his heart, but it is far harder to be
really delivered of it. Sorrow is a companion that will not be cast off with a
word. A man may more easily cover his sin, then his sorrow. Many can put a
visour of holiness upon their faces, when nothing but wickedness is in their
hearts; but it is not easy to make a show of comfort, when nothing but sorrow
is in the heart. Grief will out. Heaviness in the heart, is like the ointment
in the right hand, of which Solomon speaks ( Prove. 27.16.) that it bewraieth
it self. One said of a merry Atheist, He laugheth to thee and to me; that is,
he seems to laugh, but he mourns to himself, the man's heart is heavy. If it be
not so, yet it may be so with all wicked men, when they are merriest in the
face, they have reason to have sorrow even unto death in their hearts: it is a
hard thing (I say) to put sorrow out of the face, much more to get it out of
the heart; when it is lodged there once, it will not soon be dispossessed. The
Apostle ( Heb. 12.1.) exhorts, To lay aside every weight, and to cast off the
sin that does so easily beset us; he means it of the sin of nature, which
we bear about us; this sin (says he) does easily beset us, but let us cast
it off, that is, let us study and strive to lay aside this heaviness of sin,
which is the truest cause of the heaviness of sorrow. One would think that a
man needs not much persuasion, when he has an heavy burden upon his
shoulders, to lay it aside; yet (so it is) man can hardly be persuaded to lay
aside this burden, and it is the business we have with your souls every day,
to persuade you to lay it aside. It is a weight that easily besets us. Now as
we need much exhortation to cast off the weight of this sin, which is so
pleasing, so also of sorrow, though it be unpleasant. When sorrow besets us, it
leaves us without ease, but sorrow easily besets us. Job found it a hard task
to lay aside his burden. Because his friends thought he fed too much upon his
afflictions, therefore he tried what he could do, but it would not do. If I
say, I will leave off my heaviness, I well comfort my self, etc. See the issue
by and by.

I will comfort my self. Comfort is the very life of our lives, the spring of
our year, the light of our day, the Sun in our firmament, the complement of
mercy: and therefore Christ gives his Church the sum of all mercy, (...)
in that one promise of sending the Comforter. The Hebrew word signifies to
strengthen, Roboravit, confortavit, vires collegit, Sept. (...).
because when a man is cast down with sorrows his spirit is weakened, Comfort is
the repair of strength; If I say, I will comfort, that is, corroborate and
strengthen my self (Psalm. 39.13.) O spare me (says David) that I may recover
my strength; or that I may a little comfort my self: The Septuagint renders it,
That I may get my life again, that I may be enlivened, and re-insouled, or
fetch back my soul again. Here, if I say I will comfort my self, Take heart at
grass (as we say) and play the man, then my sorrows renew upon me.

But some may object; How is it that Job takes upon him to comfort himself, Is
it any wonder if Job came short of comfort, when he went to himself for comfort?

Comfort is not a commodity to be found in the hand or power of any creature;
the great God has all that in his own hand; if any man will have comfort, he
must trade to heaven for it. It is the honor of God to be called, The God of
all comfort (2 Cor. 1.3.) that is, the God who has all comfort at his dispose.
As some Kings have a denomination from the great staple commodities of their
Kingdoms. Our King is called, The King of the wool, because wool is the chief
commodity, and more plentiful here, then in any Country of the world. Another
is called, King of the wines: and another, of the flax. Comfort is the staple
commodity of heaven; and God is called, The God of all comfort, not only
because the chiefest and best comforts are in his hand, but because there is
not the least imaginable comfort to be had out of his hand. He has the
monopoly of comfort, or rather the solegift of comfort. We can trouble and
perplex our selves, but God only can comfort us. And he is the God of all
comfort, of all sorts and of all degrees of comfort: the God, not only of
spiritual, but of worldly comfort, of temporal comfort, as well as of
eternal. As the joys of the holy Ghost are in his hand, so are the joys of
civil relations; the joy of meat and drink, the joy of riches and honor are
in his hand also, How then says Job, I will lay aside my heaviness, I will
comfort my self? It is a hard thing to comfort others ( Luther said, It is as
easy a work to raise the dead, as to comfort the conscience) but it is harder
for a man to comfort himself. Eliphaz gave testimony to Job in the fourth
Chapter ( verse. 3, 4.) that he had upholden him that was falling, and had
strengthened the feeble knees. But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest,
it touches thee, and thou art troubled. Thou, who have helped others, can
not help thy self. Yet here Job was upon a resolve to comfort himself.

I answer, Though it be a truth, that no man is able to comfort himself, no
more then he can convert himself; and that a man is no more able to change his
heart from sorrow to joy, then he is able to change his heart from sin to
grace; yet, a man may attempt or assay, he may use means to comfort himself.
When Job says, I will comfort my self; the meaning is, I will do the utmost I
can, I will not be behind in my endeavors, I will take the best course, and
improve all opportunities to get out of these dumps, whosoever will prescribe
me a way, or direct me to a remedy of these sorrows, I will submit to it, I
will comfort my self. From whence note, That

What a man really endeavors to do, that he may be said to do.

I will comfort my self; Why? Because though he were not able to attain such an
end; Joy and comfort lies beyond the line of the creature, yet he reached at
it, he attempted and assaied all means to comfort himself. Thus the salvation
of a man is ascribed to himself; A man is said to save himself, though
salvation belongs to the Lord, even temporal salvation, but especially
eternal salvation, yet, a man may be said to save himself; As the Apostle (1
Epist. 4.16.) exhorts Timothy to walk by a holy rule, to settle himself in his
studies, to read the Scriptures, and to meditate in them, to be faithful in
dispensing of the Gospel, assuring him, If thou do these things, thou shall
both save thy self, and them that hear thee. Save thy self. No man can be his
own Savior, he may be as well his own Creator; Timothy was thus encouraged,
because in so doing, he did all that a man ought, who expects salvation. That
was the way to, though not the cause of salvation. Salvation is all Christ's,
yet he who does his best to save himself, may be said, to save himself. Thus
also a man comforts himself, converts himself, instructs himself, when he
puts himself out to the utmost of gifts, graces, and opportunities to do or
attain duties and blessings. No man (says the Prophet) does stir himself up to
take hold of the Lord. The word in the Prophet signifies, to awake, or to
watch; no man wakes or watches his opportunity to take hold of the Lord. It
notes also that action of old birds, who flutter with their wings, and beat up
their young ones, to urge and provoke them to use their wings, and fly abroad.
Thus he complained, because the lazy, dull-hearted Jews did not raise up and
waken their hearts to do what they could, though to do it was more then they
could.

Secondly, Observe, That a man in affliction may help on his comforts or his
sorrows.

I will comfort my self, I will leave off my heaviness. Some add to their
afflictions, and are active to aggravate and increase them: they make their
night darker, and obscure the light of counsel that is brought unto them: they
join with Satan their enemy, and by the black melancholy vapors of their own
hearts, stifle the consolations that are administered them by faithful friends.
Like Rachel (Jer. 31.) they refuse to be comforted; when reviving Cordials are
offered, they spill them upon the ground, and will not take in a drop: they are
so far from comforting themselves, that they will not receive comfort from
others. The Prophet seems to be resolved upon the point, he would go on in
sorrows, Look away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me
(Isa. 22.4.) As sometimes a man under great affliction bespeaks comfort from
others, O, I am in a sad case, come, comfort me, show me how I may get ease
from these sorrows. Many beg prayers, and send bills of their afflictions,
desiring to have them spread before the Lord in the Congregation, that some
comfort may be dropped from heaven into their diseased bodies, or wounded
spirits. Others slight prayers, and care not to be comforted, as if it were an
ease to them to mourn, and a refreshing to be in heaviness. There is a
twofold ground upon which comforts are thus put off.

1. Some put off their comforts upon fullennesse of spirit; black and dark
spirits love to bathe themselves in sorrow. Sorrow is the bath of drooping
spirits; and it is Satan's bath too; Melancholy is commonly called, The devils
bath; he takes delight to wash in the streams of our unnecessary tears. Sorrow
for sin puts the devil to the greatest sorrow. Godly grief is a grief to
Satan: but he delights in our worldly sorrows, as the devil may be delighted:
if he have delight in any thing, this is one thing he delights in, our
forbidden sorrows. Some sorrows are as much forbidden as any pleasures. The
devil is as much pleased with our unlawful sorrows, as he is with our
unlawful pleasures. And he labors as much to make us pleased with them.

2. Others help on their own sorrows, and lessen their comforts through
forgetfulness or ignorance; they (as the Apostle chides the Hebrews, Chap.
12.5.) have forgotten the exhortation, which speaks unto them as unto children.
Now, as wicked men rejoice, because they forget or know not their ill
condition: So godly men are sad, when they forget or know not how good their
condition is. Yet Job supposes the review of his good estate, would neither
check his sorrows, nor establish his peace, If I say, I will forget my
complaint, I will comfort my self, I am afraid of all my sorrows.

Thirdly, Observe, Man is not able to comfort himself; we can make our selves
crosses, but we cannot make our selves comforts. A man may say, as Job did (
Chap. 7.13.) to his bed, comfort me; or to his riches, comfort me, or to his
wine and good cheer, comfort me, or to his friends, comfort me: He may say to
all outward acts of pleasure, to merry company, and music, eomfort me; Yea a
Saint may say to his graces and holiness, comfort me; and yet none of these
can comfort him, (...)
or, they comfort him in vain. Timuit, expavit prae metu se abstrahere, timorem
den^tat imminentis calamitatis. (...) Significat dolor affi^ere, and interdum
figurare. Qui materiam aliquam, ut lucum vel ceram figurat manibus and digitis,
is illam premendo quasi dolor afficit. Bold. Est elegans metaphora; verba
alicujus figurare, nam qui verba detorquet, aliam figuram, i. e.
significationem iis tribuit.
To seek comfort any where but in Christ, is to seek the living among the dead.
Christ is comfort clothed in our flesh, and he is the comfort of our spirits.
Till he gives comfort, every man must conclude, as Job, I am afraid of all my
sorrows.

I am afraid.
The word signifies strong trembling and shaking fear.

Of all my sorrows. The root has a double signification. First, To afflict
with grief (Isa. 63.10.) They vexed his holy Spirit. Secondly, To fashion or
form a thing (Job 10.8.) Thy hands have made me and fashioned me round about.
The same word by a Metaphor signifies both to grieve and to fashion, to vex and
to form, because a man that forms and fashions a piece of wood or stone, seems
to put it to pain by cutting and hewing. And he that forms wax, vexes and
chafes it in his hands. Thus I say, because in the fashioning of a thing, a man
does bruise, cut, and (as it were) put it to pain, therefore the same word
signifies both to vex or grieve, and to form or fashion. And this word is
applied unto the ill usage of words (Psalm. 56.5.) Every day (says David,
speaking of his enemies) they ^rest my words; or they put my words to pain and
grief, or they painfully and grievously wrest my words, David's enemies took up
what he spoke, and put a new shape upon it, and this they did so vexingly, that
they are said to wrest his words; a thing is vexed when it is wrested, or
wrought quite out of the form it before had. The same Metaphor the Apostle
Peter uses in reference to Doctrine, 2 Pet. 3.16. speaking of the Epistles of
Paul, in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable, wrest, or put upon the rack; they painfully form his
words, and represent them in a meaning which he never intended. What is spoken
may be right, both in the matter and intendment of the speaker, yet another
wrests, forms, and fashions it in his own mould, and makes it bear a sense
which the speaker never dreamed of.

In this Text we have the Noun only, which imports either the labor or
pains, which a man takes, or the pain and grief, which a man feels. Hence in
the Hebrew this word signifies an Idol, and both acceptions fall into the
reason of it.

First. because Idols are made, fashioned and formed up curiously, with a great
deal of art and labor: the wax, or clay, or stone is put to pain; you must cut
it and carve it to make an Idol.

Secondly, because Idols are served, attended and worshipped with much pain and
grief. False worship, or the worship of Idols, is always more servile and
painful then true worship is. False worship is a painful service, a servile
service, a toil rather then a worship; but the service of the true and
everliving God, is an holy, an ingenuous, a noble and an honorable service.
Idols are troublesome, both in their making, and in their worshipping. From
this twofold interpretation of the word, I find a twofold translation given.

First, Thus, I am afraid of all my works, as if Job, Verehar omnia opera mea
Vul.
having a design to comfort himself in a reflection upon his good works, and
former holy walkings, feared they would not serve his turn, or bear up his
spirit in the evil day, which was come upon him. As if he had said; I have
lived as exactly by the rule of the Word* as I could; I have had respect to all
the Commandments of God, that I might not sin against him. Yet I am afraid of
all my works, the anger of God will surely soak through them all, or find holes
and breaches in them to come in upon me at.

Thus he is conceived reasoning with himself. But doubtless it was not Jobs
meaning to look to the innocence or holiness of his life past, as the ground
of his present comfort; he that would do so, may justly be afraid of all his
works. When we see the best of our selves, we have more reason to be afraid,
then to be comforted. As we must work out our salvation with fear and
trembling: so we have cause to fear and tremble at our works.

But rather as we translate, I am afraid of all my sorrows; that is, I no
sooner endeavor to comfort my self, but presently my sorrows throng about me,
they appear before my face, and make such a ghastly apparition, that I am
afraid. Sorrows charge and assault me afresh, when I am purposing to make an
escape from the hands of sorrow. When I think of leaving off my heaviness, or
of getting out of the sight of it, sorrows come upon me with greater violence
then before. While a prisoner is quiet and content with his restraint, the
keeper lays no great restraint upon him; but if he perceive him meditating an
escape, or attempting to break prison, and set himself at liberty, presently
more irons are clapped upon him, and an advantage taken even to load him with
chains. Such hard usage this poor prisoner feared at the hand of his sorrows,
If I say, I will leave off my heaviness, I will throw off my bolts and
fetters, and get out of these troubles, I am afraid of all my sorrows; I shall
have all the Keepers and Jailers about me, they will lay more load upon me, and
watch me more strictly then before: You tell me I am in love with my sorrows,
but the truth is, fears of sorrow incompasse me round about, I am afraid of all
my sorrows.

Note hence: First, this general truth,

That affliction is the matter of fear.

Natural fear arises from the apprehension of some approaching evil; and as
fear grows more boisterous and inordinate, so it represents us with sadder
(though but supposed) evils.

Secondly, Observe, A godly man may be much oppressed with the fear of
afflictions.

When I would comfort my self, I am afraid of all my sorrows: It is terrible to
me to think that they still increase upon me, and that whilst I hope to
escape, I am more ensnared. Christ himself, when he was in our nature, and
clothed with our flesh, was afraid of all his sorrows: he was a man of sorrows,
and he was afraid of his sorrows too, Matthew. 26.38. He said, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful even unto death; and he offered up prayers and
supplications with strong cries and tears unto him that was able to save him
from death, and was heard in that he feared (Heb. 5.) His were extraordinary
sorrows indeed, such as no creature ever felt or tasted. The Cup of sorrow
which he drank was mixed and tempered with all our sorrows, and with the cause
of them, our sins. This was it he feared, being in our nature; though as that
nature was hypostatically united unto the divine nature, it had infinitely more
power to bear all those sorrows, then we have in our nature to bear the least
sorrow. Now, if Christ himself in our flesh was afraid of his sorrows, which
yet he knew he should overcome, how much more may the fear of sorrows overcome
us, while we are in the flesh?

Lastly, Observe, That the fear of afflictions assaults and oppresses some
most, when they set themselves most to conquer and overcome them.

I, says Job, would comfort myself, but I am afraid of all my sorrows; I fear
they will be doubled and trebled upon me, therefore I had rather sit still,
then, by striving to unloose, straiten the cords of my affliction faster upon
me. The next clause seems to hint this as a reason, why his sorrows hung so
close upon him.

I know that thou will not hold me innocent. But how did Job know this? As God
said to Adam (Genesis 3.11.) Who told thee that thou wast naked? So I may say to
Job, Who told thee that God would not hold thee innocent? Or, where had thou
this assurance of thy condemnation? The Saints may know, or be assured that God
will pardon them; but a wicked man cannot know, or be assured that God will
not. This knowledge of Job was but a suspicion, or at the most a conjecture.
And the giving out of this conjecture was but the language of his fear, his
faith could say no such thing, for God had no where said it, The best men speak
sometime from their worser part. Their graces may be silent a while, and leave
corruption to have all the talk. When the flesh is under great pain, the spirit
is hindered from acting its part, and then sense gets the mastery over faith.
Had it not been upon such a disadvantage, Job had never offended with his
tongue, by saying he knew what he could not know.

I know that thou will not hold me innocent. (...) a radice (...)
The word which we translate innocent, comes from a root which signifies
pure and clean, purus, mundus, per Metaphorae innocent insous.
and in the verb to cleanse and make pure: And because innocence is the purity
or cleanness of a person, therefore the same word signifies to cleanse, and to
hold or make innocent: In which sense it is used frequently, Exo. 20.2. Thou will not hold him guiltless (or innocent) that takes thy Name in vain. The
counsel that David gave upon his deathbed unto Solomon concerning Joab, was,
Therefore hold thou him not innocent, or guiltless (1 King. 2.9.) that is, let
the blood which he has shed be upon him, let his honor and his name continue
stained and blemished in thy thoughts and judgment, Hold him not innocent.

Here the Question is, To what antecedent we are to refer the relative, Thou?
I know that thou will not hold me innocent; Thou, who?

There are two opinions about it. Some refer it to God, and some to Bilaad,
to whom Job makes answer in this place.

They that refer it unto God, make out the sense thus. Either, first, taking
the word properly for cleansing and healing the sores and wounds which were
upon his body; Adversus illud quod amici statuunt, probos, videlicet etiam
castigatos nunquam succidi, hoc pro certo statuam, o Deus, nunquam esse me ab
istis quibus totus scateo foedissimis ulceribus ac vermibu^ repurgandum. Bez
Novi quod non sis me liberum dimissurus. Coc.
I know thou will not cleanse my body from this filthiness, from these
diseases that now anoy me: And so it is an answer to the words of Bildad,
telling Job, that in case he sought unto God, and humbled himself before him,
he would awaken for him, and remove those judgments. No, says Job, when I
think of ease and deliverance, all my fears return upon me, and I know God will
not yet cleanse, ease or deliver me from them.

Again, Taking it tropically (as we render it) for a judicial cleansing or
purification; so, Thou will not hold me innocent, is as much as this, Lord,
such sorrows and troubles are upon me, that I fear thou will not declare, or
pronounce, or give testimony concerning me to the world, that I am an innocent
person. Because the sores and troubles upon him, were as an evidence against
him in the judgment of his friends, that he was a wicked person, therefore
(says he) Lord, I am afraid, Thou will not hold me, that is, Thou will not
declare me to be innocent by taking away these evils, Non mundabis, i. e.
purum, justum, vel etiam innocentem non declarabis.
that so this opinion of my friends concerning me may be removed or confuted.

From this sense note:

First, That even a godly man in deep afflictions may have misgiving thoughts
of God.

The soul misgives sometimes about the pardon of sin, and is even swallowed
up with despair, concluding, I know God will not hold me innocent; he will not
be reconciled unto me, or blot out my transgression.

But especially (which is rather the mind of Job) the soul misgives about
release from punishment. Some being hampered in the bands of affliction,
conclude, God will never let them loose, or set them at liberty again. Such a
conclusion David's unbelief made against himself, I shall one day perish by the
hand of Saul (1 Samuel 27.1.) When Jonah was cast into the deep, in the midst of
the seas, when the floods compassed him, and all the billows and waves passed
over him, then he said ( Chap. 2.4.) I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes.
Indeed Jonah began to recover quickly, his next words being a breath of faith,
Yet I will look again toward thy holy Temple.

Secondly, Observe, That until fear of guilt be removed, fear of trouble will
not remove.

Job was not very clear about the pardon of his sins, somewhat stuck upon his
spirit, while he was under the clouds and darkness of this temptation;
therefore, says he, I am afraid of all my sorrows. Till the soul is settled in
the matter of pardon, or freedom from guilt, it can never be settled about
freedom from punishment. Hence the Apostle ( Heb. 2.10, 15.) speaking of the
Saints before the coming of Christ, calls Christ, the Captain of our salvation,
and assures us, he took flesh, that through death, he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver those who through fear
of death, were all their life time subject unto bondage. The language is very
near this of the Text, I am afraid of all my sorrows. As Job was in bondage
under his afflictions through the fear of his returning sorrows: So, they were
all their life time subject unto bondage through the fear of approaching death.
All the Saints before the coming of Christ, were under such a bondage, for the
Apostle speaks as of a general state, That he might deliver those, who through
the fear of death, were all their life time subject unto bondage. The reason
hereof, was, because they had not so manifest and convincing a light concerning
the pardon of sin, the freeness of grace, and the abundance of that mercy
which was brought in afterward, and revealed by Jesus Christ, when he actually
made our atonement by the blood of his cross: For howsoever it is undeniable,
that the faithful under the old Testament, had knowledge of that satisfaction
which was to be made by the Mediator for the removing of sin, and the taking
away of guilt (every sacrifice spoke this, showing that there was an atonement
to be made by some other blood, which the blood of the sacrifice typified) yet
notwithstanding there was not a clearing and a quieting of their hearts,
because Christ (though in the promise slain from the beginning of the world)
was not actually slain, nor offered up for sinners. The Apostle ( Heb. 10.1,
2.) argues upon the same point, That the Law, with those Sacrifices, could not
make the comers thereunto perfect, that is, it could not assure the heart that
sin was taken away, for if it could, then (says he) the sacrifices should
not have needed to be offered up so often. What needed any repetition, seeing
they who were once so purged should have had no more conscience of sin, that
is, sin should never have troubled and vexed their consciences any more? But
now Christ by one offering has for ever perfected them that are sanctified
(verse. 14.) that is, he has made a perfect satisfaction for them; and
completed the peace of their consciences. So then, while there remains any
scruple about sin, fears of evil will hang upon the spirit. And we find that
the old Saints were very fearful of outward afflictions, because they had as
it were a relish or taste of the disfavour and displeasure of God in them. And
in proportion as any of them had more or less of free grace appearing to them,
so they were more or less enthralled with these fears. We may observe through
out the old Testament, that there was not such a spirit of rejoicing in
sufferings and afflictions, as we find breakings forth in the new. Paul never
says, I am afraid of all my sorrows; No, he says, As sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing. You never hear him complain of his afflictions. He indeed complains
of his corruptions, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death! But he never said, O miserable man, how am I afflicted, I am in
deaths often, who shall deliver me from this death of the body! We find the
Saints under the Gospel clothed with a spirit of exultation and rejoicing, of
which we hear little, if any thing at all under the Law: The want of which we
are to ascribe to their want of a clear light about the removing of guilt, and
the pardon of sin, I know thou will not hold me innocent.

Thirdly, Observe, That God often deals with his best servants, in regard of
outward troubles, as if they were guilty.

I know thou will not hold me innocent; that is, thou will not deal with me as
with an innocent person. As the Lord dealt with his Son, so he deals with his
servants. God the Father dealt with Jesus Christ as with a guilty person ( Isa.
53.9, 12.) He was numbered among transgressors, and made his grave with the
wicked. The Lord reckoned him as a sinner, while he was satisfying his justice
for sin, and making an atonement for sinners. Job is no where called a type
of Christ, but he was like him, and their parallel might be drawn in many
things, especially in this, that both were numbered with the wicked, and in that
both were used, as if they had been guilty. The dispensations of God to his own
beloved Son once did, and to his faithful servants often do look like those
to the greatest transgressors. His Son was handled, so that he might redeem
sinners; his servants are so handled, sometimes to prevent, often to purge them
from sin, sometimes to try their graces, always to make them fitter vessels
for glory. Though we cannot make any earnings toward glory by the weightiest
afflictions, yet these light afflictions, which are but for a moment, work for
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

I shall pass from this reference of the word, Thou, when I have briefly
vindicated the text from the corruptions of some Papists, Bellarm. l. 5. de
justif. cap. 5.
who urge it to prove the uncertainty of our justification* Job (say they)
doubted whether God would declare him just or no. I answer, Justified persons
may have doubts, yet that does not argue the uncertainty of justification.
Justification is a sure act in it self, and we may be sure of it, though some
are unsettled about it. This Scripture gives no shelter, much less support to
that doctrine of doubting. The Vulgar reading, grossly varying from the
original, is all the shadow it has in this place. For as that Translatour
mistakes the former clause, which he renders, I am afraid of all my works: So
this later, which he renders, Sciens quod non parceres delinquenti. Vulg.
Knowing that thou will not pardon or spare him that offends. He that seeks
to be justified by his works, shall not want fears about his justification: And
if this be a truth, which their translation seems to hold forth, that God will
not pardon him that offends, the best and holiest men in the world have
reason, not only to fear whether they are justified, but to resolve they can
never be justified in his sight. If every man that sins must doubt of the
pardon of sin, all men must doubt. In that common acception of the word
offend, it is false, that God will not pardon him that offends: whom should he
pardon but such as offend? They who are above sin, are above pardon. Job never
thought God would not pardon him, because he had sinned, it being one of the
royal titles of God, The God pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin. But
if we take sinning or offending in a stricter sense, as it imports a man
obstinate and still engaged with delight to sin (in which sense the next title
of the Lords great name, after, Forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, is
to be understood, And that will by no means clear the guilty (Exodus 34.7.) The
Hebrew is, And that clearing will not clear. We supply the word guilty; which
the Chaldee well explains by this periphrasis, Him that will not convert, or
turn to the Lord) such offenders the Lord will not pardon. But to say, that the
Lord will not spare and pardon such guilty persons, such delinquents as will
not return unto him, but go on to add one wickedness to another, is no
denial of the Saints assurance of pardon, they being already turned and
converted to the Lord. So much for that clause, as the antecedent referres unto
God, I know thou will not hold me innocent.

But rather take the antecedent to be Bildad. I know, Thou Bildad, wilt not
hold me innocent; as if Job had said, When I think of comforting my self, my
wounds bleed afresh, and my sorrows present themselves to my thoughts again, by
the sight of which I am assured I shall not be judged innocent by thee, but
rather more wicked, as my sorrows appear to be more; In vanum laeborabo ut
ostendam tibi afflictum simul and innocentem me esse posse Bol.
for seeing thou art resolved to conclude the multitude of my sins from the
multitude of my suffering, in vain shall I labor to show and approve my self as
an innocent person before thee, when as I shall still be an afflicted person
before thee: I know thou can not hold me innocent, while abiding afflictions
lead thy judgment to conclude that a man is wicked. How shall I being in
trouble gain any credit of integrity, in thy opinion; so long as outward
troubles render me a hypocrite in thy opinion?

I shall note only this from it, He that judges of a man's innocence by his
outward estate; may for ever condemn an innocent. Bildad judged so of Job, this
caused Job to say, I know thou will not hold me innocent, or think me good,
seeing evils are still upon me, and are like to continue upon me still. Judge
not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment, is the rule of
Christ ( Ioh. 7.24.) as if they could hardly judge what is right, who judge by
what appears. We must not judge of things till they appear; nor may we judge of
persons by their appearance. As oftentimes in holiness, so sometime in
sinfullnesse, men are not what they seem to be. All is not gold that glisters,
and some gold does not glister: Many are not that in holiness, which they seem
to be by their actings toward God, and some are not in sinfulness, what they
seem to be by Gods acting toward them. It is easier to do good, then to be
good; and usually they who are good suffer that which is evil.

Verse 29. If I be wicked, Why then labor I in vain?
These words may be connected with either of the interpretations given upon the
former verse, I know, thou (O God) or thou (O Bildad) wilt not hold me
innocent. Now then, If I be wicked, etc.

The original word has been heretofore opened. Only note, that the Hebrew is
absolute, and not by way of supposition, (...) Ego impius.
plainly thus, I am wicked, or, I shall he accounted wicked, Why therefore
labor I in vain? Or, now therefore I labor in vain. When Job says, I am
wicked, it is not as if he gave the cause, and assented to his friends, Ye have
had an ill opinion of me all this while, Impius hoc loco non qui sit, sed qui
ut improbus tractet^r vel qui impius videatur, and liquet Iobum suis amicis
Impium fuisse visum ut qui in h c Christum praeferret, qui cum imp js reputatus
fuit Fr. Joh. (...)
now I begin to have as ill an opinion of my self, I am wicked. No, he means it
only thus, I am handled or accounted as a wicked man, I am wicked, in your
thoughts, and the providence of God seems to give you occasion of thinking so,
ye look upon me, as if I were a wicked man, and I look like one, Why then
labor I in vain?

Why labor I in vain? The word signifies hardest labor; why do I travel so
painfully to vindicate my self, and to stand fair in your eyes? It is laboring
with toil, or moiling labor, answerable to that Greek word ((...)) which
signifies sore and extreme labor. It is too much to bestow any labor in vain
(that is, Laboravit, defatigatus fuit, Graeco (...) respondet, and notat ex
labor summam molestiam (...) pro (...). Aquil.
without fruit or success) much more to bestow hard and sore labor.

But what was this sore, hard and painful labor? He means all those labors
which he bestowed, either to extricate himself from his sufferings, or to clear
himself from their prejudice of his sinfulness, because he suffered, as if he
had said in particulars.

Why do I labor in Apologies to excuse my self? Or in arguments, defend my
cause? Why do I labor in prayer to deprecate these troubles, and get out of
the bands of my afflictions? Pleading for our selves with men, is hard labor,
but especially pleading for our selves with God. Prayer is strong labor,
therefore it is called wrestling: Bildad advised Job to pray unto God, in the
8th Chapter; here Job seems to answer, Why labor I in prayer; and in seeking
unto God, seeing all is in vain, and lost labor? to what end should I labor in
any of these duties, for I am wicked (in the opinion of man) or if I be wicked,
in the sight of God, or seeing God has cast me into such a condition, as
appearingly and visibly casts me among the wicked.

For the better understanding of this, we may consider the words, as an
argument by way of Dilemma, If I be wicked, Why then labor I in vain? If I
wash my self with snow-water, etc. As if he had said, Either I am wicked, or I
am clean and pure; If I am wicked (as you say I am) I deserve more punishment,
then I labor in vain to be eased of this. If I am pure and clean, as washed
with snow-water, what will the issue be? God will yet cast me into the ditch of
affliction; so that I am between two walls hemmed in on both sides: Wickedness
would certainly ruin me, and my righteousness will not deliver me, Why
therefore do ye feed me with vain hopes that I should be delivered, if I were
righteous! So Bildad assured him in the former Chapter.

Si vitae praeter itae laboribu^ and pietatis studio sanctitatem non comparavi,
neque coram Deo justus babeor, certe labor meus inanis suit. Aquin.
More particularly, If I am wicked, Why then labor I in vain?

First, Some interpret his words as a contest with God; Thus; if by my study of
holiness, and care to walk circumspectly in thy ways, I have not yet gained
the reputation of holiness; If I cannot yet pass in thy account for a godly
man, surely I shall still labor in vain about that point, as hitherto I have
done.

But secondly (for I lay this aside) Others thus, If I am wicked, it is a vain
thing for me to seek the Lord, as you advise me. Why will you put me upon a
business which will be fruitless and without success? It was the word of God
in Jobs time, though no Scripture, Si autem and sic impius sum frustra
laboravi, i. e. si impius sum, ut vos de me dicitis. Vul.
That God hears not sinners: Not such sinners as Jobs friends challenged him
to be. So Job seems to compare their opinion of him, and counsel given him
thus together; your opinion of me is, that I am a wicked man; your counsel to
me is, that I should seek unto God: Surely, your opinion of me, and your
counsel to me can never agree, for if I am wicked (as you hold me to be) I
labor in vain, while I obey your counsel.

There is a sense, wherein it is in vain for a wicked man to seek unto God, and
a sense wherein it is not in vain for a wicked man to seek unto God: we must
distinguish of this interpretation.

If a man be wicked, it is in vain for him to seek unto God, while he loves
wickedness and delights in it. Psalm. 66.2 If I regard iniquity in my heart,
the Lord will not hear my prayer. He that is so wicked as to love wickedness,
prays in vain, fasts and humbles his soul in vain. The sacrifice of the wicked
is an abomination to the Lord, that is, the Lord abominates his sacrifice, but,
The prayer of the upright is his delight. Solomon describes an hypocrite in the
former words: he is one that will pray and offer sacrifice, and yet puts the
stumbling block of his iniquity before his face (Ezekiel. 14.4.) So they ( Jer.
7.4.) cried, The temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these; The
Prophet discovers, who these zealous Templers were, verse. 9. Will ye steal,
murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and then come and stand in this
house, which is called by my Name, and say, We are delivered to do all these
abominations? Some mingle prayer and fasting with stealing and murdering: such
praying and fasting, are as unacceptable to God, as stealing and murdering are:
Such laboring to please the Lord, is displeasing to the Lord. What have thou
to do (says God to the wicked) to take my Covenant into thy mouth (Psalm.
50.16.) Does God say to the wicked, What have thou to do with my Covenant? For
whom is the Covenant made, but for the wicked? If men were not wicked or
sinful, what needed there a Covenant of grace? The Covenant is for the wicked.
And the Covenant brings grace enough to pardon those who are most wicked; why
then does the Lord say to the wicked, What have thou to do to take my Covenant
into thy mouth? Observe what follows, and his meaning is expounded, Seeing thou
hate to be reformed; As if God had said, Thou wicked man, who protectest thy
sin, and hold it close, refusing to return, and hating to reform; what
have thou to do to meddle with my Covenant? Lay off thy defiled hands. He that
is resolved to hold his sin, takes hold of the Covenant in vain, or rather he
lets it go, while he seems to hold it. Woe unto those who sue for mercy, while
they neglect duty. Thus a wicked man labors in vain.

But there is a sense in which a wicked man does not labor in vain, how wicked
soever he is. What else means the Prophets invitation (Isa. 55.5.) Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon. Let him forsake his ways, and then no matter what his
ways have been, let him return to the Lord, and then his former departures
shall not hinder acceptance. Christ died for the ungodly, To. 5.6. and God
justifies the ungodly To. 4.5. It is not in vain for an ungodly man to come to
God indeed, and when he does, he ceases to be ungodly. They draw nigh only with
their lips, whose hearts are not changed, and they draw nigh in vain. As God
has not said to the seed of Jacob (real Saints) Seek ye me in vain. So he
has not said in vain to wicked men, Seek ye my face. For with the word which
bids them seek, he gives them power to seek, and the mercy they seek for. The
grace of God prevents us, that we may seek him, and blesses us when we do seek
him. If all who are wicked labor in vain, then all had labored in vain,
forasmuch as all were wicked.

Thirdly, You may take the meaning of it thus, If I am wicked; that is, Si
adhuc mecu^ agit Deus tanquam cum impto, quo^sum frustra labore^? Philip. Haec
sunt verba hominis a Deo derelicti. Vatabl.
if I am reputed by men, and still afflicted by God, as a wicked man, then why
should I labor in vain, or trouble my self any further to so little purpose?
If this sense may be admitted, it is a passionate speech proceeding from
impatience and distemper of spirit: Much like that of David, and very near it
in words, Psalm. 73.13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my
hands in innocence, for all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened
every morning. David's afflictions wrought as hard conclusions in him, as Jobs
did, Grace acts and speaks ever like it self, but a gracious man does not.
David showed there was vanity and remainders of defilement in his heart, by
saying, I have cleansed my heart in vain. Mr Broughton renders to this sense, I
shall be holden as wicked, now why do I labor in vain? Hence observe,

That where hope fails, endeavor fails too.

I have no hope, says Job, to get out of these afflictions, which fall upon
wicked men, or to get one step beyond a wicked man in your reputation, my
labor is in vain, why then do I labor? When the heart sinks, the hands hang
down. Where the one gives over believing, and hoping, the other give over
acting and working. Hence the afflicted are called upon by the Apostle, to lift
up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees (Heb. 12.12.) Hands and knees
are the instruments of action and motion; and the hanging down of these imports
both retarded or stopped; Those afflicted Hebrews saw little or no hope of
deliverance, therefore they gave over endeavoring and moving after deliverance.

Lastly, Taking the words (as in the original) absolutely, without any
supposition, I am wicked, Why then labor I in vain? As if he had said, I am
wicked, not only in the opinion of men, but I acknowledge my self to be wicked
indeed, In vanum laborarem, si coram Deo justificare me tentarem, ut falso me
hec velle praesupponis.
considered with the most holy God; and then his sense is, Lord, if thou art
pleased to go this way to work with me, to set the rigor of thy justice a
work, to find out my sin, and to judge me according to what thou find,
then in vain do I seek to comfort my self, for in thy sight no flesh can be
justified, I (as well as others) am wicked. In which acknowledgement he seems
to meet with, and confute that supposition of Bildad, Chap. 8.6. If thou were
pure; Pure, says Job, alas, I can never be pure before God. When the Lord
examines my purity, he will find it impurity. You tell me, if I were pure,
the Lord would awaken for me, I shall never be pure in your sense, I am as
pure as ever I shall be, that is, I am impure, and shall be at my best: which
sense falls in directly with the two verses following, Though I wash my self
with snow-water, and make my hands never so clean, yet thou will plunge me in
the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me. Taking up that
interpretation, I shall connect it with these two verses, and open them in
order.

Verse 30. If I wash my self with snow-water, and make my hands never so clean;
Washing is an act proper to the cleansing of the body, In lege multae erant
purificationes, quas Deus sort instituit ut populum aliarum gentiu^, talibus
ceremoniis assuetum facilius adduceret ad cultum veram, Pined.
or of bodily things; and in Scripture-story we find travelers had water
provided for them at their journeys end, to refresh and cool their bodies.
These were civil washings. But besides these we find many ceremonial washings
of the body, or bodily things, which implied the removing and taking away of
sin, and so were a token of internal purification. Therefore the Apostle (
Heb. 9.10.) describing the Jewish worship, and showing the several parts of
it, says, It stood (we supply that word, but it suits the text well; for the
substantials, the pillars upon which their worship stood, were shadows,
consisting) in meats and drinks, and diverse washings. In allusion to which the
Lord promises ( Ezekiel. 36.25.) I will sprinkle you with clean water: And the
Apostle Peter speaks of the sprinkling of the blood of Christ (1 Pet. 1.2.) And
Paul of the laver of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. The Saints who came out of great
tribulation, are said to have washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the lamb (Revel. 7.14.) Sanctification, which is cleansing from the
filth of sin, and justification, which is cleansing from the guilt of sin,
are set forth by washing, 1 Cor. 6.9. But ye are washed. Thus the Prophet
counsels the polluted Jews (Isa. 1.16.) Wash you, make you clean; which he
expounds by a moral duty in the next words, Put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, Antiquessimum suit uti balneo aut
corporis ablutione, ad detergendas animi sordes. Ab nimium faciles, qui tristia
crimina caedis, Fluminea ^olli posse putatis aqua.
learn to do well. It was usual among the Heathen to wash, as a sign of
purification, especially before they went to worship their gods, or after they
had defiled themselves with some grievous crime. One of the Poets gives them a
reproof, O ye who are so credulous, or easy of belief, to think that the
bloody sin of murdering the bodies of other men, can be taken away by
washing your own bodies. Romani no^uerunt parricidas nudos (sed in culeum
insutos) influmen abjicere, ne cum delati esse^t in mare, ipsum polluer^nt, quo
caetera quae violata sunt, expiari putantur. Cic. in Ora^. pro R sc.
They had a great opinion of a cleansing virtue in the sea, to which some
think the Prophet Micah alludes (Chap. 7.19. He will cast all their sins
into the depths of the sea. ^hristianus lotus oret. Tert. de orat. c. 10. Clem.
l. 8. Constable. c 88. Aliqui ex latinis legunt aquis vivis, non aquis nivis. Pined.
The ancient Christians, using to wash before they prayed, showed a little
touch at least of Judaisme, or of their old Gentilisme. Some have given this
for one reason, why the Lord appointed so many washings among his people, that
the Heathens might be the easier gained to the religion of the Jews, when they
found somewhat symbolizing with their customs among them: which, if it were
so, yet it cannot bear out those, who have mixed Christian worship with
Heathenish observations, thereby to facilitate their conversion. But doubtless
Job had reference to those rites either of the Jews or Gentiles, when he said,
Though I wash my self with snow-water.

Why with snow-water? That is (say some) with the most pure water* with the
clearest springing fountain water, or in the most crystal streams, not in the
water of melted snow, but in water like snow for purity and orient clearness.

Others, Conceive it an allusion to that peculiar rite in those times, when
they took snow-water to wash with, rather then spring or river water, because
that came from the heavens, not from the earth here below; and was therefore
(in their opinion) more excellent in it is nature, because it had a more
excellent original.

Thirdly, Job is thought to specify snow-water, because in those Countries the
fountain or river-water was not pure, and therefore they preserved snow, and
took that water to wash and cleanse with. As the custom still is in those
places where good water is a rare commodity.

Or lastly, He may say, If I wash in snow-water, because he would express the
cleanest washing, such as makes the body look like snow, white and pure. White
as snow is a proverbiall ( Isa. 1.18.) for the most resplendent whiteness. In
Scriptura talibus aliquis dicitur lotus, qualtum reserre videtur similitudinem.
Sanct.
And we find in Scripture, a thing is said to be washed with that, the
likeness of which after washing it represents: Thus the Church glories in
Christ, That his eyes were as the eyes of a Dove by the rivers of water washed
with milk (Cant. 5.12.) that is, his eyes were white as milk, after washing. So
here, Though I wash my self with snow-water, that is, though I wash my self,
till I become as white and as pure as snow, etc. We read a like phrase (Psalm.
51.9.) Purge me with hysop, and I shall be clean, in allusion to the Leviticall
law, which appointed the Priest to sprinkle both things and persons with a
bunch of hysop ( Levit. 14. Numb. 19.) So the Chaldee paraphrase expounds the
Psalm, Cleanse me, as the Priest sprinkling with hysop cleansed the people.
Though I wash my self with snow-water, And make my hands never so clean.

The Hebrew text is very emphaticall, Though I wash mine hands in purity; which
some express by that which is the instrument of purifying the hands, Though I
wash my hands with soap; So M. Broughton, Though I wash my hands with
wash-bals, to make my hands clean and sweet. We translate, though not to the
letter of the Hebrew, yet to the sense, Though I wash my hands never so clean,
yet, etc.

As the former expression refers to internal holiness: so this later to
external. The hands in Scripture note our outward works. Hands are the
executive part, the instruments of action Your hands are full of blood, Isa. 1.
that is, your actions are cruel and bloody: there is not only blood in your
hearts, but in your hands too (Psalm. 26.6.) I will wash mine hands in
innocence, so will I compass thine altar, that is, I will make all my outward
conversation pure and holy. The Lord has rewarded me according to the purity
of my hands, (Psalm. 18.20.) Again (Psalm. 73.13.) I have, in vain, washed my
hands in innocence, that is, I have lived innocently in vain. The Apostle James
calls for the holiness of the outward man in the same language, Cleanse your
hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double-minded, Chap. 4.8.

Besides, It was usual to wash the hands, as an emblem or token of innocence,
and freedom from guilt. The law of Moses appointed, in case a man were slain,
no man knowing how, that the Elders of the nearest City, should wash their
hands over the Heifer that was offered in Sacrifice, saying, Our hands have not
shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it, Deuteronomy. 21.6, 7. So Pilate, when
he would make it visible unto all the world (as he thought) that he was free
from the blood of Christ, called for a basin of water to wash his hands: all
the water in the Ocean could not wash Pilates conscience from the guilt of
Christ's blood, yet he called for a basin of water, and washed his hands,
saying, I am free from the blood of this just person, Scio quod quantumvis
diligentissime vitae candorem and morum integritatem comparare studeam, tamen
non ideo dolorum and paenarum expers sim. Pined.
see ye to it. So then, the meaning of Job is, Though I be clean within and
clean without, though my heart be as clean, as washing can make my hands,
though (as the Apostle taught long after) I lift up pure hands in prayer,
without wrath and doubting, yet

Verse 31. Thou shall plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor
me.
The word which we translate plunge, signifies a dipping or immersion, (...)
Tinxit, intinxit ita lavit ut res non mundetur, sed tantum attingant humorem.
rather to die or stain, then to cleanse, Ezekiel. 23.15.

There are two interpretations of these words, Thou shall plunge me in the
ditch.

They may be understood either, first thus, that, God would adjudge him
sinful, notwithstanding all his purifyings: and so it answers the expression
of the later clause of the former verse; As if he had said, Though I make my
self as clean as clean can be, and thereupon judge my self never so clean, yet
thou may account me unclean, yea the more I labor to justify my self in my
cleanness, the more unclean may thou judge me to be; Yet, Thou will plunge
me in the ditch; Futura apud Hebreos saepe debitum indicant.
For we are to understand the words, Thou will plunge me; not as of that which
the Lord would do, but as of that which the Lord might justly do. As if he
had said, Thou might have greater cause to plunge me in the ditch, when I am
so fine and clean in mine own eyes, then before. When I think I have washed my
self as white as snow, thou may look upon me, as drawn through a dirty
channel, or as wallowed in the mire. After all my cleansing and rinsing, and
purifying, thy pure eyes can easily see a sinner in me, and discover that I am
polluted, though I am washed.

This phrase of plunging in a ditch, Phrasis hebraea est, qua samae nominisque
nitor pollui dicitur. Bold (...)
notes the greatest defilement, it imports a man all over defiled: The Jews say
of a man that has lost his credit, and is exceedingly blemished in his
reputation, That he is cast in the dirt, or thrown in the mire.

Again, The word which we translate ditch, sometimes signifies corruption only
(Psalm. 16.10. Corruption interitus, illas igitur sordes intelligit, quas affert
squalida mors, me demerges in locum putredinis, Varro l. 4 de Li^g. Lat.
) Thou will not suffer thine holy One to see corruption. And secondly, it
signifies a pit dug and prepared, wherein dead and corrupting carcases are
laid (Psalm. 94.13.) Till the pit be dug for the wicked; that is, till they
be destroyed and put into the pit.

Besides, We learn from antiquity, that they had special pits or graves for
offenders, who were slain by the law (as some speak) or cut off by the hand
of justice; who being enemies to humane society while they lived, were not
admitted society with the bodies of honest men, when they died. The Prophet
Isaiah (Chap. 14.18, 19, 20.) describing the ruin and ignominious down fall of
the King of Babylon, says, That all the Kings of the Nations, even all of them
lie in glory, every one in his own house (that is, in their Fathers sepulchers)
But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch: and as the
raiment of those that are sl^in, thrust through with a sword, that go down to
the stones of the pit. Thou shall not be joined to them in burial.

And hence, to be cast into a ditch notes any great humbling or affliction,
reproach or contumely.

We may take it here in either sense, Thou will plunge me into filth and
corruption, or show me to be filthy and corrupt, though I cleanse my self; or,
Thou will cast me into the greatest afflictions, notwithstanding all my
purifications. I shall give a note, suting this last sense, at the close of the
whole verse.

From the first, here observe,

They who would make themselves most holy, appear most unholy before God.
Thoughts of our own purity, render us impure. We are never so black before God,
as when we are whitest in our own eyes. We find the Pharisee ( Luke 18.)
washing himself in snow-water, and making his hands very clean, he tells us that
he had fasted and prayed, and given alms, and paid tithes (this is to wash our
selves in snow-water, and to make our hands very clean) but the Lord plunged
this Pharisee in the ditch, he cast him for a wicked man. The poor Publican
plunged himself in the ditch, and judged himself fit to be thrown into the
mire; But he went home to his house justified, rather then the other. The Lord
tells his people (Jer. 2.22.) Though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee
much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me. The speech is of the same
importance in the letter with this of Job; yet there the holy Ghost rather
intends an hypocritical washing, Est se excusare, culpam a^^e^are, simulamenta
p^etatis osten tare.
by excusing or denying our sins; or (as some gloss that text) by showing
images or imaginations, fancies or forgeries of holiness. If thou shall put
thy self in these dresses of holiness, as if thou were washed with nitre, and
cleansed with much soap, yet thou can not avoid mine eye, For thine iniquity
is marked before me, I can see thy sin through all the dawbings and paintings,
through thy deckings and coverings put upon it. Now, as God sees iniquity through
all the masks and coverings of hypocrites; so he can see spots through all the
washings and cleansings of the most sincere. And if we wash our selves to
justify our selves, our very washing is our defiling. God will not only see,
but mark their iniquity, who think they can put all their iniquity out of his
sight. And such shall be made so vile, that not only God, but their own clothes
shall abhor them, as Job expresses himself in the next words.

Mine own clothes will abhor me. We have the word at the eighth Chapter,
verse 14. Whose hope shall loath him, which we render, Whose hope shall be cut
off. Clothes may be taken either properly or figuratively. Taken properly, the
words may import, first, his degradation from all former dignities. I shall be
deprived of all honor and estimation, and so the clothes which I wore in the
days of my prosperity, will so much unbecome me, that they will abhor me. Or
secondly, Taken properly, they are conceived to be a circumlocution of death.

Thou will plunge me in the pit, that is, I shall die, and mine own clothes
will abhor me. The dead are stripped; garments do not become a dead carcass. M.
Broughtons paraphrase upon his own translation intimates this; Mine own clothes
shall loath me; namely, says he, When I go naked to the grave, as though my
clothes did loath me.

Others understand it figuratively, Mine own clothes shall abhor me, that is:
First, Those that are my dearest friends shall abhor me, Thou will make them
flee from me, who are as near to me, as the clothes on my back.

Or secondly, In a figure, Mine own clothes, that is, mine own works shall
abhor me. Hypocrites are said to come in sheeps-clothing (Mat. 7.) that is,
doing the works of those who are sincere, appearing like them in practice. And
when we are warned to keep our garments (Revel. 16.15.) the meaning is, that we
must keep faith and a good conscience in every act of our lives.

Thirdly, It may have respect to lepers, whose clothes did abhor them, because
they wore some mark of difference upon their garments, showing that they were
to be shunned, and their company avoided.

But rather in general, Mine own clothes shall abhor me, notes extreme
pollution. If I justify my self before God, Tam squalidus ero ut ea quibus
nullus est se^su^, tantum squalorem sentiri and abominari videantur.
I shall be so unclean, that my clothes will be loath to touch me. We say of one
that is very filthy, A man would not touch him with a pair of tongs. And it is
usual in Scripture (to give you that rule for the understanding of this, and
other the like forms of speaking) when a matter is spoken of in a way of
excess, that things insensible have sense, yea reason and understanding
ascribed to them: abhorring, Vbi aliquarum rerum ex^essus est, dicuntur
aliquando in Scripturis sentire insensibilia. Sanct.
is an act beyond sense, it has a mixture of reason and understanding; now to
note his exceeding lothsomenesse to God and man, who attempts to justify
himself before God, the text says, His clothes (which have neither life nor
sense) shall abhor him. When the Pharisees, envying the acclamations which the
multitude of Christ's Disciples gave him at his entrance into Jerusalem, desired
that he would rebuke and silence them: Christ answered, I tell you, if these
should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out, importing how
just an occasion there was, why his Name and glory should be lifted up; Do ye
think much that reasonable men speak? If these should hold their peace, the
stones that have neither life nor sense would speak. Thus (Genesis 4.10.) to note
the foulness of Cains sin, and his cruelty toward his brother, God says,
The earth has opened her mouth to receive thy brothers blood from thy hand, as
if the earth had been sensibly affected with the cruelty of Cain toward his
brother; thou would not let his blood stay in his body, therefore the earth
in kindness opened her mouth, and took in his blood from thy hand, and that
cries up unto me. So here, I shall be so foul, that if my clothes had sense,
life and reason, and could dispose of their own actings, and set themselves
upon what body and limbs they pleased, Job summam foeditatem animae per summa^
foeditatem corporis indigitat. Tam foedus a judicio tuo discederem, ut is
corpore est sordidus quem vestes suae horrent. Coc. Quamvis ego mundus sum a
culpa, tamen paenis atque dolorum, and aegritudinum sordibus and squalore
obsolescam.
surely they would put themselves off from my body, and never come on again,
they would abhor me, I should be as filthy before God in soul, as he is in
body, who must be washed before he is fit to have his clothes put on him: As to
be clothed with shame; so to have our clothes ashamed of us, notes the greatest
dishonor.

Lastly, This casting into the ditch, and the abhorring of his clothes, may
refer to the continuance of his afflictions; though I should make my self
never so pure, yet the Lord would cast me again into the ditch of affliction,
he will put me into the pit of trouble, till (like a man drawn out of the mire)
Mine own clothes abhor me, or make me an abhorring to all that see me. I know
the Lord will make further trial of me.

Hence note,

God casts his servants again and again into the miery ditch, as refiners cast
gold again and again into the fiery furnace, to make them more pure.

That which defiles the outward man, may be cleansing to the inward: And the
abominable clothing of the body, may be a means to put the soul into the most
handsome dress.

Secondly, Observe, That

After purgings and cleansings, the Lord often goes on with further
chastenings.

Though I wash my self, etc. yet thou will cast me in the ditch, and mine own
clothes will abhor me. Yea, our purgings and cleansings are sometimes so far
from causing God to take off our afflictions, that they do but fit us for more
affliction: For the Lord will not trust an impure spirit, or an heart defiled
under many corruptions, under great afflictions. He therefore cleanses many,
and makes them more holy, that they may be more fit to bear afflictions. No
certain argument can be grounded upon this, that a man shall come out of
affliction, because he is cleansed, for God chooses (in some cases) to afflict
such most,
who are most cleansed. The Lord has as much service from us, while we suffer,
as while we do his will; passive obedience is higher and harder service then
active, and an unclean heart is of the two (though it be fit for neither) more
unfit for suffering then for doing. Therefore Jobs friends could not groundedly
affirm, that he should be delivered, if he were cleansed. Indeed if Gods
thoughts were like man's thoughts, or if he were tied by such rules as we, we
might make such conclusions; but ( Job concludes) He is not a man as we are.

JOB Chap. 9. Verse. 32, 33, etc. For he is not a man as I am, that I should
answer him, and we should come together in judgment.

Neither is there any Daies-man betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us
both.


JOB does two things in the close of this Chapter.

First, He again renounceth all thought or intendment of answering God by any
worthiness or goodness in himself. A point he had often touched before, it
being the grand objection, which his friends brought against him, as if his
spirit were heightened up to the presumption of a trial or contest with God
himself. It Is a duty to clear our selves most, where and in what we are most
suspected.

This he does in the 32. and 33. verses.

He is not a man as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come together
in judgment.

Neither is there any Daies-man betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us
both.

In which words Job offers two things to assure them that he was far enough
from such an engaging with God.

First, From the disparity of their condition (verse. 32.) He is not a man as I
am. God is not like me, I am no match for God; and I will not be so foolhardy,
as to contend with one, who is infinitely above me.

Secondly, Lest any should think, that though himself, hand to hand (as we
speak) would not venture upon God, yet he might (possibly) get some friend or
second, to interpose and umpire it between them, or to determine whether Gods
dealings with him were just and equal, or no: And so (though not alone, yet)
by a friend, or a third party to them both, he would try out the matter. No
(says Job in the 33. verse) Not so neither, as I alone will not undertake him;
so neither is there any Daies-man betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us
both.

In the two last verses Job makes a petition to the Lord, desiring a favorable
condescension, that he would be pleased to abate of the present height and
extremity of his pain, and then he hoped yet, that he might answer him, though
he would not contend with him; answer him in reference to his own integrity,
about which his friends had charged and wounded him, though not in reference to
his own righteousness, about which the Lord might charge and condemn him, Let
him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify me, then would I
speak and not fear him, but it is not so with me. He concludes with the
difference of his state, from what he desired of God it might be: And he begins
with the difference of his person from what God himself is. It is not with me
as I could wish, and God is not such an one, nor can be, as I am, and must be.

Verse 32. For he is not a man as I am, etc.
He does not say, God is not such a man as I am, but God is not a man as I am.
One man may say unto another man, Thou art not such a man as I am: Every
different degree or endowment among men, may bear a man out in saying so, and
pride will prompt a man to say so, when he is not in degree better, but in
kind worse then other men. Such was the language of the Pharisee (Luke 18.11.)
God, I thank thee, I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
or even as this Publican: yet no man can say to another man, Thou art not a man
as I am.

But seeing God is not a man at all, what is there in this assertion of Job? He
is not a man as I am.

The words import a double difference. First, A difference in qualification.
Secondly, In nature: here Job chiefly intends the difference of quality (which
yet in God is his nature) that he was not wise, Non tam essentiae ad essentia^,
quam qualitatis ad qualitatem, i. e. suae ad divinam puritatem collatio fit and
denotatur. Bold,
and just, and holy, and pure as God.

Moses in his song (Exodus 15.3.) after the overthrow of the Egyptians in the
red sea, speaks thus, The Lord is a man of war; that phrase intends not a
humane nature to God; when he says, God is a man of war; he means only
this, God is a great warrior. We call a Ship of war, A man of war. As a
man of words signifies an eloquent man, though with some only a talkative man:
So a man of war signifies a famous warrior, or one trained up for war; in
which sense Saul says of Goliath, that he had been a man of war from his
youth (1 Samuel 17.33.) God is a great warrior, the most potent Commander, The
Generalissimo of all the Armies in heaven and earth, The Lord of hosts is his
Name, He is a man of war, though he is not a man.

Further, when Job says, He is not a man as I am, he gives us the reason of
all he had said before, Ratio est omnium superiorum, et si justus sim, cum Deo
tamen contendens pro so^te habeor, quia non est par utriusque nostrum conditio.
Merc.
especially of what he had said immediately before, Though I wash my self with
snow-water, and make my hands never so clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the
ditch, For he is not a man as I am; that is, though I by washing my self should
think I were all white, and not a spot to be seen upon me (as hypocrites by
covering themselves, think they are all hid, and not a sin to be found about
them) yet he would throw me into the ditch again, as like to like, dirt to
dirt, for he is not a man as I am, he has other eyes, and thoughts, and ways
then creatures have.

Secondly, As they contain a reason, why the Lord would judge him impure,
though he should wash himself with snow-water; so also, why the Lord would
afflict him, though he should wash himself with snow-water, He is not a man as
I am. As if he had said, Should I see a man without spot or speck, without
blame or fault, yet full of wounds and stripes, full of troubles and sorrows:
Should I see him afflicted, of whom I could not say he had sinned, it were
beyond my reason. But though I cannot, yet the Lord can see reason to afflict a
man in whom I see no iniquity. He knows why and wherefore, he may and does cast
them into the fire, in whom I can see no dross. He is not a man as I am. God
exceeds man in his actings, as much as he does in his nature, as he is what man
is not, so he can do what man cannot, Every thing is in working, as it is in
being. God always works like himself, and infinitely above man.

As to the present business, he works above man chiefly in two things.

First, Man cannot justly commence a suit against, or contend with another man,
except he be able to charge him with some wrong that he has done him, or lay
some crime to his charge.

Secondly, A humane Judge cannot condemn or cast a man, unless he first
legally convict him of his crime. Thus it is with men in their judicial
proceedings. He that contends must know some crime; and the Judge passes
sentence as he sees the crime proved and made good against him; but God is not
as man, he may proceed to judgment without an accusation, and he may give
judgment before the crime be proved; Job was smitten without cause truly
alleged, much less attested. God afflicts that grace may be proved, not
because sin is proved, He is not a man as I am, that I should answer him.

Answer him. Respondere, hoc loco, potest esse verbum forens^.
It is a judiciary word, or answering in judgment; To justify is a law term,
and so is to answer; one puts in his bill, and another his answer; some Courts
proceed by bill and answer. If the Lord (says Job) should put in his bill
against me, I would not put in my answer, He is not a man as I am, that I
should answer him.

Or we may take the word [Answer] in general, for the returning of
satisfaction to a question. If the Lord demand a reason or an account of me, I
could not satisfy him. Many, who can give a reason of the hope that is in
them, cannot give a reason of the sufferings, which are upon them: But though
they know no particular reason why they suffer, yet they believe it is not
without reason. Some holy Martyrs have said to their cruel persecutours,
urging them with sophistical Questions, We can die, but we cannot dispute. And
so the Saints, under the most difficult providence of God, are resolved to
say, We can die under them, but we will not dispute them. He is not a man
that we should answer him in what he speaks or does.

Hence observe,

First, The consideration, that God is above man, is enough to humble and
silence man.

No man is proud in the presence of another whom he thinks to be his better.
The sight of greater beauty, keeps down pride of beauty. Pride cannot live in
the eye of that which is above the reason of it in our selves: Yea, he that
finds he is but equal, or upon even ground with others, can hardly be proud
of any thing in himself. While we suppose our gifts or knowledge, but like
those of other men, we are not lifted up in the opinion of them. Now, If
equality check pride, a thought of superiority must needs kill it. And if the
common superiority of a man kiss our pride, how much more does the knowledge of
that superexcellent superiority which is in God? Does not the beauty and
dignity of God, obscure the luster and darken the beauty of all creatures? Is
the shining of the stars any thing, when the Sun appears? Much less is the
holiness, strength, and goodness of man any thing, when the goodness, holiness and
strength of God stand forth or appear: we must say we are nothing, when we see
what God is. The sight of him, in whom nothing of our imperfections can be
found, cannot but humble us in the sight of all our perfections. Hence, when
the Lord would abase man, and extol himself, he removes all of man from
himself (1 Samuel 15.29.) God is not a man that he should repen; Men are full of
repentings, and that they are so, shows them to be men. There is a repentance
which is a grace of God, and there is a repentance which is an infirmity in
man. By the former, men turn to God from that sin, in which they were, or
have done. By the later, men turn both from God and man in what they promise or
purpose, either to be or do. They are this day of one mind, and to morrow of
another; to day they love, and to morrow they hate; now they will, and anon
they will not. They are in and out, no man knows where to find them; but God
is ever the same, he changes not. Elihu sends a challenge to all teachers, in
the name of God, Who teaches like him? (Chap. 36.22.) God himself challenges
Job in his own name (Chap. 40.9.) Have thou an arm like God? Or can thou
thunder with a voice like him? To whom will you liken me (says God, when he
would bring down the pride of the creature) To whom will you liken me, and
make me equal, and compare me, that we may be like? (Isa. 46.5.) Why do ye
exalt your selves? Why have ye such high thoughts of your selves? Can ye find
out any to compare with me? Or can ye make a parallel of me among all my
creatures?

All the unevenness of man toward God, arises from presumptuous thoughts of
his evennesse with God. Take a taste in two or three particulars.

First, Man grows into a boldness of sinning against God, because he thinks
God is but so holy as man is; he conceits that which suits his spirit, suits
Gods Spirit also: This causes him to do many things most unsuitable to the
Spirit of God (Psalm. 50.18.) When thou saw a thief, then thou consentest
with him, and thou have been partaker with the adulterer: thou give thy mouth
to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit, etc. these things have thou done. And
what encouraged or hardened him to do these things? The next words give us an
account of that, Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy self;
that is, thou did frame conceptions of me according to the Idaea of thine own
brain, or the model of thine own heart. Thou wast well pleased with such
filthiness and abominations, therefore thou did conclude, I would not be
displeased with them. The true reason why most men make nothing of evil, is,
because they make God nothing in goodness (as to that point) beyond themselves;
this does not trouble our spirits, we see no hurt in what we do: Surely then
God sees no hurt in it, neither is his Spirit troubled with our doings.

Secondly, Boldness in pleading with, and complaining against God, when he
does what likes not us, arises from thoughts that we are like him. None would
quarrel what God does in cutting out and proportioning their own estates to
them: or in casting down the humble and meek; in exalting the proud and vile,
if they did fully believe God had as much right and reason as they see he has
power to do what he does. Man draws God into his own compass, and then
wonders to find him work so out of compass. If I were as God, says one, I
would do thus and thus; surely, God is as I am, he has such thoughts as I
have, says another, then why does he thus? Till we have fully studied this
point, That God is not as we are, we shall never rest fully satisfied in what
God does, if he does what we would not.

Thirdly, Unbelief springs from the same muddy fountain: unbelief of the power
of God to deliver us, when we are in outward straits and dangers; and unbelief
of the mercy of God to pardon us, when we are in spiritual straits and
desertions. What Is the reason why, when great dangers encompasse us, we cannot
believe deliverance? Do we not make God like to our selves? Do we not
shorten his hand to our own measure, and think it cannot be done, because men
cannot do it? And for mercy about the pardon of sin; man being awakened sees
how he has provoked God, sin stares upon his face, and he finds out many
aggravations upon his sin: then he begins to collect thus, certainly if a man
had so provoked his neighbor, he could never pardon or forgive him; Can then
such sins as these be forgiven by God? Man's mercy cannot reach so high as this,
therefore surely the mercies of God will not. We have a very gracious promise,
backed with a caution to prevent these jealousies ( Isa. 55.6, 7.) Let the
wicked for sake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon. Now, as when God calls upon man to obey his will, and
do his Commandments, he is apt to say, at least in his heart, the duties are
too many, and the burdens too great to be born: So when the Lord calls upon
wicked men, the worst of wicked men to repent or turn unto him, and he will
abundantly pardon, or he will multiply to pardon (as it is in the original)
they are ready to object, What? Pardon such as we are? We are too filthy and
vile for washing. Surely, he will not pardon us. These mercies are too many
for us, and these favors too great for us to receive. Well (says God) I
preconceive your conceits of me, ye are measuring me by your selves, ye think
it cannot be done, because ye cannot do it; your hearts are too narrow to
pass by so many, so great provocations, therefore ye say, mine is too narrow
also. Do ye thus measure me the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? I would
have you know, My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my
ways, for as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher
then your ways, and my thoughts then your thoughts, verse 8, 9. As if he had
said, Your thoughts are as much below my mercy, as your ways were below my
holiness. Cease then from doubting what I have promised, as I would have you
cease from doing what I have forbidden, Your unbelief that I will not pardon
your sin, dishonours me as much as your disobedience did in committing sin.
Till we believe God is holy above us, we fear not to sin; and till we
believe God is merciful above us, we cannot believe he will pardon our sin.

Thus we see how the lifting up of our selves in our thoughts to an equality,
or to some similitude with God, or the drawing down of God to an equality, or
some similitude with our selves, is the ground and cause of all our unequal
carriage toward God, of our boldness in sinning, of our boldness in pleading
with, and complaining against him, of our extreme unbelief in the point of
deliverance from troubles, or of the pardon of our sins. Secondly, Observe,

There is no comparison between God and man.

He is not a man as I am. Man is like to man, face answers face, and heart
answers heart, strength answers strength, and wit answers wit. Solomon
concludes this (Eccles. 6.10.) That which has been, is named already, and it
is known that it is man. A man it but a man, be he never so great in vvorldly
wealth or honor: as he bears the name, so he has the nature of man still;
Nor can he contend with him that is mightier then he, i. e. with God. If he
venture beyond his line, or move out of the sphere of his activity, if he
would act more then a man, he shall quickly find that he is but man, He
cannot contend with him that is mightier then he. Man was indeed made in the
likeness of God, Genesis 1.27. In the image of God created he him, yet we must
not say, God is like man, he is not in our image. God put some impressions of
himself upon man, but he took no impressions of man upon himself. He is not a
man as I am. He has given us some of his own excellencies, but he has not
taken upon him any of our weaknesses. God has honored man to give him
somewhat of himself, but God should dishonor himself to take anything of man.
Thus man is in the likeness of God: but God is not in the likeness of man.
Take heed of such thoughts. It is as dangerous to frame a likeness or a
similitude of God to our hearts, as to frame a likeness or a similitude of God
upon a wall (Exodus 15.10.) Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the gods?
That is, there is none like unto thee: None amongst the gods, neither among
those who are falsely called gods, the Idols of the Heathen, nor among those who
are truly called gods (for God calls them so) the Angels in heaven, and
Magistrates here upon the earth: among these truly called gods, there is none
like the true God, much less is there any among the mere pure mortals, like
unto the immortal God. Who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful
in praises, doing wonders? So ( Mic. 7.18.) Who is a god like unto thee, that
pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage. Who is a god like unto thee? Not only is there no man that can pardon
as God, but there is no God that can pardon like God, he puts it upon that, Who
is a god like unto thee? Not as if he granted that there were any other gods
besides the Lord, but to meet with the thoughts of men, with those sinful
principles and conceits, which lodge in man, and make other gods. To say of God
only this, He is God, is to say all; we cannot say more good of God, then to
call him God; as we cannot say more evil of sin, then to call it sin; when we
have called it sin, we have called it all. The Apostle ( Romans 7.13.) puts that
upon it, as the worst he could say of it, Sin that it might appear sin. We
cannot represent it in a worse likeness then its own. All men say they sin,
but sin appears sin to very few. And when the Apostle would put a disgraceful
title or epethite upon sin, he invests it with its own name, sinful sin. Thus
to the point in hand, we cannot call God more, then when we call him God.
Nothing can be predicated of him better then himself. When God appears to be
God, all excellency appears. All men (almost) acknowledge God, but God appears
to very few. It Is but little of God that can be known: and there are not many
who know that little; very many know but little of that little, and most know
nothing of it at all.

Thus also to say that man is man, is proof and aggravation enough of his
depraved condition (Hos. 6.7.) They like men have transgressed the Covenant,
they have done like themselves. When we see men vain, and wicked, and sinful,
and covetous, and earthly, we may say of them, they have done like men; and how
wondrous and glorious things soever God does, we can but say, He has done
like God.

As a consectary from the whole, take this caution, If God is not a man as we
are, then God must never be measured by the rule and line of man. Man has not
line enough to measure God by. The Lord exceeds man in all; he is not only
above man's infirmities, but he is above all his perfections. The Lord is not
only not weak as man is weak, or unholy as man is unholy, but the Lord is not
strong as man is strong, nor holy as man is holy, nor just as man is just, nor
wise as man is wise: Then, man must not venture to judge of the wisdom of God
by his own wisdom, or of the justice, holiness and strength of God, by his
own strength, holiness and justice. Man is not able to measure God in any of
his Attributes; and in three things especially, man should take heed of
measuring God in his actings.

First, In the great work of election. In this man is very apt to be meddling,
and to be measuring God by the line of natural reason, or of civil justice:
the Apostles dispute beats down this presumption, Romans 9. We read there how man
begins to bustle and startle at that great conclusion (verse. 18.) Therefore he
has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. If it be
thus, says he, if every man's state be peremptorily determined by the will of
God, if he loves and hates before men have done either good or evil, Why does
he find fault? for who has resisted his will? What need any trouble
themselves about the way, when their end is under an unmovable decree? Why
should any strive to forsake evil and do good on earth, seeing it was resolved
in heaven what should become of them, before they had done either good or evil?
Thus the pride and ignorance of man cavils at the decrees of God. But stay
(says the Apostle) O man, who art thou that reply against God! He is not a
man as thou art: he has done what he has done by virtue of his just
prerogative, and therefore he is not unjust in doing it. Besides, if ye will
needs argue from reason, then see how common reason confutes this blasphemy,
Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel
unto honor, and another unto dishonor? What if God has done thus, and what
if he will do thus? What have thou to do with it? Know thy place, and keep
thy rank; art not thou clay in the hand of the Potter?

Secondly, Measure not God by your own line in his providentiall dispensations:
He may have a method of his own in giving or taking away, in pulling down or
building up, in wounding or healing, in abasing man, or in raising him, because
all is his own. He who has a right to all, can wrong none, and he who
possesses all, is debtour to none.

Thirdly, Measure not God by your own line in the matter of your ordinary
approvings: and that two ways.

First, Do it not in your approving of things. And

Secondly, Do it not in your approving of persons. Take heed first of
measuring God by your selves in your approving of things, as if because you
approve it, therefore God surely does. This misconceit has been the cause of
almost all, and almost all the cause of all the superstition, idolatry and
will worship that ever was in the world. Man thinks God must needs like any
thing which is done to his honor; hence because the adorning and adoring of
images, bowing to altars, using of unwritten Ceremonies are directed to the
honor of God, therefore man concludes surely God likes them. Whereas nothing
pleases God, but what himself appoints: he is never honored, but when he is
obeyed. As no man has been his counselor, to direct him what to do with us:
So no man can be his counselor, to direct him what to require of us. Not that
which we commend is approved, but that which the Lord commends.

Secondly, Take heed of this in your approbation or estimation of persons, Not
be whom you commend is approved, but he whom the Lord commends. We should judge
of men as we believe God judges. Or (to come nearer) let no man think himself
is approved of God, because he is approved by himself. Many flatter themselves
in their own eyes, till their iniquity is found to be hateful (Psalm. 36.2.)
Christ intimates this, speaking to the Pharisees ( Luke 16.15.) Ye are they
that justify your selves, ye have high thoughts of your own worth, and glory
in your own excellencies, and ye think God has high thoughts of you, that he
glories in you too; but let me tell you, That which is highly esteemed amongst
men, is an abomination in the sight of God. We are the men, said the Pharisees,
ours are excellent gifts, thus they admired and doted upon themselves: but the
Lord found them out, and what they highly esteemed, he abominated. Some write
and subscribe their own letters testimonial, and can get no hand to them but
their own. Not he who commends himself is approved, but he whom the Lord
commends; such shall find, that their own good word would do them no good, He
is not a man as they are. He, says Job, is not a man as I am, that I should
answer him.

And we should come together in judgment. It has been showed what judgment
is, at the 19th verse of this Chapter, and at the third verse of the eighth
Chapter, therefore I shall not now stay upon it, only as to the matter in hand;
Judgment may be taken three ways.

First, For pleading, which is but preparatory to judgment, 1 Disceptatio and
mutur^ (...). rationum. 2 Iuris definitio 3 Exactio castigationis and debiti.
Merc.
the opening and arguing of the case or fact under trial.

Secondly, For the decision and determination of the case according to law, or
the award of judgment.

Thirdly, For the inflicting and executing of the sentence according to the
judgment awarded.

Here Job chiefly intends the first, He is not a man as I am, that I should
answer him, and we should come together in judgment, that is, that I should
plead, argue and debate my matters with him before any other Judge. God and man
cannot come together to be judged; for all mankind must receive their
judgment from God. Vt veniamus pariter in judicium.
Or nearer the Hebrew (which suits the former clause better) He is not a man as
I am, that we should come alike to judgment; No, we should be very unlike,
very unequally matched in judgment. Man and man, who are upon even terms in
their nature, may yet be upon such uneven terms in their condition, that they
cannot come alike to judgment. A poor man cannot grapple with a rich man, nor
a mean man with the honorable. Now, if they who are of the same nature cannot
come alike in judgment, because of a disparity in their condition; How shall
they who differ not only in condition, but in nature? Can God and man? Can poor
wretched and miserable man, come alike in judgment with the great and glorious
God? And so the meaning of Job may be thus conceived, If I had only a man (like
my self) to deal with, then I would venture a trial with him, at any seat of
judgment, or Court of Justice; but he is not a man as I am, much less such a
man as I am. How shall I set my self with him to be judged, when as himself is
the Judge of all, and is himself judged of none?

Hence observe,

Man is not able to contend with God in judgment.

Who is like me, and who will appoint me the time (or (nearer the letter) who
will convent me in judgment?) Who is that shepherd that will stand before me?
Isa. 49.19. Man must come before God in judgment, We must all appear before
the judgment seat of Christ (2 Cor. 5.10.) None shall escape his tribunal.
But man cannot stand before God in judgment. The wicked cannot stand at all
before him in judgment, because they stand upon their own bottom. The
righteous dare not stand before him in judgment upon their own bottom; if they
should, themselves and their cause would quickly fall together.

There are seven considerations which tell us, that we cannot come together,
much less alike together with God in judgment.

1. He is of such strength, that none can wrest themselves out of his hand. No
power can daunt him.

2. He is of such sincerity, that bribes cannot corrupt him, nor can gifts put
out his eyes.

3. He is of such wisdom, that none can overreach him, nor can our wit
entangle him.

4. He is so knowing that none of our sins and failings, no not the least of
them, are secrets to, or hidden from him.

5. He is so holy, that he cannot bear with the least sin, and so just, that he
cannot but punish it, unless he receive satisfaction for it.

6. He cannot be a party in judgment, for he is the supreme Judge, and there
is no appealing from his sentence.

7. He is the last, yea an everlasting Judge, and therefore there is no
repealing of his sentence. Who is able to contend with him, whom no power can
daunt, no bribes corrupt, no wit overreach, who knows all our sins, and will
spare none of them, from whose sentence there is no appealing, and whose
sentence cannot be repealed? There is no Judge above God, therefore we cannot
appeal from him; there is none to come after God, therefore what he has judged
cannot be repealed.

Job having thus waved and professed against contending with God in judgment,
proceeds in the thirty third verse, to show that there is none to whom his
case might be referred for arbitration. There are two ways by which
controversies are ended.

First, By the legal sentence of the public Judge.

Secondly, By the moderation of a private friend. This later Job means, when he
says,

Verse 33. Neither is there any Daies-man betwixt us, that can lay his hand
upon us both.
The Septuagint render these words as a wish, or as a prayer, (...) Sept.
O that there were a Daies-man, or, a Mediator betwixt God and me, that might
lay his hand upon us both. But the original bears it clearly in the negative,
Neither is there any Daies-man betwixt us.

The word which we translate Daies-man, (...) a (...) Arguere Heb. Non est
arguens inter nos vel increpans.
comes from a root which signifies to argue or reprove, and so some render
it here, Neither is there any Arguer or Reprover, none to set the matter right
between God and me, none to state the question between us, none to reprove the
Lord, if I should say, or if by the common rules of justice it should appear he
has done me wrong. The word is used in that sense ( Genesis 31.24.) where Jacob
tells his uncle Laban, The Lord rebuked thee yesternight; the Lord himself came
as an umpire, as a Daies-man betwixt Jacob and Laban, and rebuked. Laban for
his hard and unjust thoughts of, and intentions concerning Jacob; Take heed
(says God) thou speak not unto Jacob either good or bad, that is, do not
threaten or persuade him to return, thou will repent it if thou do. Thus
also the Lord appeared, as a Daies-man between his people of old, and the great
ones of the world ( Psalm. 105.14.) He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea,
he rebuked Kings for their sakes. God is always able to, and often does
interpose for, and vindicate his people from the oppressions of men. It Is
costly meddling with the Saints. Kings may get a rebuke for it. Yea, Kings may
smart, and Kingdoms shake for it.

Fere omnes interpretes hunc versum de Mediatore seu arbitro, quem
jurisconsulti vocant sequestrem, intelligunt, quasi Job optasset ordinarium
Iudicem praecedenti versiculo, mediatorem vero seu arbi trum hoc versu.
What a Daies-man is, is so plain and well known by the custom and usage of most
places, that it needs little explication. We in our language sometimes call him
an umpire, sometimes an Arbitratour, sometimes a Mediator, sometimes a
Referree; and in some Countries with us, when a question arises between
neighbors, concerning which they are unwilling to spend money and time in
suits of Law, they say, We will refer it unto men; which kind of speaking
seems to allude to the title of Magistrates and Judges, whom the Scripture
calls gods; and when a business is brought before them, it may be said to be
referred or put to God. In opposition to which, when it is taken up by the
umpiridge of friends, it is said, To be referred or put to men. We in our
English tongue, call such Daies-men, either because they bestowed a days pains
upon the ending of a business, or because they were obliged to end it by a set
day; whereas Judges may take more liberty to themselves. Yet some of the Greeks
express all man's judgment by this word, Ideo sequester appellatur quod ejus
qui electus sit, utraque pars fidem sequatur. Gel. l. 20. c. 10. Sequester est
qui errantibus medius intervenit, qui a^ud Graecos (...) d citur, apud quem
pignota deponi solent a sequendo dictas, quod ejus fidem utraque pars sequatur,
Isidor. l 10. Etymol.
Mans-day, because certain days were appointed for judicature. The Apostle
Paul uses the same phrase (1 Cor. 4.3.) in opposition to the Lord's Day, the
great day of judgment, to which he there appeals, from all the days set for
man's judgment in this world. The Latins call Daies-men, sequestres; and
Critiques tell us, that as the Daies-man is expressed by a word in the Hebrew,
whose root signifies to rebuke, because a Daies-man had power to rebuke and
reprove him that had done the wrong: So he is called sequester in the Latin,
from a word which signifies to follow, because of a power committed to him,
that which way soever he should state and determine the business between the
parties, they were bound to follow, and submit to his award; or, because he was
supposed a man of such wisdom, faithfulness and integrity, that both parties
might safely follow him: Hence he was called sequester, that is, one whom they
must or might follow, and abide by his sentence. To assure which the parties
usually engaged themselves under penalties (of valuable damage to the business
in question) to stand to his arbitration.

There are five things (by which we may more distinctly understand Jobs
meaning) belonging to a Daies-man, or an Vmpire.

1. He must be agreed upon and chosen by both parties, for unless he be
accepted by both of them, he can have no power to determine for, or against
either of them.

2. He must hear both sides speak, and allege what they can for themselves,
before he determines.

3. He must beat out the matter by interrogatories and questions; he must not
stay upon the bare narrative of the persons.

4. He must have power to conclude and determine of the differences betwixt
them.

5. Both parties must be bound, at least by promise, Talis judex vocatur
compromissarius, quasi ex compromisso a litigatoribus sumpto.
to stand to the determination which he shall make. Such a one is a Daies-man
among men: who is also called a Compromiser, and his work, the Compromising of
a matter, because as he is elected by a the mutual consent, so confirmed by
the mutual promise of those who are at variance, to reconcile them, and take
up their differences. Now, says Job, as there is no Judge, so there is no
Daies-man betwixt me and God.

That might lay his hand upon us both. Some understand the words [upon us both]
of Job and his friends, There is not a Daies-man betwixt me and my friends, not
one that can judge and consider of my innocence and their charge, as if he had
said, Though I will not plead it out with God, yet I dare refer the
controversy betwixt you and me to an equal umpire, I dare go to the trial of
my innocence with you, but I see no Daies-man; you are all parties in the
business, and I know of none that will stand between us indifferently and
unprejudiced.

But the text refers clearly to God, There is no Daies-man, none to arbitrate
the matter between God and me, None to lay his hands upon us both.

To lay on hands is diversely used in Scripture. The hand signifies all power:
Hence, to lay the hands, is to put forth power: and to do so, is taken some
times in an ill sense, and sometimes in a good sense.

First, In an ill sense, and so to lay the hands, is to strike or smite even to
death, Genesis 22.12. Lay not thine hand upon the child, upon Isaac, that is, do
not slay him. We have the same expression ( Genesis 37.22.) when Reuben pleaded
for Joseph that he should not be murdered, Shed no blood, but cast him into
this pit, and lay no hand upon him; that is, do not destroy him. This laying on
of the hands, notes any violent act, either proceeding from holy zeal or
justice, as in Nehemiah, who threatens the prophaners of the Sabbath, If ye do
so again I will lay hands on you; or from malice, as in the chief Priests, who
sought to lay hands on Christ the Lord of the Sabbath (Luke 20.19.) And Christ
prophesying what the condition of his Disciples and of believers should be,
what usage they should find in the world, tells them ( Mat. 21.12.) They shall
lay their hands upon you, and persecute you. Thus Haman thought scorn to lay
his hands on Mordecai alone (Esth. 3.6.) He had a design to take revenge upon
the whole Nation of the Jews.

Secondly, To lay on the hands is taken in a good sense; and so I find it used
three ways.

1. In benedictions, Mark 10.16. Christ took up the young children in his arms,
and laid his hands upon them and blessed them. As under the Law, Levit. 1.4.
and Chap. 4.15. The people or the Elders laying their hands upon the beast,
which was to be offered in Sacrifice, intimated the laying of all their sins by
faith upon Christ, of whom that Sacrifice was a type. So Christ's laying his
hands upon those children, implied the bestowing and pouring out of mercy upon
them, in the pardoning of their sins, and the furnishing of them with the
graces of his Spirit. The same action used by the Apostles in the name of
Christ, had the same signification and effect. When Peter and John came to
Samaria, and saw what work the Word had made among that people, They laid their
hands on them, and they received the holy Ghost, Act. 8.17. Paul likewise laid
his hands on the Disciples at Ephesus, and they received the holy Ghost, Act.
19.6. It was used also as a sign of healing, Mark 16.18. They shall lay hands
on the sick, and they shall recover: And ( Mat. 9.18.) the Ruler says unto
Christ, My daughter is sick, but come and lay thine hands on her, and she shall
be healed. Some interpret the Rulers desire of this sign, to be as a sign he
had faith, so also that his faith was weak. The Centurion (concerning whom
Christ testified, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel) desired
Christ but to speak the word only, and his servant should be healed (Mat. 8.8.)
As a word is the proper object of faith, so faith acts most properly, when it
rests and lives upon a word only. Signs are mercies to the weak, and they are
witnesses of our weakness. Signs are but crouches and spectacles to help the
lamenesse and dimsightednesse of faith. But to our text.

2. Laying on of hands was used in the ordination or solemn setting of a man
apart unto an office, The children of Israel, that is, some of the chief of
them (under the Ceremonial Law) laid their hands upon the Levites, Numb.
8.10.) which was either a testification that they gave up all carnal and
worldly interests in them, and bequeathed them wholly unto God, or an
approbation of their office, and of the Levites ministration in it on their
behalf. The same Ceremony (for the matter) was continued in the sending forth
of Gospel-officers. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee
by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, was Paul's
counsel to Timothy, in reference to himself (1 Timothy 4.14.) And in reference to
others (1 Timothy 5.22.) Lay hands suddenly on no man. And Paul and Barnabas being
immediately designed by God for a special work of the Ministry, to which they
were called before, Impositio man^um potestatis signum, q.d qui utrumque
nostru^ valet mano imposita co^rcere. Merc. Ponere manum, est litem companere
and controversiae authors ad f^edus concorde^^que adducere. Pa^^fi a^oris
esfigies describitur ad alterutrum litigant um manum alte natim ex^endens ut
junctis dex ris pacis foedus iniretur. Q^intil.
were sent away with fasting and prayer, and the laying on of hands, Act. 13.3.

3. The hand specially signifies civil power, Ps. 89.25. I will set his hand
also in the sea and his right hand in the floods: that is, I will give him
power over them who dwell by the seas And then, Laying on of hands, implies the
authority which one man has over another to determine or resolve a case, or to
settle a business between them, and that is the intendment of it here, There
is no Daie^-man that might lay his hands upon us both; that is, who may
authoritatively decide and make an end of this controversy. To impose the hand
was to compose the difference. I find a threefold posture of the Daies-man
observed in the action of his hand.

First, He put forth his hand toward the parties, desiring them to join hands,
or (as we speak) to shake hands and be friends. Joining hands signifies consent
(Exodus 23.1.) Thou shall not put thy hand with the wicked; that is, thou shall
make no agreement with him. Some of the Ancients describe the Pacificatour or
Daies-man, having his hands closed into the hands of those between whom he was
to make peace: Hence they who are unfaithful in Covenant, are said to have a
lying or a deceitful right hand. Quibus nulla foederis servati fides mendacem
dextram habere dicuntur.
The Prophet Isaiah speaking of a false worshipper, who had engaged his faith
to serve Idols, concludes, He feeds of ashes, a deceived heart has turned
him aside that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my
right hand? (Isa. 44.20.) or (as others translate) Is there not a lie at my
right hand? noting, that the Idol to which he had given his heart and hand,
would deceive him most when he trusted most to it.

(...) Cum qual^m attentione, studio and industria pon^re Arbiter medius inter
litigantes benign manum nunc super hunc nunc super illam ponere sel^bat,
dicen^, Tum hoc hallucinari^ tu veno been egisti, sed hoc and hoc sacere non
debuisti. Bold.
Secondly, The Daies-man eying the temper or distemper, both of the complainant
and defendant, laid his hand gently now upon one, and then upon another, using
his best Rhetoric to persuade, yea to conjure them to peace and quietness;
Sir, said he to one, I beseech you to accept of these terms and conditions,
it is you that have done the wrong, and trespassed against your neighbor; and
presently he bespake the other, that he would pass by the offense, heal the
breach, forget the injury, or take reasonable satisfaction for his damage.

Thirdly, The Daies-man giving sentence, laid his hand upon the head of him
whom he found faulty, and to have done the wrong, in token of condemnation.
Among the Ceremonies of consecrating the Leviticall Priests, this is given in
command (Exodus 29.10.) Thou shall cause a bullock to be brought before the
Tabernacle of the Congregation: and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands
upon the head of the bullock: And in the rules given concerning the burnt
offerings of the people, it is directed, that the bringer shall lay his hand
upon the head of the burnt-offering, etc. ( Levit. 1.4.) Now this laying of
their hands upon the head of the Sacrifice, implied the laying of their sins
upon the head of the Sacrifice, and that, the laying of their sins upon the
head of Christ, on whom the Prophet assures us, The Lord laid the iniquity of
us all (Isa. 53.6.) And as the laying on of the hand upon the head of the beast
transferred their sins upon him, so likewise that sentence of death and
condemnation which was due to their sin, and was presently executed by slaying
of the beast: which was a lively type of Christ (the Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world) dying under a sentence of condemnation in the stead of
sinners.

Lastly, The laying on of the hand, notes the keeping of the parties in
compass, for contenders use to be very violent one against another.

Thus to the present text, The laying on of the hand signifies only the
composing or compounding of a difference. When Job complained or affirmed only,
There is no Daies-man betwixt us; his meaning was, that there was no man who
could take up the matter betwixt God and him, there was none such to be found,
Non potest dari Deo mihique simul litigantibus arbiter: quasi in Deum aeque ac
in me potestate^ exercendo.
for he speaks not only (De facto) that there was no Daies-man, but (de
impossibili) as of a thing which was impossible to be; As if he had said, I
would gladly refer this matter to arbitration, but the Lord, who is engaged
with me, is above the arbitration of men or Angels; Creatures may not meddle
with any of his matters further then they are called and I know not of any whom
God has called to, or appointed over this matter.

Hence observe,

First, When controversies arise, the rule of love bids us refer our
differences to the determination of brethren.

Job speaks according to the usage of those days; men did not presently run to
law, and call one another before the Judge, they had daies-men and umpires to
determine matters between them. Thus Jacob bespeaks Laban (Genesis 31.37.) Whereas
thou have searched all my stuff, what have thou found of all thy housholdstuff?
set it here before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us
both. The Apostle (1 Cor. 6.1, 5.) is very angry with the Corinthians, because
they were so hasty to go to Law, Verily there is utterly a fault among you,
because you go to law one with another; What is there not a Daies-man among
you? Is there not a man among you fit to be an Arbitratour? I speak to your
shame (says Paul) Is it so that there is not a wise man among you, no not one
that shall be able to judge between his brethren? But brother goes to law with
brother, and that before the unbelievers. The sin of these Corinthians was the
greater, because the Judges were Heathen, yet such contendings bear a
proportion of sinfulness, though Judges be Christians. To bring every matter
to the judgment seat, when (possibly) a brother or a friend might take up the
matter, is a transgression against the law of love. We should rather labor
after reconcilements, then suits in Law; which are a cause, not only of trouble
and expense, In proverbio est portores esse iniquas pacis conditiones opti^ a
judicis sententia.
but of great breaches and heart-burnings among friends and brethren. We have a
proverbiall speech among us, A lean arbitration is better then a fat judgment.
It is better to the parties, they shall get more by it, the charge of obtaining
right by law, many times eating out all, and sometimes more then all, always a
considerable part of that which the law gives us as our right. We use to say to
dissenters, Be friends, the Law is costly. It Is very costly to most men's
purses, and to some men's consciences. It Is rare, if a man wrongs not his soul
by seeking the rights of his credit or estate.

Secondly, Observe, That no creature can umpire the business betwixt God and
man.

There is a twofold reason of it.

Oportet ut in judice sit altior sapien^ia, quae sit qua^ regula, ad quam
examinantur dicta utriusque partis.
First, He that is our umpire is supposed wiser then our selves. They who cannot
agree need more wisdom then their own to work their agreement. But there is no
creature wise as God, yea, there is no creature wise but God; who is therefore
called, The God only wise. God is best able to judge of his own actions. No man
has been his Counselor (Romans 11.34.) much less shall any man be his Judge:
Men sometimes abound too much in their own sense, but God must abound in his.
His will is the rule of all, much more his wisdom; or rather his wisdom is the
rule of all, because his will is; his will and wisdom being the same, and of
the same extent, both infinite.

Oportet ut in judice sit major potest as, quae possit utramque partem
comprimere.
Secondly, He that is a Daies-man or Vmpire, must (according to the rules before
spoken of) have power to compel the parties to submit or stand to what he
shall determine. But as we cannot lay any restraint upon God, from doing what
he will; so we cannot lay any constraint upon him, to do what we will. Who
shall force the Lord? To whom has he given an assumpsit, or engaged himself
under a penalty to perform what he shall award? The Lord does whatsoever he
pleases both in heaven and earth, and he will do no more then he pleases.
Persuasion cannot move him, much less can power compel him. He that is above
all in power, cannot be dealt with any way, but by persuasion. And he who is
above all in wisdom, cannot be persuaded by any against his own will.

There is indeed a Daies-man betwixt God and man, but God himself has
appointed him. God has referred the differences betwixt himself and man, unto
Jesus Christ; and (his own good will and free grace moving him thereunto) he
stands engaged in the bonds of his everlasting truth and faithfulness to perform
what Jesus Christ, as Mediator, should ask for us: unto him we may safely
commit our cause and our souls, with that assurance of the Apostle (2 Timothy
1.12.) I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep
that which I have committed unto him against that day. Christ, God-man is
umpire between God and man; what we trust him with shall not miscarry: he will
make our cause good, and our persons acceptable before God at that great day.
It is infinite mercy, when we were neither able to manage our own cause, nor
to find out any in heaven or earth who could, that then God himself should
find out one, in wisdom and power like himself, one who thought it no robbery
to be equal with God to be our Daies-man. Many of the Ancients interpret this
Text, either as Jobs desire and prayer, that Christ would come in the flesh, O
that there were a days-man betwixt us: or as a prophecy of Jesus Christ, to
come as our Daies-man in the flesh, There is no Daies-man yet, but a Daies-man
shall come. The sense is pious, but the context will not bear it; In the 16th
Chapter, v. 21. and Chap. 17. v. 3. We shall find Job speaking clearly of the
Mediator Jesus Christ, and of his great work of atonement between God and man.
But here he seems to keep to the present controversy, about the business of
affliction, not of salvation.

Take two or three consectaries flowing from the whole matter.

First, Job at the lowest speaks highly of God, and humbly of himself. The
greater his afflictions were the purer was his language. He was not able to
grapple with God, and there was none to be found who could umpire the matter
betwixt them. The will of God is the supreme law. What he will do with us, we
must be content he should. The secrets of his providence are beyond our search,
and his judgments above our reach.

Secondly, The greatness and transcendency of God should keep us low in our
own thoughts.

Our knowledge of God is the present cure of our own pride. The knowledge of
God causes us to know our selves, and that which makes us know our selves,
cannot but make us low in our selves. Though a proud man is commonly said, To
know himself too much, yet the truth is, he does not know himself enough, no,
nor at all, as he should know himself. Many are proud of, and with their
knowledge, yet pride is the daughter of ignorance. Some pride lodges in every
man's heart, because more then some ignorance does. Job had some of both, in
his; why does he lay the thought of the infinite glory and sovereignty of God
so often to his heart, but to keep down or to cure the swellings of his heart.

Thirdly, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God.

He is not a man as we are (we are not able to match him) and there is (among
men) no Daies-man betwixt us. David made it his election (2 Samuel 24.) To fall
into the hands of God, and not into the hands of man. And it is best for us to
fall into the hands of God (as David put himself into his hands) with respect
to his great mercies. But woe unto u^, if we fall into his hands, as contenders
with his great power. Shall we thus provoke the Lord? Are we stronger then he?
It is our duty, when we do, and our privilege that we may, cast our selves
into the hands of God, when the hand of man oppresses us; Satis idoneus est
patientiae sequester Deus, si injuriam deposueris juxta eum, ultor est; si
damnum, restitutor; si dolorem, medicus; si mortem, rescuscitator est. Tertul.
l. de Patient.
for (as one of the Ancients speaks sweetly and feelingly) If thou do
deposit thy injuries with him, he is able to revenge thee; if thy losses, he is
able to repair thee; if thy sickness, he is able to heal thee; and if thy
death, he can raise thee up and estate thee in life again. Thus (I say) it is
best to fall into the hands of God, in expectation of mercy, through the
Mediator, but it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God,
upon contempt of mercy obtained by the Mediator: So the Apostle argues (Heb.
10.26.) If men sin wilfully after they have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment and fiery indignation etc. Thence concluding (verse.
31.) It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. They who
slight the blood of Christ, and neglect the great salvation tendered to
sinners b^ ^im, can have no more sacrifice for sin. Wicked men crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame (Heb. 6.6.) But
God will not crucify his Son, or put him to open shame again for them. God
will not make another Gospel for them (as he must, if they be saved) who
contemn this. No, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, these men who once
(with all mankind) fell into the hands of God by transgressing his Law, are
now (under another notion) fallen into his hands, even by the contempt of his
Gospel; and now God says, I will deal with them alone, for they have refused
the Daies-man whom I sent, and who was ready to lay his hand upon us both. It
had been unconceivably sad with us all, if, as in the case of Jobs temporal
lost estate, there was no Daies-man between God and him on earth, so in the
case of our spiritual lost estate, there had been no Daies-man between God and
man in heaven: But it will be unconceivably more sad with those, who having bad
the tender of such a Daies-man, shall be found contemners of him. Greatest love
neglected, breaks forth and ends in greatest wrath.

JOB Chap. 9. Verse. 34, 35. Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his
fear terrify me.

Then would I speak, and not fear him, but it is not so with me.


WE have showed (in the two former verses) Job renouncing and protesting
against all thought of contending at all with God; He is not a man as I am,
that I should answer him, Exploratum est me non posse Deum, coram superiore
aliquo judice sistere: quo ^irca superest, ut ipse s t supremus ju^ex, apud
quem ego pro me dicere paratus um, si co^trabat flagellum calam tatis quo me
cedit, and extenuet formidinem majestatis qua concutior. ^^ned.
etc. In these two he desires God not to contend with him: as if he had said,
Lord, I will not plead or dispute with thee; and I know (such is thy
sovereignty) thou may do wh^t thou please with me; Yet, oh that thou
would be pleased to abate of the severity of thy proceeding, and to remit
the fierceness of that wrath, wherein thou appearest against me, that I might
have liberty to spread my c^ndition in thy presence. I have no friend to take
up the matter for me; but I would open my case in a few words my self, if I
might obtain a cessation, but for the time of treaty, if thou would forbear
fighting, while I am spea^ing Let him take h s rod away from m^, and let not
his fear terrify me. Then would I speak, etc.

Let him take his rod away from me.
The rod has diverse acceptions. (...) Virga baculus, qu^ nascitur ex arhore
ant radice arboris.
The word Sh bet in the Hebrew, is taken sometimes strictly for a branch, bough
or sprig, growing forth from the stock of a tree: and because a rod or a staff
is made of the branch of a tree, therefore the same word signifies both.

Secondly, It signifies a Scepter; the Scepter of a King, which emblems the
power of a King. Ahasucrus held forth his golden Scepter to Queen Esther, in
token of acceptance ( Esth. 5.2.) And because in ancient times (as the learned
observe) they were wont to make Scepters of such rods, Sceptrum quod
priscireges majestatis and se veritatis gratia manu tenebant baculus erat.
and all Scepters have the form or shape of a rod, therefore the original
expresses the rod and the Scepter by the same word (Genesis 49.10.) The Scepter
[Shebet, the rod] shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his
feet. Thy Scepter, O God, is a Scepter of righteousness (Psalm. 45.6.) that is,
thou usest thy Scepter righteously. The Scepter notes two things. 1. Authority
to judge or command. 2. Power to correct or punish; both are included in that
prophecy of the Kingdom of Christ (Psalm. 110.2.) The Lord shall send the rod of
thy strength out of Sion; that is, he shall invest thee with power to govern,
as the next words expound it, Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.
Commanders in war direct with a rod or leading staff; and Magistrates punish
with a rod in times of peace.

Sceptrum significat regium Dominium, cujus signum erat sceptrum. Tribus qu^e
ex uno pa^re tanquam bacul^s ex una arbore nata est. Percussio, punitio plaga,
quae fit baculo,
Hence thirdly, By a Metonymy the Scepter imports dominion, rule and government
it self, Amos 1.8. I will cut off him that holds the Scepter, that is, who
has the government in his hand.

Fourthly, The word is often used in Scripture to signify a Tribe, or a family
of persons, because a tribe is as a branch sprung from one stock; so the twelve
Tribes of Israel (like twelve branches) sprung from that great and ancient
stock, the Patriarch Jacob.

Lastly, The word signifies punishment or correction; correction is often given
with a rod, therefore to be under the rod is to be under punishment. Thus the
Lord threatens to visit the transgression of the house of David with a rod, and
their iniquity with stripes, Psalm. 89.32. The rod and reproof give wisdom
(Prove. 29.15.) The rod has a voice, Hear the rod (says the Prophet, Mic.
6.9.) but it is best when a voice is joined with the rod, and instruction mixed
with correction.

Quinque apud Hebraeos sunt nomina pro baculo (...) Bold Bold. in loc.
There are in the Hebrew (to note that by the way) five words, which signify a
rod or a staff. Some resolve that seeming contradiction which is in the two
Evangelists, Matthew and Mark, by the different signification of these words.
When Christ ( Matthew. 10.10. as also, Luke 9.3.) sent forth his Apostles to
preach the Gospel, among other instructions and directions given them for their
journey, this is one, Take no staves. But ( Mar. 6.8.) Christ commanded them
that they should take nothing for their journey, save a staff only. One
Evangelist says, they must not take staves, and in the other they are bidden
to take staves. Now (say these) in Matthew and Luke, where he forbids his
Disciples to take staves, he expresses himself by the word in the text,
Shebet, which signifies a correcting or smiting staff: (...)
Take no staves to smite and strike with, Baculus vel virga ad percutiendum.
(...).
ye go out with a message of peace in your ^^uths, let there not be so much as
an instrument of contention in your hands. But in Mark he uses the word
Misnan, which signifies a staff to lean upon; Take a staff to rest or ease your
selves upon, or to help your selves on in your travel, Virga vel baculus ad
sust entandum.
A walking staff, but not a striking staff. Thus they reconcile the difference.
But though this interpretation be good, yet this ground of it appears not,
either in the Syriack, which in both texts has the word Shebet, or in the
Greek, which expresses both by ((...)) So then we must rather say, that the
same word signifies a staff for both uses, and that when Christ forbids his
Disciples a staff, he means a staff to strike with (Preachers must be no
strikers, according to the Apostles rule in Timothy) and that when he bids them
take a staff, he means a walking staff. Iunerant Preachers might be wearied
with traveling, as well as with speaking.

But to the Text. The rod which Job desires might be removed, Nihil aliud
postulat Job, quam ut Deus vel mittigaret, vel penitus auferret ab eo flagella,
sc morbos and dolores. Non a^at pro jure, sed gratiae and moderationi faciat
locum. Coc.
is, That sore affliction which the sovereign power of God laid upon him, and
exercised him with. As if he had said, Lord, thou dealest with me upon the
height of thy prerogative, and I acknowledge thou may do so: But my humble
suit and prayer is, that thou would afflict me less then thou have, though
thou have not afflicted me more then thou may. Thou have not injured me at
all, but o that thou would relieve me.

He speaks to this sense with a little variety of words (Chap. 13.20, 21.)
Only do not two things unto me, then will I not hide my self from thee;
withdraw thine hand from me, and let not thy dread make me afraid. And in a
language not unlike this, he describes the peace and prosperity of wicked men
(Chap. 21.9.) Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon
them. We find also that Elihu (who undertook Job, and debated the matter with
him, when these three had no more to say, or would say no more.) He, I say,
perceiving what it was which Job had complained of as an impediment of speaking
unto God, promises that himfelf would give him no such impediment or cause of
complaint (Chap. 33.7.) Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither
shall my hand be heavy upon thee; As if he had said, The Lords hand has been
heavy upon thee, and his terror has made thee afraid, but (take my word) I
will deal gently: and mildly with thee, My terror shall not make thee afraid,
neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee. So that, Jobs desire is only this,
That he might have ease or release from ^is present sorrows. And it is (not
improbably) conceived, that he alludes to the custom of the Judges in those
Eastern Countries, who laid a rod upon some offenders in token of condemation,
and took it off from others in token of absolution, of grace and favor. Take
thy rod away from me.

Affliction is called a rod in a threefold consideration.

1. Because of the smart of it. Afflictions are grievous and painful to flesh
and blood. They grieve and pain the outward man, while the inward man takes
pleasure in them. I (says Paul) take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches,
in persecutions, in necessities, in distresses for Christ's sake (2 Cor. 12.10.)
that is, my spirit does, for no affliction (not that for Christ's sake) is
joyous for the present, but grievous to the flesh. For, as the Spirit would not
do those evils of sin, which the flesh would and does ( The evil which I would
not that I do, was Paul's cry, Romans 7.19.) So the flesh would not endure those
evils of sorrow, which the Spirit would and does. And as a believer delights in
the Law of God, after the inward man, when corruption is vexed and troubled at
it; so a believer delights in the rod of God, after the inward man, when
corruption is most impatient and unquiet under it. Hence the Apostles counsel
to the dispersed Jews, Rejoice when ye fall into diverse temptations (Jam. 1.)
that is, into diverse afflictions; the flesh has it is sense, and feels smart;
but the Spirit is armed with faith, which overcomes the smart. Affliction were
not so much as a rod, if it did not make us smart; and we are not so much as
Christians, if we cannot bear the smart with patience, or overcome it with
faith.

2. Affliction is called a Rod, in regard of the hand that uses it. A sword is
in the hand of a Judge, and a Rod in the hand of a father. God deals with his
people as a father with his children in afflicting them. When we most provoke
his fatherly displeasure against us, he does not wish (as Balaam when his Ass
offended him) that there were a sword in his hand to slay us; he only takes up
a rod to scourge us. Hence

3. Affliction is called a rod, in regard of the end for which it is sent. A
rod is not prepared to kill, nor is it an instrument of cruelty. A rod is not
for destruction, but for correction. There are indeed destroying rods, which
God will destroy, and save his people who are destroyed by them, I will destroy
the rod of the oppressor (Isa. 9.4.) Nebuchadnezzar the rod of Gods anger; was
a destroying rod, yet they among the Jews, who feared God, were only corrected,
while they were destroyed. The Lord means no hurt to those who are good, when
he makes them smart and die under the rod of those who are evil. If ever any
man might think he had a sword in his bowels, rather then a rod upon his back,
Job might, yet even he calls it a rod, while he calls to God for the removing of
it, Remove thy rod away from me. And seeing he calls to have it removed, we may
observe,

That it is lawful for to pray against affliction.

We may pray to be eased of that, which we must be patient under. To be
discontented with affliction is sinful, bu^ it is no sin (it is a duty) to
desire the taking of it away. For

1. We may pray for the preventing of afflictions, therefore we may pray for
the removing of afflictions, we may pray, Lord, keep thy rod off from us;
therefore we may pray, Lord, take thy rod off from us.

2. Afflictions themselves are evil. There is no good in them, nor can they do
us any good of themselves. The good comes from a superior work, from those
admirable influences and concurrences of God upon, and with corrections. The
rod is an evil in it self, and will make us worse, unless the Lord make it a
blessing to us. Some are stubborn under the rod: and their hearts are hardened,
while themselves are melted in the fire of affliction. As man lives not by
bread alone: So man mends not by the rod alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. It Is little less then a miracle that this
dry rod (as that of Aaron did natural) should blossom and bring forth
spiritual fruit, the fruits of righteousness.

3. We may pray for the removing of afflictions, because the Lord often sends
afflictions upon this message, to bespeak prayer. Many a soul is sluggish in
prayer till awakened by the voice of the rod. When the rod makes the flesh
smart, then the Spirit (in whom any thing of the Spirit is) cries mightily unto
God, and among the many things about which the soul exercises prayer under
afflictions, this is one, that the affliction may be removed. As they always
sin, who murmur at and quarrel with God, because he corrects them, so also do
they, who say, they care not how long he corrects them, or let him correct
them, as long as he will. It is as ill a sign when a child will not pray his
parent to spare him, when he is about to chasten him, or to stay his hand when
he is chastening of him, as it is to resist his chastisement. There may be
greater contempt of God in lying under affliction, then in resisting it. Now,
as it is our duty to pray for deliverance out of trouble; so it is one end why
the Lord casts us into trouble, that we may be engaged to pray for deliverance.

But take it with a caution, we must not pray absolutely for deliverance, or
the removal of afflictions, but at least with an implicit limitation. While we
are striving earnestly for the taking away of the rod, we should be ready to
submit, if the Lord will not take it away. A believer may say to the Lord (as
wrestling Jacob) I will not let thee go except thou bless me; but he must not
say, I will not let thee go, except thou now deliver me. Time, and means and
manner must all be laid at Gods feet, and submitted to his wisdom. And we must
honor God, though he will not remove the rod, even while we are praying that
he would remove it.

For the close of this point consider, the rod may be removed, not only by a
total release from affliction; But

First, By an abatement of the affliction; as we are said to leave off those
graces, from the degrees and lively actings of which we fall and decline: He
that lacks these things (that is, who abounds not, as he has heretofore,
in the exercise of them) is blind, etc. (2 Pet. 1.9.) Thou have left thy first
love, says Christ to the Angel of Ephesus, when the heat of his former love
was cooled: So the Lord may be said to remove our troubles, when he remits the
extremity, and cools the heat of them.

Secondly, The rod is removed, when it is sanctified to us, when the Lord (who
is excellent in working) causes it to do us good. The Saints die, yet death
is abolished, as to the Saints, by the death of Christ (2 Timothy 1.10.) because
Christ has plucked out the sting of their death, and made it a gain to them.
Thus while Christ makes temporal losses or sufferings an advantage to the
spiritual estate of his people, he takes them away. And as outward blessings
are taken away, from wicked men, while they possess them, riches are not
riches to them, nor is their honor an honor to them, because they are
ensnared by them: So the outward cross is taken away from the godly, while
they suffer, because they are bettered by the cross.

Thirdly, Affliction is removed from us, when Christ gives us strength to bear
affliction. Nothing grieves us, either in active or passive obedience, but what
is either against our wills, or above our power; It is all one to have a burden
taken off our shoulders, or to have so much strength given, as makes it easy
to us. While the Saints have trouble upon their backs and loins, they have no
trouble in their hearts and spirits, when their spirits are carried above those
troubles. To conquer an enemy is more noble then to have none. Much more (which
is promised the Saints in the throng of sorest enemies) to be more then
conquerours. In all, or any of these ways Jobs prayer may be fulfilled, Take
away thy rod from me.

And let not thy fear terrify me. There was somewhat more upon Job then a rod,
(...) a radice (...) Formidabilis, terribilis. Emathah.
or it was an extraordinary rod, a rod like a Scorpion.

Let not thy fear terrify me. The word which we translate [fear] comes from a
root signifying that which is very formidable and terrible. Fear and dread
shall fall upon them (Exodus 15.16.) that is, they shall be extremely afraid,
even dead with fear, as the next words import, They shall be still as a stone,
etc. There is a letter added (as the Hebricians observe) to the word used by
Moses, (...), ne me transversum agat. Sept. alius, ne me consternet.
implying the excess of fear. Giants are called by this name Emims (Deuteronomy.
2.11.) because they are of a dreadful aspect. The whole host of Israel
trembled at the sight of Goliath (1 Samuel 17.24.) (...) Idols (...) expressed by
this name Emim. And there is a double reason of it. Either because Idols are a
terror to their worshippers: we hear how at this day poor Pagans, who worship
Idols, are extremely oppressed with slavish fear of displeasing them. The true
God is terrible to his despisers; but false Gods are terrible to their
worshippers.

Or secondly, They were called Emims in a way of contempt; Yours are terrible
Gods sure? They have hands and handle not, feet and walk not, eyes and see not.
Here are terrible gods. So then, Idols are Emims, either because they are
really to be feared so little; or, because they are superstitiously feared so
much.

Jobs fear was no needless fear, he was not terrified with a fancy, Ex vi
verbi originalis ejusno di terror est qui hominem exa^itat and quasi extra
evalde distrabat.
though his fancy was ready enough to over-act upon his affliction, and so
increased his fear, Let not thy fear, that is (say some) fearful thoughts or
sights terrify me. So (Chap. 7.14.) When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my
couch shall ease my complaint, then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest
me with visions. There is an humbling and a cleansing fear, The fear of the
Lord is clean, not only in the nature of it, but in the effects of it (Psalm.
19.9.). There is also an amazing, and a terrifying fear, such the letter of the
original imports this to be, even a fear bordering upon madness, as if he
were rather frighted then afraid, and scared, rather then troubled.

Others expound this fear with reference to the two former verses, especially
to the verse immediately foregoing. There Job desires a Daies-man, or
complains that there is none; here he tells us what he might have expected, if
he had one. As if he had said, Had I a Daies-man, then I know he would take
away the rod from me, that is, he would give judgment that I should be eased
of this affliction; and his fear should not terrify me, that is, he would
never give a sentence which should be a terror to me. That Is a fair sense in
reference to what he spoke before; but I rather keep his meaning within the
compass of what he is speaking here.

And then by fear we may understand,

Paveris nomine intelligendum putare^ fulgore^, splendorem vel majestatem
niniam, qua priscis illis temporibus nonnunquam Deus, vel Angelus pro Deo
servi^ suis apparabat. Bol.
First, Those rays and beams of Majesty, which the Lord letting out a little
upon Job, he was not able to bear them. We find when in those ancient times
God appeared, the beholders were terrified. Manoahs wife tells her husband, A
man of God came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an
Angel of God, very terrible (Judge. 13.6.) And when God appeared to Abraham, An
horror of great darkness fell upon him (Genesis 15.12.) in what a woeful plight
was Daniel, receiving the visions of God? ( Dan. 10.8.) God who is the joy of
his people, is also a terror to them. Things which are not what they seem to
be, are not so terrible near hand as at a distance; God who is infinitely more
then he can seem to be, is more terrible near hand then at a distance. Hence it
is, that when God, who is always near us, shows himself to be so, our spirits
fail within us. In that presence of God which we shall have in glory, there
will be fullness of joy. And in that presence of God which we have in the ways
of grace, there is abundance of joy. But if while we are here in a state of
grace, some little of that presence of God, which is proper to the state of
glory falls upon us, we are more distressed then comforted with it: How much
more then, when God clothes himself with terror, and (as he did to Job) so
reveals himself unto us.

Secondly, We may interpret this fear (by the former part of the verse) the
rod; his afflictions were terrible, the hand of God lifted up to smite him,
made him afraid. But whether it were this or that, the majesty of God overawing
him, or the rod of God chastening him, the sense is plain, Job was oppressed with
fear from the Lord, yea with terror from the Almighty, causing this vehement
deprecation, Let not his fear terrify me. Hence observe,

First, That, God sometimes appears terribly to those he loves entirely.

Job was one of Gods darlings; and God was embracing him, while he was
scourging him. Job had kisses from heaven, when he felt nothing but lashes here
upon the earth. The heart of God was full of love, while his hand was filled
with a rod; his bowels yearn'd upon Job, and his face terrified him at the same
time. That precious man Heman, was followed with terrors and visions of
amazement all his days, I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up,
while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted (Psalm. 88.15.) The terrors of God,
even terrors to distraction, may be the present portion of those, whose
portion is everlasting mercy. Observe,

Secondly, Man is not able to bear the anger of G d.

Though he be but correcting us, yet we cannot bear his anger toward us. This
caused the Prophet to cry out ( Jer. 10.24.) Correct me, O Lord, but not in
thine anger. The words are not a prayer for correction (I know no warrant for
that) but a submission to it. As if he had said, Lord, I am willing to bear thy
correction, but I cannot (and who can?) bear thine anger. The Church complains
( Psalm. 90.7.) We are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath we are
troubled. The fatherly anger of God, is as a consuming fire, and we are but as
stubble before it: What then is the fierceness of that anger, which he will
pour out upon wicked men for ever! Who knows the power of thine anger? (Psalm.
90.11.) Man cannot understand how powerful the anger of God is, much less
stand before the power of his anger. As man cannot comprehend the love of God (
Ephesians. 3.18, 19.) The Apostle exhorts, To know the love of God which passes
knowledge; that is, to know so much of it as is knowable; (the love of God is
past the knowledge, not only of nature, but of grace, because it is infinite)
So we should labor, To know the anger of God, which passes knowledge, that
is, to know it so far as it is knowable. The anger of God cannot be fully
known, because it has an infiniteness in it, as well as his love. And as the
one shall never be fully known, but by enjoying it; so neither can the other,
but by feeling it. Upon this consideration the Lord makes that gracious promise
to his people ( Isa. 57.16.) I will not contend for ever, neither will I be
always wroth, for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have
made. But is not the spirit or soul of man of an everlasting make? And shall
not the damned endure the contendings of Gods wrath for ever, and not fail? The
substance of the soul cannot fail, and the spirit is incorruptible; The spirit
is full of moral corruption, but it is not subject to natural corruption, or
the corruption of its nature. How glad would the damned be, if their spirits
might fail, and their souls return to nothing. The failing of the spirit under
the wrath of God, is the failing of its hope and courage. Thus the spirit
sinks, and the immortal soul dies away under the sense and weight of Gods
displeasure.

But what if the Lord should take away his rod, and change his ^errours into
smiles? What will Job do then? when this is granted see what he will do.

Verse 35. Then would I speak and not fear him; but it is not so with me.
(...). Sept.
But is this the use which Job would make of the mercy he begs? Does he entreat
the Lord to take his terrifying fear away from him, and then resolve not to
fear him at all? Whose voice is this? Is this the voice of Job, I will speak
and not fear him? Jobs character in the first Chapter was, A man fearing God;
and dares he now say, I will speak and not fear him? As the fear of God ought
to be the seasoning of all our works and actions, so it ought to be the
seasoning of all our words and speeches: why then does he say, I will speak and
not fear him?

To clear this, I answer, Fear may be taken two ways. Either for the grace of
fear, or for the perturbation of fear. When Job says, I would speak and not
fear him, his meaning is not to lay down that fear of God, which is a bridle to
the soul, keeping it from sin, or that reverentiall affection, which fits us
for, and should act us in every holy duty we perform to God. When Job prayed to
be free from the fear of God, he resolved thus to fear God. It Is only the
perturbation of fear, distracting fear, not sanctifying, humbling fear, which
Job would lay aside, when God should please to withdraw his terrifying fear.
And so his mind is plainly this. If the Lord will be entreated to remit the
extremity of my affliction, and remove those terrors wherewith I am
affrighted, then I would speak boldly and cheerfully to him, I would set out
the truth of my case, and declare the innocence of my person. Qui injudicio
consiernatur non potest recte agere causam suam, seque ita utoportet desendere
ac tueri, terror enim impedimento est ei. P^ned.
Vehement passions hinder my reason, it is uneasy to speak, till I am eased of
my pains: I cannot tell how it is with me, so long as it is thus with me. Hence
note,

That extremity of fear is an interruption to speech.

While sense is much troubled, reason cannot act much. When Ephraim spoke
trembling, he exalted himself in Israel (Hos. 13.1.) There, to speak trembling,
is, to speak humbly. Our words to God should be accompanied with low thoughts
of our selves. Ephraims trembling is opposed to pride and hardness of heart.
They who thus tremble at the Word of God, are fittest to speak to God; yet
excessive trembling hinders us in speaking. And until the Lord quiets and
composes our hearts by a word from heaven; till he speak to our distempered
minds, as once to the raging sea, Be quiet and still; we cannot utter our
hearts, or declare our minds unto him. When God sends a gracious message to
poor sinners, and invites them to a conference, as he did his ancient people
(Isa. 1.18.) Come, let us reason together; then they come boldly to the throne
of grace, notwithstanding their crimson and scarlet sins. Then they are not
afraid to speak, they may speak and not fear him. (...) Quia non sic ego mecum.
(...). Non enim sic conscius sum.


But ( says Job) it is not so with me. There is much diversity of opinion
about these words. M. Broughton translates, I am not so with my self, and gives
this note upon it, I am not such with my self, as Gods scourge seems to make
me, or such as your words would make me. The Septuagint renders it, I am not so
conscious to my self, or I am not so self-guilty. The Hebrew word for word runs
thus, For not so I with my self. Some difference arises from the first
particle, we read [But] Most [For] The original is rather causall then
exceptive, I would speak and not fear him, for it is not so with me.

Particula Chen propter variam quam habet significationem, varijs quoque
interpretationibus ansam praebit, est enim vox aequivoca plura significans. Bol.
But the word which causes the greatest difference, is that which we translate
[So] It is not so with me. The Hebrew is Chen, and that has two principal
significations. It signifies sometimes right or just, and is applied both to
persons, and to things.

First, Unto things, Jer. 8.6. The Lord hearkened and heard, and there was no
man that spoke (Chen) aright; or things which were right, Jer. 23.10. The word
is opposed to evil, Their course is evil, and their force is not right; that
is, the force, might or power which they have, is not set upon or employed
about that which is right, but wholly bent to do wrong; or they commit evil
with all their might.

Qui bonam habet (...) est ((...)) rectus apud seipsum: testatur igitur se
bonam habere conscientiam and inde (...) apud Deum, si non projure suo agere,
vel gratia uti velit. Coc.
Secondly, The word [Chen] is applied unto persons, noting a man that is upright
hearted, faithful and honest, both in conscience and conversation. When
Joseph's brethren ( Genesis 42.11, 19, 31.) pleaded for themselves, they say unto
him, We are (Chenim) right men, we are no spies. We are not come to find out
the weakness of the Land, but to get a supply of our own wants. Joseph said,
Ye are spies, ye come to circumvent us, to put tricks upon us, to work your own
ends, by discovering what we are; No, say they, pray, Sr, do not misunderstand
us, we are (Chenim) honest, right-hearted, plain-meaning men.

Secondly, The word is used adverbially, It is not so with me, that is, It is
not so as you imagine. In which sense we find it, Genesis 1.7. The Lord said, Let
there be light, and it was (Chen) so, as the Lord commanded, so it was, Eccles.
8.10. I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place of the
holy, and they were strangers in the City, where they had done so.

Upon both these significations of the word, different interpre^ations of the
whole are grounded.

First, Taking the word to note an upright hearted man, Job is conceived to
speak interrogatively, as if he put this Question, For am I not right in my
self? As if he had said, If you think it too much boldness that I have said I
would speak unto God, and not fear him, Am not I right in my self? Am not I
found and true at heart? Thus he seems to allude unto that testimony, which God
gave of him at the first verse of this book, A man perfect and upright; As if
he had said, I am no turn-coat or apostate, I am as I was, and I doubt not but
I shall be what I am; still perfect before God, and upright with men. And if
so, why may not I have boldness to come unto God, and speak freely with him?
They who are sincere with God, may have great boldness in coming unto God.
Uprightness has boldness with men; and uprightness has boldness toward
God. Though no uprightness or righteousness in man can give him boldness in
himself, yet it may give him boldness in another. He may be assured, that
though he cannot be accepted for his uprightness, yet being upright he shall
be accepted.

Secondly, Others read it negatively, I would speak, and not fear him, for I am
not right in, or with my self. And so the sense may be made out thus, I have
not gone about to justify my self all this while, I have not stood upon my own
righteousness pleading with God; if my righteousness were in my self, then I
might fear to speak with God, though his fear should not terrify me, and
though he should take away his rod from me; but I have a better bottom then my
own, I am not right in my self, I am right only in the free grace of God, and
in the righteousness of my redeemer. According to this exposition he returns
to his first proposition, laid down in the second verse of this Chapter, How
should man be just or righteous with God? I am not right in my self; as I said
in the beginning of my answer, Man is not righteous; so I now conclude in my
own particular case, I am not righteous in my self: and being righteous in
another, if God would but give me a little respit from these sorrows, I would
speak and not be afraid. This teaches us,

First, That the confidence and holy boldness which the Saints have in coming
unto God, is grounded upon the righteousness of Christ, not upon any
worthiness in themselves.

Secondly, Observe,

He that is most upright in heart, is most forward to acknowledge, and most
constant in acknowledging his own unrighteousness. They who are most proud,
are most empty. And they who have least, usually speak with the most. Sincerity
rates it self low, I am not right, that is, righteous, says upright Job.

Thirdly, (Say others) I am not right in my self; that is, I am at present
uncomposed and unsettled in my own spirit: As if Job had said, I desire that the
Lord would remove his fear and mitigate my afflictions, that I might speak with
him and not fear, for as yet I am not right in my self, my spirit is so
overwhelmed, and my thoughts are so troubled within me, Quia non sic sum apud
me; ut nunc sum: sc. in hac affl ctione uti me nunc rractat and exagitae Deus:
sum velut extra me, animi impos. Merc. Neque enim metuens possum respondere.
Vul.
that I have not the free use of my own understanding, nor can my reason do
its office, much less my grace. I am scarce in my right mind, but rather as a
man distracted (so was Heman) with the terrors of the Lord, I know not how to
manage faith under such fears, the majesty and dreadfulnesse of God oppress my
spirit, as I am, I am not myself. The Vulgar gives this interpretation instead
of a translation, For I cannot answer while I am afraid. Hence note,

A godly man in sore temptaions, may for a while appear less then a man.

Fears hinder him from showing the best of his natural self, much more any
thing of his spiritual self.

Further, note two things, experienced by many of the Saints in the day of
their distress.

First, A godly man under greatest afflictions keeps to the opinion of his own
integrity, yet builds his comfort upon the free grace of God.

He can, according to the first interpretation of these words, challenge all
with this Question, Am I not right in my self? Is there not integrity in my
spirit? And according to the second, he is ready to make this negative
confession, I am not right in my self, I stand not upon my own integrity.

Secondly, The Saints in great afflictions are often so overwhelmed with the
majesty of God, that they are not able to express their interest in God, much
less make out the comforts of that interest.

The former of these arises from that seed of holiness and stock of grace
abiding in them. The other arises from the natural weakness of flesh and
blood, in which they abide, and from the moral corruption of nature, abiding
in them.

Thus we see how the sense of the text rises, as the word [Chen] is understood
nominally, for right or just. We translate it adverbially, But it is not so
with me; or, For it is not so with me. This reading bears a threefold
interpretation.

First, In construction with the former words, thus, Let him take away his rod,
etc. then will I speak, and not fear him, for it is not so with me; that is, I
am not so fearful, or of so low a spirit, I am not such a stranger, or of so
little acquaintance with God, that I should not know how to speak unto him, or
that I should be afraid to speak unto him. If the Lord would but hide that
brightness of his own glory, which dazles me, and ease me of my own pains,
which distract me, I should sure enough speak unto him, (...)

But secondly, We may rather refer it to the false and unkind opinion of his
friends, who judged him a wicked man, or an hypocrite, which here he denies, It
is not so with me; as if he had said, If the Lord would be pleased to grant
what I have petitioned, I would speak unto him without fear or doubt of being
heard, for it is not so with me, namely, as you have suspected and imagined all
this while, or as you think it is. I am not the man you take, or rather mistake
me to be, if I were, then though the Lord should take all his afflictions from
me, and all withdraw his terrors, yet I should be afraid to speak unto him;
yea I should be afraid to pray unto him, every prayer (were I wicked) would be
a praying down judgment upon my self: But seeing I can boldly affirm, my
conscience also bearing me witness, that though I sin, yet I love not to
sin, that though I am weak, yet I am not wicked, as ye have charged me; Non
sic impius ego apud me. Pagn. Non sum talis qualem me putatis. Vatabl. Merc.
my heart being thus clear before God, I cannot fear to open my mouth and
report my cause before God.

Hence observe (which has been offered from other passages in this book, and
therefore I shall only observe it,) That

A godly man stands to, and knows his own integrity in the midst of all the
clamours and slanders, the misapprehensions or aspersions of friends or
enemies.

Whosoever loads and charges him with studied or approved hypocrisy, he will
(and he ought to) unload and discharge himself (at least) with Jobs plain
denial; you suspect me thus, but I am sure, it is not so with me.

Thirdly, The words may bear this meaning, I have sought and earnestly
entreated the Lord to abate my afflictions, and to remove his terrors, But it
is not so with me; Alas, I do not find that the Lord has done any of these
things for me. His rod is still upon my back, and his terrors stand as thick
about my soul as ever: was ever poor man in such a plight as I? It Is not
(alas) with me, as I have prayed, or as I would have it. The rod smarts, and
terrors amaze me still. Hence note,

That a godly man may pray in affliction, and not presently be relieved in or
from his affliction.

Many a soul can say, It is so with me, as I have prayed, I have the wishes and
desires of my soul: yet many (and I believe many more then can) cannot say so.
The Lord lets precious prayers lie unanswered to our sense. We may pray long
before we find it so with us, as we have prayed, and yet those prayers are not
lost, but laid up; not buried, but sown. And it becomes us to have patience,
till the harvest, though it be a late one.

Lastly, There is an opinion which gives this verse connection with the first of
the next Chapter. Quia non ita est (sc quia a me terrorem suum non eximit) ego
mecum. sc. Loquar mecum, ipse querar and omnem aserbitatem animi effundam apud
me, ut facit in sequenti capite.
As if Job had thus resolved, upon the Lords not answering his petition, Had
the Lord condescended to take away his rod, and remove his terror, as I
requested, then I had somewhat to say, and I would have spoken it out unto him,
but because it is not so, or because I am not answered, therefore I with my self
(The word [Speak] is not in the text: but such supplies of a word are frequent,
not only in the Hebrew, but also in other languages) Seeing I have not liberty
to speak to the Lord, I will pour my complaints into mine own bosom, and
commune with my own heart. He pursues this tacit resolution in the tenth
Chapter, which begins thus, My soul is weary of my life, I will leave my
complaint upon my self.

JOB Chap. 10. Verse. 1. My soul is weary of my life, I will leave my complaint
upon my self, I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.


JOB having in the former Chapter justified God in afflicting him, and
maintained his own integrity, notwithstanding those afflictions, now returns
to that work, about which he had been too busy before; yet that, Afflicti
saepe se exonerari puta^t, si laxis habenis de suo dolor querantur and suas
enumerent calamitates uberrima oratione. Merc.
wherein it seems he only found (as the case stood with him) some little ease
and refreshing, The breathing out of his afflicted spirit in sad complainings.
He resumes his former lamentation, and renews afresh what he had been more then
large enough in, at the 3d, 6th and 7th Chapters of this book. Here, as there,
he shows how ill it was with him, and what cause he had to be in heaviness,
under the pressure of so many evils.

And here, more then there, Argumentis utitur a natura Dei and ante-acceptis
ipsius beneficijs, quibus mala haec quae immifit Deus magnopere repugnare
videantur. Merl.
he remonstrates that he conceived himself more hardly dealt with, then stood
not only with the goodness of God in his nature, but with that goodness which
he had formerly acted both toward others and himself: This encouraged him
about the close of the Chapter (verse. 20, and 22.) to petition again, that he
might have a little refreshing before he lay down in his grave: and that God
would (after these storms) return him some of those fair days he had enjoyed,
before he returned to the earth, and should be seen no more.

His complaint is very rhetorical and high, Vehemens quide^ partibus omnibus
and gravis est querimonia, ^ed medesta, fi unum ^^^ud optatum exceperis, ver.
18, 19. Merl.
yet with an allay or mixture of modesty. Indeed his spirit brake out, and
passion got head, at the 18, and 19 verses, where he expostulates with God, in
the language of the third Chapter, Wherefore host thou brought me forth out of
the womb, etc? But abating that excess of his tongue and spirit, his
complaints are knit up with solid arguments, and his Queries put the point
resolutely, yet humbly, home to God himself: that he would be pleased to show
the reason of his present dealings, and why he varied so much from what he had
done in former times.

The first verse gives us a general ground of this and of all his sorrowful
complaints, The wearisomenesse of his life, My soul is weary of my life, I will
leave my complaint upon my self.

The argument may be formed thus; He has reason to complain of his
afflictions, whose afflictions are so heavy upon him, and so bitter, that he
has reason to be weary of his very life.

But thus my case stands, my afflictions are so bitter to, and heavy upon me,
that I am weary of my life.

Therefore I have reason to complain.



The assumption of this syllogism is contained in the first words of the
verse, My soul is weary of my life. And the conclusion in the latter; Therefore
I will leave my complaint upon my self, I will speak in the bitterness of my
soul.

My soul is weary of my life. Life and soul are often in Scripture put
promiscuously for the same, but here they differ. The soul may be taken two
ways.

First, Strictly, as it is opposed to the body.

Secondly, In a more large sense (by a Synecdoche of the part for the whole)
for the whole man consisting of body and soul: If so here, then the meaning of
Job in saying [My soul is weary of my life] is no more but this, I (Job) am
weary of my life; that is, of the marriage or union of my soul and body, O that
this band (which I (though most are grieved at the weakness of theirs) find
too strong) were broken, or a bill of divorce granted for their separation.
Life is the band or tie by which soul and body subsist together. And when that
band is broken or cut asunder by the stroke of death, the body goes to the
grave, and the soul or spirit returns to God who gave it.

Again, When Job says, My soul is weary of my life. Life may be taken either
for the act of life, and so the sense is, I am weary of living; or it may be
taken for the manner of life, and so the sense is, I am weary of that course or
state of life wherein I am. Life is often put (not strictly for the act of
living, but) for the state or condition in which a man lives, or with which
life is clothed; The circumstances and concomitants of life are called life.
Thus in our common speech, when a man is in misery, another says, I would not
have his life, or what a life has he? The Apostles character of all natural
men, is, that they are alienated from the life of God (Ephesians. 4.18.) that is,
they cannot endure to live such a life as God lives, or as he commands them to
live, they cannot endure to be holy, as he is holy, or holy, as he calls them to
be holy, in all manner of conversation. Thus Job was alienated from his own
life, I (says he) am weary of my life; that is, of a life thus imbittered,
thus afflicted.

My soul is weary. The word which we translate [weary] varies the understanding
of this sentence. It signifies properly to be weakened, (...) Debilitatus,
languefactus per metapheram taeedio affectus, offensus fuit.
as also to be melted or molten with heat; because a man that is extremely
heated or melted by heat, is weakened, his spirits and strength being drawn
forth and dissipated. But it is most commonly applied to that weariness which
arises from the displeasednesse or irksomeness of our minds. All burdens upon
the body are light, compared with those which reach the soul. Three things
weary and load the soul.

First, The filth and guilt of our own sins. I will sprinkle you (says the
Lord, Ezekiel. 36.31.) with clean water, etc. What Is the effect of this? It
follows, Then shall you remember your own evil ways, and loath or be weary of
your selves (it is this word) because of all your abominations. As if the Lord
had said, before I change your hearts, ye sin, and are not wear^^ of your
sins, nay, ye make a sport of, and dally with them: But when I shall work that
great change upon your hearts, your opinion and apprehensions of sin will
change too: nothing will be so bitter or burdensome, so unpleasant or wearisome
to your souls as sin. Fools make a mock of sin; they who are truly wise,
mourn and groan under the sense and weight of it.

Secondly, The unsutablenesse and perverseness of other men's manners or
dispositions weary the soul, The righteous soul of Lot was vexed from day to
day in seeing and hearing the unrighteous deeds of the debauched Sodomites (2
Pet. 2.8.) The soul of God is said to be wearied by such courses of the sons of
men (Psalm. 95.10.) Forty years long was I grieved, or wearied, with that
generation. The Lord (as we may speak with reverence) was even weary of his
life, he had such a troublesome people to deal with; they grieved him at the
heart (as the old world did, Genesis 6.6.) and were a heavy burden to his Spirit.
That Is the Apostles language, in his description of that peoples frowardness,
and of Gods patience toward them ( Act. 13.18. (...).
) He suffered their manners forty years in the wilderness; which some render,
He bare them as a burden; the continual murmurings and unbelief of that
people were to the Lord (who is yet above all passion) as a heavy weight is to
a man, or as the peevishness and unquietness of a sucking child is to the
nurse, as our translatours conceive the Greek word should rather be. Thus also
he reproves the same people by the Prophet (Isa. 43.24.) Thou have wearied me
with thine iniquities. And Christ (though by another word) speaks the same
thing of his own Disciples ( Mark 9.19. (...) Tolero, (...) autem d^^untur
translatitie qui volentes onus subeunt, and sub eo perdurant.
when the man possessed with an unclean spirit being brought to them, they could
not cast him out) How long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you? I
am wearied with your unbelief, O ye of little faith. The Disciples were still
so slow of heart, and came so short of a Gospel Spirit, that Christ professes,
He was burdened even with them, How long shall I suffer you? The il manners of
all, are a weariness to the good, but theirs most who are nearest to them.
Which is also the reason, why a godly man is wearied most of all with the
corruption of his own heart, for that is nearest to him of all.

Now, as our own sins, and the il manners of others weary the soul: so

Thirdly, The pains and troubles which are upon the body often cause such grief
of mind, as is an extreme weariness to the soul: That Is the meaning of this
text [My soul is weary of my life] That is, my life is filled with such outward
troubles, as fill my inward man with trouble, and weary my very soul.

Verbum (...) exsententia. R. David, and R. Mardoc. significat excidere aut
succidere. Excisa est anima mea^n me, Page Vatao. etc. A^um est de vita mea, en
mar or, vel perinde ac si mortu^s p^are sum.
Secondly, The word is translated by diverse of the learned Rabbis, To cut, yea
to cut off, as with a sword, or any other edged instrument: These render Jobs
mind thus, My soul is cut off in me; or, My soul is cut off from my life; As
if he had said, My days are at an end, I am ready to die, the thread of my
life is cut, I am but a dead man. While life continues, soul and body are as it
were one piece, but death divides them; or the recourse of night and day, runs
the thread of time through our lives, till our web (longer or shorter) be
finished, and then the thread is cut. To which similitude Hezekiah alludes in
his mourning deathbed song, as he supposed (Isa. 38.10, 12.) I said in the
cutting off of my days, etc. Mine age is removed from me, as a shepherds tent,
I have cut off like a Weaver my life, he will cut me off with pining sickness,
or from the thrum, which being woond about the beam, the Weaver having finished
his work, cuts the web off from it. The same word in the Hebrew signifies
pining sickness, and a thrum, because of the thinness and weakness of it. My
life (says Hezekiah) is spent, I am at the very last cast, the yern of time is
all wrought off, therefore my life is ready to be cut off. I am a borderer upon
death, and to be numbered among the dead, rather then among the living. Such a
sense this reading gives the text of Job, My soul is cut off from my life.
Denotat displicentiam qua homo interius tabescit prae doloru sensu. Proprie
significat (...), i. e. remputida^ and quae nausea^ parit aversari.


Thirdly, The word signifies a reluctance or displicency of spirit, arising
from the sight and sense of that which is very loathsome, filthy, and of an
evil savor. It answers the Greek work rendered, Abomination (Matthew. 24.15.)
The abomination of desolation; he means the Romans, who being Idolaters, their
worship was abominable, and who being Lords of the world, their power was
formidable, and laid all countries waste and desolate, which opposed them, or
which they had a mind to oppose. And so when Job says, My soul is weary of my
life; his meaning is represented thus, My soul refuses to inhabit, or to act so
filthy a body as mine; My soul loathes to dwell, or stay any longer in this
nasty lodging: As David (Psalm. 120.5.) speaks of his weariness in dwelling
amongst wicked men, because of their moral filthiness, or the pollution of
their minds and ways. Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshec; that I dwell in the
t^nts of Kedar; So Job seems to speak, in reference to the natural pollution
and filthiness of his own body. Woe is me that I sojourn in such a diseased
body, and dwell (which yet will not die) in such a dying carease. The noble
tenant, my soul, is weary of staying in such a stinking and filthy habitation,
and I perceive (for I have moved him hitherto in vain) the great landlord will
neither repair it, nor as yet let it fall. As then, a man, who lives in an ill
or incommodious house, says, I am weary of dwelling in it; or as a man that
has a filthy garment, says, R Moses cum alijs Hebraeis doctoribus existimat
propriam vocis significationem esse, litigare aut contendere. Litigavit anima
mea in vita mea.
I am weary of wearing it: So says Job here, My soul is weary of my life, were
I well rid of it, I should be well,

Fourthly, Many of the Jewish Doctors tell us that the most strict and proper
signification of this word, is, To contend or strive, to chide or wrangle (we
may give it in that homely language.) As if the meaning of Job were, My soul
does even contend, chide and wrangle with my life, my soul contests and
disputes the matter with my life, why it will not end, that I may get out from
this body of mine, and go beyond the reach of these afflictions. The 95.
Psalm, verse. 10. is so translated, Litigavi, Page
Forty years long did I contend, chide or contest angerly with that
generation: The Lord did often chide with the people of Israel, and they used
to chide with Moses; whence one place was called Meribah, yea, through their
unbelief they did chide with God himself, and (there is no reason dust and
ashes should have the last word) God also gave them their chidings, and told
them plainly their own, more then once. Thus the soul of Job chid his life,
what is the reason that I am held in this condition, why wilt not thou be gone,
that I may be at rest? Carnal men chide with their lives for hastening so fast
away, because they know of no rest, or have hope of none hereafter. A godly man
may be brought to chide with his life for making no more haste away, because he
finds none, or so little rest here. Elihu (Chapter 33.19) describing in the method
which God uses to humble proud man, ads, He is chastened also with pain upon
his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pains; He is chastened; the
word signifies also reproving, or convincing by arguments, and that in a quick
and passionate, as well as in a rational and solid way. Now, while afflictions
chidingly smite us, we are apt to chide them, and give them at least a word for
a blow. Job did not only chide with his afflictions, but with his life, because
it would not depart and be gone, being so unkindly used and imbittered by
afflictions. His soul did even chide his life out a doors.

Crudelis effecta est anima mea. Chald. Homo qui sibi ipsi mortem precatur
adversum se saevire videtur.
The Chaldee paraphrast gives the meaning yet higher, My soul is grown cruel
against my life; As if he had said, I am so exceedingly afflicted and pained,
that my soul begins to rage against my life, I can hardly hold my own hands off
from my life, and I would not have God hold his. Let not my life be spared, how
glad should I be to see it poured out, Anguish is come upon me (as the
Amalekite reports of Saul, 2 Samuel 1.9.) because my life is whole in me. O that
God would stand upon me and slay me; my soul is hardened against my life (like
the Ostrich against her young ones, Chap. 39.16.) as if it were not mine. Let
me die, and that shall be a favor, smite me, and that will be to me as a
precious ointment, though it break my head, and let out my troubled spirits.
Then we are cruel to our lives, when we care not what is done to us, or how we
are, used so we may be rid of our lives.

But (to pass this) our translation is clear and significant, My soul is weary
of my life.] I am so weary of the pains wherein I live, that I had rather my
life should end, then my pains should continue.

Job complained in the third Chapter, he complained at the sixth and seventh
Chapters, he erred twice, yea thrice upon this point before, yet now we hear
him complaining, as if he had not complained at all. This was Jobs infirmity:
though somewhat has, and more may be said to take off those aspersions which
his friends cast upon him for complaining, yet no doubt it was his sin to
complain; especially to break out so often, and in such bitter complainings.
Hence observe,

A godly man may (possibly) fall often into the same sin.

Where grace takes hold of the heart, it breaks the custom and spoils the
trade of sin; yet a godly man may sin over the same sin, and renew the
same transgression. The trade of sin is spoiled, when the soul leaves
devising, plotting, contriving sin, which acts denominate a worker of
iniquity. The custom of sin is broken, when though the same sin be
committed again, yet the soul puts in it is plea and complaint against it. It Is
here as in civil things, if we make our challenge or demand, the custom is
gone, though the acts be renewed by the power and prevalency of the opposite
party; yet, when I say a godly man may fall into sin often, I mean not of
gross and scandalous sins; God does not let his people fall often into the
mire. Noah was not often drunk, nor did David commit adultery often, or more
then once. The grace of God which brings salvation, teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts. And if a godly man fall often into any the
least sin, yet he lies not in sin, because he renews repentance, as often as
he sins, and rises as often as he falls: he resolves (through the strength of
Christ) never to sin, when through his own weakness, and the violence of
temptation, he is soon after over-taken or surpised with sin. David
professes (Psalm. 119.30.) I have chosen the way of truth; His election was
truth; truth of heart, which is opposed to hypocrisy; truth of judgment,
which is opposed to error; and truth of speech, which is opposed to lying; yet
he slipped with his tongue, more then once, and told an untruth, more then one.
He cannot be acquitted from this failing, when he answered Ahimelech the
Priest, The King has commanded me a business, and has said unto me, Let not
any man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and what I have
commanded thee; and I have appointed my servants to such a place (1 Samuel 21.2.)
He again faulters with his tongue, and speaks either falsely or doubtfully, when
the King of the Philistines asked him, Whether have ye made a rode to day? And
David said, against the South of Judah, etc. (1 Samuel 27.10.) when as his
invasion was against the Geshurites, and the Ge^rites, and the Amalekites
(verse. 8.) He that overcame the Bear, the Lion, and Goliath the Giant, is
overcome by fear, and the mother of it unbelief. David's example should be no
encouragement, shall be no excuse to those who willingly fall often into the
same sin. A good man is not priviledg'd from doing it, but no man is
priviledg'd to do it. Such examples must not teach us to sin, but they teach
us how unable we (alone) are to keep our selves from sin: they teach us also,
what need we have to depend upon, and look up to Christ, that we may be kept
from sin: if he leave us but a little unto our selves, the flesh will discover
much of it self, and we shall quickly show what our natures are, though we are
renewed by grace. We must trust to the supplies, not to the receipts of grace.

Secondly, When Job says [My soul is weary of my life.] We learn; That

Soul and life in man are two distinct things.

For howsoever (as was touched in explication) the soul is often put for the
whole man, and so the sense of, my soul is weary, may be but this, I am weary
of my life: yet the holy Ghost would never denominate all man by that, which is
(...) not a part of man. That Is a brutish opinion which makes the soul nothing,
or nothing else but life, and this life no more in entity then the life of a
beast, which vanishes, when it dies. That these opinionists tell us, they
believe the body shall rise again by the power of God, cannot satisfy for this
fall, which their opinion gives the soul: neither does the immortality of the
soul at all contradict, (which was threatened for, and is the wages of sin) the
death of the whole man. For death consists not (if we may say a privation does
consist) in the annihilation, but in the separation of those parts of man, soul
and body, which by life are united and kept close together.

Thirdly, When Job says, My soul is weary of my life, we learn,

That the life of man may grow to be a burden to him.

In the third Chapter Job wished for death, his wish was examined there, about
the lawfulness of it, I shall now only examine (a touch about which was given
lately) whence this weariness of life causing wishes to be rid of life does
arise. There is a weariness of life incident only, and proper to wicked men.
And there is a weariness of life, which may grow upon the best of men. Take a
brief account of the usual grounds of both.

First, Carnal men are often sick with discontent, and die of a humor: If the
Lord will not give them their lusts, they bid him take their lives. Necessaries
and competencies will not satisfy them, they must have superfluities; they
languish, if they have not quails to their Manna, as Israel once desired and
had. Was it any thing but this, which made Ahab go home sullen and sad? Sullen
sadness is a degree of this weariness. Ahab had a Kingdom, and yet he could
not live without a vineyard. He that takes away another man's life to obtain
what he desires, thinks his own life searee desirable, unless he may obtain
it. There was a spice of this distemper in Jonah, though a good man, and a
Prophet ( Jonah 4.8.) because the Lord did but kill his gourd, kill me too,
says Jonah, He wished himself to die, and said (his gourd being dead) It is
better for me to die then to live. It is an excess of desire, when we desire
any outward thing (much more when we desire things unnecessary, things not to
supply our wants, but to serve our lusts) As Rachel did children (who are the
best and noblest of outward things) Give me them, or else I die, (Genesis 30.1.)

Secondly, Some wicked men are wearied of their lives by the horror of their
consciences. A hell within, makes the world without a hell too. They who have a
sight of eternal death (as the wages of sin) without the sight of a remedy may
soon be weary of a temporal life. As much peace of conscience and soul joy in
believing, makes some of the Saints wish themselves out of the body; so also
does trouble of conscience, and grief of soul make many of the wicked. A man
who is not at all weary of committing sin may be weary of his life, because he
has committed it. And he, who was never troubled that his wickedness is as an
offense against God, may feel his wickedness extremely offensive against
himself. To such a soul the evil of sin is so great an evil of punishment,
that he is ready to cry out with Cain, My punishment is greater then I can
bear. Yea, what his guilty conscience feared, comes to be the desire of many
under the same guilt, That every one that finds them would slay them: And
some are so weary of their lives at the sight of sin, that they make away
their lives themselves, hoping to get out of the sight of sin. There are sins
which cry to God for vengeance, and some cry to the sinner himself for
vengeance. This cry was so loud and forcible in the ears of Judas, that it
caused him to go away and hang himself. And what made Ahithophel weary of his
life, but his wickedness? The rejecting of his counsel was not so much the
reason of it, as the sinfulness of his counsel: A good man may be troubled at
others, when his good counsel is not accepted, but he grows not unacceptable to
himself; nay, he is well-pleased that he has given honest counsel, though none
will take it, though all are displeased at it. But they who aim not at the
pleasing of God in what they do, think themselves undone (and die they will)
if they please not men.

Thirdly, Inordinate cares for the things of this life, make others weary of
their lives. He that cannot cast his care upon God, may soon be cast down
himself. Christ. ( Luke 21.34.) cautions his Disciples, Take heed lest your
hearts be overcharged with the cares of this life. That which Christ would
prevent in the Saints, falls often upon carnal men, their hearts are
overcharged with cares, cares are compared to a burden, and they are compared
to thorns, they do not only press, but vex and wound: Their weight presses
some to death, their sharpness wounds others to death: And not a few would go
out of the world, because they cannot get so much of it, as they would.

These things (among others) make wicked men weary of their lives. There are
other things which make godly men weary of their lives; such are these,

First, The violence of Satan's, and the worlds temptations. The soul would
gladly be rid of the body, that it might be beyond the reach and assaults of
the devil, and his assistants. There Is a serpent every where, but in the
heavenly paradise. Only they complain not of temptation, who are willing slaves
to the tempter. The Apostle (1 Cor. 10.13.) assures the Corinthians, There has
no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man; but God is faithful,
who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able, but will with
the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it, as if
he had said, Temptations are sore burdens, and although yours hitherto have
been but ordinary temptations, such as usually befall the Saints, though yours
be moderate afflictions, and (...) common stature, such as in the eye of reason
any man may (...) with by a common assistance of grace; yet there are
temptations, which (if God, the faithful. God should not come in with greater
assistances then usual) you are not able to bear. They who wrestle with more
then flesh and blood, always need more then the strength of flesh and blood to
help them in their wrestlings. And because they are often assaulted with
greater strength, therefore they are assisted with greater strength. For if God
do either withdraw his help from the Saints, or leave them to wrestle with
Satan alone, and to fight single with his Armies, or if he do, not proportion
the aid he sends to the temptation he permits, they are sadly overcharged,
though they can never be totally overcome; and it is possible to grow weary of
the battle, though we are assured of the victory. It is the honor of the
Saints to conquer, when they are tempted, but it is their happiness to be
above or without temptation. How many poor souls put up bills of complaint, and
beg prayers against temptations. Paul praid thrice, that is, often and much,
when the messenger of Satan buffeted him: whether his were an inward or an
outward temptation is doubted, but without doubt that temptation made his life
burdensome to him, till he received that answer from God, My grace is
sufficient for thee.

Secondly, The Saints are wearied with the weight of their sinful hearts.
Inward corruption burdens more then outward temptation: and were it not for
corruption within, temptation without could not be very burdensome: The devil
tempted Christ, but because he found nothing at all in him, complying with, or
suitable to his temptations; therefore Christ threw them off with ease. That
enemy without could do us no hurt (he might put us to some trouble) if he
found no correspondence within. The traitor in our own bowels, opens our
ports, and lets in the adversary. His sparks could never inflame us, if he
found no tindar in us. The baseness and unbelief, the lusts and vanities of
our minds are apt to take fire at every injection. A gracious soul cannot live
here without sin, and yet can easier die then sin. Paul (Romans 7.24.) cries
out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death, or from this body of death! That is, from my body which is subject to
death by reason of these remains of carnal corruption, or from my carnal
corruptions, which are the remains of my spiritual death, and are worse to me
then any death. All the afflictions of his (...), and the pains of his body,
were but a play, and a kind of so (...) compared with the trouble which this
body of death put him to. He rejoiced in tribulation, but he could not but
mourn under corruption. Many poor souls are so vexed with these mystical
Canaanites, that their spiritual Canaan (the state of grace) is to them like
Egypt, the land of their captivity. And when they are commanded to rejoice,
they answer, if we could not sin, we could rejoice, How shall we sing the Lords
song in a strange land? O that we might go home.

Thirdly, The Saints grow weary of their lives through the wickedness of other
men's lives, not only do their own corruptions burden them, but (which shows
the holiness of their hearts more) the corruptions of others. The sinfulness
and pollutions of the times and places wherein they live, especially of persons
they are related to, makes their lives grievous, and imbitters all their
comforts. Rebekah that good woman, tells her husband Isaac (Genesis 27.46.) I am
weary of my life, because of the daughters of Heth, for if Jacob take a wife of
the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land,
What good shall my life do me? The sweetness of my life is gone, if this son
miscarry, as his brother has done before him. The Prophet Jeremy cries out, O
that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of waifaring men, that I might
leave my people, and go from them; What made him so weary of living among them?
(and that was but a step on this side, being weary of his life.) The next words
show us, They be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men (Jer. 9.2.)
Better be in a waste wilderness among vvilde beasts, then in a populous City,
among beastly men. It Is a part of our complete happiness in heaven, that we
shall have no ill neighbors there. They who are evil can take pleasure in
those who do evil. But the more holiness any one has, the more is he
burdened with the unholinesse of others. And that is the reason why God himself
is expressed to be so exceedingly burdened with the sins of men, to be wearied
and broken with them, to be laden with them, as a Cart with sheaves, He is
infinitely holy. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God (Ephesians. 4.30.) The Spirit is
so holy, that sin (which is unholinesse) grieves him presently. And in
proportion, look how much any man is more holy then others, by so much is he
more afflicted with the impurity of others. As the holy Spirit of God, who is
all holy: so the spirits of holy men (who yet have a mixture of sin) cannot but
be afflicted with the sins of men.

Fourthly, Some of the Saints would part with this life, because they have got
such assurance and evidence of a better life. When much of eternal life
appears to a godly man, he is weary of a temporal life. Natural things are
but burdensome trifles to those who are stored with spiritual. Christ says (
Luke 5.39.) No man having drunk old wine, straight way desires new, for he
says the old is better: He that tastes what is better then he enjoyes, is
unsatisfied with all he enjoyes. We can hardly be persuaded what we have is
good, when we see better of the same kind. How much more hardly is this
persuasion wrought in us, that earthly things (which differ in kind from
heavenly) are any great good, when heavenly things are open before us. When the
Disciples (at the transfiguration) had but a glimpse of glory, They say, It is
good to be here, Let us build three tabernacles. They do not speak
comparatively, as if now they had met with somewhat, better then ever they had
before; but positively, as if they had never met with any good before. When the
Spirit carries the Saints into his wine-cellar, and gives them a draught of
everlasting consolations, the wine of worldly comforts will not down; they
begin to disrelish the dainties and delicacies of the creature. A true sight of
heaven makes the earth scarce worth the looking after, or the living in. Such
live, because God will have them live to do him service, not because they
desire to live to serve their own ends. Paul was in a great straight betwixt
two ( Phil. 1.23.) whether he should depart or abide in the flesh: but the
straight was not in reference to himself, he was assured, dying would be to
him, but a traveling to Christ, and therefore death was to him an easy
election. His straight was only this, whether he should not abide still in the
flesh, to to supply the needs of the Church, and forbear glory a while, that he
might prepare others for glory. The same Apostle (2 Cor. 5.4.) says in the
first verse, We know that if the earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved,
we have a building of God, an house made without hands, eternal in the
heavens. When their faith was thus upon the wing, soaring up to the assurance
of an house made without hands; they grew weary of their smoaky cottages
presently; they could not endure to live in those poor lodges, corruptible
bodies, having a view of such glorious palaces; therefore he adds, In this we
groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house, (...).
which is from heaven. The word signifies groaning, as a man that has a
weighty burden lying upon him, which makes him fetch his wind even from his
bowels. The body is the burden, rather then the house or the clothing of the
soul, when once the soul knows it shall be clothed with an house, which is from
heaven. As (I said before) much of hell in this life makes wicked men weary of
this life, so also does much of heaven. Cic. in Tuscul. Quest de Cleombroto.
The Roman Orator tells us, that a young man, who lived in great prosperity,
having read Plato about the immortality of the soul, was so affected, that he
threw himself violently from a high wall into the sea, that he might have a
proof of that immortality, by his experience of it. The Gospel forbids such
haste, and knows no such ways to happiness. As Christ (not we) has
purchased that estate; so Christ must lead us (we must not thrust our selves)
into the possession of it: but yet the earnests, the fore-tastes and
first fruits of heaven, which the Saints find in this life (though they be
such as eat the marrow and fatness, such as may have the very cream and
spirits of the creature to live upon) make them groan often and earnestly for
the next life. This is good, but heaven is better.

Lastly, Which is the case of this text, the Saints may grow weary of their
lives from the outward afflictions and troubles of this life. Sickness and
pains upon the body, poverty and want in the estate, reproaches and
unkindenesses put upon our persons, with a thousand evils to which this life
is subject every day, cause many to vvish and long for an end of their days.
And though they are ready to submit to the will of God, if he have appointed
them to a longer conflict with these evils, yet they cannot but show their
vvillignesse, yea their gladness to part with their lives, that they may part
with such troubles accompaning their lives.

And as the afflictions of the body natural, so of the body politic may make
them weary of their lives. How many in Germany and Ireland have been so
vvearied with hearing the voice of the oppressor, that they have wished
themselves in their graves, only to get out of their hearing. And with us,
since these troubles began, have not many been tired with living? Have they not
cried after death, and wooed the grave, as being weary of the world? The
Prophet ( Isa. 32.2.) speaks of a weary land. A man (meaning Christ) shall be
as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land. The land it self (being
insensible) could not be weary; but he calls it a weary land, because the
inhabitants living in the land, were wearied with the troubles and continual
vexations which they found there. In these cases the soul of a believer stands
(like Abraham when the Angels passed by) at the tent door of his body, ready to
come forth, looking when God will but call, yea, he cries out, that he may be
called (in the language of Job) My soul is weary of my life.

I will leave my complaint upon my self, I will speak in the bitterness of my
soul. I will leave, etc.] That is, I will carry my complaint no further, it
shall trouble none but my self.

The original signifies also to strengthen or fortify ( Nehem. 3.8) They
fortified Jerusalem unto the broad wall; we put in the Margin; They left
Jerusalem to the broad wall: So the sense of Job may be this, My pains do not
abate, but increase, why then should I remit or abate my complaint, I will
strengthen my complaint as long as my sorrows are strengthened.

My complaint. That word has been explained before, it signifies an inward, as
well as an outward complaint, and that most properly. Some translate it so
here, I will groan in silence with my self. Per mittam mihi mussitatione^.
Tygur. Silentio egomet ingemiscam and Philosophabor. Polychron. Deponam a me
querimoniam meam. Jun.
But the text requires, rather that we interpret it of an external complaint,
formed up into words. The Septuagint are express, and so is Austin, I will
leave my words upon my self: both interpreting it of a vocal declaration of
his mind and meaning.

The greatest difficulty lies in those words [upon my self] One renders, I will
leave my complaint off, or lay it aside from my self. As if Job meant to give
over this work of complaining, and to compose his heart to quietness, how
unquiet soever his estate continued. But his following practice seems to
confute this interpretation, and to deny any such intention.

Others give this sense, I will speak at my own peril, and if any danger or
inconvenience come of it, I will bear it my self. I will run that venture. Job
uses such language ( chap. 13.13.) Hold your peace, let me alone that I may
speak, and let come on me what will. We may gloss it with that heroical
resolution of Queen Esther (Esth. 4.16.) So will I go in unto the King, which
is not according to the Law, and if I perish, I perish. The Hebrew preposition
has various acceptions.

Praepositio (...) frequenter per super, nonnunquam per cum and aliquando per
adversus redditur. Nihil contra Deum, in me tantum desaeviam. Pined.
First (As we) It is translated Upon. Secondly, With. Thirdly, Against.
Fourthly, Concerning or about.

We may take in any of, or all these translations. And from all, the meaning of
Job seems to rise thus, I intend not to speak a word against God, I will not
charge the Almighty with injustice, or with rigor, to do which were highest
wickedness; I purpose indeed to complain, but I will complain only upon, or
with my self, concerning or against my self, I will not utter a word against
the wisdom of God, or accuse his providence. I will not shoot an arrow against
heaven, or send out a murmur against the most high.

There are two ways of leaving our complaints upon ourselves,

First, When we let them lie wholly upon our selves, and will not go to God for
strength or patience to bear them. Who can sufficiently mourn over them, who
leave their complaints in this sense upon themselves? It is sinful and foolish
to leave our complaints thus upon our selves: It Is a duty to leave them upon
God, and to pour them into the bosom of Christ, who can, and who only can
either ease us of them, or make them easy to us: who can, and who only can
take off our burdens, or enable us to carry them. The burden of our ordinary
cares will break our backs, if left upon our selves; how then shall we in our
own strength stand under the burden of extremest sorrows?

Secondly, We leave our complaint upon our selves. When we make no excuses or
evasions, but plainly charge the fault upon our selves. Thus we ought to leave
all our complaints upon our selves. It is sinful and foolish to charge any of
them wholly upon the devil, or at all upon God. An honest heart takes them
home, and says, God is righteous, but I am a transgressour, what he has done
he may do, and he has done justly in all that he has done. This is the sense
of Jobs resolution, I will leave my complaint upon my self.

Hence observe,

Whatsoever a godly man suffers, he will not charge God with it, but himself.

He is more careful of the honor of God, then of his own peace, and had
rather die then the glory of God should suffer. O Lord (says Daniel, chap.
9.7.) righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face; And
(verse. 14.) the Lord is righteous in all his works which he does, for we obeyed
not his voice. When the Angel was smiting Israel with the plague of pestilence,
David bespeaks the Lord in reference to the people, Lo, I have sinned, and I
have done wickedly; but these sheep, What have they done? Let thine hand I pray
thee be against me, etc. (2 Samuel 24.17.) I take the blame to my self, Lord,
upon me let thy stroke be, even upon me, not upon Israel: So says the soul, in
reference unto God, upon me be the blame of all the troubles and afflictions
which I feel, not upon God, What has God done? All that he has done is right,
and just, and good. It is an argument of a holy frame of heart, to be often
judging our selves, and always acquitting of God: To be often complaining of
our selves, and to be ever exalting God: To be always thanking him for our
comforts, and always saying, we may thank our selves for our sorrows.
Whatsoever the Lord says or does concerning us, we should not only say with
Hezekiah (when a sad message was brought him, 2 King. 20.19.) Good is the Word
of the Lord, but also, Good are the works of the Lord. Many men are ready to
lay their sins (much more their sorrows) upon God. So the Apostle represents
them ( Romans 9.19.) Thou will say unto me, Why does he then find fault? Why
does God complain of us? we have more reason to complain of, and charge our
faults on God. If he hardens whom he will, Why are we blamed for being
hardened? For who has resisted his will? Thus they question God, Who has
resisted thy will? whose lives are nothing else but a continued war against,
and resistance of his will. They who strive most to comply with the will of
God, complain often of themselves for resisting it. And though they know God
hardens whom he will, yet they will not leave the hardening of any upon
God, as his fault, but as his prerogative. They confess it to be as great an
act of holiness in God, to harden some men in sin, as it is to soften others
by his grace: Mercy appears chiefly in the one, justice appears chiefly in the
other, but holiness equally in both.

I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. A bitter soul brings forth
bitter words. Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. If there
be abundance of joy in the heart, the mouth will speak joyfully; and if there
be abundance of sorrow in the heart, the mouth speaks sorrowfully. Loquar
quicquid mihi afflictio suggesserit.
As when there is abundance of filth in the heart, the mouth speaks
filthiness. We may see the lines and image of man's mind drawn upon his words.
One man speaks in the anger of his soul, and he speaks angerly. Another speaks
in the pride of his soul, and he speaks proudly. A third speaks in the
profaneness of his soul, and he speaks profanely. Again, one speaks in the
courage of his soul, and he speaks courageously. Another speaks in the patience
of his soul, and he speaks patiently. A third speaks in the faith of his soul,
and he speaks beleevingly. There is a neernesse to this sense, in that of the
sixtieth Psalm ( verse. 6.) God has spoken in his holiness; and we are assured
he cannot but speak holily, who is all holy. I (says Job) will speak in the
bitterness of my soul, and he spoke bitterly; his soul was bitter, and so was
his speech too.

What he means by the bitterness of his soul, has been opened heretofore, in
the third Chapter, and in the seventh Chapter, verse. 11. thither I refer the
Reader.

In brief, I will speak in the bitterness of my soul, is either this, I will
let out the sorrows of my heart at my tongue, and it shall appear by what I
say, what I feel. Or

Further, I will speak in the bitterness of my soul, may be taken as an
Apology for what he spoke. As if he had said, Do not charge my complaint upon
my own account, No^ ra^ mea futura sunt verba, quam meae amaritudinis, haec
enim imperat and extorquet orationem.
If I speak bitterly, it is not I that speak, but the bitterness that is in
me. As Paul, when he did what he would not, pleads in the seventh of the
Romans, It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. It is not I
Paul an Apostle, not I regenerate Paul, but the remains of unregenerate Paul,
of Paul a Pharisee, which rebel against the Law of God. In the same manner
says Job here, and so say the Saints; Are we at any time impatient, and
complain more then becomes us, know it is not we that speak, but the
bitterness of our hearts. The thing which we would not, that speak we; and
therefore it is not we that speak, but the sorrow that dwells in us.

So then, speaking in the bitterness of the soul, notes either the excess or
greatness of a complaint, or the cause and spring of a complaint. The
complaints of Job came not from the ordinary temper of his spirit, but from the
troubles of his estate, distempering his spirit; he desired rather to be
praising and glorifying God for his receipts, then complaining over his own
wants. But his wants were such, as he could not refrain from complaining I will
speak in the bitterness of my soul.

But what speaks he?

As when he first spoke these words ( Chap. 7.11.) he presently turned his
speech to God, desiring him to deal more sweetly with him, and puts the
question, Am I a Sea or a Whale? etc.

So here, after he has set forth his resolvednesse to complain, he presently
turns his speech to God, imploring favor, I will say unto God, do not condemn
me (verse. 2.) and he puts the question (verse. 3.) Is it good unto thee that
thou should oppress? As if he had said, Lord, I cannot but complain of my
condition, and I must take the boldness to complain to thee; but I will not
complain of thee, as if thou were mine enemy; nor will I contend with thee, as
if thou were a party, my meaning and scope is only this, to supplicate thee as
my Judge. I will say unto God, Do not condemn me, etc.

JOB Chap. 10. Verse. 2, 3. I will say unto God, Do not condemn me, show me
wherefore thou contendest with me.

Is it good unto thee that thou should oppress? That thou should despise
the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked?


IN the former verse, Job resolved to complain, in this second he begins his
complaint; I will say unto God etc. He complains to God, not against God. He
leaves his complaint upon himself, but he tendereth and presents it before
the Lord, I will say unto God.

What he says may be cast into a double request; 1. That God would not condemn
him. 2. That he would instruct or convince him; as if he had said,
Lord, do not use thy absolute power to destroy me; Do not reject me, because
thou will? Show me the reason of thy proceedings, that I may either sit down
contented with what is amiss in my state, or reform and amend what is amiss
in my life.

Do not condemn me.
(...). Noli me docere impium esse. Sept. Forte graviore aliqua tristitia
obrutus, impiam aliquam vocem emittam, q. d. Noli occasione^ quaerere mei
lapsus.
The Septuagint has a very different rendering of this clause, I will say unto
God, Do not teach me to be wicked, or to do wickedly; but is it not wickedness
as black as hell, to suppose that God teaches any man to be wicked? The Lord
hates wickedness, and can he teach it? The Lord punishes wickedness,
therefore he cannot teach it.

The mind of the Greek translatours is not, that God does formally teach any
to be wicked, but that some learn wickedness, or are ensnared in sin by that
which God does unto them; As if Job had said, Lord, do not increase and heap
afflictions upon me: Do not over-grieve and burden the spirit of thy poor
creature, lest he should even be forced through impatience to speak
unadvisedly, or do any thing unbecommingly: Lord, do not occasion me through
the extremity of my afflictions to say or do that which I must repent, and be
ashamed of. Which is also the sense of that petition in the Lords-praier, Lead
us not into temptation. Great affliction lay us open to great temptations. And
as calamity is an occasion for our graces and virtues to show themselves: So
also for our lusts and corruptions. Some never appear so holy; and others, (I
mean of those who are really godly) never show so much unholinesse, as in
affliction. Hence that request of Agur (Prove. 30.9.) Lord, feed me with food
convenient for me, lest I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my God in
vain. Such is the meaning of the Septuagint, when they say, Lord, teach me not
to be wicked. God teaches man to be holy, both by his word, and by his works,
yet some of his works may occasion the flesh to learn wickedness, and to act
wickedly.

Verba sunt hominis se excusantis, and quasi praecastigantis liberiorem suam
orationem. Aquin.
Secondly, These words may be understood, as a Preface; or a rhetorical
introduction to prepare the ears of the Lord to re-receive the bill of
complaint, which Job was about to put up unto him; As if he had said, Lord
(possibly) through the tediousness of my pain, and the continuance of my
sorrows, words may slip from me, of which I shall not be able to give a good
account, or others make a fair construction; yet, Lord, Do not condemn: Do
not censure me: I speak only to excuse my self, not to accuse thy Majesty. I
speak only in my own defense, let not what I speak be an offense to thee. Lord,
I have so great a weight of affliction upon me, that I cannot but hope thou will give my words some grains of allowance, if they should want their due
weight of wisdom and of holiness. As Abraham, when he was about to pray for
Sodom, makes his apologies and preparatory speeches unto God, Let not my Lord
be angry, and I will speak, and I will speak yet this once (Genesis 18.) So here,
I will speak, etc. but I will first say unto God, be not angry, Do not condemn
me, If (my infirmities prevailing over me) I speak amiss. Lord, be not
critical with me, examine not every word strictly. Strong passions make an
unruly Orator; and when the speaker bears much, he may expect to be much borne
with by his hearers. That Is a second. But rather, (...) Verbum condemnandi fere
semper ad culpam pertinet. Noli me peragere reum aut sontem pronunciare. His
suppliciis videris me velat impium sceleratumque pala^ declarare. Pin. Ne
quaeso me ita affligas ut omnes qui hoc vident, judicant me propter peccata
gravissima talia pati


Thirdly, We may take the words as a plain deprecation, Do not condemn me; The
Hebrew is literally thus rendered, Do not wicked me, that is, Do not count
me, or cast me for a wicked man. But did the Lord account Job as a wicked man?
Or had Job an opinion that the Lord did account him so? Surely Job had good
(yet humble) thoughts of himself, though he endured so many evils, yea he was
persuaded that the Lord (who laid those evils on him) had good thoughts of him
too: and when he says, Do not condemn me, doubtless he had hopes, possibly
he had assurances that the Lord had justified and acquitted him; why then
resolves he, I will say unto God, Do not condemn me?

First, We may expound him thus, Lord, Do not that against me, which may give
the world occasion to condemn me; or, Lay not thy hand so heavily upon me, lest
they that understand not the reason of thy dealings, should be occasioned to
adjudge me wicked: Though Job had a witness above, and a record on high,
though he knew his reputation was unblemished before God in the midst of all
these breaches upon his family, and botches upon his body, yet he knew men
would condemn him as guilty of the most notorious evils of sin, when they saw
him languishing under such unparalled evils of punishment. This moved him to
pray, Lord, do not condemn me, by making me an object of the worlds
condemnation.

Again, The words (Do not condemn me) may have this meaning, Lord, Permitto
reru^ aliarum ^j^cturam, sed non possum non do^ene vehementer laesam meae
sanctitatis and innocentiae existimationem. Pined.
Do what thou will with me, only do not condemn me. His earnest deprecation of
this may carry in it a willing submission to any thing besides this. And it is
very usual with men to do so; we think we could bear any affliction but that,
or better then that, which is upon us. Yet Job had great reason to choose any
affliction rather then this. He might well say, I can (through thy grace
enabling me) bear these or any other pains of my body, and losses in my estate,
but I know not how to bear the loss of mine innocence, or the reproach of
being thrown out of thy favor. The world, and these my friends will be
confirmed in their misapprehensions of me, if thou do not speedily deliver
me, and confute their rash jugement by some eminent mercy.

Condemnation has three things in it, which make it grievous.

First, The penalty of the sentence.

Secondly, The disfavour of the Judge.

Thirdly, The stain of his integrity who is condemned. To have but so much as a
suspicion or jealousy of the displeasure of God, afflicts the spirit of a
godly man, more then all his other afflictions. Though Job had a sure interest
in the favor of God, and was freed from the penalty of condemnation, by his
union with Christ; yet sometimes clouds and darkness came over him, and the
terrors of the Lord did fight against him, which caused those sad lamentations
in the sixth Chapter: but here he is chiefly troubled at the stain of his
integrity in the eye of the world, who beholding his afflictions, blotted him
as a wicked man, and esteemed him forsaken of God, even utterly discarded, and
cast out of his sight. Observe hence,

First, That, Great afflictions carry a charge of wickedness upon the
afflicted.

Paul having escaped death in a wreck at sea, could not escape a hard censure
at land, when a viper was seen upon his hand: This man (say those Barbarians of
Melita among themselves) is no doubt a murderer, whom though he has escaped
the sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live (Act. 28.4.) We find also that
those exemplary judgments which befell the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had
mingled with their sacrifices (it seems he caused them to be slain, while they
offered sacrifice) and those upon whom the Tower of Siloe fell, left them all
under a charge of highest wickedness; else Christ had not taken it off,
saying, Suppose ye that those Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans,
because they suffered such things? or those eighteen upon whom the Tower of
Siloe fell, think ye that they were sinners above all that dwelt in Jerusalem?
As if he had said, I, who know your thoughts, know ye are ready to think so. It
is a very ill, but it is a very common thing, to judge both of persons and of
causes by success. Does a man gain and thrive in the world; here is a man sure
whom God loves, says the world. Though a Jeremy can say, Why does the way of
the wicked prosper? He can see them to be wicked through all their prosperity;
yet, how often are they accounted righteous, who prosper; and good, who enjoy
good? But does a man wither and go down the wind in the world? He Is a man sure
whom God hates, says the world. Man is apt to think them the worst, who suffer
worst, and that they have sinned most who have most sorrow. The Prophet ( Isa.
53.4, 5.) fore-tels that Christ himself, While he bore our griefs, and carried
our sorrows, should be esteemed stricken, smitten of God and afflicted. Christ
was esteemed a great sinner, when God gave him up to be smitten for sinners;
therefore he adds, but he was wounded for our transgressions, etc.

Secondly, observe, The displeasure of God is more grievous to the Saints, then
all other pressures and sorrows whatsoever.

Job says not, Lord do not afflict me, do not chasten me, lay not thine hand
upon me any more, but Lord do not condemn me. It is infinitely worse to be
condemned, then to be chastened, yea then to be killed. Condemnation carries in
it an argument of disfavour, and that makes it so burdensome. As the love of
God is better to us, then all the good things of this life ( Psalm. 4.6.) Many
will say, Who will show us any good? This is the great query of the world: but
what says David, Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us; thou
have put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and their
wine increased. And as the favor of God is better to us then the good things
of this life, so then life, which is better then all earthly goods ( Ps. 63.3.)
Thy loving kindness is better then life; Now, I say, as the love of God is
better to us then the best things in the world, so the displeasure of God is
worser to us then the worst things that are in the world; all the torments and
racks, all the sicknesses and distempers, all the reproaches and contempts of
men have not so much evil in them to us, as one frown from God. Hence, as when
two sore diseases (suppose the gout and the stone) both very painful, yet one
much exceeding, at once afflict the body, the patient forgets the less: so it
is, when inward and outward sorrows at once ceaze upon one man, when the arrows
of God are fastened in his spirit, he forgets the arrow in his flesh. The wounds
of the spirit heal all the wounds of the flesh; they make them, as if they were
no wounds, or not worth the complaining of.

Thirdly, observe, To be accounted wicked, is a sore affliction.

It is an affliction to have an ill name, though we deserve it not, and to be
accounted wicked, though we are not; it is I grant far better to be censured,
then to be flattered. It is very ill when others count us, and worst of all
when we account our selves better then we are, yet it is no small evil to be
accounted worse then we are, especially to be accounted evil, when we are good.
A wound in our honor, is not a wound to be slighted. It was no small part of
the sufferings of Christ, that he was numbered with the transgressors in his
death, and called Beelzebub, a friend of Publicans and sinners, while he lived.

Fourthly, observe from this, Do not condemn me.

That condemnation is the adjudging of one to be wicked.

Condemnation supposes a man guilty, and leaves him under a penalty. As
Justification is the adjudging and declaring of a person to be righteous, or
the accepting of him for righteous in another, who is not righteous in himself;
so condemnation is the adjudging, pronouncing and declaring of a man to be
wicked, who in himself is wicked. That Is Jobs first request, I will say unto
God, Do not condemn me. As if he had said, Seeing thou art the God and Father
of all, who call upon thee in faith, and fear thy Name; therefore in faith and
filial reverence, I beseech thee to acquit me of my sin: yea, because I know
thou have acquitted me, therefore deal not with me, as if I were condemned for
sin. Make it appear that thou art my God, either by removing these strokes
(which represent me to the world as thy enemy, rather then thy son) or by
removing the dread and terror of them, that they may appear as exercises of my
grace, not as revenges upon, or punishments of my sin: that while my body is
pained with thy rod, my soul may rejoice in thy love, and that, while I am
under this cross, I may triumph over it. Or if thou art resolved still to
detain me at this rate of suffering, then I have another humble suit,

Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. That Is his second request.

Show me] The word signifies to make a matter intelligible or plain to the
understanding; If I must still feel these pains, (...) Facscire me.
then make me to understand them also: Let not the whole weight of my sorrows
lie upon my sense, manifest them to my reason; the more I know of them, the
better I shall manage and endure them.

Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. (...) Partium est non judicis
parts litigant non condemnant, judex condemnat, non lit^gat. Drus.
] The word which we translate to contend, signifies properly contention between
party and party, not the sentence of the Judge. The parties to a suit, contend,
but do not condemn. The Judge condemns the Delinquent party, but he does not
contend. His office is to hear the cause, and upon full evidence on both sides
to pass his sentence. Job speaks in the style of both, desiring the Lord not
to condemn him as a Judge, and to show him why he contended with him, as a
party. Thus the Lord is said in Hosea, to have a controversy with the
inhabitants of Israel (Hos. 4.1.) and it seems by another Prophet, that he had
continued a long one with them, and therefore promised, I will not contend for
ever, Isa. 57.16.

Further, Cause me to know; or, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me, is,
as if Job had said, Lord, my troubles and sorrows are very well known, they run
into every eye, they are apparent enough to the world; all see that thy hand is
lifted up, and I feel it: Oportet omnibus notam fieri causam mearum
aegri^udinum, nequis ex re manifesta ad occultiorem alia^ causam investigandam
temere dilaberetur. Pined.
but the reason of it I do not understand, much less do they; there is a
curtain drawn between the world, and the reason why I am troubled; yea, there
is a curtain drawn between me, and the reason of my troubles: Now therefore,
Lord, draw back the curtain, or unvail my eyes; let me see clearly, and let the
world see why I am thus affl^cted; for though I know I am a sinner, and have
many failings, yet I know nothing my self: I am not conscious of any
wickedness, or close hypocrisy, much less of any profaneness or apostacy,
which should cause thee to pour out such full viols of thy indignation upon me;
Then, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me,

This [Wherefore] may have a threefold reference; 1. Show me, whether it be
for sin or no? 2. If it be for sin, Show me for what sin it is? 3. If it be not
for sin, Show me for what else it is? What is the thing thou aimest at and
intendest? What Is the end thou proposest to thy self in these my unheard of
afflictions?


But is it lawful to put such queries, or to desire such resolutions from the
Lord? Ought not Job to have prayed for wisdom^ how to bear his cross, rather
then have asked knowledge, why it was laid upon him?

Job desired a reason: First, Not to satisfy his curiosity, but his
conscience; not that he would be prying into Gods secrets, or unlocking the
cabinet of his counsel to see what was there; but that the secrets of his own
heart might be opened, and a discovery made to him of what was hid there. He
desired a reason, not doubting the justice of goodness of God, but as
suspecting some evil in himself, as yet unseen.

Or, secondly, He desired a reason, not so much to satisfy himself, as that
the world might be satisfied; that they who judged and condemned him, as an
hypocrite, might have their rash judgment confuted and answered by a
determination from heaven. As if he had further said, Lord, if thou would
but show me this thing, it would either stop the mouths of those, who have
been so forward to censure me; or stop my mouth from any further complainings
to thee: I cannot rescue my self out of thy hand, nor dare I accuse thy
wisdom, in laying thy hand upon me. But, Lord, deal not with me by the strict
rule of thy sovereignty, which is to act above all rules, and to do what thou will, because thou will, without giving a reason to thy creature. I cannot
charge thee with injustice, if thou should resolve to keep me still
unresolved I know thou art not obliged to give me an account of any of thy
matters; but Lord, condescend so far to dust and ashes, Show me wherefore
thou contendest with me. If it be for sin, a sight of that (through thy
grace) will humble me for it, and cause me to return to thee from it. If it be
for trial, I shall undergo it with more patience, and my friends will behold
me under it with more charity. Let all or some of these considerations prevail
with thy majesty, to open this secret to me, and expound the myster^e of my
afflictions, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me.

Observe hence,

First, An afflicted soul is very solicitous about the reason of his affliction.

He that knows what it is to be in the dark, loves not to be in the dark. As
natural, so moral light is sweet, and spiritual light is sweetest of all.
Man would not be under concealments, or have all about him mysteries and
riddles. Evil men love not that light which shows them a rule against their
sins, but any man would have light to show him the reason of his sufferings. To
be troubled we know not why, is an aggravation of our troubles. That is more
then felt, which is only felt. As to know the cause of a disease, leads and
lets us into the way of a perfect cure, so to know it is half a cure. Job, as
here he does, so heretofore he had complained that his way was hidden ( Chap.
3.23.) and here as before he solicites that his way might be cleared to him.

Secondly, observe, A godly man may be long in the dark about the reason of
Gods dealing with him.

He labors always to give an account of his own heart and ways to God, but
he is seldom able to give an account of the ways of God toward him The way of
God both in mercy and in judgment is in the sea, and his footsteps are not
seen. As there is much of the Word of God, which a sincere heart after many
prayers and much study, is not able to give a reason of: so also are there many
of his works. The text of both is dark to us, till God make the Comment, and he
sees it best sometimes to make us call and call, wait and wait before he makes
it. There was famine in the Land of Israel three years, year after year, and
yet David knew not the cause; doubtless he did often examine his own heart, and
look into the Kingdom, to see what might be a provocation there, but saw
nothing till (after three years) he enquired of the Lord, who answered, It is
for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites (2 Samuel
21.1.) It is more then probable that David had enquired of the Lord before that
time. A holy heart, especially one so holy as David's was, can hardly let
personal affliction be a day or an hour old, without enquiring of the Lord
about it: And shall we think that David let this National affliction grow
three years old, before he enquired of the Lord about it? surely then this
enquiry after the end of three years, was that grand and most solemn enquiry by
Vrim and Thummim, appointed as the last resort to God in cases of greatest
difficulty and concernment; till David used this means, he found no resolution
of that case, why the Lord contended with his Kingdom by famine, year after
year. Neither had Job got resolution (when he thus complained) why the Lord
contended with him, by sore diseases and mighty terrors, day after day.

But because it might yet be wondered at by some, how he durst adventure to put
up such a request to God; he argues further in the next verse, that the state
wherein he was, seemed to necessitate him to it, and to prompt or put that
request into his mouth; Ne cui mirum videatur istud a me postulari, res ipsa
huc me adegit, absit enim a me, ut tibi placere posse existimem vio^e^tam
cujuspiam oppressionem. Bez.
As if he had said, My condition cries aloud to me, that I should cry aloud to
God, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. For, far be it from me to
think that the Lord delights in oppression, in breaking the work of his own
hands, or in maintaining the works of wicked men: wicked Judges use to do so,
whom God will never encourage (as with a light shining from heaven) by his
example. Far be it from me to think so dishonourably of God, and therefore I
am thus importunate to know the reason of his dealings with me, and what his
thoughts are concerning me.

Verse 3. Is it good unto thee that thou should oppress? that thou
should despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the
wicked.


Is it good, etc?

I am sure it is not, it is not pleasing unto thee to oppress, to despise the
work of thy hands, thou delightest not to shine upon the counsel of the wicked:
Nequaquam probat alio^um iniquam vim multo minus ipse alios opprimit. Sanct.
Thou can not endure any of these evils acted by man, much less will thou
act them thy self: Thou who art just, even justice it self, can not love
oppression; thou who art merciful, even mercy it self, wilt not despise the
work of thine hands: thou who art holy, even holiness it self, how should
thou delight in wicked men? Thou art of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, and
approve of it. What blasphemy then is it to imagine that thou do practice it.
Thy justice, thy mercy, thy holiness, are such as cannot admit the taint of
these aspersions.

Omnes vias injustitiae quibus terreni julices corrumpi and jus pervertere
solent a Domino conator amoliri. Merc. Interrogatio sensum reddit omnin^
contrarium me ^uaqua^ probas, etc. Sanct.
So then, in this third and fourth verse, Job reckons up those ways, by which
earthly men corrupt ot pervert justice; and he removes them all from the Lord.
Some men do, but God does not oppress: Some men do, but God does not destroy
the work of his hands: Some men do, but God never does shine upon the counsel
of the wicked.

Is it good to thee that thou do oppress, etc? These interrogations (we
see) are vehement negations, they flatly and peremptorily deny, what they seem
doubtingly to enquire. The sense is, It is not good unto thee, yea, it is evil
in thy sight to oppress, etc. Thou hate oppression, Ab absurdis
argumentatur, quae in Deo minime sunt, tame^ cogitari possunt ab infirmitate
humana. Jun.
wrong dealing shall not dwell with thee. Job puts these questions, not as if
he questioned, whether it were good to the Lord to oppress, or good to destroy
the work of his hands, and to shine upon the counsel of the wicked; These were
no points of controversy with him, nor did he seek resolution about them. Yea,
he therefore begs a reason of the Lord, wherefore he was so oppressed, becaase
he knew it was not good unto Him that he should oppress.

Is it good unto thee?] The Hebrew signifies three things. (...) Bonum triplex
denotat. 1. Vtile. 2. Iucundum. 3. Honestum.


First, That which is profitable.

Secondly, That which is pleasant.

Thirdly, That which is just, right, or honorable, any thing tend^ng to
reputation. And there may be this threefold sense of it in this place.

1. Is it good unto thee? that is, Numquid tibi proderit. Vatab.
comes there any advantage unto the Lord by oppressing? Surely none, What
profit is there in our blood?

2. Is it good unto thee? that is, Is it pleasing or delightful? Is the Lord
taken with the afflicting of his people? I know he does not willingly afflict
the children of men.

3. Is it good unto thee? that is, Do thou reckon it thine honor to lay thy
hand severely upon thy poor creatures? No, it is thy glory to pass by a
transgression. Now seeing it it not good unto thee any of these ways, seeing
thou have no gain or profit by it, no joy or delight in it, no glory or honor
from it. Show me wherefore thou contendest with me; That Is still the burden of
this mournful Song, Is it good unto thee That thou should oppress?

The word which we translate to oppress, (...) Significat opprimere alique^
verbu aut factis. Numquid lo^u^ tibi videtur, si calumnieris me. Vulg.
signifies a double oppression. First, An oppression by our words. And
secondly, An oppression by our actions, the oppression of the tongue, and the
oppression of the hand. The tongue is a great tyrant, the tongue will lay on
load, and draw blood. The Vulgar understands it of this tongue-oppression, Is
it good for thee that thou should calumniate or slander me? that is, Give
others occasion to speak evil of me. That is a good sense. Slander and censure
wound deep, hard words bruise the credit and break the heatt, as well as hard
blows, bruise the flesh, and break the bones. But take it here rather for
oppression by outward violence: So the word is often used ( Psalm. 119.122.) I
have done judgment and justice, give me not ^ver to mine oppressors, to
those, who would wrong me, because I have done right. And it notes, as an open
or violent oppression, so a cunning, subtle oppression, a cheating, fraudulent
oppression. All wrong, how close and cunning soever, is oppression. We have
that sense of the word ( Hos. 12.7.) He is a merchant, the balances of deceit
are in his hand, he loves to oppress. How does a Merchant oppress? He comes
not like a thief or a Nimrod with a sword in his hand, bidding you, Deliver
your purse or your life, commanding you to give up your right, or your liberty;
but while in buying and selling, in trading and dealing, he offers you a fair
bargain, or as we say, a penny worth for your penny, he smites you secretly,
and cuts your throat (as famine does) without a knife: the balances of deceit
are in his hand; Balances are put for all instruments, or means of trading, by
these he deceives: light weights oppress the State, as a heavy weight presses
the body. The word imports also oppression by withholding what is due, as well
as by taking away what we duly hold ( Deuteronomy. 24.14.) Thou shall not oppress an
hired servant that is poor and needy; that is, thou shall not detain or keep
back any part of his wages.

The word (you see) is of a large sense, Is it good unto thee to oppress? I
know thou will not oppress me, either by speaking evil of, or over-censuring
me; either by open violence, or by secret fraud; either by taking from me what
I have, or by detaining from me, what I ought to have. Thou will not oppress
either with tongue or hand; either as a robber with thy sword, or as a merchant
with thy balances. Thus Job expostulates upon highest confidence, both of the
justice and holiness of God; as if he had said, Lord, I know thou do not
love to oppress; no thou art merciful and full of compassion. Whence is it
then that thou seem to act so unlike thy self? Is this thy pity to a poor
creature, and thy love to the work of thy hands? Thou usest to rejoice in the
consolation of thy people, and mercy pleases thee; thou usest to send out
rivers of goodness for wearied souls to bathe in, and streams of comfort for
thirsty souls to drink and be refreshed in. How is it then that a bitter cup
is put to my lips continually, and that I am overwhelmed in a salt sea, in a
sea of gall and bitterness?

Hence observe, God is so good and gracious that he loves not to grieve his
creature.

Among men ( Mica. 7.4.) The best of them is as a brier, the most upright is
sharper then a thorn hedge. Even they that seem most gentle and compassionate,
will yet sometimes scratch like briars, and tear like thorns: but the Lord
changes not, neither do his compassions fail. The actings of God appear
sometimes unsuitable to his nature, but they are never so. When he breaks us to
pieces, he delights not in our breakings, nor does he ever break his own, but
with an intent to bind them up again. God is so far from loving to oppress,
that one of his most eminent works of providence is, to relieve those who are
oppressed ( Ps. 12.4.) For the oppression of the poor will I arise, says the
Lord. And when the Lord arises, oppressors shall fall. O Lord (cries Hezekiah
in his sickness) I am oppressed, undertake for me (Isa. 38.14.) As if he had
said, This disease like a merciless tyrant oppresses my spirit, death has
even mastered me, and got the victory over my house of clay. Lord, Come to my
rescue, thou wast wont to deliver poor men, as a prey out of the hand, yea
mouths of their oppressors. O deliver me from this cruel sickness, which is
ready to oppress my life, and hale me as a prisoner to the grave. Is it good
unto thee that thou should oppress? And That thou should despise the
work of thine hands?

This clause has the same sense in general with the former, It is not good
unto thee, It is neither pleasing, nor profitable, nor honorable, That thou
should despise the work of thine hands. (...) Significat rejicere cum
fastidio, tanquam vile and comtemptum quid Mer. in Pag^. Exfastid^o and
contemptu sequi solet rei contemptae oppressio aut abj ct^o Hu^c hominem quem
^uis ma^i b^s fo masti de luto terrae. Dru.


Some translate this clause by oppression, Is it good that thou should
oppress the work of thine hands? The word in propriety signifies to d^spise:
we have met with it more then once before; it notes also loathing, yea
abhorring. And it may very well bear that other sense of oppressing: for when a
man loathes a thing and abhors it, he will quickly slight and oppress it: who
cares what becomes of that which he abhors? These two are joined together (2
King. 17.20.) The Lord rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and
delivered them into the hand of spoilers, until he had cast them out of his
sight. When once the Lord rejected, or despised the seed of Israel, they were
presently afflicted and delivered up to spoiling.

That thou should despise the work of thine hands] He means himself or any
other man; all men being the work of Gods hands. (...) Proprie labore^ and
lassitudinem, quandam in efficiendo opere denotat, ex quo orationis bujus vis
amplificatur
The word which we translate work, strictly taken, signifies hard work, extreme
labor, labor with weariness. Here understand it in a large sense, for God
works not to weariness. And when after he had finished the whole work of
creation: it is said by Moses (Genesis 2.2.) That he rested on the seventh day,
from all the work which he had made. The meaning is only this, he gave over or
ceased to work, not that his work put him to any pain or need of rest.

But why is man called, The work of Gods hands? Has God (who is a Spirit)
hands or any bodily parts?

By an ordinary figure in Scripture, hands and feet, eyes and ears, are
ascribed unto God. He is therefore said to have hands, because he works, not
because he works with hands. The hand is the instrument of work. Philosophers
call it, The Organ of Organs; man is called, The work of Gods hands, because
the hand is man's instrument in working. Now, whereas man is called, The work of
Gods hands, it imports three things;

First, An immediety in the work, or an immediate work. God made man himself
without any help.

Secondly, An exactness in the work, the work proclaims an accurate author,
The work of thy hands, a special piece of work, No hand but thine could make
such a piece.

Thirdly, It notes the fullness and compleatnesse of the work, a work
consummate and perfect, having the last hand put to it. Man is the work of Gods
hands in all and each of these senses.

Heaven is called a building of God, an house not made with hand, (2 Cor. 5.1.)
Man is a building of God, and he is the work of Gods hands, yet God made man
without hands, as much as he made heaven without hands. The hand of God implies
two things; 1. The power of God. 2. The wisdom of God.


Man is the work of both, For the invisible things of him from the creation of
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and God head. Now, if the beams and beauty of the divine
nature be visible in all that was created, then much more in man, who is the
epitome or sum of all that was created.

When Job puts the question, Is it good unto thee to despise the work of thy
hands? he alludes to artificers, Alio argumento injustitiam a Deo ansert, quod
artifices sua opera amare soleant. Merc.
who having made an excellent piece, will not destroy or break it in pieces,
no, they are very tender of their work, yea, they are apt to boast and grow
proud of it. The instinct of nature teaches us to love, not only that which is
our own by natural production, but that also which is our own by artificial
conception or operation. Indeed if a man make a mean, or an unworthy piece, he
despises it; such work discommends the workman, and he will break or burn it,
rather then let it be made public to the publishing of his own weakness or
unskilfulnesse. Man was the masterpiece of the whole visible Creation. Man was
made (not as other creatures) to have a being only, but that he might be in the
likeness of God, Hoc corpus meu^ quod in utero matris meae tam conciane and
apt formasti, destrues?
and bear his image. The Lord needs not be ashamed of, neither does he despise
any part of his work, much less this, which is the best and noblest part of
his work. Hence observe in general,

Man is the work of God.

All of man, man throughout, is the work of God. The fabrique of his body is
Gods work. I am fearfully and wonderfully made, says David, mavelous are thy
works, and that my soul knows right well; my substance was not hid from thee,
when I was made in secret, etc. In thy book all my members were written, which
in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them (Psalm.
139.14, 15.) A skillful architect before he builds, draws a model, or gives a
draught of the building in his book, or upon a Table; there he will show you
every room and contrivance: in his book are all the parts of the building
written, while as yet there are none of them, or before any of them are framed
and set up. In allusion to Architects and other Artisans, David speaks of God,
In thy book were all my members written; that is, Thou have made me as exactly,
as if thou had drawn my several members, and my whole proportion with a pen
or pensil in a book, before thou would adventure to form me up. The Lord
uses no book, no pen to decipher his work. He had the perfect Idaea of all
things in himself from everlasting, But He may well be said to work as by
pattern, whose work is the most perfect pattern.

As the body, so the soul of man is the work of Gods hand too. His power and
wisdom wrought it, and work mightily in it. In regard of bodily substance, the
most inferior creatures claim kindred of man, and he may be compared to the
beast that perishes. But in regard of the soul, man transcends them all, and
may challenge a neernesse, if not an equality with the Angels. The body is to
the soul, but as a mud wall which imprisons some precious treasure; at best but
like a gold ring to a sparkling diamond. If the more unworthy part of man be a
work worthy of God, how much more is his more worthy part? There is yet
somewhat in man of Gods making, which is better then either of these parts, and
is indeed all man. There is somewhat in man more excellent then man. The
qualities of a man are superior to his nature: man by his nature differs only
from a beast, but some men by their qualities differ from other men: one man
has better qualities then another, but no man has a better nature then
another. As the soul is more excellent then the body, and reason then sense, so
inward gifts are more excellent then the soul, and grace then reason. These are
the beauty, the gildings and engravings of the inner man. The Assyrians are
called, the work of Gods hands, not only in reference to creation, but
regeneration in Christ ( Isa. 19.25.) Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria
the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance. It Is a promise of the
calling of the Gentiles, when they who were not a people should receive Christ,
and be made the spiritual Israel, by the mighty work of God. This also is the
work which David intends, when he invites all lands to serve the Lord with
gladness, because it is he that has made us, and not we our selves (Psalm.
100.3.) Hence the Apostle calls all believers emphatically, The work of God
(Ephesians. 2.10.) We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works.
Man is the workmanship of God, as he is fitted for natural and civil works,
but he is most of all the workmanship of God, as he is fitted for spiritual
and holy works. All is the work of God, but this is curious work, workmanship
indeed.

From the whole, take three cautions.

First, Be not proud of what ye are, all is the work of God: How beautiful or
comely, how wise or holy soever ye are, it is not of your selves. What has any
man either in naturals or supernaturals, which he has not received?

Secondly, Despise not what others are or have, though they are not such exact
pieces, though they have not such excellent endowments as your selves, yet they
are what the hand of God has wrought them, and they have what the hand of God
has wrought in them. Be more thankful if ye are better framed, and have more
workmanship bestowed upon you, slight not those upon whom God has bestowed
less.

Thirdly, Despise not what your selves are; To do so is a sin, and a sin (in
respect of the body) very common. Many are ashamed to be seen, as God has made
them, few are ashamed to be seen, what the devil has made them. Many are
troubled at small defects in the outward man: Few are troubled at the greatest
deformities of their inner man; they call for no repairs, for no fresh colors
to be laid on there; many buy artificial beauty to supply the defects of
natural, who never had a thought of buying (without money) spiritual beauty
to supply the defects of supernatural. The crookedness and distortions, the
blackness and uncomelinesse of the soul are most deplorable, yet are they
little deplored; we are called every day to mend and cure them, we are told
where and how we may have all set right, and made fair again, and yet the most
stir not, or not to purpose. God will not know any body at the last day,
unless his souls be mended by grace, and some do so mend their bodies by art,
that God will not know their souls at that day. Depart from me, I know you not
(will be all their entertainment) ye have mended your bodies till ye have marred
your souls. Besides, What can the man do that comes after the King? says
Solomon (Eccles. 2.12) The work of the wisest among men, is beyond the
correction of an ordinary man. Much more may we say, What can the man do that
comes after God? The work of the most wise God is beyond the correction of the
wisest among men. They who thus come after God to mend his work, lest they
should be despised, will but make themselves more despicable. There is more
worth in the very defects of Gods work, then in the perfection of man's. We may
use means to help many bodily infirmities: but they who are discontent with
Gods work, are quickly proud of their own, and will one day be ashamed of their
own.

Secondly, Consider how Job argues, Is it good that thou should despise the
work of thy hands? Hence observe,

It is an argument moving the Lord to much compassion, to tell him that we are
his work, as we are creatures, and his work especially as we are new creatures.

When we are under such afflictions as threaten to ruin us, it is seasonable to
tell the Lord he made us. David strengthens prayer upon this argument ( Psalm.
138.8.) Forsake not the work of thy own hands; All men love their own works,
many dote upon them: Shall we think God will forsake his? See how the people of
God plead with God in greatest distress ( Isa. 64.8.) But now, O Lord, thou
art our Father, we are the clay, and thou our Potter, and we all are the work
of thine hand, Be not wroth very sore, O Lord. Will thou be angry with thy
work? Lord, be angry with the works of wicked men, and destroy the work of
Satan; Do not destroy the work of thine own hands, thy people are thy work,
Have thou not formed them for thy self? They will show forth thy praise. That
invitation to prayer ( Isa. 45.11.) seems to intimate that this plea has a
kind of command upon God, Thus says the Lord, the holy One of Israel, and his
maker, Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work
of my hands, command ye me: while ye come to me under that notion, that these
are the work of my hands, I cannot deny you; Do but name this, and it is a law
upon me, ye may have any thing of me, or do any thing with me, while ye speak
for the work of mine hands. Hence when the Prophet had put the Jews from that
plea, they were a lost people, and their case was desperate, This is a people
of no understanding, therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them,
and he that formed them will show them no favor (Isa. 27.11.) As if he had
said, Ye were wont (I know) to come to God with this motive of mercy, when he
afflicted you; Lord, thou did make and form us, therefore have mercy upon
us, but this shall prevail no more: He that made you, will not have mercy on
you; He that formed you will show you no favor. There is but one argument
stronger then this among all the Topics of prayer, and that never fails,
namely, that God has redeemed us, or that we are his redeemed ones. God
bestowed much cost upon us in the work of Creation, and therefore under that
title he can hardly cast us off, but he has bestowed so much cost upon us in
the work of redemption, that he will never cast us off.

Further, The Scripture makes frequent use of this argument to repress the
pride and presumption of man, and to stop his mouth when he begins to question,
and call God to account about any of his dealings, with, why is it thus? Or,
why am I thus? Thus the Prophet silences the murmurings both of man's heart and
tongue ( Isa. 45.9, 10.) Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker, shall the
clay say to him that fashioned it, Why have thou made me thus? And when the
Apostle found unquiet, and bold spirits busied in contesting with God about his
eternal counsels, in choosing some and rejecting others, in showing mercy to
some and hardening others, he stops them with, Who art thou, O man, that
reply against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why
have thou made me thus? Remember thou art the clay and he is the Potter. That
we are the work of Gods hand moves his compassion toward us, and represseth
our presumption against him. We must not proudly dispute it out with him, for
we are the work of his hands, and we may humbly plead with him, not to despise
the work of his hands, or to Shine upon the counsel of the wicked.

God is light, and he has light, but he has none for wicked men, or for their
counsels.

To shine upon the counsel of the wicked notes three things. Impiorum consitia
illustrare, idem est quod juvare, and illorum caeptis ac conatibus favere.


First, To favor or delight in them.

Secondly, To succor or assist them.

Thirdly, To make them prosperous and successful.

David praying against his enemies, says, Let their way be dark and slippery,
Psalm. 35.6. And when the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwinde, he questions,
Who is this that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? (Job 38.2.) As to
darken ways, and to darken counsel is to hinder and trouble them: so to shine
upon ways and counsels is to help and favor them. The Sun is the candle of
the world, and Sunshine is the comfort of the world. The Psalmist prays in
this language, Thou that dwell between the Cherubims, shine forth; that is,
help and favor us; so it is expounded in the next verse, Before Ephraim,
Benjamin and Manasses, stir up thy strength, and come and save us (Psalm. 80.1,
2.) Thou will light my candle (was David's confidence) the Lord my God will
enlighten my darkness, for by thee I have run through a troop, and by my God
have I leaped over a wall (Psalm. 18.28, 29.) that is, I have done great things,
and I have overcome the greatest difficulties through thine assistance. Will
God shine thus upon the counsel of the wicked? Or will he help the evil-doer?
Job denies it, and therefore prays, Show me why thou contendest with me. I
know thou bear no good will to those who are wilful in doing evil, nor
take thou pleasure in those, who take pleasure in iniquity.

But does not the Lord give good success to those who are evil? Does the way
of the wicked never prosper? Prospers it not so far sometimes, that godly men
stumble in their way, and are offended?

I answer, God makes his Sun to shine upon the evil and the good, but
himself never shines upon the evil. Wicked men receive benefits from God, but
they receive no blessings from God.

There is a twofold light. First, The light of Gods providence. Secondly, The
light of Gods countenance. The light of Gods countenance never shines upon the
counsel of the wicked, they have only the light of his providence. He never
shines upon them to favor them, though he often shines upon them to prosper
them. A man may have much good showed him, and yet no good will showed him. The
clouds and darkness, which at any time cover the counsels of the righteous,
are clearer then all the light which shines upon the counsels of the wicked.
God varies his dispensations often, but he never varies his affections;
whatsoever he does against the righteous, he never hates or dislikes them; and
whatsoever he does for the wicked, he never loves or likes them.

But who are the wicked intended in this text upon whose counsels God will not
shine? There are four apprehensions about it: who are wicked all agree, but who
these wicked are is not agreed. Some refer the word to his friends, I know thou will not favor their sinful censures and rash judgments concerning me.
Surely they shall receive little thanks and less reward for these
discourtesies; thou will not go forth with them, or give witness to what they
have done; thou will not confirm or attest what they have spoken.

Job (I grant) found little comfort from his friends: but I do not find that
they gave him evil counsel, much less that they took wicked counsel against
him. The Lord reproved them for the error of their speech, but he did not
reprove them for the wickedness of their persons. Indeed Job charges them
deeply (Chap. 13.7.) Will you speak wickedly for God? Yet I do not believe that
he judged them wicked. A thing in it self wicked may be spoken, and yet the
speaker not be wicked. Therefore I would not think Job aims at his friends, or
fastens so deep a charge on them, though they had charged him so deep.

Secondly, Others conceave Job means the devil and his angels, Will thou shine
upon Satan's counsel? As when Ahasuerus (being informed of that conspiracy
against the Jews) enquired, who is he? and where is he that durst presume in
his heart to do so? Queen Esther said, the adversary and enemy is this wicked
Haman (Chap. 7.5, 6.) So might Job have answered the Lord. My adversary and
enemy is this wicked Satan. He laid the plot and has stirred up all these
evils against me: I know Lord, thou will not take Satan's part: thou will not
help him who would be the destroyer and murderer, who is the great malignant
and projectour against thy servant.

Thirdly, Others take the wicked here, for the Sabeans and Caldeans, who were
the instruments of Satan, in spoiling and robbing Job of his goods and
substance. That they were wicked, we need not question; yet

Fourthly, Take it rather in general, for all or any wicked men, upon whose
ways God seems to shine when he gives success to their works of darkness.

Hence observe,

First, Wicked men are sometimes prospered in their counsels, and walk in
pleasant (though evil) ways.

God gives delight to those in whom he has no delight. And they have many good
things from him, who never had one good thought from him. Thousands are
prospered and hated at the same time When Dionysius (in the story) had robbed an
Idol-Temple, and at his return by sea had a fair gale and pleasant weather to
waft him home with the spoils; See (said he) how the heavens smile upon us, and
how the gods are pleased with what we have done. The like conclusions many draw
from the premises of outward prosperity: surely the true God is pleased with
us: but there is a cloud upon this Sunshine and darkness in all this light.

Observe,

Secondly, The Lord hates the counsel of wicked men.

He is so far from shining upon, that he, indeed, darkens their counsels. He
casts darkness upon them, even the darkness of his heaviest displeasure, when
themselves think, and the world says, all is light about them ( Zech. 1.15.)
Thus says the Lord, I am very sore displeased with the Heathen that are at
ease; They had their pleasure, but God took no pleasure in them, I am very sore
displeased with these Heathens that are at ease, that is, I approve not their
courses, yea my wrath is kindled against their persons. The light which shines
upon wicked men, turns all at last into heat; and they have always the heat of
Gods anger mixed with their light: a heat not to warm but to consume and burn
them up. As when the Lord sends the clouds and darkness of outward affliction
upon his own people, he sends likewise the beams of his everlasting love into
their hearts: So he clouds and darkens wicked men, while his candle shines
upon their heads.

JOB Chap. 10. Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. Have thou eyes of flesh? or see thou as man
sees?

Are thy days as the days of men? Are thy years as man's days?

That thou inquire after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin?

Thou know that I am not wicked, and there is none that can deliver out of
thy hand.


JOB proceeds upon the same argument; and as in the third verse he had
removed three things inconsistent with, and dishonorable to the justice of
God: So in the two verses following, he removes two more. And as he thus
acquits the Lord from injustice or unrighteous dealing with him: so he appeals
to the Lord (who was able (he knew) to do it upon certain knowledge) to acquit
him from all the unjust charges, with which his friends had burdened him, Thou
know that I am not wicked, etc.

Have thou eyes of flesh? or see thou as man sees?
The Question is to be resolved into this negation, Lord, Thou have not eyes of
flesh, Lord, Thou see not as man sees; as if Job had thus spoken, Lord, I
have been long afflicted with grievous pains, I am as a man hanging upon a
rack, to draw out and force a confession from him; Lord, why is it thus with
me? Why am I brought to such a trial? I am sure it is not with thee as with
mortal Judges, who having eyes of flesh, can see no further then the outside
of things, and know no more then is told them, and therefore must fetch out
what lies in the heart of man by examination, and if examination will not do
it, they must do it by torture; Lord, there is no need thou should take this
course; Thou can enform thy self fully how it is with me, though I should not
speak a word, though I am silent, yet thine ear hears the voice and understands
the language of my spirit. Though I hide or cover my self, yet the eye of thy
omniscience looks quite through me; seeing then thou have not eyes like the eyes
of men, wherefore is it that thou inquire by these afflictions after mine
iniquity, and searchest (as men use to do) after my sin?

Have thou eyes of flesh? or see thou as man sees? God has no eyes, much
less eyes of flesh; God is a Spirit, and therefore he cannot have eyes of
flesh; He is all eye, and therefore (properly) he has no eyes. The eye is that
special organ or member of the body into which the power of seeing is
contracted, but God is all over a power of seeing. The body of man has
several parts, and several honors and offices are bestowed upon every part.
The eye has the great office and honor of seeing committed to it. The eye is
the light of the whole body, and knowledge is the eye of the soul. The eye of
God is the knowledge of God. Ipsum nomen Dei Graecum hanc videndi efficacit
atem prae sesert (...) nimirum (...), spectare, contemplari dicitur. Nihil est
in intellectu quod no^ pri^ suit in sensu.
The Greeks express God by a word which signifies to see: and he is therefore
said to have eyes, and to see, because the eye is a principal instrument, and
seeing a principal means by which man receives knowledge. Naturalists tell us
there is nothing in the understanding but that which is first in the sense. The
senses are doors to the mind; the furniture and riches of that are conveyed in
by the eyes or ears. These bring informations to the understanding. Natural
knowledge cannot have an immediate access to man, and it is but seldom that
spiritual has: Both are commonly let in by sense. The superior powers must
traffic with the inferior, otherwise they make no gain. Though God has no
need of any help to bring in or improve his knowledge, yet that is ascribed to
him by which knowledge is improved; He has eyes, but not of flesh; he sees,
but not as man.

Have thou eyes of flesh? Flesh by a Synechdoche is put for the whole nature of
man. The Word was made flesh (Joh. 1.14.) not body or soul, but Flesh, that is,
man consisting of soul and body. Thus here, eyes of flesh, that is, man's eyes.
And so the later clause of the verse is an exposition of the former. Oculi
carnei sunt secundum carnem judicantes.
When he says, Have thou eyes of flesh? It is no more then this, Do thou see
as man sees? To have an eye of flesh, is to judge according to the flesh, and
to see as man sees, is to see no more then man.

When Samuel was sent to anoint a King over Israel in the place of Saul (1 Samuel
16.7.) the Lord said concerning the firstborn of Jesse, Look not on his
countenance, or on the height of his stature, because I have refused him; The
reason added is this, For the Lord sees not as man sees, for man looks on the
outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart. There we have Jobs
doctrine of Gods seeing, delivered by God himself. Samuel thought he who made
the fairest show to the eye of man, must needs be the man who was fairest in
the eye of God; but the Lord sees what is not seen, and often finds most
reality in the least appearance; he who has not eyes of flesh sees beyond the
flesh.

There are seven differences between the eye of flesh or man's eye, and the eye
of God.

1. Man's eye is but a means, or an instrument of knowledge: Gods eye is his
knowledge. The act and the faculty are not distinct in God. All in God is act;
Neither is God another thing from his act: whatsoever is ascribed to him, is
himself. The eye of God is God seeing. The knowledge of God is God knowing. The
love of God is God loving.

2, Man must have a twofold light to see by; an inward light, the light of the
eye and an outward light, the light in the air: without both he cannot see; man
does not see (as Naturalists speak) by sending forth a beam or a ray from his
eye to the object, but by receaving or taking in a beam or a ray from the
object into his eye; The object issues it is species to the eye, which being
joined with the visive power of the eye, man sees: But God sees in himself,
of himself, and from himself, he needs no outward light. Christ is described
having a fiery eye, His eyes were as a flame of fire (Revel. 1.14. Revel.
2.18.) Even nature teaches us that those creatures which have fiery eyes, see
in the dark, and see best when it is darkest, because they see by sending forth
a beam or a flame from their eyes, which at once apprehends the object, and
enlightens the passage to it. God who commanded light to come out of darkness
for the use of man, commands light in darkness for his own. The darkness
hides not from thee (says David) but the night shines as the day. The
darkness and the light are both alike to thee. There is no darkness nor
shadow of death, where any of the workers of iniquity can hide themselves, Job
34.22. Thus God has not eyes of flesh; he sees not as man sees.

3. Man sees one thing after another: his eye is not able to take in all
objects at once; he views now one, and then another, to make his judgment of
them. But God sees all things together; he beholds all at one view; his eye
takes and gathers in all objects, and all that is in every object by one act.
The Lord looks from heaven, and beholds all the sons of men; from the
place of his habitation he looks upon all the inhabitants of the earth (Psalm.
33.13, 14.)

4. An eye of flesh sees at a distance, and at such a distance. Naturalists
tell us, there must be a due distance between the eye and the object. If you
put the object too near the eye, Sensibile positum super sensu^ tollet
sensationem.
the eye cannot see it, That which is sensible put upon the sense, takes away
sensation. Again, if the object be very remote, the eye cannot make any
discovery of it, The eye cannot see far, and it cannot discern so far as it
can see. We may see a thing, and not know what we see. But the eye of the Lord
sees and discerns at all distances. There are none so near him, but he knows
what they are; neernesse does not hinder his sight; and there are none so far
from him, but he can discover what they are, remoteness does not hinder his
sight. And indeed all things are present with him, as in time, so in place; God
is nearest, Deus non solu^ est proximus objecto, sed est intime cum illo
conjunctut.
even next to every object: He is in every place, yet not included by any, he
is in every thing, yet not mixed with any ( Prove. 15.3.) The eyes of the Lord
are in every place, beholding the evil and the good. His eyes are upon the
ways of man, he sees all his goings (Job 34.21.) and that this seeing is a
distinguishing sight, another Scripture clears to us, His eyelids try the
children of men (Psalm. 11.5.) Let them be what they will, and where they will,
his eyelids do not only see, but try, that is, he has a distinct, and a
certain knowledge, or a critical sight of the state and condition of every man.

5. Man sees but the color and skin, the face and outside of things or
persons, but God sees the in-sides, and looks into the very bowels of them. He
is a searcher and discerner of the heart: He sees the spirit as soon as the
face. Our clothes are not more open to him then our breasts and bosoms. An
Heathen wished for a window there, and if we had windows there, we could not
see what is there. An eye of flesh cannot read the meaning of our spirits; but
the Lord can look into the heart without a window, yea we are all window to
him, and he at every turn looks not only upon us, but into us. It was
prophesied of Christ, ( Isa. 11.3.) He shall not judge after the sight of his
eyes; neither reprove after the hearing of his ears; that is, he shall not
judge as a mere man, but as God; he shall not judge according to fair
appearances, or flying reports, He shall judge with righteousness, and reprove
with equity. Man (whose eyes are of flesh) should not judge according to
appearance, yet because his eyes are of flesh, he cannot judge of that which
does not appear. But God who calls those things which are not, as if they
were, judges of those things which appear not, as if they did appear.

6. An eye of flesh may be deceived. The sight of man is subject to manifold
deceptions. Many things put a stop to the sight of the eye. The eye of man is
in danger of as many fallacies, as the understanding; and the understanding is
entangled with many fallacies by the eye. But there is no error in the sight
of God, nor any deception of his eye; you cannot by any art or device, by any
policy or hypocrisy, by any masks or disguises, by any simulations or
dissimulations make that appear to him, which is not, or make it appear to him
otherwise then it is. The heart of man, (says the Lord) is deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? (only the Lord who makes,
can answer this challenge, so he does in the next words) I the Lord search the
heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his doings. How can that which is deceitful receive
according to its doings, but by knowing all its doings and all it is deceits? As
the tongue (the greatest troubler of the world) no man can tame: so the heart
(the greatest impostour in the world) no man can discover but God, and he can
do it easily, and does it continually.

7. When it is said, the Lord has not eyes of flesh, he sees not as man
sees, the meaning is, his knowledge is not imperfect as the knowledge of man
is. An eye of flesh has bin but a while, and can be but a while, and therefore
cannot attain much knowledge, We are but of yesterday, and know nothing (says
Bilaad, c. 8.) He that has but little experience, must needs have more then a
little ignorance. Experience breeds knowledge, and brings to perfection in
knowledge. The eye of God is from everlasting. If he had not (as he has) all
knowledge in and from himself, he might have fetched it in before this time,
from what he has seen. And he (having seen all things) must needs have perfect
knowledge, whose knowledge had been perfect, though he had never seen any of
these things.

Besides, As this phrase, an eye of flesh, imports thinness of experience, and
thence imperfection of knowledge, so grossness of spirit, and dimnesse of
understanding to attain knowledge. When Peter made that gracious confession (
Mat. 16.16.) Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. Christ answers, Caro
significat aliquia pingue obtusum crassu^ minime subti^e aut perspicax.
Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood (that is, man) has not
revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven, As if he had said,
All men are flesh and blood, so dull-sighted and blind, that they could never
have perceived this truth by any study or observation, it comes only by gift
and revelation.

The eye of God is not an eye of flesh in this sense neither. All spirits have
much clearness of understanding, much sharpness and quickness of
apprehension. The devil being a spirit, Demon.
though now a wicked spirit, has one name from knowledge. How much more
knowing is he, who is The spirit, the Creator of the spirits of all flesh, and
the Creator of those spirits which subsist without flesh?

Further, Sight is put for judgment, and seeing for judging. Judging is an act
beyond knowing. Judgment is the result of knowledge. So, Thou do not see,
is, Thou do not judge as man judges.

1. Man's judgment is often hindered by his affections. Number vides more hominum,
and si^ut illi ex facie judicas ut affectibus ducaris si^ut illi?
His judgment is hindered by diverse affections, especially by love, and the
nearness of relations; man can hardly see a fault and a friend, a sin and a
son together. Love makes knowledge as ignorance, and light as darkness.
Christian charity covers a multitude of sins from private revenge, and harsh
censures; But humane charity cover^ a multitude of sins from public justice,
and wholesome admonitions. The former keeps from rigid severity, this endangers
to cockering flattery. It is not thus with God, He sees not as man sees. They
who have the greatest interest, the nearest relation to God, are seen what they
are, and shall be judged as they are. God has (indeed) an infinite largeness
of affection to poor sinners, and the lap of his garment of love covers every
day a multitude, yea many multitudes of sins. But he does not this, because his
love to the persons offending hinders his eye from seeing, but because his Son
having satisfied his justice for the persons offending, he turns away his eye
from seeing their sins. God proclaims himself at once, The God pardoning
iniquity, transgression and sin, and that will by no means acquit the guilty
(Exodus 34.7.) There is nothing but the Name of his Son, and of his Son
suffering, which turns his eye from sin. He will espy, and punish, or espy to
punish all our faults through all other titles and interests whatsoever.

Again, Man's judgment is clouded by wrath and malice. He cannot see the
innocence of those he hates, or do them justice to whom he bears no affection.
The want of love hinders an eye of flesh, as much as the inordinacy or excess
of it. But though the Lord be angry and displeased with man, yet he wrongs no
man. The wrath of man cannot work the righteousness of God, but the wrath of
God works righteousness to man. He never gives more then right to those he
loves most, nor less then right to those he hates most. That which we call
passion in God, is acted with highest reason, his anger never errs.

2. Man is much swaied in judgment by the power, pomp and splendor of men. We
are apt to think they have most worth in them, who are worth most. And that
they are good, with whom all is well. Even the Saints are touched with this
infirmity: The Apostle James (chap. 2.2, 3.) bespeaks them thus, If there come
into your Assembly a man with a gold ring in goodly apparel, and there come in
a poor man in vile raiment, and ye have respect to him that wears the gay
clothing, and say unto him, Come and sit here by me in a good place, and say to
the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool, Are ye not
partial in your selves, and Judges of evil thoughts? that is, Are ye not
condemned in your selves, and convinced in your own consciences, that you do
evil, and so that your thoughts have been evil, which moved you to do so? Can
you choose but judge this an evil thought, to think him the best man that
wears the best clothes, and him a vile person that is in vile apparel? Thus
men, yea good men may mis-judge of men. But the Lord sees not as man sees, It
is not good clothes, but a good heart; it is not a gold ring, but a golden
conversation which he accepts; wickedness is abominable in his eye, though it
sit upon a throne; and holiness shines in his eye, though it lie upon a
dunghill. Holiness is not less lovely to him, because clothed with rags,
nor unholinesse less loathsome to him, because it goes in a gay coat. It Is
well conceived, Forte Job resp^cit ad carneos judicum oculos, qui ex specie and
carnis splendore judicant, sordidos vero and squal^dos contemnu^t At Deus
sordida and humilia non despicit, Sanct.
that Job had reference to his own condition when he spoke thus; he lay in a
woeful plight, all over sores, and boils, and filthiness, yet (says he) Lord,
I know thou see not as man sees; Thou do not therefore think me the worse,
because I am thus ill. I am even a loathing, not only to others, but to my
self, yet I know thou do not loath me; Thou have not a bad opinion of me,
because my condition is thus bad.

3. Man judges the cause by the effect, the tree by the fruit, the man by his
actions, that is the way of man's judgment, and so man ought to judge. We ought
to think well of them, who do well; and when the hand is clean, charity bids us
say the heart is clean too. But the Lord sees not as man sees; he in judging
men transcends the rule he gives men to judge by. He judges the fruit by the
tree, the effect by the cause, and the action by the man; he had respect to
Abel, and then to his offering. If the worker please him not, neither does his
work; as he makes, so he sees the tree good, and then then the fruit good. Till
the man mends, his manners never mend in Gods esteem. When a good tree brings
forth evil fruit, or an evil tree good fruit, it is accidental to them both,
not natural. God judges us by what we always are, not by what we sometimes
act, either in good or evil.

In this also Job comforts himself, that whatsoever fruit he might seem to
bring forth, yet the Lord judged him not (as his friends did) by some unsavory
speeches that came from him, but by the savourinesse of that spirit which was
in him. He knew God judged him by the settled temper of his inward man, and the
soundness of his mind, not by the casual distemper of his outward man, or
the sound of his tongue. Job was a good tree, and the root of the matter was in
him. And Job was assured God would not condemn him for his fruit, if some of it
were bitter and unpleasant, while he saw his root was good.

4. Man must take time to hear and discuss every case, to find and beat out
the truth of every controversy, but God judges all at an instant; the matter
is no sooner before him, but he knows it fully: indeed the matter was ever
before him, and ever fully known, he knew it from eternity: Things are known to
him before they are, by whom all things are. The Lord needs not to put
questions or to be informed by confessions. God is able to prevent our
questions with resolutions, and to give us answers before we give him our
doubts ( Joh. 16.30.) Now are we sure that thou know all things, and need
not that any man should ask thee; that is acquainted with our doubts before we
propose them, can answer them as soon as we propose them. Seeing it is thus
(says Job) why am I held so long upon the rack to draw out the matter from me?
I know thou do not judge as man judges, by enquiring into, or comparing
circumstances and actions, answers and questions. Thou art able to make out a
judgment of me, and of my condition from thy own knowledge without the
contribution of my answers to thy questions, or of other men's testimonies
concerning my actions, Thou see not as man sees.

Lastly, To have eyes of flesh, and to see as man, is to see with scorn, (...)
Est aliquando despicere, and cernere cum contemptu.
or with disdain. The original word which we translate to see, put alone,
signifies sometimes to despise. The Prince of Tyrus is threatened thus ( Ezekiel.
28.17.) I will lay thee before kings that they may behold (that is, despise and
deride) thee; And the Spouse in the Canticles (Chap. 1.6.) deprecates, look not
upon me, because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me; that is,
God has looked upon me with a scorching eye of displeasure, and made me black
with troubles, do not ye look upon me with a scornful eye of disdain, because
of my blacknes. Thus God sees or looks not as man sees; he looks not
disdainfully upon a poor afflicted soul, as men do upon their friends in their
affliction, or as ye my friends do upon me in mine affliction.

This is the fourth dishonorable thought, which Job removes from God. His
eyes are not eyes of flesh, he sees not as man sees, either in reference to
the truth or manner, the clearness or speediness, the certainty or
impartiality, the infallibility or charity of his judgment. Upon all which his
former request is again to be inferred, Show me wherefore thou contendest with
me.

He proceeds to a fifth, which he also by way of interrogation removes from
God, and so virtually renews the same petition.

Verse 5. Are thy days as the days of men? Are thy years as man's days?
I know they are not.

Are thy days at man's days? Some interpreters take the word day for
judgment, Are thy days as man's days? that is, Are thy judging days, Ponitur
dies pro judicio ex Cilicum idiotismo. Hieron, Putarim Paulum potius diem
maluisse dicere, quam judicium, u^ alluderet ad diem illum supremum in quo
Dominus ipse judex sedebit. Bez.
or thy judgment given upon those days, like man's days, or the judgment
which man gives? We have the word in that sense (1 Cor. 4.3.) where the
Apostle concludes in his own case, It is a very small thing with me to be
judged of you, or of man's judgment; the Greek is, To be judged of man's day:
and according to the idiom of that language in some countries, the day of a man
is put for the judgment of a man. Though others conceive Paul calls it a day
rather then a judgment, in allusion to that last day, wherein God will sit in
judgment upon the whole world. So the meaning of Job is plainly this, The
Lords judgment is not like man's judgment; This Exposition falls in with the
sense of the former verse; men judge by outward proofs and probabilities, by
questions and interrogatories, by testimonies and witnesses: God needs none of
these humane helps in his day of judgment; yet in Jobs case, he carried it, as
if he needed them. The suit depending so long before him, and such variety of
experiments and trials, being put upon, or taken of him.

But, we may better interpret days for a part of time; and so, Enos cujus
vitae duratio brevissima and pene nulla.
Are thy days as man's days? is, Art thou short lived as man is? The word
[Man] signifies man in his worst condition, Are thy days like the days of a
weak man? of a miserable sickly man? Are they like the days of a man, whom we
number among the dead, and who is giving up the ghost every hour? There are
some men, whom we call long-lived, that is, men who in probability may live
very long: we say of a healthy strong man, we would take a lease of his life,
or if we were to take a lease for lives, we would put his life in for one: he
is a man of a good complexion and constitution, a man like to live, and see
many days. But, says Jo^, Are thy days as the days of Enosh? As the days
of a weak sickly man, as the days of one, who looks as if he would drop into
the grave every day; as the days of a very borderer upon death, of the next
neighbor, and heir apparent to the king of terrors? Lord, I am sure thy days
are not as the days of such a weakling, of such mouldring, sickly clod of
earth. This sense may have a double reference.

Perslat Job in excludenda ignorantia a Deo judice; Dies hominis significant
vitam bre vissimam, quae cum multa ignorantia conjuncta est. Sanct Ars longa
vita brevis. Hypocr.
1. To the knowledge of God concerning Job. 2. To the manner of Gods dealing
with Job.
1. Thy days are not as the days of man, thou have had, and have time enough
to gather knowledge and experience, if thou did need such help to make thee
more knowing. It was the ancient complaint of that great Physician, when he saw
how much of his art he had to learn, and how little time he had to learn it in,
Art is long, and time is short, what can I learn in such a span-long life as
mine? Hence it is conceived, that though the fathers before the flood (some of
whose lives reached eight or nine Centuries) wanted the help of Libraries and
Academies, which we enjoy; yet, that by the experience of so many years, they
gathered a great stock of knowledge, and proved men of eminent learning. Men
whose days are not as the days of ordinary men, attain knowledge beyond
ordinary men. How then can the Lord want any perfection of the most perfect
knowledge, who numbereth not only by hundreds and thousands of years, but by an
eternity of years. His knowledge must needs be full, concerning the state both
of things and persons, who not only has Antiquity of days, but is the Ancient
of days (Dan. 7.9.) Many men have lived so many days, that they are justly
called Ancient, but no man ever lived or shall live so long, as to deserve this
title, Ancient of days. God is called the Ancient of days, not only, because
he has been many days, yea all the days that ever have been, but because he
is ancienter then days; He is the days ancient, for he made the day. His
days cannot be like man's days, who made five days ancienter then man. God
has more then all days, therefore he has all knowledge: he has all
experience, therefore he has neither ignorance, nor nescience. Upon this ground
Job argues it out with God, that he must needs know all thing, who was before
all times; and that he was acquainted with him better then all men, who lived
at that day, because he lived and was acquainted with what he would be, before
man had a day, even from eternity.

2. These words, Thy days are not as man's days, may refer to the dealing of
God with Job; As if he had said, Lord, why then do thou make such haste to
enquire after me? why do thou so incessantly follow me with afflictions? Why
do thou keep me upon the rack from day to day, night and day, and wilt give
me no rest? Lord, thou need not fear to loose time, for thou have all time
at thy command: thou can not want opportunity, who have eternity. The reason
why man is called upon so earnestly, to redeem the time, is, because he has so
little time given him, and no time at all, but what is given him. His days are
short days and they are but few, and (which should provoke him more to make
haste) he knows not how few; unless he lay hold upon the present day, he is
not sure of any day. But Lord, thou art Lord of time, and Master not only over
thy work, but also over thy days, thou can allow thy self as many days as
thou please to do thy work in. Why then do thou deal thus severely with
me, as if thou were afraid thou should over-slip thy day; or want a season
to deal with me in.

Again, When he says, Are thy days as man's days? it may refer to the
changes which happen in the days of man: Deo nihil affert novi crastina dies.
the days of man are sometimes fair, and sometimes cloudy, sometimes he has
good days, and sometimes he has ill days, therefore he must take his time,
and lay hold upon his opportunity. He must make his hay while the Sunshines,
who cannot command the Sun to shine. But the days of the Lord are (like
himself) always the same, always alike. There are no changes of time to him,
who is himself unchangeable.

Lastly, Are thy days as the days of man? A^iam suarum miseriarum causam
excludit a Deo, q.d. si non esset firma Dei voluntas, atque benevolentia erga
suos, sed innata illi esset inconstantia, nihil mirum esset si me, que^ quondam
ingentibus beneficiis cumula vit odio prosequatur. Bold. (...)
may have reference to man himself; man is as mutable a creature, as his time
is: and man is mutable, not only in his condition, but in his affection: now he
loves, anon he hates, now he rejoices, anon he sorroweth; now he esteems,
anon he rejects; now he imbraceth, anon he contemns, Lord (says Job) I
know thou art not in thy days as man is in his; Where thou art once a friend,
thou art always a friend; whom thou love thou love for ever. Thy
affections are as unchangeable as thy nature.

There is a difference in the later clause of the verse, for whereas he says
in the first, Are thy days as the days of man? In the second he says, Are
thy years as man's days? The days of God in the first part, are the same with
the years of God in the second. But man has not years ascribed to him in the
second. The time of man is so short that it is reckoned by the shortest
complete time, a day. And when David computes the longest date of man's life, he
does not say, The years of man are threescore years and ten; but the days of
our years are threescore years and ten (Psa. 90.10.) There is yet another
difference in the original about the word man. In the first clause the Hebrew
word for man was Enosh, here it is Geber, which signifies a strong man, a
mighty man, a man of the most masculine spirit, and strongest body, of the most
vigorous abilities, and greatest probabilities to live long. A man of brass,
and heart of oak, rather then of clay, and dust of the earth, Lord, Thy days
are not only not as the days of Enosh, a weak, sickly man, but, Thy years are
not as the days of Geber, as the days of the mightiest and healthiest, of the
strongest and stoutest among the sons of men.

Observe hence more distinctly the difference between the days of God, and the
days of man.

First, Gods day is the day of eternity.

Man's days are but days of time. God is said, To inhabit eternity (Isa.
57.15.) that is, he is fixed in eternity, he is without beginning, and without
end, yea his days are without succession of days. All the days of God are
but a day. Not only are a thousand years to him as one day, but eternity is to
him as one day. All that God does, is said to be done to day; Thou art my
son, to day have I begotten thee (Psalm. 2.7.) yet he speaks (say some) of the
eternal generation of the Son: or, as it refers to the resurrection of
Christ (so the Apostle expounds it, Act. 13.33.) God calls that time, To day,
though it came a long time after: all is present with God; Past and to come in
relation to God, is neither past nor to come, all is now or to day. That was
not past to God, which never had beginning, the eternal generation of his Son:
nor was that to come to God which was always before him: The temporal
resurrection of his Son, To day have I begotten thee, is the most proper style
for God.

Tempus est mensura hominum habens principium and finem, aeviternitas est
Angelorum, principium habeus, sed non finem, aeternitas est propria Deo, nec
principiu^ habens nec finem.
Some distinguish thus between these three, Eternity, Eviternity and Time.
Eternity is that which is peculiar unto God, his are the days of eternity.
Eviternity is proper to Angels and spirits, which have a beginning, but shall
have no end. Time is the portion and lot of man, who has had a beginning, and
shall have an end. Time is the measure of those things, which actually corrupt
and change. Eviternity is the measure of things incorruptible and unchangeable,
not in themselves, but by the appointment of God. Eternity is peculiar to God,
in whom it is absolutely impossible any change should be. Time has continual
successions, eternity a constant permanency, eviternity partakes of both. Hence

The second difference, Man's days are moveable, the days of God move not.
Aeternitas est quae nihil habet mutabile, ibi nihil est praeteritum quasi jam
non fit, nihil futaru^ quasi nondum fit, quia ^o^ est ibi nisi est. Aug. in Ps
101. Erat and erit nostri temporis fluxaeque naturae segmenta sunt. Aeternitas
est semper and immutabile esse.


Thirdly, Man's days being past cannot be recalled: Gods day is ever within his
call, for, that which is past is as much present to him, as that which is
present, and that which is to come is as much present to him, as that which is.
Man's day was, is, and shall be, Gods day always is; his name is, I am; It was,
and it will be, are divisions and fragments, morsels and bits of time, eternity
is an It is.

This teaches us; First,

That God has time enough to do his work in.

His days are not as man's days. He needs not hasten his work, lest he should
loose his opportunity, who is possessed of eternity. And

Secondly, This (by the way) shows us the infinite happiness and
unconceivable blessedness of God; His days are not as man's days; one of man's
days carries away one comfort, and the next a second. This day brings one
comfort, and the next a second, and so he loses or receives his comforts by
days and by days, by the fluxes and refluxes of time. God has all his
happiness in eternity, that is, he has all at once. Time neither brings nor
carries away from God. He enjoys as much at this present, what he ever had,
as what he has at this present; and he enjoys as much what shall be, as he
does what is present; he enjoys all at once, because he sees all at once.
God has not one thing after another, but all together. Eternity is the longest
and the shortest, it is longest in duration, and the shortest in fruition, not
that the enjoyment of any thing there is short, but because in the shortest
enjoyment there is all. Every moment of eternity being filled with all the
blessedness of eternity.

Thirdly, This shows the reason why the Lord takes such leisure to do his
work; he does not precipitate or thrust on his designs, because he may take
what time he will. God has all time at his command. Men bear sway and rule
over persons and places, God only rules times. Man has not one day in his
power, not only not the day to come, but not the day present. Go to now (says
the Apostle James chap. 4.13, 14.) ye that say to day, or to morrow we will go
into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain,
whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow, Nor indeed does any man know
whether he shall be on the morrow, or on all the day wherein he is. God can
boast of to morrow, that is, of eternity, or of all time to come. Man cannot
boast of tomorrow, that is of the next day, no nor of the next time to come of
the same day. Hence it is that man must hasten, lest he miss his season. When
David had Saul at an advantage (1 Samuel 24.5.) they about him advise him to make
use of it, and not to let it slip, Behold the day of which the Lord said unto
thee, etc. Sr having such a day, take hold of it, if you let this go, you may
never see such another. Time is no part of the dominion of Kings. So likewise
Abishai counsels David upon the same advantage (1 Samuel 26.8.) God has
delivered thy enemy into thine hand this day (let him go this day, and probably
thou shall never have the like day again) Now therefore let me smite him, I
pray thee with the spear, even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him
the second time. I can dispatch him at one time, and possibly thou shall not
have a second time. In a good work, it is good, yea it is best to do our work at
once, and not to expect (what we may, or may never have) a second time, when we
have a time. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. He has
much hardness, but no wisdom in his heart, who hopes to do that good to morrow,
which he resolvs to neglect until to morrow. A wise man may hope to do that to
morrow, which he cannot do to day, but it is highest folly to resolve upon a
neglect of any duty this day upon a hope of doing it next day. It is said,
Revel. 12.6. Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, because the devil is come
down, having great wrath; (why so angry?) because he knows that his time is
but short. When the devil knows he has but a little time, he will do as much
work as he can, and do it presently, he sees all will escape out of his hands
else. Only the Lord hastens not, neither needs he to hasten his work at any
time upon this ground, because he has but a short time. He can take what time
he will, and make his day as long, and his days as many as himself pleases
for the acting of his counsels, whether to punish or to show mercy. And hence
it is that he delaieth, till wicked profane spirits wonder, yea scoff at his
delay, and think, surely the Lord will never do any such thing as he has
threatened, or promised, because he staieth so long before he does it; whereas
indeed to him that inhabiteth eternity, deferment is no delay, though to us it
seem so, whose times are measured out by inches and hours, by moments, and by
minutes. Those profane wretches ( Isa. 5.19.) call the Lord, and provoke him to
action, Let him make speed and hasten his work, that we may see it. The Lord
appears slow and slack to many men, but the Lord is not slack as some men count
slacknesse (2 Pet. 3.9.) Men think he is slack, when he is only patient, and
themselves ignorant, That a thousand years to the Lord are but as one day; God
does not measure time by our pole, nor cast it up by our Arithmetike. Eternity
does not only like the unjust steward, bid us write fifty for an hundred, but
one for a thousand, and (which bears the disproportion of diverse hundreds in
every one of that thousand) one day for a thousand years. Time is not only a
small thing, but nothing unto God, Mine age (says David) is nothing unto thee
(Psalm. 39.5.) And if all Nations before him are as nothing, if they are counted
to him less then nothing (Isa. 40.17.) Then not only the age of one man, but
the ages of all men added together, are before him as nothing, and are counted
to him less then nothing. Surely he cannot want time to do all things, before
whom all times are nothing. He cannot want time to pour out his judgments, and
to empty the vials of his wrath upon wicked men, nor can he want time to
fulfill his promises, and to make good every word of blessing which he has
spoken to, or concerning his own people; Wicked men! Do not ye hope; Godly
men! Do not ye fear, God will not do what he has said, because he has not
already done it. He has not lost his time or season, because he has not
accepted that, which ye thought to be the time or season. Christ warns his
Disciples ( Joh. 9.4.) to make haste about their work, for the night (namely of
death) comes wherein no man can work; while you have the day, do your work,
for I know what day yours is, your day will be gone, and the night will come,
then you can work no more: But Gods day fears no night, what ever comes he can
do his work. The Preacher gives the same counsel upon the same ground ( Eccles.
9.) Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with all thy might; lay hold
upon the fore-lock of time, why? There is no wisdom or counsel in the grave
whither thou go; When thou die there is an end of all thy working time;
do thy work well for thou can not recall a day of thy life to mend thy work
in, neither can thou work at all in that night of death. The Lords day knows
nothing of a grave, nor is his Sun acquainted with going down, if he seem
slack to his work, or slack at his work this day and the next, etc. yet he has
another day at his call, and after that another and another, all which are to
him but one day. Therefore he takes or leaves, defers or hastens, comes or goes
at pleasure. Are thy days, O Lord, as man's days? Are thy years as the days
of men? I know they are not.

But why does Job make so many of these negative queries?

The next words will answer.

Verse 6. That thou inquire after mine iniquity, and searchest after my
sin.
Here Is the reason of those former Questions. As if he had said, Lord, surely
thou need not search and examine me in this manner, seeing it is neither
thus nor thus with thee, It is not good to thee to oppress or to despise the
work of thy hands, thou have not eyes of flesh, or days of man.

That thou inquire after mine iniquity. (...) Significat non tam verbis and
interrogatione, quam actionibus and summa studio aliquid inqu rere; and non
raro de poena and nece procuranda accipitur.
The original signifies an enquiry two ways. 1. By word. 2. By actions. By
somewhat done, or by somewhat spoken. And it signifies both to do and speak
with great intention and heat of spirit. The word is also applied to those
enquiries which are made by torture, when the party is suspected for
concealment of the matter under enquiry. Which way of examination is called by
the Latins, the bringing of a man to question. That last engine which was
invented to support the tottering state of Rome, wherein poor souls are put to
extreme tortures, to force confessions or self accusations (that I say) is
called the Inquisition, and the Judges Inquisitours; because inquisition or
enquiry (according to the word of the text) is there made after the iniquities
of men, after their supposed heresies and heretical practices against the
Romish Church. Job seems to allude to such ways of examination, why does the
Lord enquire after my iniquity, by fore judgments and terrible afflictions, by
strong pains and mighty terrors.

At lowest, the word signifies a diligent search, or a scrutiny with utmost
industry; even such as they use, who maliciously hunt for the precious life.
The Lord says to Moses return into Egypt for all the men which sought thy
life are dead ( Exodus 4.19.) it is this word. So (1 Samuel 22.23.) abide thou
with me (says David to Abiathar) fear not, for he that seeks my life,
seeks thy life. When revenge makes a search, it is a diligent search: malice
has a piercing eye, and enquires narrowly. That gracious promise is thus
expressed ( Jer. 50.20.) In those days the iniquity of Israel shall be sought
for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be
found. Job complains here, Thou inquire after mine iniquity; there the
promise is, In those days the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, or,
enquired after, and it shall not be found; that is, suppose the iniquity of
Israel should be sought after, suppose there should be an hue and cry sent out
after the sin of my people, yet, says the Lord it shall not be found, why,
what hinders the finding of it, or where shall it be hid? The next words
resolve the doubt, It shall be hid in the pardoning mercies of God. I the Lord
will pardon those whom I reserve; The Lord would give such a full and free
pardon of sin, that what search and enquiry soever should be made after it,
there should not be so much as any scar or mark, not so much as any print or
stain left, to be a witness of their sin, or a plea for their condemnation.
Answerable to that ( Romans 8.1.) There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus. Job speaks as if God were so far from hiding his iniquity in a
pardon, when it came to be searched for, that himself searched for it, as if he
were resolved not to pardon it. Wherefore is it that thou inquire after mine
iniquity, and searchest after my sin?

Both parts of the verse meet in the same sense. (...) Est inquirere in
peccatorem per testes and judiciartam questionem. Pined. Quaerere not at
scientiam Dei, and denotat animadversionem, and vindictam. Darash a Bak^sh
distingui potest, si illud in revocatione ad animum, hoc inscrutatione
occultorum ponamus. Coc.
The word (Darash) in the later, being often applied as the former to a
judiciary search. Yet some distinguish them strictly thus: the former to
signify an enquiry by recalling to memory, or the examining of our selves,
Thou inquire after mine iniquity, that is, thou ask thy self whether thou
have not observed some iniquity in me, Thou do (as it were) rub up thy
memory, and take an account of what is laid up there concerning me. Memory is
the storehouse or treasury, the record or register of the soul. Books are a
memory without us, and memory is a book within us. Then the other word
signifies searching by examination of the suspected party in either of those
ways before explained. The Lord tells the Jews (whose wickedness was grown
immodest, and rose a step beyond hypocrisy) that he needed not search after
their sins, In thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of poor innocents, I
have not not found it by secret search, Ier. 2.34. as noting, that the Lord
does sometimes make a secret search, and that there are some who hide their
sins, some who sit close upon, and cover them, as Rachel did the stolen Idols,
when La^an came to search Jacobs stuff: that there are some who make excuses
and apologies for them: to these the Lord comes with a secret search for their
iniquity. The word in Jeremy signifies digging; I have not found it by digging:
some put their sins under ground; only deep digging can find these out: Job
enquires of the Lord, why he made such a searching after his iniquities, why he
was so curious in looking into every corner, Sententia plana est, non est
necesse, ut in peccata mea curiofius inquiras, cum Deus sit cui not a sunt and
perspecta omnia, etiam interiora cordis. Bold.
and behind every door to find out the rubbish of his life, seeing the
closest sin is as open to his eye as the Sun at noonday; and besides, God knew
that Job had no close sins, no darling beloved sin in his bosom, no sweet
morsels of any forbidden fruit under his tongue. He tells the Lord as much in
plain terms in the next words, Thou know that I am not wicked. As we use to
say to a man that makes a busy search after any thing, either in a place or
about a person, where there is no probability that it should be found; or when
we suppose the party searching cannot have the least ground of persuasion, that
the thing is there, or with him; In such a case (I say) a man will answer, why
do ye make such a search? ye know what ye look for is not here, ye know well
enough I have it not, ye have some other end in this. Thus Job speaks here.
Lord, why do thou search for mine iniquity. Thou know well enough that I
am not wicked, there is certainly somewhat else in the wind. Show me wherefore
thou contend^st with me.

Take a note or two from these words, That thou inquire after mine iniquity
etc.

First, God knows us before he searches us.

Job professes of himself as a Judge (Chap. 29.16.) The cause which I know not
I searched out, but God searches out those causes which he knows. God does not
search us that he may know us, or to inform himself, but to make us know him
and our selves. There are not many, who know themselves at all, there are none
who know themselves enough. The Lord searches us, that we may search our
selves. There are not many who know God at all, there are none who know God
enough; God searches us that we may seek after him. By every affliction the
Lord would make us know our selves and Himself better. It is said of Manasseh,
when he was in the briars, That, then Manasseh knew the Lord and then
(doubtless) he began to know himself. The same light that brings us to the
knowledge of what God is, brings us also to the knowledge of what our selves
are.

Secondly, Observe,

Afflictions are searchers.

Thou searchest for mine iniquity, says Job. Job supposed that the Lord came
to try him, and to find out the bottom of his heart: when God smites our
bodies or our estates, he searches our hearts, and makes enquiry in our
lives. The Prophet threatens the Jews ( Zeph. 1.12.) That God would come and
search Jerusalem with candles; That is, as some interpret, he would cause the
Chaldeans to search for their most hidden treasures, and find them out. Others
understand it of God himself, searching Jerusalem. But God is not like the
woman in the Parable, who had lost her groat; he needs no candlelight to
find out the lost groat, or to find out the filthiness that is in the most
secret corners of the heart. The meaning then is, that God would search
Jerusalem, that is, the people of Jerusalem, as exactly, as if they were
searched with a candle; Quum minutatem cognoscam de peccatis potuli, and cum eo
inibo rations meas accuratissime, ut solent qui adhibitis lucernis perlustrant
omnia. Jun.
he would bring forth their secret sins, and all their hidden abominations.
This search was made by those terrible and sore judgments brought upon
Jerusalem. God kindled a fire of affliction, and searched them by the light of
that fire, Troubles are as so many candles lighted up to search our selves by,
and they will be as so many fires kindled to consume us with, if we search not
our selves. At this time God is searching England with candles. The Prophet
describing the great sorrows of the Jews in their captivity, directs us what to
do ( Lam. 3.40.) Let us search and try our ways. When God is searching us, it
is high time for us to search our selves. It is sad, when God is searching for
our sins, if we are not searching for them too; and it is more sad, if when God
comes to search for our sins, we be found hiding our sins. These are
searching times God is searching, let us search too: else we may be sure (as
Moses (Numb 32.23.) tells the people of Israel) our sins will find us out. They
who endeavor not to find their sins, shall be found by their sins, Our
iniquity will enquire after us; if we enquire not after it. But what if
iniquity enquire after us? What? If iniquity enquire after us, it will find
us; and if iniquity find us, trouble will find us, yea, if iniquity find us
alone without Christ, hell and death will find us. If iniquity find any man,
he has reason enough to say unto it (what Ahab said to Eliah without reason)
Have thou found me, O my enemy. The best of men have reason to look out what is
evil in them, when God brings evil upon them, or wraps them up in common evils.
They who have no wickedness in them to cast them under condemnation have yet sin
enough in them, to make them smart under correction. Though Job could say from
the testimony of a pure conscience, Thou know I am not wicked; yet he durst
not say, thou know I have not sinned. Job acknowledged he was sinful, and
God knew he was not wicked. In searching after iniquity, he found not
hypocrisy, yea he knew he was not an hypocrite before he searched him: so it
follows,

Verse 7. Thou know that I am not wicked, and there is none that can deliver
out of thine hand.
Continet versus septimus, id quod praecipue in hac causa and disputatione
spectandum est, sc. Iobum non esse improbum. Pined,
This 7. verse contains one of the chiefest questions of that grand
controversy handled in this book, whether Job were a wicked man or no? Satan
represented him for such to God; and therefore called that he might be tried:
the Lord tried him upon that challenge, and he was brought to a grievous
trial; Job appeals to the Lords own knowledge, and is contented to stand or
fall according to his determination, being yet assured, that he stood right in
the thoughts of God. Thou know I am not wicked.

(...) Apud scire tuu^ est. Multo plus dicit per hanc phrasin apud scire tuum
est, quam si diceret tu scis. In scientia tua est, penes notitiam tuam est, non
aliunde, sed ex te optime nosti me non esse improbum. Dru. Haeret in regenitis
peccatum, improbi ta^en dici, nec possunt, nec debent. Mer.
Thou know. The Hebrew is rendered word for word, thus, It is upon thy
knowledge, or, It is upon thy know that I am not wicked: As if he had said,
Thou have not this knowledge from without, thou do not ground thy judgment
concerning the state of any man upon what others say of him, upon reports or
hear-saies; no, thy knowledge is from thy self; Thou know upon thine own
knowledge, thine is an internal, an immediate, and so a perfect, an infallible
knowledge, and that tells thee of me, I am not wicked.

That I am not wicked. He does not say, Thou know that I am not a sinner,
or, Thou know that I have not sinned, Job had no such opinion of himself,
and he knew God had no such knowledge of him. There is a great difference
between being a sinner, and a wicked man. The best of Saints while they are
here upon the earth are sinners, but the worst of Saints even here upon the
earth are not wicked; they have a new nature, they are new creatures,
regenerate and born again by the Word and Spirit, therefore they are not
wicked; though much sin be in them, yet no wickedness is in them; and they are
denominated from their better part, not wicked from their remaining corruption,
but holy from their received renovation, Thou know that I am not wicked.

Again, The word in the original being in the verb, (...) Quod non impie
egerim. Mont.
we may translate (as many do) Thou know that I have not done wickedly. But
the sense is the same, for every man is in doing as he is in being; He that is
not wicked in his state cannot act wickedly. So we must understand that of the
Apostle John (1 Epist. 3.8.) He that commits sin is of the devil.

Thirdly, To be wicked is ordinarily opposed to our being just; and so, Thou
know that I am not wicked, is, Thou know that I am not condemned or cast
at thy bar, for a wicked man. I am not condemned, but justified in thy sight.
In which sense the word is used in that prophetique curse against Judas, who
betrayed Christ ( Psalm. 109.7.) When he shall be judged, let him be condemned:
so we render it; the Hebrew is elegantly translated thus, Exeat improbus.
When he shall be judged, let him go out wicked; that is, let him go out from
before the bar and tribunal of his Judges, a condemned man, or, Improbus and
justus verba sunt forensia. Drus.
Let him proceed wicked, Let that be his title and his honor, wicked and just
are judiciary or Court-terms, equivalent with justified and condemned.

Some join these words with the verse going before, Do thou search into mine
iniquity that thou may know whether I am wicked? As if he had said, Lord thou
need not make enquiry about this thing for as I am not wicked, so thou art
not ignorant: thou have not afflicted me, because I am wicked, nor have thou
searched me, because thou art ignorant, Thou know that I am not wicked.
Hence observe,

First, That the Lord knows the state of every man, and of every thing exactly.

The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows them
that are his (2 Timothy 2.19.) and he knows them that are not his: not his by
the grace of election and regeneration: for all are his by the right of
creation and dominion. Thus he knows all the fowls of the mountains, and the
beasts of the field are his ( Psalm. 50.11.) David gives this glory to God in
his own case ( Psalm. 139.1.) O Lord, Thou have searched me and known me; God
did not search him to know him, but he searched him and knew him. The knowledge
of God was not a consequent, but a concomitant of that search; or it is spoken
in opposition to man; a man may search his neighbor, and yet not know him.
There are depths and turnings in the heart of man, which no man can reach or
find out; but God has a thread which will lead him into all and through all
the labirynths, a line which will found all the depths of man. Hence David
makes a particular of the knowledge of God; God knew him in all that he was,
and in all that he did, Thou know my down-lying and my up-rising, and thou
art acquainted with all my ways. God is the Judge of all men, therefore he
knows all men, Heb. 4.13. There is no creature which is not manifest in his
sight, (...).
all things are naked and open before him, with whom we have to do. The
Apostle by two metaphors in these words teaches us, that as the out-members and
lineaments of the body, together with their beauty or deformity are clearly
seen, when the body is naked and uncloathed; that as the bowels and intrals of
the body, together with their soundness or diseases are perfectly discovered,
when the body is dissected or cut up by the hand of a skillful anatomist, even
so are we in all we do, and in all we are perfectly known, or as the same
Apostle speaks (2 Cor. 5.11.) manifest unto God, even manifest with as much
clearness to the knowledge of God, as the light is to the eye of man. He
knows, 1. Our persons. 2. Our actions. 3. He knows the manner of our actions.
4. He knows with what hearts we act. 5. He knows not only the means we use,
but the ends we propose in every action. 6. He knows what we have been as
well as what we are. And 7. He knows what we will be, as well as what we are
or have been; He knows what we have done, as well as what we do, and he
knows what we will do, as well as what we do or have already done. He sees
all creatures in the glass of his own counsels through and through. His eye has
through lights in all parts of the world, and in the hearts of all men in the
world.

And seeing man cannot be hid from God, it is the vainest attempt for any man
to think of hiding himself from God; yet that is not only the attempt, but the
hope of many, who while they do what they would not have seen, please
themselves with this conceit, that they are not seen in doing it, or that they
can secure what they have done from being seen. We learned this of our first
parents, in whom the first thing that appeared (next their shame) after they
had sinned, was the hiding of their sin. Man loves to draw a curtain between
God and himself, to raise up artificial darkness, and to walk in thick clouds
(as he vainly hopes) undiscovered.

Again, Does God know us? then let us labor to know our selves. God knows who
are wicked, many are wicked and know it not. It is a woeful mistake, when we
think our selves to be in a good estate, and God knows us to be in a bad
estate! It is a wrong to God and our selves, when God knows us to be in a good
estate, and we think our selves to be in a bad estate; but it is far worse,
when we think our estate good, and God knows it to be bad. We should be
acquainted with our condition, lest we (like Laodicea) flatter our selves into
an opinion that we are rich and clothed, and have need of nothing, when God
knows we are poor and naked, and wanting all things.

Secondly, Observe from the elegancy of the Hebrew expression. It is upon thy
knowledge that I am not wicked.

God knows all things in and of himself.

This gives glory to God, and lifts him up above the creature in the fullness
of his knowledge. Men who have the greatest knowledge, and vastest
comprehensions of things, yet have not that knowledge in and from themselves,
they fetch it in by borrowed helps, and glad they can have it so too. It costs
man a great deal of travel and study, to make himself master of a little
knowledge ( Job 12.12.) With the ancient is wisdom, and in length of days is
understanding: Some indeed get wisdom and understanding, and are owners of a
vast stock and treasure of knowledge; but when? but how? When they are old;
when they have had long experience, and have studied hard for it, With the
ancient is wisdom, and in length of days is understanding: Thus men get
knowledge. But mark what is said of God in the next words ( verse. 13.) But with
him (meaning God) is wisdom and strength, He has counsel and understanding.
With him it is, and he has it: The Lord does not grow more knowing by years,
nor does his understanding mend by the multitude of days: though he be the
Ancient of days, yet it is not his antiquity which has got him this
knowledge; his knowledge is in him, and with him, and from himself; he fetches
not his knowledge from sense, nor does he take it up by information; He learns
it not by demonstration raised from the things themselves, nor by the collation
of one thing with another. He does not know this to be so, because that is so,
but all things are so, because he knows them. He knows all, 1. Fully, not to
halves. 2. Certainly, not probably. 3. Actually, not possibly. 4. At once, not
successively; as not one thing by another, so not one thing after another. Such
are the eminencies and transcendencies of the knowledge of God.

The Scripture speaks sometimes as if God derived his knowledge from report, or
as if he did not know whether a people were wicked or no, till he had
enquired. When the new world was building their Babel, the Lord said, Let us
go down to see the City (Genesis 11.5.) And when Sodom was burning in lust, the
Lord resolved, I will go down and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it, which is come unto me, and if not, I will know
(Genesis 18.21.)

In both those places of Scripture God comes down to our capacity, but he comes
not down to any place in the world. He needs not come any whether, who is
every where. God speaks after the manner of men: but he acts not after the
manner of men. God gives us an example what we should do, he does not work
after our example. Lest we should judge before we see, God says, I will go
down and see, before I judge: lest we should censure one another upon fames and
common cries without further enquiry, whether it be so or no, therefore the
Lord says, I will go down and see whether they have done altogether according
to the cry that is come unto me. God knew Sodom was wicked, before he came
down, but he came down to make it known, that he knew it.

As those Scriptures seem to import that God knew not how wicked the builders
of Babel were, or the dwellers in Sodom, till he took pains to enquire; so
another Scripture imports, that he did not know Abraham was a godly man, till
he made an experiment of it, by putting him upon that hard piece of obedience,
the offering up of his son, Now I know thou fear me (Genesis 22.12.) as if the
Lord had collected his knowledge of what Abraham was, from what Abraham did.
But that testimony of God, Now I know, is but now I have made it known, or, now
I know that in the fruit, which I knew before in the root; now I see my fear
in thy works, as before I saw it in thy faith. That place ( Deuteronomy. 8.2.) bears a
like sense; where Moses bespeaks Israel thus, Thou shall remember all the way
which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to
humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou
would keep his Commandments or no. The Lord needed not forty years, no nor
one minutes experience to make up his thoughts concerning that people; he knew
what they were at first sight, and what they would prove (even a stubborn,
an unbelieving and a backsliding people) before they were. God proved them,
not to know what was in their hearts, but that we might know it: that, what
he knew by his internal, immediate inspection, others also might know by
external observation. It would not have been believed, that they were so
bad, if God had not drawn it out by that forty years variety of his
dispensations toward them. Or Moses describes God after the manner of men,
who prove things that they may know them, whereas indeed God knows, and then
proves them.

Thirdly, Considering how Job comes in with this assurance [Thou know that
I am not wicked] to relieve himself in his distress, we may observe,

That it is matter of highest consolation to the Saints, to know and remember
that God knows them.

That God knows their hearts and lives, is the joy of their hearts and lives.
How rejoycingly does David speak ( Psalm. 139.1, 2.) O Lord, thou have searched
me and known me, thou know my down-sitting and mine up-rising, etc. He seems
to be as glad that God knew him, as that God would save him. My witness is in
heaven, and my record is on high, was Jobs resort again, when his friends
scorned him ( chap. 16.19.) There are no mistakes in God; he will give right
evidence, as a witness, and a righteous sentence, as a Judge.

Again, That God knows us, assures us,

First, That what we have done shall not be forgotten; God is not unrighteous
to forget our work and labor of love, etc. Heb. 6.10. It assures us,

Secondly, That we shall not be mis-interpreted for what we have done. The
reason why many men have so ill an opinion of others, is, because they have so
little knowledge of them. Ignorance makes as corrupt glosses, as unsound
decisions upon persons and actions, as it does upon texts or questions. Some
pervert knowingly and against light, but most pervert ignorantly and for want
of light. God knows us perfectly, and he never acts against his knowledge. It
assures us,

Thirdly, That we shall be well accepted and rewarded. Though men make ill
requitals, and pay in bad, yea in base coin, yet every man shall receive of God
according to what he is, and what his works are ( Genesis 4.7.) If thou do
well, Shall thou not be accepted?

Lastly, It is a comfort to us, while we are uncertain about our own estates,
to know that God knows us. God has a better opinion of some men then they
have of themselves. Some do not only think, but judge and conclude themselves
wicked, when God knows that they are not wicked. The foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are his.

Fourthly, Thou know that I am not wicked. Then observe,

To do wickedly, or to be wicked is inconsistent with grace.

If Job had been a wicked man, he had been a lost man. Sin is not inconsistent
with grace, but wickedness is.

But you will say, What is wickedness? And when is a man so sinful that he
is to be numbered among the wicked? To clear that, because Job ventures all
upon it,

I answer; first, In every wicked man sin reigns, that is, sin has not only
a being in him, but dominion over him; he yields ready and free obedience to
it, as to his natural Lord, not a forced and involuntary obedience only, as to
a tyrant. Our committing of sin gives not the rule to sin: but our submitting
to it. As a man may do many good things, and yet grace not reign and rule in
his heart: so it is possible for a man to do many evil things, and yet not have
sin rule in his heart. A man may lay by the actings of a sin, and yet that be a
reigning sin, and a man may fall into the act of sin, and yet that no
reigning sin. The reign of sin or of grace are chiefly seen in that professed
subjection or resignation of our selves to the dictates and commands of grace
or sin. No man can be at once Gods Son, and sins servant; no nor at once a
servant to both.

Secondly, A wicked man is a customary sinner, he drives a trade in sin. A
godly man (possibly) may commit the same sin again, yet the custom is broken,
because he puts in a plea against sin, and often moves God for power, not
only against, but over it: if he attain not this blessed victory, yet he
cease not to complain, and pray, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of death? When shall I be delivered from this burden and
b^^dage of corruption? When shall it once be? O that it might once be! Wicked
men are so far from pleading against, that they usually plead for their sins;
and labor more to make excuses and apologies for them, then to get power and
victory over them. They in stead of making preparation to resist the lusts of
the flesh, make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

Thirdly, A wicked man preserves in himself a purpose to sin, while he
seems to pray and protest against his sin. He is (as Augustine confessed of
himself before his conversion) afraid God should grant his prayer, while he
prays that his corruptions may be mortified. He may put up prayers against
sin, but he puts up no desires against it. As custom is the rode of our lives,
so purposes are the rode of our hearts. What a man's purposes are, such the
movings of his heart are ( Isa. 56.12.) To morrow shall be as to day, and much
more abundant, say they in their beastly abuse of the creatures, we have been
drunk to day, and hope to be more to morrow ( Ezekiel. 11.21.) Their heart does go
after the heart of their abominable things; that is, the inclinations and
resolutions of their hearts go or walk after their abominations. A godly man
sins, but he does not purpose to sin; his purposes are not to sin,
holiness is his way; and as sin is it self a by-way, so it is besides his
way. The honest traveller intends to keep straight on to his journeys end, if
he miss his way at any time, he misses his purpose. The robber skulks about
in by-vvaies, and comes not into the rode, but to find and seize upon his
prey. Peter denied Christ, but did Peter purpose to deny Christ? No, Peter
purposed not to deny Christ, yea Peter promised not to deny Christ. Peter
resolved that he would die rather then deny Christ, and yet he denied Christ;
Peter did not go out and make a bargain with the Scribes and Pharisees, as
Judas did to betray his Master. Peter was betrayed when he denied his Master,
Peter was suddenly attached with a violent temptation and arrested with base
fear. He did not deny Christ, because he resolved to do it, but because he
resolved so much not to do it, without due dependence upon Christ for power
not to do it. A godly man may have some deliberations about sin, yet no
resolutions: He may deliberate upon the acting of some sin, when the occasion
is given, but he does not deliberate upon the finding of occasions to provoke
him to the acting of sin. David did not go up to his house top to invite an
incentive of lust, though he there met with one.

Fourthly, Wickedness carries clearness, yea fullness of consent in sin. A
wicked man may have many checks at sin from his conscience, but he has none
from his will. And a wicked man may have some motions to good from his
conscience, but he has none from his will. When a wicked man abstains from
doing evil, he wills it; and when he does good, he wills it not. In nature, the
act and the consent go both to evil, I do evil, and I will do it, is the
stubborn voice of corrupt nature. In grace, though the act goes sometimes to
evil, yet the consent does not. The evil which I would not, that do I, is the
mournful voice of grace. In glory, both act and consent go to good, and
neither of them to any evil. The good which I will, I do, the evil which I
would not, I do not, shall be for ever the triumphant voice of glory. When the
Apostle Paul (Romans 7.) bewailed his own bondage under corruption, he yet
professed that what ever evil he did, he consented not to do it. And though
there may be some kind of consent in the sinning of a godly man, yet it is not
such a consent, as in a wicked man: For as a wicked man, though he may
sometimes show his willingness, and give his consent to do good, to hear the
Word, to pray, etc. Yet it is not a clear, a full and free consent, the will
never comes up heartily in it: so there may be some kind of consent, a
negative consent in a godly man doing evil, he may not (as to that act) resist
or deny; as when a question is put to the vote, a man who does not affirm, may
be said to give some consent, when he suspends his voice, and does not openly
oppose. Thus a godly man when a temptation comes, never gives a direct yea of
consent, yet sometimes not giving his no, there is a kind of consent, a middle
act, not a clear or determinate act of consent. Now a wicked man, as he is
taken captive by the devil at his will (2 Timothy 2.26.) that is at Satan's will,
the devil takes him captive when he pleases: so also at his own will; He is
pleased to be taken captive by the devil.

Eram gratis malus and malitiae meae causa nulla erat, nisi malitia August.
lib. 3. confess. c. 4.
Fifthly, Where there is a wickedness in sinning, there is delight in sin. Pure
delight in sin is impurest wickedness. To disobey for naught is the most
wicked disobedience, as to serve God for naught is the most holy service. What
is it which shows the eminency of grace? Is it not the joy which the soul
finds in the ways of grace? When we can delight in the law of God, as his
law, abstracted from ends and fruits. When it is meat and drink to us to do the
will of God, though we suffer hunger, and are ready to starve in doing it, here
is godliness at the highest: and when any delight in sin as sin, as
contrary to the will of God, abstracted from ends and fruits, here is
wickedness at the highest. To act in such a degree of sin, is inconsistent
with any degree of grace.

Job appeals to the testimony of God, that he had not sinned in any of these
degrees, while he says, Thou know that I am not wicked.

Observe, Fifthly, A godly man may know that he is so, and be confident of it.

He that says, God knows he is not wicked, knows it himself. For though
the Lord has a knowledge of us beyond ours, though he know us, better then we
know our selves, yet no man can tell the Lord, Thou know that I am not
wicked, but he who knows that he is not. The excellency of our condition
consists in being godly, the comfort of it consists in knowing that we are
godly. When David offers himself to the trial ( Psalm. 139.24.) Search me, O
Lord, and see if there be any way of wickedness in me; He speaks not as
doubting whether he were wicked or no, but as being assured that he was not. As
if he had said, There are many weaknesses in me I know, but I know not of any
wickedness. He that offers himself to Gods search for his wickedness, gives a
strong argument of his own uprightness. The best of the Saints may be at a
loss sometimes for their assurances, and not know they are good. They may
stand sometimes hovering between heaven and earth, yea between heaven and hell,
as uncertain to which they shall be accounted. Yet many of the Saints are fully
persuaded they are Saints, and sit with Christ in heavenly places, while they
are w^ndering here upon on the earth. A godly man may know this two ways;

First, By the workings of grace in his heart.

Secondly, By the testimony of the Spirit with his heart.

First, By the workings of grace in his heart (1 John 2.3.) Hereby we know
that we know him, if we keep his Commandments: and ( chap. 3.14.) We know that
we are passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. There may be
such workings of grace in the heart, as may amount to an evidence of grace.
What our being is, is discernable in our workings. The word is, as clear as
light, that our justification may have a light or evidence in our
sanctification, though no cause or foundation there. Grace is the image of
Christ stamped upon the soul, and they who reflecting upon their souls, see the
image of Christ there, may be sure that Christ is theirs. Christ has given all
himself to those to whom he has given this part of himself.

Secondly, This may be known by the testimony of the Spirit with the heart (2
Cor. 5.5.) He that has wrought us for the self same thing is God; God sets up
a frame of holiness in every believer, He has wrought us; and how are we
assured that he has? Who also has given us the earnest of his Spirit. The
graces of the Spirit are a real earnest of the Spirit, yet they are not
always an evidentiall earnest; therefore an earnest is often superadded to our
graces. There is a threefold work of the Spirit.

First, To conveigh and plant grace in the soul.

Secondly, To act and help us to exercise the graces, which are planted there.

Thirdly, To shine upon and enlighten those graces, or to give an earnest of
those graces; This last work the Spirit fullfils two ways.

First, By arguments and inferences, which is a mediate work.

Secondly, By presence and influence, which is an immediate work. This the
Apostle calls witnesse-bearing (1 John 5.8.) There are three that bear witness
in earth, The Spirit, and the water, and the blood. The Spirit brings in the
witness of the water and of the blood, which is his mediate work; but besides
and above these he gives a distinct witness of his own, which is his immediate
work, and is in a way of peculiarity and transcendency, called the witness of
the Spirit. Hence that of the Apostle Paul, We have not received the spirit of
the world, but we have received the Spirit which is of Christ, that we may know
the things that are freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. The things freely
given may be received by us, and yet the receipt of them not known to us,
therefore we receive the Spirit, that we may know what is given us, and what we
have received. The Spirit does (as it were) put his hand to our receipts, and
his seal also, whence he is said, To seal us up to the day of redemption,
Ephesians. 4.30.

Sixthly, Observe,

A godly man dares appeal to God himself, that he is not wicked.

He dares stand before God to justify his sincerity, though he dares not stand
to justify himself before God. Job had often laid all thoughts of his own
righteousness in the dust, but he always stands up for his own uprightness.
God is my witness (says the Apostle Paul, Rom, 9.1.) whom I serve in my
spirit in the Gospel of his Son; I serve God in my spirit, and God knows that
I do so, I dare appeal unto him that it is so, God is my witness. When Christ
put that question, and drove it home upon Peter thrice, Simon, Love thou me?
Lord (says he) Thou know all things, Thou know that I love thee (Joh.
21.) As if he had said, I will not give testimony of my self, thou shall not
have it upon my word, but upon thine own knowledge. It were easy for me to
say, Master, I love thee with all my heart, with all my soul, but I refer my
self to thy own bosom, Thou know I love thee. So when Hezekiah lay (as he
thought) upon his deathbed, he turned himself to the wall, desiring God to look
upon the integrity of his life, Lord, remember how I have walked before thee in
truth (Isa. 38.3.) I do not go to the world for their good word of me, I rest
not in what my Subjects or neighbor Princes say of me, Lord, it is enough for
me, that what I have been, and what I am, is laid up safe in the treasury of
thy thoughts. This brings strong consolation, when we take not up the testimony
of men, nor rest in the good opinion of our brethren, but can have God himself
to make affidavit, or bear witness with us, and for us. That such a man will
say, I am an honest man, that such a man will give his word for me, is cold
comfort; but when the soul can say, God will give his word for me, The Lord
knows that I am not wicked; here is enough to warm our hearts when the love of
the world is waxen so cold, and their tongues so frozen with uncharitableness,
that they will not speak a good word of us, how much good soever they know by
us.

Seventhly, Consider the condition wherein Job was, when he spoke this, he was
upon the rack, and, as it were, under an inquisition, God laid his hand extreme
hard upon him, yet at that time, even then, he says, Lord, thou know that I
am not wicked. Hence observe,

A man of an upright heart and good conscience, will not be brought to think
that God has ill thoughts of him, how much evil so ever God brings upon him.

The actings of God toward us are often full of changes and turnings, but the
thoughts of God never change. A soul may be afflicted till he is weary of
himself, yet he knows God is not weary of him. Whomsoever he has once made
good, he cannot but for ever esteem good; and, all such a man's afflictions, are
either to show how good God has made him, or to make him better.

Eighthly, Job was under as bad thoughts of man, as (almost) any man ever was,
when he spoke thus to God, Thou know that I am not wicked. Hence observe,

That all the hard censures and misconstructions of men, cannot beat an upright
heart out of this hold, that God loves him, and has a good opinion of him.

Let men think what they will of him, and judge him as severely as they please;
this moves him not at all to think, that God judges him so too. He can see the
love of God through all the anger of creatures. He likes not his condition the
better, because some men tell him it is good, nor the worse, because any man
tells him it is ill, while he finds himself bottomed upon the free grace of
God, and cheared with the clearness of his own integrity. The gates of hell
shall not (much less shall the uncharitableness of men) prevail against such
a man. Happy is he, who can say unto God, Thou know that I am not wicked,
while men are saying, thou art wicked. And how miserable is he, whose heart
tells him he is wicked, though men say, surely, thou art good. If our heart
condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and knows all things, (1 John
3.20.) Does conscience tell you that you are wicked, God can tell you so much
more? It is a woeful thing for any man to be under the just condemnation of his
own heart, though it is more woeful to be under the flatteries of his own
heart. It is bad enough to be daubed by others with untempered mortar, it is
far worse to be a self-dauber; No man has cause to rejoice in what himself, or
be troubled at what others say of him, unless God say so too.

Two things are further observable from these words;

First, There is no medium between a godly and a wicked man. Every man is one
of these two. Some are called civil honest men; many conceit that these are
good men indeed, and not a few, that these are in a middle state between good
and evil: But the truth is, there is nothing between good and evil, light and
darkness: there is no medium of participation between these extrems. Solomon
(Eccles. 9.2.) sets all men in two orders, All things come alike unto ell,
there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good, to the
clean, and to the unclean, to him that swears, and to him that fears an
oath. Note by the way, he does not put the distinction between him that
swears, and him that swears not, but between him that swears, and him
that fears an oath. There are many who are not swearers (swearing is
deboysery, and so inconsistent with civility) who yet do not fear an oath. It
is better to fear to do evil, then not to do evil. This division runs through
the whole world. Good and evil (in a remiss degree) mingle in the same person,
but no man's person is in a middle state between good and evil.

Secondly, God has a negative knowledge concerning the state of every man.
This is a transcendent, beyond any knowledge which man has of man. God does
not only know what is in us, but what is not in us, not only what we are, but
what we are not. Thou know that I am not wicked. The reason why a negative
oath is not admitted among men, is, because no man can swear so in knowledge.
None can speak negatively of another, knowingly, but God alone. We may say of a
man, there is that in him for which it is meet for us to judge him godly. But
it is impossible from any outward evidence to conclude peremptorily, he is not
wicked. It is more to say of a man, he is not wicked, then to say, he is godly.
It is easier to know what is, then what is not. As it is in voting, so in
knowing: Negative votes are strongest. To say such a thing shall not pass or
be done, imports the greatest power: so negative knowledge is the highest, to
say such a thing is not, or such a man did it not, imports a certain knowledge,
a knowledge so certain, as is appliable to none, but God himself, Thou know
that I am not wicked.

And there is none that can deliver out of thine hand. (...) In piel. (...)
Spoliavit, diripuit, vel significat furto se eripuit.
What none? Then were our condition sad indeed? None, excludes mere creatures
only. Christ can deliver us out of the hand of God. And Job believed Christ had
delivered him, when he said, There is none that can deliver.

The hand of God is the power of God; and to deliver out of his hand, is to
fetch out, or free from his power. The word which we translate to deliver,
notes delivering either by power or by policy, by strength, or by wit. A
prisoner is delivered sometimes by rescue or open violence, sometimes by
stealth or secret conveyance; he picks a lock, or breaks a door to deliver
himself out of the hand of man. But neither of these ways can any man deliver
himself, or get deliverance out of the hand of God. There is no difficulty in
the interpretation of these words, but there is some difference about the
intent of them.

Ne mea quidem integritas, cujus tu mihi testis es, facit ut hac plaga liberer:
ut qui nihil facto meo coram te promereri possim. Jun.
First, Some, for none, translate nothing, and so join these words with the
former, as an argument of the insufficiency of man's righteousness, Thou
know that I am not wicked, yet there is nothing (in my righteousness) that
can deliver me out of thine hand. As Paul said (1 Cor. 4.4.) I know nothing by
my self, yet am I not hereby justified. So Job says, Lord, Thou know
nothing by me, yet hereby I cannot be delivered.

Secondly, These words may be expounded, as tending to move compassion, and to
stir up bowels of pity in God toward Job; As if he had said, Lord, why do
thou deal thus severely with me, when there is none that can deliver me out of
thine hand; who can rescue me, while thou laiest thine arrest upon me? Thou
may keep me under restraint, as long as thou will; I cannot be fetched off, or
out, and will thou deal thus hardly with me? Will thou punish me thus? Whom we
cannot hold long in our hands, we are apt to deal more roughly with, while they
are in our hands, and to take our penny worths out of them, while we have them.
And it is usual with great Princes speedily to seal the Writ of execution
against an eminent offender, when they hear or suspect many potent suitors will
move for his pardon, and solicit his deliverance out of the hand of justice.
Job seems to speak in allusion to such, If there were any who could deliver me
out of thine hand, or pull me away from thee by strength, or by entreaty, I
should wonder the less at thy severity.

God does sometimes even bespeak the intercession of others, and complains that
none come in to deliver a people or a person out of his hand. When he was about
to destroy Sodom, he tells it unto Abraham, probably, for that very end, that
Abraham might intercede for Sodom, and (at least) get Lot out of his hand. When
God was about to execute his judgments upon Jerusalem, Non est qui clam^t Deus
optme re stringas gladium, ne strictum exterdas ^n populum tuu^.
He saw and there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessour, none
to take him off from destroying that people ( Isa. 59.16.) The Prophet
complains in words of the same importance ( chap. 64.7.) There is none that
calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee. Friends,
seeing a father go out hastily to correct his child, rise presently, or stir up
themselves to take hold of the father, or to mediate for the child, Pray spare
him for this time and hold your hand: but says the Prophet, There is none that
will stir up himself to take hold of God. He is going out in wrath, and no man
puts him in mind of mercy, with that cry of another Prophet, O spare thy
people, and give not thine heritage to reproach! When Abraham was ready to slay
Isaac upon the altar, when his hand was stretched out to fetch the fatal blow,
just then, did the Angel take hold of his sword, and delivered Isaac out of his
hand. God says to Moses (Exodus 32.10.) Let me alone; God was about to destroy
that people, Moses would not permit him, he seeks to deliver Israel out of the
revenging hand of God, by that holy violence of prayer and supplication.

Lastly, Others look upon Job, as breathing out a very heroic and magnanimous
spirit in these words. As if he had said, Lord, Thou know, and thou shall
know, that I am not wicked, though none deliver or take me out of thine hand,
Thou shall find me holding mine integrity, as long as I hold my life, I am
resolved to honor thee, whatsoever thou do with me. And so he refutes the
charge of Satan: Satan said, Touch his flesh and his bone, and he will curse
thee to thy face: No, says Job, though he takes away my flesh and my bones,
yet I will not curse him to his face, no nor speak an ill word of him behind
his back. Though I should never be delivered, yet God shall never be
blasphemed. Upon the whole observe,

That there is no means on earth can rescue us out of the hand of God.

I kill, and I make alive, I wound, and I heal; neither is there any that can
deliver out of my hand. Deuteronomy. 32.39. Till God discharge us there is no escaping:
none can force us out of his hand, whatsoever is in theirs; power cannot,
policy cannot, riches cannot: we cannot bribe our selves out of the sight, or
beyond the stroke of divine justice. A golden key will not open Gods prison
door. Riches avail not in the day of wrath, and in some days of wrath, prayer
it self cannot prevail. Then take heed how ye fall into the hands of God. No
wise man will run into his displeasure, from whom there is no deliverance, but
at his own pleasure. See more of this point, Chap. 9.12.

JOB Chap. 10. Verse. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Thine hands have made me, and
fashioned me together round about; and yet thou do destroy me.

Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou
bring me into dust again?

Have thou not poured me out as milk, and crudled me like cheese?

Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with bones and
sinews.

Thou have granted me life and favor, and thy visitation has preserved my
spirit.

And these things have thou hid in thine heart, I know that this is with thee.


AT the third verse of this Chapter, we found Job questioning with the Lord, Is
it good for thee that thou should oppress? That thou should despise the
work of thine hands? In these words he insisteth upon, and illustrateth that
argument, by fitting it to his own condition; As if he had said, Lord, seeing
thou will not despise the work of ^^ine hands, why should thou despise me?
Am not I the work of thy hands? Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me
together round about, and yet thou do destroy me. The whole context argues
out this point: wherein we may observe,

1. His forming or making, set down in general at the eighth verse, Thine
hands have made me, and fashioned me together round about.

2. The matter out of which he was formed and made, at the ninth verse,
Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay.

3. His forming is drawn out in particulars. Wherein we have,

First, His conception at the tenth verse, Have not thou poured me out as milk,
and crudled me as cheese?

2. The conjunction or setting together of his patts, at the 11. verse, Thou
have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with bones and sinews.

3. The quickening of his parts thus joined and set together, at the 12. verse,
Thou have granted me life.

4. The preservation of his life, in the same verse, Thou have given me life,
and (not only so, but) favor, and thy visitation does preserve my spirit.

5. Lastly, We have Jobs strength of assurance, or his assertion concerning all
this at the 13. verse, These things thou have hid in thine heart, I know that
this is with thee; as if he had said, Lord, Thou know all is truth which I
have spoken.

There are three opinions concerning the connection or tie of these words with
those that went before.

First, Some conceive that Job persisteth in the same matter handled, in the
words immediately foregoing, exalting the knowledge of God concerning man upon
this ground, because God made man. Thou know that I am not wicked. How did
Job know that? He must needs know what man is, who made man, Thine hands have
made me and fashioned me together round about; forasmuch as I am thy work, a
piece of thy framing, surely, thou know what thou have framed: thou who
had knowledge enough to make me, have a perfect knowledge of what thou have
made me. We may join it also with the later clause, None can deliver out of
thine hand; Why? Thine hands have made me and fashioned me. Is it possible for
the work to deliver it self out of the hand of him who wrought it? Is that
which is formed too strong for him that formed it, when as the same hand which
gave it form, gave it strength? We find this argument as to the former part (
Psalm. 94.9.) where from the work of God in our natural constitution, the holy
penman proves the fullness of his knowledge concerning us in every condition;
Understand ye brutish (he speaks to men, who acted more like beasts then men)
He that planted the ear, Shall he not hear? He that formed the eye shall he not
see? As if he had said, He that made the ear, is all hearing; and he who formed
the eye, is all eye, all sight. The argument holds strong from Gods power in
forming man, to his power of knowing man, and to his power of disposing man. I
am teneo huj^^ rei causam; cum enim manus illius me fecerint, jure suo potest
Deus me destruere Cajet.
That Is the first way of dependence.

Secondly, Job may be conceived, as rendering an account of those things about
which he had taken the boldness to interrogate the Lord, at the third verse.
Here he answers his own question; as if he had said, now I see well enough why
thou may despise and destroy thy work, It is thy work; I will go no further
for a reason to vindicate thee in breaking me to pieces then this, That thine
hands have set me together: Thou have made me, and thou may unmake me; thou
have raised me up, and thou may pull me down. So the copulative (vau) in the
original, which we translate by the adversative, yet, is taken for a
conjunction causall; and so it is frequently used in Scripture ( Genesis 30.20.)
Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return; The sense is, Dust thou art,
therefore to dust thou shall return (Exodus 15.23, 24.) The waters were bitter,
and the people murmured; that is, The waters were bitter, therefore the people
murmured; thus here, Thine hands have made me and fashioned me, therefore thou
do destroy me. He that builds the house at his own charge, and by his own
power, may ruin it at his own pleasure.

Ex sua formatione artificis misericordiam movet, and ex commemorato pristino
beneficio, alia denuo efflagitandi ansam arripit. Pined.
Thirdly, The words may carry the sense of a strong motive to prevail with God,
to handle Job more gently, or to deal more tenderly with him; why? The Lord had
bestowed much care and cost to make and fashion him: therefore he will surely
pity and spare him. There is a natural motion of the heart in every agent,
toward the preservation of that which proceeds from it. Creation is followed
with providence. If a speechless and livelesse creature could speak and
understand, it would argue with it is maker (in Jobs case) as Job does, Do
thou yet destroy me? David strengthens his heart to ask good at the hands of
God, because he had spoken good concerning him (2 Samuel 7.27.) Thou, O Lord of
Hosts, God of Israel, have revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee
an house, therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer
unto thee. Now, if David were not only emboldned to ask, but even assured to
receive mercy, because God promised to build him a house, that is, to prosper
his estate and family, how much more might Job be encouraged to pray for, and
expect mercy from the hand of God, because God had already framed and built
that natural house, his body? The Prophet Isaiah being about to plead with God
for new mercies, presents him with a catalogue of his old mercies ( Chap. 63.7,
8, 9.) I will mention the loving kindenesses of the Lord, and the praises of
the Lord, according to all that the Lord has done unto us, and the great
goodness toward the house of Israel, which he has bestowed on them according
to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving kindenesses, etc.
Having thus at large told the Lord what he had done, the Prophet (in a holy
zeal) contends with him about what he was doing (verse. 15.) Look down from
heaven, and behold from^ the habitation of thy holiness, and of thy glory;
where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy
mercies toward me, Are they restrained? Doubtless thou art our Father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, etc. As if he had said, That great sea of thy
goodness has sent out abundant streams of good things heretofore, and are all
those streams now dried up, and the springs exhausted? What Is become of thy
zeal and strength and compassions? Are they all spent and gone? Thus Job seems
to plead here, thine hands have made me, Et sic repent praecipitas me. Vulg.
Antithesi beneficiorum amplissimorum, in se a Domino collatoru^, exaggerat iram
qua nunc in se desaevit ac afflictiones, quibus exagitatur. Jun.
thou have done thus and thus for me, and will thou now destroy me? According
to this interpretation the later clause of the verse is rendered by an
interrogation, Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me, and do thou yet
destroy me? What; thou my maker destroy me! Remember, I beseech thee (so in the
next verse) that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou bring me into the
dust again? Thus by a specification of the great outward benefits which he had
received from the hand of God, he seems to aggravate his present sorrows, and
to solicit future mercies.

Thine hands.
Hands are often ascribed to God, as was showed, verse. 3. Many things are made
with the hand; The maker of all things is without hands, and yet he is all
hand. Hence all things that were made, are said to be made by the hands of God;
not only the forming of man, but the forming of the heavens and of the earth,
is the work of his hand ( Psalm. 102.25. Psalm. 95.5. both are put together) (
Isa. 48.13.) Mine hand also has laid the foundation of the earth, and my right
hand has spanned the heavens. Wheresoever the great works of God are expressed,
a hand usually is expressed as the instrument working them, yet his hand wrought
the least as well as the greatest, a worm of the earth, as well as man upon the
earth, or the Angels in heaven.

The heads of men have run into great variety of opinion, about these hands
forming man.

First, Many of the Ancients understand by the hands of God, Ambros. in Hexam
Hom. 11. Basil, etc.
The Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity, and the holy spirit of
God, who is the third, Thine hands have made me, that is, the Son and the
holy Spirit, who were assistant to, and of counsel with the Father at the
Creation of man, And God said, Let us make man in our image after our likeness,
Genesis 1.26.

Others expound hands literally and formally, not as if God had hands (that is
below their conceit) but thus, It has been said of old, that when God at first
formed man, the Son took upon him an outward shape, or the shape of a man;
and so (say they) Christ (not made man, but) in the form of man formed man.

Thirdly, The hands of God are all second causes, which God uses toward the
production of any effect. Causis secundis veluti quibusda^ manibus utitur Deus
ad producendas res sublunares. Aquin.
All hands work for God, they work for him, while they are set a work against
him; and so may be called, The hands of God. Man's making since the Creation, is
not an immediate work; the Creation of the first man was. Yet it is so much the
work of God still, that every man is the work of his hands, as well as the
first man. All inferior causes concurring to the making of man are the hands,
by which God makes man.

Fourthly, The hands of God, are generally taken for the power and wisdom of
God. The hand of power acts, what the hand of wisdom does contrive. As the hand
is often put for power, so to put any thing into the hand of another, is to put
it into his power. That grant which was made to Satan at the beginning of this
book, runs in this strain, Behold, be (meaning Job) is in thine hand (that is,
Thou may do with him what thou will) only save his life (Chap. 2.6.)

The Schoolmen determine the hands of God to be the understanding and will of
God, which they call, The executive power of God; by these he determines what
shall be done, and does what he predetermines. The very decree and purpose of
God, is called the hand of God ( Act. 4.28.) Of a truth, against thy holy
child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the
Gentiles and the people of Israel were gathered together, for to do whatsoever
thy hand, and thy counsel determined before to be done. Gods hand was the
sovereign power of God, overruling those evil instruments to fulfill his holy
counsels, while they intended only to fulfill their own wicked counsels.

We may best interpret Job in the fourth sense, Thine hands have made me and
fashioned me, Tu pro tua potestate tuoque jure Bez.
that is, I am made and fashioned by thy power and wisdom, I am a piece of thy
forming. None but the only wise, and all-powerfull God, could produce such an
effect as I am.

Have made me and fashioned me. Here are two words which some distinguish by
referring the one to the body, the other to the soul. We need not be so
accurate about these words. But thus much is plainly noted in them, that the
Lord was exceeding accurate about this work, the fashioning of man. Both words
have their special elegancies.

The first, which we translate made, signifies more then to make, (...) In sua
prima significatione denotat, dolor afficere.
it signifies to make exactly and curiously. It is a word proper to Artificers,
who work, or should work with an equal mixture of diligence and knowledge, of
pains and skill: Artificers mingle their heads, and their hands in every thing
they undertake, and bestow more study then toil upon their works.

This word is translated also to grieve, vex, or to put one to trouble. The
perverse carriage of the people of Israel toward the Spirit of God, is
expressed by it ( Isa. 63.10. Panis anxietate magna and labor partus.
) They rebellid and vexed his holy Spirit. And that bread of sorrows, that is,
bread gotten by sorrowful or hard labor is delivered in this term ( Ps.
127.2.) See a further explication of the word, Chap. 9. verse. 27. page 352.

God is not put to any pain at all in making man, Deus no^ se fatigavit in
homine condendo; Sed de Deo Scriptura hominis more loquitur, quasi summa cura
and anxietate ad eu^ formandum usus esset Deus, ut nihil ad ejus perfectionem
deesset. Merc. Manus tuae dolor afficiunt me, quae secerunt me. Jun.
he does all his works with infinite delight and ease. Nothing is hard to him
who can do all things: Omnipotency never meets with any difficulty. But God is
expressed in making man by a word, signifying solicitousnesse and painful care,
implying, That man is made as those things are, upon which man bestows greatest
pains and care. Man does not look like a piece of work slubbered over slightly,
or clapped up in haste. The most wise God, who showed his manifold wisdom in the
work of redemption, showed much of his wisdom in the work of creation; He made
man (as we speak) in print.

A learned translatour renders, Thy hands put me to pain, which have made me;
as if Job had complained here of the pain which God put him to after he had
made him, rather then exalted God for the pains he seemed to have taken, when
he made him. But we may better keep to our rendering, Thine hands have made me,
and Fashioned me.

The making of man imports his being: The fashioning of him, the outward
formality of his being. Man receives not only his nature, but his figure from
God. The word signifies to trim or polish, (...) Est aliquid facere, sed
ornate and polite, rem omnibus modis perfectam efficere.
to do a thing curiously and completely ( Genesis 1.31.) God saw all that he had
made, and behold it was very good. He saw all with delight and highest
content: for, he had put all into a composure of most exquisite comeliness,
and perfect beauty. A due and proper fashion to the essence of comeliness.
Thine hands have not only made, but fashioned me, and that not in part only,
but as it follows, (...) Alludere videtur ad figuli rotam Pined. Artifices
opus pene absolutum curiose circumspiciunt, ut si quid oculis ingratum
deprehendant, corrigant. Sanct
Together round about.

This is no pleonasme or superfluity of speech; for though when a thing is made
and fashioned, it is supposed to be made round about, yet here to show the
exactness of God in making man, Job speaks as if God had resolved to have all
of his own doing, and would not trust the least part of this work into the
hand of any other, Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me together round
about. Which words are, say some,

First, An allusion to the art of a potter, who forms and fashioneth earthen
vessels, turning them often about and about upon his wheel. Or it may be an
allusion to a Statuary, or to a painter, who having a curious costly piece in
hand, goes about it, and views it round on every side: That if any thing suit
not his eye, his fancy, or the rule of art, he may correct it.

Secondly, Dicit in circuitu, quod corpus videtur animae esse in circuitu,
sicut vestimentum vest ito, aut sicut domu habitatori Aquin.
Others conceive that this round about, is only a circumlocution for the body,
because the body encompasseth the soul round about, as a garment does the body,
or a house the inhabitant.

Thirdly, Totum dicit ut ad singula corporis membra referatur. Idem est, quod
latinus dicit intus and extra, intus and in cate, a capite ad pedes. Quantus,
quantus sum, magna Dei cura and artificio elaboratus sum. Pined. (...).
Together round about, is (as was touched before) me in every part, or all me.
When some took offense at Christ's healing of a sick man upon the Sabbath Day,
he answers, Are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every whit whole on
the Sabbath day? (Joh. 7.23.) or that I have made the whole man whole, not
leaving any unsound limb about him? There is a like phrase ( Luke 11.40.)
which may illustrate this; Ye fools, Did not he that made that which is
without, make that which is within also? That is, Did not he that made man,
make him together round about; Did not he make whatsoever is man? So, Jobs
together round about, is, as if he had said, Thou have made me within and
without from head to foot; thou have made me all that I am; how great, how
good, how strong, how beautiful soever I am, I am made by thee. Thou (as David
speaks, Psalm. 139.5.) have beset or formed me (so the Hebrew) behind and
before, and laid thine hand upon me. (...) Formasti me.


Fourthly, By together round about, we may understand all without man, which
man has about him. Thou have made and fashioned not only my body, but my
estate, my honor, my friends, my children (children round about the Table,
Psalm. 128.2. Per circuitam omnia etiam illa intelligamus quae hominem cingunt,
sc facultates, liberos, familiam universam.
) Thou have given me all that I have about me; Whatsoever I am, I am made and
fashioned by thine hands: So the phrase is used, Chap. 19.9, 10. He has stripped
me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head, he has destroyed me on every
side; or, he has destroyed me round about, that is, All that he has made
round about me, he has taken away from me; he has stripped me of all he once
clothed me with. Mr Broughton translates much to that sense, Thou have
fashioned me and made me in every point; that is, Look whatsoever I am
considerable in, under what notion so ever I may be taken, Thou have made me
and fashioned me in all.

Observe, First,

The making of man now, is the work of God, as well as the making of the first
man was.

Job does not say, The Lord did once make and fashion man, but thine hands have
made me: He ascribes his own making to God, as well as Adams. The structure
and frame of nature is the work of God, not of nature: Nature and natural
causes are nothing but the order in which God works. God turns or
changes, stops or sets them forward as he pleases. Natura nihil aliud est
quam divinorum operumordo. Brent.
Second causes work purely at the will of God, though means be used by man,
yet the effect is Gods. Corn grows in the field by the hand of God. You will
say, What then does the hushandman? What does the earth? What do the Sun and
rain? Do not all these work? All those are nothing but the order wherein,
and by which the hand of God makes the corn to grow; for let all those second
causes work as hard as they can, yet the corn grows not, unless God speak the
word; His steps, not the husbandmans drop fatness; It is he, not the Sun or
the rain, which makes the valleys stand thick with corn, to laugh and sing. As
in spirituals so in naturals, he that planteth, and he that vvatereth is
nothing, but God that gives the increase. The Psalmist speaks exclusively of
man, as to the point of man's making, and he puts an emphasis upon it, as if
man did not take notice enough, if a^ all, of this, that in this man is
nothing, Know ye, that the Lord he is God, Psalm. 100.3.
it is he that has made us, and not we our selves. There may be a great deal
of grace acted in acknowledging God to be the author of nature: yet I conceive
the Psalmist speaks there rather of Gods making us in grace then in nature.

Secondly, Observe, Job recounting what God had done for him, brings in, Thy
hands have made me and fashioned me, then,

Our making and natural constitution are to be reckoned amongst the great
benefits received from God.

Psalm. 139.14. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. The
making of a man is a wonder: though the frequency of it makes the wonder little
observed, yet the wonder is not (in it self) the less. David, who had serious
and holy thoughts about natural things, confesses, I am fearfully and
wonderfully made. A Heathen had three reasons for which he used especially to
thank God. One of them was this, because he had made him a man. If men, who
have but the light of nature can see so much of God in nature, How much of God
should we see in nature, who have the light of grace to see it by!

Thirdly, From the words put together, Thine hands have made me and fashioned
me together round about, Observe

The whole fashion and fabric of man is from God.

From which general take these consectaries.

See more of this point before at the third verse of this Chapter, page 443.
First, Then do not undervalue the body, it is the work of God, He has
fashioned it round about. We always look upon and value our bodies too much,
when we are proud of them; but we can never look upon or value our bodies too
much, while we are thankful for them; and that we may be so, we ought to view
every room of this house of clay, from story to story, from the garret to the
cellar, from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, that we seeing the
wonderful works of God, may have our hearts enlarged in his praises. Some have
put ignoble titles upon the body of man, calling it a prison, or a shackle. The
body is not a prison, it is a palace; it is not a shackle, it is an organ, a
fit instrument for the soul to use and act by. If at any time the body be
unusefull to the soul, that proceeds from sinful corruption, not from its
natural constitution.

(...).
But the Apostle ( Phil. 3.21.) calls our body, a vile body, or the body of
our vileness. Man's body is not vile, as God made it (so it is a stately
structure) but as sin has made it. The Apostle calls it vile, not absolutely,
and in it self, but relatively. The body clothed with mortality is vile,
compared with the body, when it shall be clothed with glory, and that glory
like the glory of the body of Christ, as is assured us, Who shall change our
vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body; The words
carry an allusion to those who changing old and broken vessels, desire to have
them wrought in the best, and newest fashion. The body of Christ is the richest
piece of Gods work, and this shall be the pattern of ours; as here upon earth
the spirits of believers are of the same fashion with Christ's (the same mind
is in the Saints, which was in Christ, there is but one draft of grace (in the
main) upon the souls of all holy men, and that is a copy of Christ's, his being
the original) So in heaven the bodies of all believers shall be of the same
fashion with Christ's. There shall be but one draft of glory in the main (for
degrees do not vary the kind) upon the body of Christ, and the bodies of all
his members. In reference to this future change of the body, the body in its
present state, is vile.

Secondly, Hence it follows, That as we must not undervalue the frame of man's
body in general, as imperfect; so we may not despise any for their special
bodily imperfections. It is God who has made and fashioned them round about.
It is said (2 Samuel 5.8.) that the blind and the lame were hated of David's
soul. Yet to hate any for defects in the body, is a very great defect in the
soul: and to contemn any for natural blemishes, is a spiritual blemish. How
then could David hate the blind and the lame, and not sin, or are we to number
this among his sins? There are two expositions of those words upon either of
which we may clear the difficulty.

First, That when David sent to summon that fort, the Iebusites who were the
defendants, trusting in the strength of the place, told David in scorn that he
must first conquer the blind and the lame. As implying that blind and lame
soldiers, were garrison good enough to deal with his great Army upon the
advantage of such a fortress.

Secondly, The blind and the lame, may rather be the Idols and strange Gods
which the Iebusites worshipped, of whose protection, they were not the less
confident, because the Jews counted them but blind and lame. As if they had
said, even these gods, which you call blind and lame, see well enough what ye
are doing, and will come fast enough, and too fast for your ease, to our aid
and succor. These blind and lame gods were justly hated of David's soul, but
he had learned better then to hate men, who were made lame or blind by God.

Thirdly, Seeing all men are fashioned round about by the hands of God, then as
we must not despise any for their bodily imperfections, so not envy any for
their bodily perfections. Some are as much troubled to see another have a
better body, or a more beautiful face, as many are (alike sinfully both) to
see another have a better purse, or a more plentiful estate then themselves.

Fourthly, Let not the thing formed, say to him that formed it, Why have thou
made me thus? If thy earthly Tabernacle be not so highly, so strongly built, if
the materials of it be not so pure, or not so exactly tempered, if thou have
not so good a constitution, so elegant a composition, if thou art not so
adorned and polished, as some others are; yet be not discontented, the hands of
God have made and fashioned thee round about. It is a great honor to a vessel,
that he made it, though he have made it (in this sense) a vessel of dishonor.

Fifthly, If God has fashioned our bodies, then we must not put them out of
fashion. It is dangerous to deface the work of God, to undo that which God has
done, to unmake that which God has made. How sad is it that any should pull
down a building of Gods own setting up, without warrant from God! Self-murder,
or the murder of another, is an high affront to God, and should have a severe
revenge from man. He that sheds his own blood takes revenge upon himself, And
who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image of
God made he man (Genesis 9.6.) As what God has joined by a civil, so by a
natural band, Let no man put asunder.

Lastly, If thou art made and fashioned by God, then let God have the use of
all thou art. Let God dwell in the house, which he has set up. Let thy body be
employed for God; he that made it, has most right to it. Every thing in man
shows forth the wisdom and goodness of God toward man, let every thing in man
show forth obedience and submission unto God. This was the ground of David's
prayer ( Psalm. 119.73.) Thy hands have made me and fashioned me, give me
understanding, that I may learn thy commandments; as if he had said, Lord, I
would use this body, this soul, this all, which thou have made, for thy glory,
therefore give me understanding that I may learn thy will, I would not do the
will of another, while I dwell in thy house, and am thy tenant at will. I would
not employ those members which thou have given me, to fulfill the Law of sin,
or the commands of Satan. The Apostle is clear upon this argument in reference
to redemption (1 Cor. 6.19.) Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price;
therefore glorify God with your bodies, and in your spirits, which are Gods;
Now as in the work of redemption we are of God by grace, so in the work of
creation we are of God by nature. The reason holds in both, glorify God with
your bodies, which are not your own, but Gods. It is usual in letting out of
houses to put a clause in the lease, that the house shall not be employed to
such and such uses, but only to such as are expressed in the indenture. Surely
the Lord who has built and furnished these houses, has taught us how to
employ them, and what trade to exercise in them, even the trade of holiness.
Take heed you do not let out any room or corner of a room in this house for sin
to trade in, or for the work of iniquity. This is to let out a house of Gods
making to the devils using.

Yet thou do destroy me. The word signifies to swallow up; (...) Absorbere
est morsicatim destruere. Coc. Deglutio significat omnimoda^ exterminatione^,
resumque omnium profundissimum exitium. (...).
and to swallow up with greediness, Psalm. 52.4. Thou love all devouring (or
swallowing) words; words which swallow down thy neighbors credit, and devour
his good name, as one morsel. The holy Ghost expresses our final victory over
death, by a word which reaches this sense (1 Cor. 15.54.) Death is swallowed
up (or drunk down) in victory; death is drunk up at a draught. Christ called
his sufferings (by which he got this victory) a cup. The Apostle uses the same
word again (2 Cor. 5.4.) That mortality might be swallowed up of life. When
this mortal shall have put on immortality, death shall be swallowed up in
victory, that is, there shall be a complete victory over death, and not only
so, but mortality shall be swallowed up of life. In heaven there shall be no
death, nor any thing like death, nothing bearing any the least resemblance of
it is image, or letter of it is superscription, nothing of mortality shall be
found or felt there: There mortality shall be swallowed up of life; here Job
complains that his life was almost swallowed up of mortality. Yet thou do
destroy, or swallow me up: As thou have already swallowed up my estate, so thou
seem resolved to swallow up my very breath. When Joab besieged Abel, a wise
woman out of the City cried unto him, Thou seek to destroy a City in Israel;
why will thou swallow up the inheritance of the Lord? 2 Samuel 20.19. Job saw a
great Army of afflictions encamping about him: and he seems to cry out to the
Lord of those hoasts, why seek thou to destroy thy servant, why will thou
swallow me, who am the work of thy hands?

Distinctio Habraeorum magis postulat, ut verba praecedentia, simul
circumquaque cum his jungantur, and absorbistime, Merc.
Gramarians observe from the exactest reading of the Hebrew, that the former
words [Together round about] should be joined with these [Thou do destroy me]
Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me, and yet thou do destroy me
together round about; that is, Thou make an utter end, a total consumption
of me.

Again, These words are read by some with an interrogation, Thine hands have
made me and fashioned me, and do thou yet destroy me? The question does not
alter, but quicken the sense, and render it more pressing and patheticall, Will thou destroy me thus exactly, Licet sensus non multum diversus sit,
interrogatio tamen sensum reddit valde acrem, and incitatum. Merc.
whom thou have made so exactly? The (yet) in the text sounds out an
admiration. As when God ( Amos 4.) had brought many judgments upon Jerusalem,
and found them still impenitent, he conchides the narrative of every one, with,
Yet have they not returned unto me; As if he had said, What a wonder is here?
So Job repeating the favors of God to him, concludes with a yet thou do, or
do thou yet destroy me? As if he had said, What a wonder is here? How
unsearchable are thy judgments, O God, Quem diligentissime fecisti
diligentissime destruis.
and thy ways past finding out? Thus he sets what God then did, in opposition
to what he had done, that so the consideration of former mercies might provoke
him to remove or mitigate present judgments. Do thou destroy me who have
made me?

Hence observe,

First, That to mind God of making us, is an argument to stay his hand from
breaking us. See more of this point, ver. 3 p. 445.


It repented the Lord (says Moses, Genesis 6.6.) that he had made man, and it
grieved him at the heart. This repentance and grief did not arise from his
making of man; but from that necessity which his own justice and honor laid
upon him to destroy man whom he had made; as it follows in the next words, And
the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created. The words show the
resolution of God, not his propension; it went to his heart to do it. If God
repented and grieved (understand both by a figure) because he had made man,
whom he must destroy, then it cannot but be a grief to him to destroy that
which he has made. It is as easy to the power of God to undo, as it is to do:
but it is not so easy to his will to undo, as it is to do.

Secondly, Observe, Afflictions destructive to the outward man, may be the lot
of the best men.

God never destroies that spiritual creature, which the hand of his grace has
made and fashioned: but he does sometimes destroy the natural creature of
those who are spiritual.

Thirdly, Observe, A good man will make honorable mention of the goodness of
God to him, while he is under greatest evils.

Job writes the natural history of Gods power and wisdom in his constitution,
while destruction was knocking at his doors. Though God will destroy what he
has made, yet he ought to be glorified for what he has made. The praise of
God for fashioning us, is never so comely, as when he is putting us out of
fashion.

Fourthly, Observe, God does that sometimes which is most improbable he should
do.

He acts strangely in ways of mercy, and strangely in ways of judgment. He
saves those whom we expect he should destroy, and he destroies those whom we
expect he should save. The Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the
world would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have
entered into the gates of Jerusalem (Lam. 4.12.) and who would have believed
that the adversary and the enemy, sorrow and destruction should have entered
into the gates of Job? God comes with such afflictions upon his people now, as
make him to be admired by all the world. Christ will come with such mercies
at the last, as will make him to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in
all them that believe (2 Thessalonians. 1.10.) Christ will exceed, not only our
unbelief, but our faith.

In the former verse Job pleaded with God, as his maker, he proceeds still in
the same argument, and re-enforceth it from a special intimation of the matter
out of which he was made, clay.

Verse 9. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay' and
will thou bring me into dust again?


Remember, I beseech thee. (...) Recordatus est, memor fuit, odoratus suit,
qua^, do de sacrificijs usurpatur. Odoretur omnia muneratua. Jun. Zachar, mas
aut a memoria qua magis pollet quam mulier, aut quia memoriam, and nomen
familiae conservat. Buxtorf.
Job speaks heartily, his spirit was in a heat, Remember, I beseech thee. The
original word is applied to a sensitive act, as well as to a rational (
Psalm. 20.3.) The Lord remember, or smell all thy offerings. Memory is the
savor or sent of things preserved in the mind. The Hebrews express man, or a
male child, by a word of that root, and they give two reasons of it. Either,
first, because man is of a stronger memory then the woman. Or, secondly,
because the man-child preserves the memory of the family, and is a monument
of his fathers honor, his name being carried on from generation to generation;
in opposition to which, women or females are called Nashim, which word
implies forgetfulness, because the^r names and titles are swallowed up in
their husbands, and forgotten when they are married.

Memory or the act of remembering is improperly applied to God. For remembrance
is of things past, but to God all things are present. Memory is the storehouse
wherein we lay up several notions, and keep records of what has been done,
which by an act of the understanding we review and fetch out again. All things
are ever open before God. He needs not turn leaves or search registers, he
needs not so much as strain a thought to recall what is past; that which was
from the beginning, and shall be to the end, yea, to that which has no end,
eternity, is always before him. God is said to remember, or to forget when he
acts like a man, who remembers or forgets; but there is no act either of
forgetfulness, or of remembrance in God.

Remembering implies two things in God.

First, A serious attention to the person and consideration of the thing which
he formerly seemed to slight, or lightly to pass by. We also remember by
minding and thinking upon what is present, as well as by recalling what is
past.

Secondly, To remember, notes a speedy supply of our wants, or actual
deliverance out of dangers. God remembers us when he favors us, he remembers
us, when he pities us, he remembers us, when he relieves us, Who remembered us
in our low estate, Psalm 136.23. that is, who brought us out of our low estate.
The needy shall not always be forgotten (Psalm. 9.18.) not always, no nor at any
time, the Lord does not at all forget any, much less such needy ones, as that
Scripture intends. The meaning is, they shall not always be undelivered, their
estate shall not lie for ever unconsidered, and their cry unattended to. God
will not deal with them, nor suffer others to deal with them, as if he had
forgotten them. Hannah was long under that affliction of barrenness, and when
the Lord gave her conception, it is said, He remembered Hannah (1 Samuel 1.19.)
his thoughts were ever upon her, and upon her petition, but when he granted her
petition, then he remembered her indeed. As we then remember God, when we obey
his commands: so God remembers us then, when he fulfils our requests. Remember,
I beseech thee.

As it is our duty to remember the Lord: so it is our privilege that we may
put him in remembrance.

It is a privilege, and a very great one to be a remembrancer to the king of
heaven. The Prophet describes such an office ( Isa. 62.6.) Ye that make mention
of the Lord, or nearer the Hebrew, Ye that are the Lords remembrancers, keep
not silence, and give him no rest. Great Princes have an officer called their
Remembrancer, and they need remembrancers. It is at once their honor and their
weakness to have them. They cannot retain all businesses, and preserve a
record within themselves of all affairs within their Kingdoms: It is an honor
to God that he has remembrancers, but it is his greater honor that he has no
need of them. Himself is the living record of all that has been done, or is to
be done. Knowledge is above memory, and he that knows all things is above
remembrancers. God is willing we should speak to him after the manner of men:
but we must not conceive of him after the manner of men. We must not think he
has forgotten us, though we may beseech him to remember us.

There are four things which the Saints usually move the Lord to remember.

First, His own mercies, Remember, O Lord thy tender mercies, was David's prayer
( Psalm. 25.6.) Has God forgotten to be gracious? was David's question and
infirmity ( Psalm. 77.9.) yet God acts sometimes, as if he had forgot his
nature, or had need to be minded to do what he is. God can no more forget
himself, then deny himself, no more forget to be gracious then cease to be: yet
he gives his people leave, yea a charge, to move him to do, what he cannot but
do, what he is resolved, yea what he is ready to do. Mercy pleases God so
much, that he often appears displeased on purpose, that we may remember him of
his mercy. He delights we should desire, what he delights to grant.

Secondly, The Saints usually mind God of his Covenant. God is ever mindful
of his Covenant (Psalm. 111.5.) yet he loves to be minded of it. His royal
title is, The God that keeps Covenant for ever; yet he loves to be desired
not to break it. Thus Jeremy begs for the Jews, the Vovenant People of God. Do
not abhor us for thy name sake, Do not disgrace the throne of thy glory,
remember, break not thy Covenant with us. Jer. 14.21. The Psalmist prays upon
the same ground, Have respect to the Covenant, for the dark places of the
earth, are full of the habitations of cruelty; As if he had said, Lord, Thou
have made a Covenant to preserve and protect thy people, but now they are
oppressed; The dark places, that is, places full of ignorance and wickedness
(which are spiritual darkness) are full of cruelty: Holy knowledge has no
such enemy as ignorance. Or the dark places are full, etc. may be thus
understood, there is no such obscure corner or by-place in the land, but their
malice searches it out for the vexation of thy people. We are so far from
having liberty to serve thee publicly in the light, that we feel the cruelty
of bloody minded men, though we do it secretly or in the dark. Now Lord it is
time for thee to remember thy Covenant.

Thirdly, The Saints use to put God in remembrance of the rage and blasphemies
of his and their enemies. Thus the Church of the Jews cries unto the Lord (
Psalm. 137.7.) Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem,
who said, raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof. When a man is
wronged who intends revenge, he will say to the party wronging him, well,
Remember this, or, I shall remember you for this. Revengefull men have strong
memories: so has the God to whom vengeance belongs. He will certainly
remember the sinful, revengefull cry of Edom against Jerusalem, though the
sins of Jerusalem did cry to him for vengeance. The Psalmist is as earnest in
another place, urging the Lord to remember for his own interest, as here for
the interest of his Sion (Psalm. 74.18.) Remember this, that the enemy has
reproached, O Lord, and that the foolish people have blasphemed thy Name. As if
he had said, Pray, Lord, take a note of this, make a memorandum of this, That
the enemy has reproached thy Name: God will remember it, if any of his
servants are reproached, much more when himself is.

Fourthly, The Saints remember God of their own frailty, and that twofold.
First, Natural, Secondly, Spiritual. Remember how short my time is, wherefore
have thou made all men in vain? (Psalm. 89.47.) Man is a frail short-lived
creature, and it is some comfort to him, that God knows he is so. That which
Job puts the Lord in remembrance of, is his natural frailty; some understand
it also of his spiritual, Remember, I beseech thee, That thou have made me as
the clay.

The LXX reads it, Thou have made me clay. (...). Sept. (...)
The word signifies cement or mortar, which are mixed of earth and water, Thou
have made me as tempered clay. When the original of man is described, Proprie
significat cementum, vel terram aqua mixtam.
it is said, The Lord formed man dust out of the ground, or, of the dust of the
ground (Genesis 2.7.) here Job says, Thou have made me as the clay, or, Thou have
made me of the clay; the sense is near the same, whether we take clay for the
matter out of which man was made, or for the similitude according to which man
was made. Job speaks of himself with respect to creation: for, In memoriam
revoca, ut me e luto primum, i. e. primum homine^ unde orti caeteri formaris.
figuli more. Merc.
according to the ordinary course of generation, man is not made of clay. The
first man was made of clay, and of him all men are. We derive our pedigree from
the dirt, and are a kin to clay. Job might say, and so may any man, Thou have
made me of the clay. However Job was, and man now is made as the clay; that is,
frail, brittle and weak. We are composed of materials, which will quickly crack
and break. When the holy Ghost would describe how easily Christ can shatter to
pieces all the opposites of his Kingdom, it is said, He shall dash them in
pieces like a potters vessel: A potters vessel will not bear blows, especially
not the blows of such an instrument, as is there spoken of, an iron rod: He
shall break them with a rod of iron (Psalm. 2.9.) we may break a potters vessel
with a little wand, or a weak reed, how then should it endure the weight and
hardness of an iron rod? The Spirit of God seems to delight in this allusion,
and therefore takes it up often, Read, Isa. 45.9. Isa. 64.8. Romans 9.21. We have
the state of the Jews, described under this notion ( Jer. 18.4.) The Lord bids
Jeremy go down to the potters house, he obeys, and found the potter working a
work on the wheel, And the vessel that he made of clay, was marred in the hand
of the potter, so he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter
to make it. Then, the Word of the Lord came to him, saying, Cannot I do to you
as this potter? says the Lord, Behold, as the clay is in the hand of the
potter, so are ye in my hand, O house of Israel. I can form you, and I can
break you, I can put you into what condition I please, and ye ought not to be
displeased at it. A potters vessel is an emblem of the strongest Kingdoms, How
much more of the strongest men?

That we are made of clay, intimates three things, at all which Job seems to
aim, when he says, Thou have made me as the clay.

First, The excellency of man's frame. He is not thrust together like a rude
lump or mass of earth, but curiously wrought (Psalm. 139.15.) To make a vessel
of clay is an artificial work, not a natural. It requires much pains, but
more skill. Whence Job argues, Thou have made me as the clay; Thou have showed
thy heavenly wisdom in shaping and contriving me, as a vessel of honor for
thy use, And will thou bring me into dust again? The remembrance of that love
and care which God has laid out upon us in our constitution, is an argument
moving him to pity and compassion, as was showed at the third verse.

Secondly, That God has made us of clay, shows our utter inability to contend
with God, and to stand against his strokes: It is, as if Job had said, Lord,
Surely thou forgettest of what metal I am made, thou think I am made of a
hard rock, or of invincible Adamant, that I am compounded of iron, and other
the strongest materials; Alas, Lord, there is no such matter, I am made but as
the clay; A great deal of power and wisdom appeared in making me, but a little
power will serve to ruin me; I am no sooner touched but cracked. Why then do
thou plant all thy Ordnance, and discharge so many volleys of shot against me?
Lord, What am I? Am I a wall of brass, or a bulwark of stone? Thou know I
am but a wall of clay, a paper wall, a potters vessel, a little moistened
earth. Will any man prepare Cannon to batter a cottage, or a beetle to kill a
fly? Thy providence needs not make such provision against me, or handle me so
roughly: that which is weak calls for tender usage, and that which is weak may
last long, if tenderly used; a glass with care will continue many ages. Deal
gently with thy servant, Remember, I beseech thee, thou have made me as the
clay.

Thirdly, That we are made as the clay, shows our easiness to be overcome by
temptation, and our obnoxiousnesse to sin. Sin is (in its kind) as spiritual,
as grace is, yet our sinful corruption is figuratively called, the flesh.
(...), ad circumagendum proclivis: Metaphora ducta a laciniotis and talaribus
vestibus, quae currentibus in stadio non sunt aptae.
One reason (I conceive) of which may be this, because flesh, taken properly,
is an occasion of sin. As the sensitive part is a servant, so a snare to the
rational, much more to the spiritual. The flesh is at once the organ, and the
burden of the spirit. The Apostle calling Saints to run the race of holiness
with patience, gives a very suitable advice, Let us lay aside every weight, that
is, all carnal comber; he that would show himself light of foot, will not take
a burden upon his back, he casts off his very garments; to which the next words
of the Apostle seem to allude, Cast off every weight, and the sin which does
so easily beset us: So a garment does, especially a long garment, which in
running daggles and folds about our heels. The reason why our sinful
corruption is compared to such a garment, is, because it is so much assisted by
this body of clay, the flesh, which is as a long garment to the soul, hanging
about it, and besetting it, on every side.

From which sense Job seems thus to move the Lord, Suppose I have sinned (he
had said, verse. 7. Thou know I am not wicked, but suppose I have sinned) and
have had my failings, yet, Lord, Remember thou have made me as the clay, I am
not a pure spirit, as Angels are, I have a body of earth about me, which clogs
and hinders me in every duty, which many ways endangers me unto every sin.
God himself takes up this as an argument to spare sinful man ( Psalm. 78.39.)
when the people of Israel rebelled against him, He many a time turned his anger
away, and did not stir up all his wrath. What staid him? The next words give a
reason; for he remembered that they were but flesh; that is, weak and very
subject unto sin. This argument prevails again ( Psalm. 103.14.) Like as a
father spares his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him; Why? For
he knows their frame, he remembers that they are dust. As if the very matter
out of which man was first made, though without sin, were some disadvantage to
him in the resisting of sin. It was a disadvantage before man had any sin in
him, how much more is it now, when most men have nothing at all in them, but
sin, and the best have very much. That which is born of the flesh (says
Christ, Ioh. 3.6.) is flesh. His meaning is, corrupt nature can produce none
but corrupt acts. It is a truth also, that our pure nature, because it was
constituted (as of other parts, so) of flesh (the soul like a sparkling
diamond, being set in clay) was thereby rendered more prone to fleshly or
sinful acts. Natural flesh (in its best state) is more apt to bring forth
spiritual flesh (namely sin) then a spirit is. Angeli idcirco
irremissibiliter peccaverunt, quia tanto robustius stare poterant quanto eos
carnis commix tio non tenebat. Greg. Moral in loc
And that is a reason among others, which some give, why God was so
irreconcilably angry with the Angels which fell, why he did never so much as
mention them in a way of mercy, or discovered a thought of them for good since
their fall (I say) one reason given is this, Because God could not remember
that Angels were made as the clay, or formed out of the dust; They were created
spirits, pure spirits, they had no clogs of flesh and blood about them, no
fogs, no mists vapouring up from a sensitive part to cloud their intellectual.
They had the more power to continue pure, because they were free from any
earthly and elementary mixtures. Their sin was a compound of more evils,
because their nature was so simple. Angels having no tempter without them, no
flesh about them, turned themselves away from God, merely upon the freedom of
their own wills. As every good action is by so much the better, by how much it
has a freer concurrence of our wills: so is every evil action so much the
worse. The sin we commit is the greater, by how much we have had the less
provocation to commit it. The sin of our first parents in eating the
forbidden fruit, was aggravated in it self, because God gave them such plenty
and variety of other fruits to eat: but it was lessened in comparison of the
Angels sin, because they had more provocations to sin, then the Angels had.
The bait of the temptation against our first parents, was laid in their
constitution, which being corporal and earthly, must needs be delighted with
earthly objects. The forbidden fruit was pleasant to the eye, there the flesh
took it, And it was pleasant to the taste, there the flesh took it again. These
provocations man had over and besides that of the Angels, a hope or a desire to
mend his condition, and to become like unto God. A body of earth has a
sutablenesse to all earthly allurements. Every like has a natural tendency
and motion toward its like. This moves the Lord to pity sinful man, though
man must not hence plead impunity for sin. The measure and degrees of sin
upon such actings are abated, but the acts do not therefore put off the nature
of sin. A sinner in dust and clay cannot be excused, yet is not so much
polluted, and more to be pitied then a sinning spirit. And that is a third
notion in which we may expound Job, beseeching God to remember, that he has
made him as the clay.

I might write many things in this clay out of which man was made; but I have
met with other passages already of the same subject, especially in the fourth
Chapter, verse. 19. in those words, Materia ex quae orti sumus nobis ad
modestia^ magistra esse debet, quid enim luto sive argilla vilius? Sanct.
Whose foundation is in the dust; which Text being near of the same importance
and interpretation with this in hand, I shall rather refer the Reader thither,
then insist upon the same deductions and inferences a second time. Take only
this in general. Our reflection upon the matter out of which we are extracted,
should lesson us to low and modest thoughts of our selves: for what is lower
then the earth. We say, He that lies upon the earth, has not whence to fall;
It is as true, He that rises out of the earth, has nothing in himself whence
he should be lifted up.

Remember that thou have made me as the clay, and Will thou bring me into the
dust again?

To be brought to the dust, is first a circumlocution or description of death,
Psalm. 30.9. Shall the dust praise thee, shall it declare thy truth? That is,
shall I praise thee when I am among the dead? What profit is there in my blood,
when I go down to the pit? Not that profit sure, I cannot bring thee in the
tribute of praise, when my life's gone out.

Secondly, To be brought to the dust, is a description of any low and poor
condition, Psalm. 22.29. All they that be fat upon the earth (that is the great
and mighty) shall eat and worship, All they that go down to the dust (that is,
the mean and base) shall bow before him. As if he had said, rich and poor, high
and low, the King and the beggar, have alike need of salvation by Jesus Christ,
and must submit unto him, that they may be saved, for as it there follows, None
can keep alive his own soul. The captivity of the Jews in Babylon is expressed
under those notions of death, and of dwelling in the dust, Isa. 26.19. to show
how low they were brought; even so low, that no power but his, who can raise
the dead could work their deliverance.

Job saw himself brought to the dust of a low condition, of poverty and of
disgrace, and he feared he should be brought to the dust of death, and of the
grave. That Is the meaning of this expostulating querie, And will thou bring me
into the dust again? He was not at all brought out of the dust of his
affliction, and therefore he could not say of that, Will thou bring me into the
dust again?

The words are read three ways.

1. As an Assertion. 2. As an Interrogation. 3. As an Admiration.
First, Many Interpreters give them as a plain assertion, Remember, that thou
have made me as the clay, and thou will bring me into the dust again.

Secondly, Others read them (as we) with an interrogation, Remember, that thou
have made me as the clay, and will thou bring me into the dust again?

Thirdly, Some heighten them into an admiration, Thou have made me as the clay,
and (what?) will thou now bring me into the dust again! What a wonder is this?
Could I have expected such a sudden change as this! Quoad naturam vilissimus
sum, quoad judicium tuum morti addictus, ut in pulverem revertar, utrumque
debet te commovere, ut parcas mihi in vita, Coc. Particula and pro sic sumenda
est, and futurum potentiale est, decentiam vel debitum, vel jus, vel potestatem
denotans, q. d. sicut me tanqua^ cementum compegisti, eadem potestate cum
volueris in terram reduces nulla mihi illa^o injuria Bol.


Take the words as a direct assertion, Thou will bring me into the dust again.
So they may have reference to the decree of God concerning man, as those before
had to the creation of man. As if he had said, By creation and natural
constitution, I am frail and weak, made of the clay, by thy purpose and decree
I am appointed unto death, Thou will bring me into the dust again, therefore
spare me for the short time I have to live.

Some change the conjunction [And] into the adverb of likeness, so, to note a
right, power, or privilege, and the text runs in this form, Remember, that as
thou have made me of, or as the clay, so thou may (it is thy privilege, none
can contradict thee in it, and thou do me no wrong in it, thou may) as
thou have purposed, bring me to the dust again. Though it be common and
natural to all creatures mixed of elements, to be resolved and turned back into
that out of which they were made, that is to die; yet to man it is more then
natural; there is a decree upon it, besides the naturality of it: Man dies by
a statute law of heaven. To die is a penalty inflicted upon man for sin, for
he had not been under a necessity of dying, if he had not sinned. And therefore
though God formed man (as the holy story informs us ( Genesis 2.7.) out of the
dust of the earth, yet so long as man stood, he never said to him, To dust thou
shall return; God only put a supposition, that in case man did fall, he should
surely die. But when man had fallen by sin, then he hears what he was, and what
he must be, For dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return (Genesis 3.19.) As
if God had thus bespoken sinful man. Thy body was framed out of dust, and now
I charge this burden upon thee, thou shall return to the dust again.

It is a Question (and I shall touch upon it.) Whether death were natural to
man or no? Whether man were made mortal, or whether he made himself mortal?
Some affirm, That death was natural, not accidental or occasional to
mankind. They argue for this opinion,

First, thus, Adam died not the death of the body, or a natural death, when he
had sinned, therefore the death of the body was not inflicted for sin upon his
person, and his posterity, but was seated in, or a consequent of his nature.

I answer, Though Adam died not presently a natural death, yet he was
presently made subject or liable unto death; the sentence was past upon him,
though the sentence was not executed upon him. A malefactor who is cast at the
bar, is a dead man in law, though he be reprieved from the present stroke of
death.

Again, Though death it self did not instantly seize upon him, yet the symptoms
of death, and tokens of mortality did. Fear and shame, pains and distempers,
sweat and weariness quickly showed themselves as so many harbingers or
forerunners of his approaching dissolution: we see and feel death in these,
before we see or feel death it self. These bid us prepare our bodies for the
grave, and our souls for heaven.

Secondly, Others reason thus, Christ has delivered his people, the elect,
from all that punishment, which the sin of Adam did contract and deserve; but
Christ has not delivered his elect, his own people, from turning to the dust.
Godly men die as well as the ungodly, believers as well as infidels, therefore
(say they) the death of the body was not procured by sin.

I answer, Whatsoever is an evil in death, Christ has delivered his people
from; he has taken away all that from death, which is punishment or annoiance,
though death be not taken away. Christ has freed us from the effects of sin,
as he has freed us from sin it self, that is, from their prevalence and
dominion over us, not from their presence or being in and upon us. Hence the
Apostle (1 Cor. 15.) triumphs over death, O death, where is thy sting? O
grave, where is thy victory? As if he had said, Death once had a power over man
to sting him to death, death once had a victorious power, and would have bin
the great conqueror, riding in triumph over all the posterity of Adam: but now
death has neither sting nor sword to use against believers, it has nothing of
victory over the Saints. It is now but a sleep, a sleep in Christ, a rest from
labor, a putting off the rags, the worn rags of mortality, that we may be
dressed in the robes of glory. The evil of death is removed, and that which
remains of death (the separation of soul and body) proves the greatest good to
both, it being but a preparatory to their everlasting union.

Thirdly, It is argued, That death and corruption were natural to man, because
the matter out of which man was made, was dying and corruptible; Omne
principiatum sequitur naturam principiorum.
for that which is made, must follow the nature of that principle out of which
it is made. The effect cannot be (say they) more noble then the cause, nor the
subject constituted, more durable then that which goes into its constitution.

To clear up an answer to this, we must distinguish of a threefold immortality.

1. A primitive, simple, independent, essential immortality; this is proper
and peculiar to God, in which sense the Apostle affirms, He only has
immortality (1 Timothy 6.16.)

2. There is a derivative, dependant, essential immortality. Some substances
have no seed of corruptibility, nor of death in them. Being either separate
from all matter, which is the seat and root of corruption, as the Angels, or
united to matter, yet so as not being produced from it, or having any affinity
with it, such are the souls of men. Whole man in his creation was not immortal
either of these ways; (...). Graec. Int.
a part of man was, but man was not created immortal: Man was of a middle
state and condition, neither altogether so mortal, nor altogether immortal,
but capable of either.

3. There is an immortality by the power or gift, by the mercy or justice of
God. The power and justice of God shall give an immortality to the bodies of
the damned in hell, they shall ever live a dying life, who were dead all while
they lived. They who have slighted the mercy of God, shall be upheld by his
power, to endure his justice to all eternity; wicked men would have sinned with
delight for ever upon the earth, if they could have lived for ever upon the
earth, and they shall live for ever with pain in hell to suffer for their sin.

The power, goodness and mercy of God, shall much more give immortality to the
bodies of the Saints in glory; they who have had a will to delight in obeying
God that short time they lived on earth, shall have a power to live for ever in
delight, praising God in heaven.

The body of man in the state of innocence had an immortality, by the gift of
God; yet with condition, that he did submit to that rule which God gave him to
live by. Do this and live, Adamus habuit potentiam non moriendi, non
impotentia^ moriendi. Adamus peccans non solum potuit mori, sed non potuit non
mori. Quicunque dicit Adamum primu^ hominem mortalem factum, ita ut sive
peccaret, sive non peccaret, moreretur in corpore hoc est, de corpore exiret
non peccati merito, sed necessitate naturae; Anathema sit. Council. Melivit. Can
1.
was the law of Adams life. Adam had not an impossibility to die, but a
possibility not to die; This was the state of immortality in the state of
innocence. Man had not fallen into the grave, if he had not fallen into
transgression. His life was made as long as his obedience, if he had not turned
from God, he had not returned to the earth. Death was convaied in by sin, and
our possibility not to die, was not only lost, but changed into a necessity of
dying. So then, man is brought to dust, not because his nature was subject to
corruption, but because sin has corrupted his nature. When he abused the
liberty of his will, he was subjected to this necessity against his will. By an
irreversible ordinance of heaven, It is appointed unto men once to die, Heb.
9.27. Job speaks, to that point of Gods law concerning man, Thou have made me
as the clay, and thou will bring me into the dust again.

Thus the words are taken as an assertion of the power and privilege of God,
to unmake and pull down man, whom he had made and set up.

If we read the words by way of interrogation or admiration: so Job seems to
intend them as an allay to mitigate the present severity of the Lords
proceeding with him, Thou have made me of the clay, but a while ago, and will thou bring me into the dust again? O spare me a little before I go hence, and
shall be seen no more: It will not be long before there must be an end of me, O
let me have a more comfortable being and breathing, while I am here.

When Satan provoked the Lord against Jerusalem, to destroy it, the Lord
answered ( Zech. 3.2.) Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire? As if he had
said unto Satan, Art thou moving me to throw this people into that fire of
affliction, out of which they were so lately snatched? Jerusalem was in the fire
but awhile ago, and shall I cast it in again? Job pleads in the same form,
though not in the same matter, I was clay but the other day, and Lord, shall I
to dust again to day? Let we see some quiet days, before I see the end of my
days. Gild over this clay of mine with the shinings of thy face upon me,
before thou renderest me dust again.

I have more then once had occasion to touch this argument, and shall therefore
pass it here.

Job having thus set forth his natural constitution, in the matter of it, as
he was made of clay, goes on to describe himself more distinctly; first, in
his conception of his whole body; secondly, in the formation and delineation of
his parts.

Verse 10. Have thou not poured me out as milk, and crudled me like cheese?
Lacti simile initio semen, postea admirabili Dei opere non secus ac caseus
conerescit, and con solidatur, ut membra paulatim conformari incipiant. (...)
Notat reiliqu^dae concretione^ coagulationem vel condensationem.
Under the modest shadow of this verse, that great natural mystery of man's
generation and conception is contained. The former word signifies not only the
pouring forth of liquids, but the melting and dissolving of the hardest
metals, iron, brass, etc. that they may be fitted to run or be poured forth,
Ezekiel. 22.21, 22. And as this signifies the softning and melting of that which
is hard, so the next word (which we translate crudled) signifies the hardening
or thickning of that which is soft and fluid. Moses uses it in describing the
miraculous dividing of the red sea, Exodus 15.8. The floods stood upright as an
heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea. The Prophet
Zephany uses it for the setlednesse and resolvednesse of a people in sin (
Chap. 1.12.) The Lord (says he) will punish the men that are settled (we put in
the margin curded or thickened) on their lees. I might from these proprieties of
the original words, illustrate that secret of man's original. But forasmuch as
the Spirit of God has drawn a curtain, and cast a vail of metaphors over it,
therefore I intend not to open or discover it. (...), etc. Arist. de genesis
Animal. c. 20.
Ancient Philosophers have spoken of these natural operations in a like
language, and under these similitudes: I shall only say in general, that these
two expressions; First, Thou have poured me out as milk; secondly, And crudled
me like cheese, are appliable to that special contribution, which God has
charged upon each parent, toward that great work, the continuation of their
own kind, Miseret atque etiam pudet, aestimantem qua^ sit frivola animantium
superbissimorum origo, Plin. l. 7. c. 7.
and the raising up of a posterity in their place, to serve himself and their
generation. Learn hence,

Fitst, That man has reason to be humbled at the meannes and manner of his
original.

What has he to be proud of in the world, who that he might be prepared for
his coming into the world, was poured out as milk, and curdled as cheese. Let
not man be high minded, whose beginning was so low and homely.

Learn secondly, Our natural conception is from God.

Men (in a strict sense) are called, The fathers of our flesh, Nihil de
genitoribus aut seminibus nascitur, si ea non operetur Deus. August. in Psalm.
118.
and God the father of spirits (Heb. 12.9.) Yet God has the chief title to the
father-hood of our flesh, as well as the sole title to the fatherhood of our
spirits, Thou have poured me out as milk, and thou have crudled me like cheese;
here is no mention of his father, none of his mother, but as if the Lord had
wrought all by an immediate power, he ascribes the whole effect to him. Thou
have poured me out as milk, etc. We are also his offspring, as the Apostle
tells the Athenians out of their own Poets, Act. 17.28.

Thirdly, This gives caution to all whom the Lord has called, or shall call to
the state of marriage, to be holy in that estate. Marriage is honorable (Heb.
13.4.) and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge;
no wonder if God have a respectfull eye to the undefiled in that relation, and
a revengefull eye upon the defilers of it; seeing as his own authority
instituted it, so his own power acts so eminently in it. Our conception, our
formation, our birth and production are all ascribed to, yea assumed by God
himself. Of which second act the next verse gives us a noble and an elegant
proof.

Verse 11. Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh and fenced me with bones
and sinews.
Job proceeds like a great Philosopher about the production of man. For when by
that former work of nature, Semen in utero mulieris, primis septem d ebus
conglobatur, coagulatur, sitque ad capiendam figuram idoneu^. Gel.
the matter is poured out and crudled. God by nature makes a further progress,
and prepares for another work, the forming and fashioning of that unshapen lump
into the parts and lineaments of an organicall body. Some Naturalists undertake
to tell us exactly what is wrought the first seven days, and what the next,
when the brain, heart and liver are formed, and when the flesh, the bones, and
sinews. Gal. l. 7, de sem. ex doctrina Hippocratis.
The ancient and learned Physicians have distinguished this whole work of God
in perfecting mankind into four periods. The first is, while the matter or
principles out of which man is made being mingled together, retain their own
form. The second is, when those principles are grossed into a rude fleshy
mass. These two periods Job has taught us long before Galen and Hippocrates
in the former verse, under those notions of pouring out as milk, and curdling
as cheese. The third period is, when a representation is made of those
principal parts the brain, the heart, and the liver, together with the
threeds, and (as some allude) the warp of man's constitution, or as others, the
lines and shadows of a man, such as a skillful artisan makes with a ruder
pensil, when he is about to draw a curious picture. The fourth period is, when
both the similar and organicall parts, are completed and also beautified with
proper and lively colors. These two later periods are described by Job in this
verse, and in the beginning of the next.

Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh. (...) Nudavit.
The original word for skin, comes from a root signifying naked. We commonly
say he is naked, who has nothing upon him, but his skin. And Job who here
says, Thou have clothed me with skin, said, Chap. 1.20. Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: That is, with nothing but my
skin. He that wears only skin and flesh has no artificial clothing, but he
has a natural clothing. We are dressed in garments taken out of the Wardrobe of
God and nature before the world puts a rag upon us. Thus man is born naked, yet
clothed, unarmed, yet fenced.

Pellis ita dicta quod externas injurias tegendo repellat. Drus. Vlterius
progreditur informatione faetus, nam post corsolidatum semen, and formata jam
me^bra, accedunt extrinsecus cutis and caro, ad protegenda interiora, quae
absque hoc velut sepimento and munimento essent obnoxia and exposita periculis.
Merc.
Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, etc. Which some interpret in
reference to the soul, which is covered over and enclosed with the skin and
flesh.

But this clothing of skin and flesh refers rather to those inward, more noble
and tender parts, the heart, liver, brain and bowels, these are enclosed with
skin and flesh, lest they should take cold; these are fenced with bones and
sinews, lest they should take hurt. Hence death is called an unclothing. Death
strips us, not only to the skin, but of the skin, We that are in this
tabernacle, do groan, being burdened, not for that we would be unclothed, (2
Cor. 5.4.) that is, not that we would put off this garment of skin and flesh,
this natural clothing, but we would have a supernatural clothing upon it,
even a vest of glory put upon these vests of frailty. This Scripture in Job is
of the same language with that of Paul, Thou have clothed me with skin and
flesh.

It is said of the virtuous woman ( Prove. 31.21.) That she is not afraid of the
snow for her household, for all her household are all clothed with skarlet, or,
double garments. The great and most wise God has prepared such clothing for
man's inward parts, that he needs not fear snow or cold, he has provided double
garments, two suits, skin and flesh. Flesh is an under garment, and skin is an
upper garment: flesh covers the bones, and skin covers the flesh. Anatomists
observe, That man has two distinct coats of skin upon his flesh, or man's skin
is a lined garment, yet differing from other garments, for here the lining is
uppermost. This uppermost skin, or as some call it, the scarf-skin is without
sense, you may thrust a needle through it without pain. There was great reason
it should be so, that it might defend the skin under it from external
injuries, as also attemper the exquisite sense thereof, and so become the
medium or mean of touching: for all sensation is made by some mean, and is
either altogether hindered, or much disturbed by the immediety of the object
and the organ. Hence when this cuticle or scarf-skin is off or broken, the
gentlest touch upon that bared part, breeds much pain, but spoileth the true
sensation. Under this curtain or scarf-skin, the true and proper skin lies;
The Greeks call (...), because it may be flaied off, or (...), quasi (...), a
band, because it compasses or knitteth together the whole body. This skin is a
seamelesse garment, yet it has diverse out-lets made for the relief and ease of
nature; some of which are obvious to sense, others called pores, are both
innumerable and imperceptible.

To this double vesture of skin, flesh is added, as having according to Jobs
philosophy, an immediate conjunction or contiguity with one another. But our
Philosophers in their professed descriptions of man's anatomy, place two parts
between the skin and the flesh, namely, fat and the fleshy membrane. Concerning
which, they who please may consult the writings of learned Naturalists. I shall
not step out into such digressions.

Further, As God has given us a clothing of skin and flesh: so he has given
us armor under that clothing. Thou have fenced me with bones and sinews.

The word which we translate fenced, is the same used, Chap. 1.10. where Satan
tells the Lord that he had secured the state of Job, so, that he could not come
nigh it, Have not thou made an hedge about him? The devil made many assaults
against Job, but he could not batter down that hedge, it was Cannon-proof. As
the state, so the body of Job was fenced: if we look upon the skelleton of a
man, we shall see the proportion of an armor, breast and back formed up with
bones and sinews.

(...) Ossa a robore and firmitate dicta.
Bones are for strength and sinews for motion, bones being firm and stiff in
themselves are moveable by the sinews. There are other parts of the body which
concur to the making up of this armor, gristles, muscles, ligaments,
membranes, all which serve for motion, fastening and defense, as well as bones
and sinews: but these being the principal and most known are here expressed
for all the rest.

(...) Hippocr.
Bones give the body stability, straitness and form. They are as the carcass
of a ship, whereto the rest of the parts are fastened, and by which they are
sustained. They are as the posts, pillars, beams and rafters of a house, by
whose knittings and contignations the whole building is both proportioned and
supported. And though the bones are for number very many, and in their forms
exceeding various, some thick, some thin, some plain, some hollow, some of a
greater, others of a lesser bore, yet are they so connected and fitted together
by articulation or by coalition, by contiguity or continuity (as the Anatomists
speak) that they all appear as one bone, or pack of bones,

Sinews or nerves derive their pedigree from the brain, and are the organs by
which the animal spirits are conveyed, and flow into the whole body, and with
them both sense and motion. Sinews have so much of strength in them, that the
same word is put to signify both strength and sinews, and to do a thing
strongly and vigorously, is to do it (nervose) sinewously. It is wonderful
which Naturalists write of the conjugations and uses of the sinews, to whose
labors I refer the studious Reader for further satisfaction. I have given
enough to show, what this Text calls me to, That God has indeed clothed man
with skin and flesh, and fenced him with bones and sinews.

Some have quarrelled with the wisdom and goodness of God, for turning man
altogether naked and unarmed into the world. This Scripture is enough to
confute the unreasonablenesse of that quarrel. Job thankfully acknowledges,
That he was both clothed and armed, though not in the sense of these
complainers. It is more honorable for man to make himself artificial clothing
and arms, then to have had none but natural; God has given man reason to
invent, hands to prepare, and a tongue to call for those things which by a Law
of nature are imposed upon other creatures; the power of reason, and the skill
of the hand are a better safeguard to man then any the beasts have, and can
provide whatsoever man wants to secure him either from cold or danger. And
though the body, as now it stands, be but (as it were) the sepulcher of that
which God at first created, though we lie open to so many diseases and deaths,
that the soul may well be said to inhabit an unwalled, and an unfortified City,
yet man has great cause for ever to extol the bounty of God in those still
continued ennoblements of this earthly mansion, his mortal body. Yea, The
noble structure and symmetry of our bodies, invites our souls not only to
thankfulness, but to admiration. One of the Ancients styles man a great
miracle. Another, The miracle of miracles: A third, The measure of all things:
A fourth, The pattern of the universe, the worlds epitome, The world in a small
volume, or a little world. They also have distinguished the whole frame of the
body into three stories, in allusion to a like frame observable in the world.
First, The superior, which they call intellectual or angelical, because they
conceived it to be the habitation of Angels or Intelligences. The second or
middle part they call celestial or heavenly, the seat of the Sun and
stars. The third, Elementary, in which all corporeal creatures are
procreated and nourished. This division of the world is eminent in man, for he
also is a building of three stories. The head which is the seat of reason, the
mansion, the tower of wisdom and understanding is placed highest: the breast or
middle venture is the celestial part, wherein the heart, like the Sun is
predominant; some have called the Sun, The heart of the world; and the heart,
The Sun of man's body, by whose luster, beams and influences, all the other
parts are quickened and refreshed; hence we say, when the heart fails all fails,
and while the heart holds, all holds. The third part of the body, or the lower
venture containing all parts necessary for the nutrition of individuals, or the
propagation of the species, carries a clear resemblance with the elementary
or lowest parts of the universe.

There are five things in particular, which as so many rounds of a lather, may
help us to raise our thoughts higher in the duty of holy admiration about this
work of God.

First, That God frames up this goodly and beautiful fabrique out of such
mean and improbable materials. To consider out of what stuff our bodies are
made, advances the honor of him who made us. Man can make his work (except
the form) no better then the matter out of which he forms it. But as the form
of man's body is better then the matter, so the matter becomes better then it
was, before it received that form.

Secondly, The matter out of which God makes man is originally homogeneall, or
but of one kind, yet there is a strange heterogeny or variety in the very
substance, as well as in the shape of the several parts; which are therefore
divided by the survaiers of this building, into parts similar and dissimilar.
Is it not incredible to mere reason, that one lump should be spread out into
thin, tender skin, wrought into soft flesh, extended into tough sinews,
hardened into strong bones; that one piece should make an outward jerkin or
cassock of skin, an under garment of flesh, columns and rafters of bones, bands
and ties of sinews; that the same should make veins like channels to carry, and
blood like water to be carried into every part to moisten and refresh it? When
an Artificer builds an house, he requires more materials then one, he must
have stones and timber, iron, lead, Quomodo ex re tantula and sibi simili,
tamvariae and discrepantes parts extiterunt; haec profecto est stupenda omnino
opifi^i^ nostri sapientia and vis ad quicquid efficiendu^. Merl.
etc. to complete his fabrique: but the Lord frames all the parts, rooms and
contrivances of the body out of one and the same mass. Thou do not know
(says Solomon) how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child
(Eccles. 11.5.) Who can know by a mere rational demonstration, how a solid
substance should grow out of that which is so fluid? And that parts materially,
as well as figuratively unlike, should arise out of a like matter?

Thirdly, The work of God in the framing of man is internal, as well as
external. A statuary, or an engraver will make the image or pourtraiture of a
man, but his work is all outward, he cannot make bowels, or fashion a heart
within, he cannot cut out veins, bones and sinews. The greatest wonders of
creation are unseen. God has packt many rarities, mysteries, yea, miracles
together in man's chest. All the vital instruments and wheels, whereby the
watch of our life is perpetually moved from the first hour to the last, are
locked up in a curious internal cabinet, where God himself prepared the
pulleys, hung on the weights, and wound up the chime by the hand of his
infinite power, without opening of any part; As our own learned Anatomist
elegantly teaches us in the Preface to his sixth book.

Fourthly, The dimensions, proportions and poise of man's body are so exact and
due, that they are made the model of all structures and artificials. Castles,
Houses, Ships, yea the Ark of Noah was framed after the measure and plot of
man's body. In him is found a circulate figure, and a perfect quadrat, yea the
true quadrature of a circle, whose imaginary lines have so much troubled the
Mathematicians of many ages.

Fifthly, In every part usefulness and commodiousnesse, comeliness and
convenience meet together. What beauty is stamped upon the face? What majesty in
the eye? What strength is put into the arms? What activity into the hands? What
music and melody in the tongue? Nothing in this whole fabrique could be well
left out or better placed, either for ornament, or for use. Some men make great
houses which have many spare rooms, or rooms seldom used; but as in this house
there is not any one room wanting: so every room is of continual use.

Was ever clay thus honored, thus fashioned? Galen gave Epicurus an hundred
years to imagine a more commodious situation, configuration or composition of
any one part of the body; And surely if all the Angels in heaven had studied to
this day, they could not have cast man into a more curious mould, or have given
a fairer and more correct edition of him. This clay cannot say to him that
fashioneth it, What make thou? Or this work, he has no hands, (Isa. 45.9.)
The Lord has made man so well, that man cannot tell which way to be made
better; This work cannot say, He that wrought me had no hands, that is, I am
ill wrought; as to say, you have no eyes, you have no ears, are reproofs of
negligence and inadvertency, both in hearing and seeing. So when we say to a
man, Surely you have no hands, our meaning is, he has done his work, either
slothfully or unskilfully. But this work of man's body shall not need to say
unto God, he has no hands, he has given proof enough, that hands and head too
were employed about this work. Let us make it appear that we have hands and
tongues, and hearts for him, that we have skin and flesh, bones and sinews for
him, that we have strength, and health, and life, and all for him; seeing all
these are also derived from him, as appears in the next words, Thou have
granted me life and favor.

Job having thus described the natural conception and formation of his body,
descends to his quickening and preservation. When God had formed man out of
the dust of the earth, he then breathed into him the breath of life, and man
became a living soul; and thus when God has formed man in the womb, given him
skin and flesh, bones and sinews, then he gives life and breath and all things
necessary, to the continuation of what he has wrought up to such excellent
perfections. Our divine Philosopher teaches us this doctrine.

Verse 12. Thou have granted me life and favor, and thy visitation has
preserved my spirit.
This verse holds out to us the great Charter of God to man, consisting of
three royal grants. First, Life. Secondly, Favor. Thirdly, Visitation. The
bounty of God appears much in granting life, more in granting favor, most of
all in his grant of gracious visitations. Thou have granted me life, etc.

(...) Vitas fecisti. Mont. Vitam disposuisti mihi. Sep. Quasi debito loco and
ordine.
The letter of the Hebrew is, Thou have made, or fitted for me life and favor.
The soul is the ornament of the body, life the luster of our clay. Thou have
not thrown or hudled my life into my body, Thou have put it in exquisitely and
orderly. The frame of the body is an exquisite frame, but the frame, the
faculties and powers, the actings and motions of the soul are far more
exquisite. The inhabitant is more noble then the house, and the jewel then the
cabinet. As the life is better then meat, and the body then (artificial)
raiment (Mat. 6.25.) So the life is better then the body, which is to it a
natural raiment.

Thou have granted me life, etc. Life is here put metonymically for the soul,
of which it is an effect, as the soul is often put for the life, whereof it is
a cause.

We translate in the singular number, life, the Hebrew is plural, Thou have
granted me lives. But has a man more lives then one? Some understand Job
speaking not only of corporal, but spiritual life; as our natural life is
the salt of the body, to keep that from corrupting: so spiritual life, or the
life of grace, is the salt of the soul, to keep that from corrupting.

Secondly, Thou have granted me lives, that is, say others, temporal life and
eternal life.

Thirdly, Lives may be taken for the three great powers of life. Man has one
life consisting of three distinct lives: For whereas there is a life of
vegetation and growth, such as is in trees and plants: and a life of sense and
motion, such as is in beasts of the earth, fowls of the air, and fishes of the
sea: And a life of reason, such as is in Angels, whereby they understand and
discourse; these three lives, which are divided and shared among all other
living creatures, are brought together and compacted into the life of man.
Whole man, is the epitome or sum of the whole Creation, being enriched and
dignified with the powers of the invisible world, and of the visible put
together, under which notion we may expound this Text, Thou have granted me
lives; a threefold life, or a threefold acting and exercise of the same life.

Thou have granted me lives. Observe hence, Life is the gift of God.

With thee is the fountain of lives, the well, (...) Vena vitarum.
or the vein of lives (Psalm. 36.9.) The Psalmist alludes, either first to
waters which flow from a fountain, and so does life from God. Or, secondly, To
metals, With thee is the vein of lives; as all mineral veins, the veins of
gold and silver, of lead and iron, etc. lie (as it were) in bank, in the bosom
and bowels of the earth: so does life in God. There is not the lest vein of
this quicksilver, in all the world, but comes from him. Or, thirdly, The
Psalmist alludeth to the veins of the body, which as so many rivers and
rivolets, derive their blood from tha^ red sea the liver. God has a sea of
life in himself, and all that live are filled with life from him. This is one
of his royal titles, The living God; He is, The living God, not only
subjective, because he lives, but effective, because he enliveneth and
quickneth all living creatures, From him we receive life and breath (Act.
17.25.) In him we live, and move, and have our being, verse. 28. In him we live,
etc. that is, by him, or through him, as the same Apostle teaches ( Romans
11.36.) The same power gives us being, and maintains it. This is true, Iovis
omnia plena. Virg. Jupiter est ether, est terra Jupiter coelumque and omnia
Jupiter, and fiquid supra. Aeschyl.
yet the context carries the preposition [In] further. For the Apostle having
asserted, verse. 27. He is not far from every one of us; subjoyns this as a
proof, For in him we live etc. implying, That man is, in a sense, contained in,
or invested with God. The divine nature cannot be circumscribed with any thing,
yet circumscribeth all things: For which Paul refers the Athenians to Heathen
Poets, who spoke this truth in a carnal language, yet such as might be
spiritualized by a sanctified understanding. The result of which is, That God
is the author and conservatour of our lives. This glory is given also unto
Christ, who is called, The Prince of life, because he has life at command, The
Son quickneth whom he will. Christ has the power, not only of natural, but
of spiritual and eternal life, He is the Prince of lives. Job speaks in the
language of Princes, Thou have granted etc. As they make out grants of lands
and offices, so God makes a grant of life. The civil godship of Kings and
Magistrates appears much in this, that they can grant a forfeited life, either
by reprieve for a time, or by pardon for ever. It is ordinary with men, to
grant others leases for their lives, but they cannot grant them life. Princes
can grant an offender a lease of that life which he has, but no Prince can
grant life to those who have it not. (...) Denotat imp^n sum studiu^ vel
exuberantiam boni. Coc. Angusta in^ecentia est secu^dum leges justu^ esse;
latius officiorum pater quam juris regula. Quam multa pietas, humanitas,
liberalitas exigunt, quae omnia extra publicas tabulas sunt? Sen l. 2. d^ira.
Virtutum quaedam seminaria tribuisti mihi and praesertim misericordiae, quam
sibi innatam ipse fatetur, Job 31.18. Aquin
That Is Gods peculiar, Thou have granted me life, And favor.

The word signifies the purest, sincerest, and most tender kindness, the
fullest favor, the most courteous courtesy, Genesis 21.23. chap. 24.49. Exodus
15.13. Ruth 1.8. Hebricians tell us, That it notes an exuberancy of
kindness, such as breaks the bounds, and exceeds the ordinary laws of love.
It is but a poor way of loving, to love only by rule and measure. There is no
true love can act beyond the rule which God gives, but love quickly exceeds the
rules of men. Hence the Jews call those Chasidim, who are not only just by
statute, giving every man his right, paying every man his due, but noble,
heroical, free-hearted and open-handed in their distribution of favors.

One Expositour by favor understands the seeds of grace and virtue, especially
of charity and mercifulness, which (says he) seem to have been connaturall to
Job.

Another interprets favor by Liberum arbitrium tribuisti mihi Cajet.
free will. But I pass these as perversions, not expositions of Scripture. And
shall represent what is both safe and suitable.

First, Some restrain this favor to that which he received in the womb before
he was born, or the favor which he had to be born, which is to be reckoned
among very valuable favors. Thou art he that took me out of the womb, was
David's thankful acknowledgement, Psalm. 22.9. The womb is to all infants a
temporary prison, and to some a grave. It is favor to have those gates
unlockt, and the little prisoner set safe at liberty.

Secondly, We may interpret it as an adjunct, or an adverb, Haebraismus est
qua^do ex duob^, simul positis substantivis unum adverbia. liter sumitur
al^erumque determinat. Bold.
showing how the Lord granted him life; It is an usual Hebraisme to put the
later of two Substantives adverbially, Josh. 2.14. We will deal kindly and
truly with thee, say the Spies to Rahab. The Original is, We will deal
kindness and truth to thee; which is also rendered kindness in truth, or
kindness truly, that is, thou may trust us: we do not flatter thee, and we
will not deceive thee. So here, Thou have granted me life and favor; That is,
life by favor, or life favorably; importing, That the receipt of life, is the
receipt of a great mercy; as if Job had said, I could not deserve that thou
should bestow life upon me: When I was firmed and fashioned in the womb, it
was thy favor to quicken me: Mercy put breath into those tender principles,
and first rudiments of my body. And seeing not only sense and motion, are
brought in by life, but reason also, and all the noble operations of it, Job
had reason enough to say, Thou have granted me life, as a great, or with
abundant favor. Hence observe,

Life is a special favor of God.

There are diverse sorts of creatures which have not the favor of life bestowed
on them, no not the lowest degree of life. The Lord has given man not only
l^fe, but the highest degree of life; this is a high favor. It was Satan's
argument ( chap. 2.) Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for
his life; As if he had said, What is a man's bo^y to his life? What are his
estate, his lands, his gold and silver? What are all these dead commodities to
his life? Life is the most p^ecious of natural bl^ssings. A worm (under this
consideration) is a more noble creature then the Sun, because a worm has life,
which the Sun has not. The lowest of a superior order, is better then the
highest of an inferior; Though the Sun be the excellentest of all inanimate
creatures, yet it moves (though in heaven) in a lower orb, then any thing that
lives grovelling on the earth. A leaf is more excellent then a pearl or a
diamond, because a leaf has a life in it, which these have not; That opinion
of voluptuous Atheists or Epicures, delivered us by the Preacher, has a truth
in it, A living dog is better then a dead lion (Eccl. 9.4.) For though (as that
voice spoke from heaven, Revel. 14.13.) Blessed are the dead that die in the
Lord, and though cursed are the living that live without the Lord: In which
sense the poorest dead dog is better then the proudest lion alive; Yet,
consider man only within the line and compass of natural life; Then he that
lives in the worst condition, is better then he that once was in highest
dignity, but now is dead. It is usual in Scripture by a dog to set forth the
vilest estate of man, and the most excellent by a lion. When Mephibosheth would
show how low he was in his own eyes, though the son of a noble Prince, he joins
these two, Dead and a dog together, 2 Samuel 9.8. What is thy servant, that thou
should look upon such a dead dog as I am? He calls himself not only a dog, as
Christ did the woman of Canaan, and as she acknowledged her self to be, but to
lay himself as low as lowness it self, he calls himself a dead dog, implying,
That life gives some honor, and casts a luster upon every subject, which it
inhabits, though it be the meanest. When Esau was near perishing with hunger (
Genesis 25.32.) he resolves thus, I am at the point to die, and what profit shall
this birthright do to me? As if he had said, Shall I keep my birthright, and
lose my life? My life is more precious. Thus he spoke, and he spoke profanely
in it; yet there is some truth in what he spoke; for if we take birthright
precisely in the notion of a civil privilege; so life is better then a
birthright; but he is called profane Esau, because there was a spiritual
privilege in his birthright, which he ought to have valued above his life.
Any spiritual good thing is better then natural life, but life is the best of
natural, and better then all civil good things. When the Prophet would
express how great a blessing a King was to his people, he called him, The
breath of their nostrils, Lam. 4.29. and, live for ever, was the highest
apprecation given the Babylonian Kings. The most noble imitations of art are
about this piece of nature; It is the ambition of a painter to draw to the
life, or to shadow the motions and actings of life. When we would commend a
picture, we say, It is done to the life; How precious a favor is real life,
the very shadow of which is of so great a price? He that lays down his life,
paieth the greatest debt, whether to justice or to nature. Christ went to the
highest price for, and showed the greatest favor to sinners, when he parted
with, and pawned this jewel for them, his precious life.

This should mind parents, as to pray for quickening after conceptions, so to
give thanks when the embryon is quickened.

Now if this natural life be such a favor, What is spiritual and eternal
life? Thou have given me life and favor, Chesed omnia beneficia Dei promiscue
complectitur. Coc. Non solum vitam dedisti, sed cumulasti banis omnibus, quae
ad victum, honorem, and rem vitae necessariam pertinent. Hoc nomine
co^plectitur etiam omnia beneficia, quae ultra vita^ Deus homini concedit, dum
educandum eu^, instituendum, and informandu^ in lege sua and timore curat. Merc.
or life as a favor.

Thirdly, By favor, in conjunction with life, we may understand the accidents
of life; that is, those good things which accompany and accommodate our lives,
Thou have given me life, not a bare life, not a mere subsistence or being in
the world, but with life thou have also given me favor, many mercies and
comforts to make my life sweet and pleasant to me.

Besides, favor takes in not only those outward comforts of health, strength,
liberty, plenty, but those inward ornaments of life also; good education, and
instruction in knowledge both humane and divine. It appears Job had a fair
portion of these favors. His was not a naked, but a clothed soul, a soul
gilded and engraven all over with heavenly truths.

So that Job in this word reports the bounty and munificence of God toward
him, in all the former additions and accomplishments of his life. Many have
lives which they scarce look upon as a favor. Some accidents of life, are more
worth then the substance of it. Our well-being is better then our being. It may
prove a desirable favor to be rid of life. In which sense Job spoke of himself
at the first verse of this Chapter, My soul is weary of my life. His life was
then a burden, but once a favor. Thou have granted me life with favor.

Fourthly, Job may here intend spiritual and eternal favor. Quoniam Chesed
significat aliquid perfectum in amore; idcirca slatuimus Iohum hic intelligere
ista^ (...) sive studium quod Deus exercet erga suos qu^s facit filios suos in
Christo. Coc.
Chesed signifies the grace or favor of God in Christ ( Psalm. 89.33.) My
loving kindness will I not take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to
fail. If he fail in duty, I will chasten him in mercy, I will not remove mercy
from him. The Vulgar translates, Thou have given me life and mercy, which some
expound of that special mercy, the pardon of his sin, and his washing from
original corruption; As if Job had said, I partake not only of life, but also
of that which is better then life it self, Thy favor or loving-kindenesse,
Psalm. 63.4. The favor of God in spiritual things, (in pardoning sin, in
regenerating the soul, in sending the holy Spirit) is the perfection of his
favor. What is man without that favor which makes him a son of God, but
even a beautiful, or at most, a rational beast? as David calls him, Psalm.
49.21. And should a man give thanks for outward favors only, without any
reflection upon spiritual; a beast, could he speak might give such thanks. The
life of sense and growth is a mercy, but beasts and plants live thus: The life
of reason is a greater mercy, but wicked men live thus; many are in hell, unto
whom God granted this life, and they would be glad God would call in his grant,
and take it from them: But unto these three lives God adds a fourth to his
elect, even a life of grace through Jesus Christ. This is the favor of
favors, and the blessing of all our blessings, except this favor be granted
with our lives, it were better for us never to have had a grant of our lives.
It is more eligible not to have been born, then not to be born again.

Chesed sumitur pro venustate corporis, Coc.
There is a fifth Interpretation, taking the word Chesed for corporal favor,
or the beauty of the body, we say, such an one is well favored, he has an
excellent feature; the favor of a man is seen in the feature of his face.
Favor is the perfection of beauty. Some have a clear mixture of white and red,
yet no favor. In this sense the word is used ( Isa. 40.6.) where the Lord
makes a proclamation, The voice said, Cry, and he said, What shall I cry? All
flesh is grass, and the goodlin^sse thereof as the flower of the field; The
word which we translate goodlinesse, is Chesed, All flesh is grass (man
withers quickly) and Chesed, the goodlinesse thereof, all of man, his favor,
beauty, strength, all these are as the flower of the field. Some read goodness
for goodlinesse; the sense holds, if we take it so: the natural, the moral
goodness of man is but a flower. As no goodlines, so no goodness of man, except
spiritual, lasts long, and that lasts long and long, even for ever. Grace
is not as the flower of the field, that is durable substance: that (as the
Prophet speaks there of the Word of God in v. 8.) shall stand for ever. The
grace of God is as lasting as the Word of God, for his Word is the external
seed or principle of grace. But all other goodness and goodlinesse of man, how
good, how goodly soever, his other beauty, how beautiful soever, his strength
how strong, his favor how well favored so ever, is but as the flower of the
field, which is either cut down while it is green, or soon fades while it
stands.

Take favor in this sense, and the sense of the whole verse is harmonious and
sound. Thou have granted me life; my body is formed and quickened, and more then
so, Thou have given me favor, my body is full of beauty and comeliness. The
comeliness of the body is a favor received, and many receive favor, because
they are comely. From either of which considerations we may call the
comeliness of the body favor, and it is no common favor, God denies this to
many; he grants them the life of nature, but not favor, yea, he grants many
the life of grace, but not favor. Beautiful souls are often ill-housed; and
filthy souls clearly housed; it is admirable when both beauties meet in the same
man; Moses was a goodly child (Exodus 2.2.) and a good man. As grace in the
inward man is the best favor, so favor is graceful to the outward man.

Thou have granted me life and favor, And thy visitation has preserved my
spirit.

Here is the third benefit of this Royal grant, (...) Inspectio. (...) Sept.
The visitation of God. One reads, Thy presence. A second, Thy assistance. A
third, Thy inspection, thy over-looking or super intendency has preserved my
spirit. The Hebrew word signifies, The visitation of a superior over an
inferior, as when masters enquire into their families, or governors into
their Colleges and Hospitals, Visitatio est Dominorum and superiorum, cum ad
Deum refertur, denotat providentiam. Pined.
to see whether the statutes and orders appointed by the founders and
benefactours be observed. There is a threefold visitation of God held forth in
Scripture.

1. A visitation of condemnation. God visits to take vengeance by destructive
punishments, when warning is not taken, nor repentance showed after corrective
punishments. Shall not I visit for these things, says the Lord? Shall not my
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Jer. 5.9.

2. A visitation of correction ( Psalm. 89.32.) If thy children forsake my law,
etc. then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity
with stripes; Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from
him, etc, Though they break my laws, yet I will not break my Covenant, they
shall smart for it, but they shall not perish for it. This is a fatherly
visitation.

3. A visitation of consolation. And this twofold. 1. For deliverance out of
an evil estate, and that either temporal, the Lord is said to visit his people
Israel, when he delivered them out of Egypt (Exodus 4.31.) or spiritual and
eternal, God has visited and redeemed his people says the blessed Virgin (
Luke 1.68) that is, he has visited his people, to redeem them from sin and
Satan, death and hell, by Jesus Christ.

Secondly (Which is most proper to this Text) there is a visitation, for
protection in a good estate. When God (having caused our line to fall in a fair
place) draws his line of providentiall communication round about us; So M.
Broughton translates, Life and loving kindness have thou dealt to me, and thy
providence preserves my spirit. As if Job had said, Thou did not only give
me life and favor, but thou did protect me for many years in the enjoyment
of those favors. Providence was the hedge, not only of his outward, but of his
inward estate, Thy visitation has preserved my spirit.

(...)
The verb which we translate, has preserved, signifies to preserve, Summa
solertia atque diligentia prospexit, cavit, oberravit, ut solent custodiae and
excubiae nocturnae, vel gregum custodes
both by strength and watchfulness. The Noun expresses a Watchtower in
Hebrew, because a watchman stands upon his Tower, and looks round about him,
to espy and give notice of approaching dangers. The Lord preserves both ways,
by his watchfulnes, and by his strength: his eye is wakefull enough, and his
arm is powerful enough to preserve us. He that keeps Israel does neither
slumber nor sleep (Psalm. 121.1.) the creator of the ends of the earth faints
not, neither is weary (Isa. 40.28.) He that is thus wakefull can easily visit,
and he that is thus powerful, can easily preserve those whom he visits.

Thy visitation has preserved my spirit. But how did the visitation of God,
preserve the spirit of Job? Or what are we to understand by his spirit, which
was thus preserved?

The spirit of a man is taken three ways;

First, For life. Thus God keeps us from death, while he preserves our
spirits.

Secondly, For the soul. Thus God preserves our spirits, while he keeps us
from falling into, or from falling in temptation; while he keeps our
corruptions from prevailing, and our graces from decaying.

Thirdly, The spirit of man is taken for his courage. Thus God preserves our
spirits, while he keeps us from needless fears, and cowardly despondencies.
Doubtless Job had experience of the visitation of God preserving his spirit in
all these senses, yet here he seems chiefly to intend the preservation of his
life, which God had granted him with favor, or of those comforts which were
granted him with his life.

Hence observe. First in general,

That what God grants, he preserves.

It is a part of his grant, that he will preserve. Should the Lord bestow the
greatest stock of mercy upon us, and leave us to the wide world, we should
quickly loose all; God is not like the Carpenter or the Mason, who builds up
a house, and then leaves it to it self, or to the care of others. The Lord
surveys what he builds, and keeps up what he sets up; all would come down else.
Providence succeeds Creation, or Providence is a continued Creation. As Soon
as ever the Lord had made man, and a garden, He took the man and put him into
the Garden, which he had made, to dress it, and to keep it (Genesis 2.15.) God
puts the creatures under man's charge, yet he keeps all creatures in his
own charge, and especially man: A Garden without a man to visit it would soon
be a wilderness. And man without God to visit him, would soon be, or be in a
wilderness, either out of order, or in danger. Achish promises David, I will
make thee the keeper of my head for ever (1 Samuel 28.2.) His meaning was, he
should be Captain of his guard. Great Princes have their guards, they have
keepers of their heads. The great King of heaven and earth is a guard to the
meanest man, and the keeper of his head. God enquires of Cain for his brother
Abel (Genesis 4.) Where is Abel thy brother? What is become of him? Cain was angry
at the question, Am I (says he) my brothers keeper? We ought to be one
another keepers; our mutual visitations should preserve one another spirits.
Some are apt to think themselves too good for the work: others, that the work
is too hard for them. It is our comfort, and it may be our assurance, that God
has neither of these thoughts, The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade
upon thy right hand. The Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by
night. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil; He shall preserve thy soul:
The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in, from this time forth
and for evermore (Psalm. 121.5.) How large a writ or patent of protection is
granted here? No time shall be hurtful, neither day nor night; which include
all times. Nothing shall hurt, neither Sun nor Moon, nor heat nor cold. These
include all annoiances. Nothing shall be hurt, Thy soul shall be preserved, thy
outgoings and thy comings in shall be preserved. These include the whole
person of man, and him in all his just affairs and actions. Nothing of man is
safe without a guard, and nothing of man can be unsafe, which is thus guarded.
They shall be kept, who can say, The Lord is our keeper. And they cannot be
kept, no not by legions of Angels, who have not the Lord for their keeper. None
can keep us, but he, and he has promised to keep us for evermore. Some men are
weary of their offices, and some are put out of office; Praefecturam ejus
accipiat alter, id est, omnia quae in ejus cura sunt quae sub sua potestate
habet.
God is neither. In that Prophetical curse against Judas, it is said, Let another
take his office (Ps. 109.8.) What office? It is this word, and notes there the
office of looking to, or of preserving the souls of others, we commonly call
it, The cure of souls. Such is the office of all the Ministers of Christ,
That Is Episcopacy by divine right; this in the text is divine Episcopacy. That
word which here in Job we translate visitation, and in the Psalm now cited,
office, is called Episcopacy by the Apostle ( Act. 1.21.) Christ is the great
Bishop or visitour both of our souls and bodies. He is the oecumenicall Bishop.
The whole world is his Diocese, He preserves man and beast. See more of this
point, Chapter 7.20.

Again, For as much as this visitation which extends to the whole man, is
here in the letter determined upon the spirit. We may observe,

First, Taking spirit for life,

That as our well-being, so our being in the world is at the daily dispose of
God.

The living God not only gives, but maintains our lives. We live not by
bread, while we are healthy, nor by medicines, when we are sick; but by the
Word of God. His visitation does all.

Secondly, Take spirit for the soul, then we are taught,

That our souls are not independently immortal or incorruptible.

As the life of the whole man is not, so neither is the life of the soul, of,
or in it self, without support from God. The Angelical spirits who were never
married to bodies of earth, stand not merely by Creation, but by Providence.
The visitation of God preserves those spirits, how much more the spirits of
men, which are espoused to dust and clay.

Thirdly, As spirit signifies the soul, not only in it is natural, but in it is
spiritual state, or in the state of grace, We learn,

That our spiritual stook and treasure are in danger, and would decay, if the
power and care of God did not preserve our spirits.

Grace cannot keep it self, if left to its self. We should loose, not only
degrees of grace, but all grace, were it left in our own hands. But because it
is grace, therefore it is not left in our own hands, and because grace is not
left in our own hands, therefore it cannot be lost. So the Apostle clearly (1
Pet. 1.4.) We are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. The
word signifies to keep, as a City beleaguered without by a strong enemy, is
kept by a Garrison within. Man at the first had an excellent estate in
spirituals; though it cannot be said (properly) that he had grace (for that is
in the hand of a Mediator) yet he had the image of God, and perfect innocence,
but because God did not visit his spirit by fresh assistances, he was stripped of
all, and fell from the throne of his created glory. As God visits our souls by
preventing grace, to give us what we had not: so he visits us by his preserving
and persevering grace, to continue what he has given.

Lastly, Forasmuch as (though God creates and cares for the whole man, yet)
the visitation of God is expressed only, as to the spirit. We may observe,

That God does chiefly take care of, and provide for the spirit or soul of man.

When God formed the body of man at first, out of the dust of the earth, and
breathed into his nostrils, the breath of life, it is not said he became a
living body, or a living man, But, man became a living soul. So here, the work
of providence is not enlarged to the whole man, but restrained to his spirit;
As if the Lord did scarce think our bodies either worth, or needing a visit in
comparison of our spirits. And seeing God cares for nothing in us, so much, as
for our spirits, should not our care be chiefly for our spirits? The soul is
(upon the matter) all man, ought not man to be most of all for his soul? Shall
the thoughts of God be most busied, his care and inspection most fixed upon our
spirits, and shall not ours? While Christ in a manner discharges us of our
outward man ( Mat. 6.25.) Take no thought for your life, what ye shall ear, or
what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on, His meaning
was, to charge us more deeply with the inward man; yet how many are there,
whose outward man stands them in more cost and care, in more thoughts and
visitations for one day, then their spirits or inward man does for a whole
year, yea, for their whole lives! Visitations are frequent and serious for the
preserving of the body: but where shall we find serious thoughts of visiting
the soul?

Take this word further, If it be the visitation of God which preserves our
spirits, we should often visit God with prayer, entreating him to continue
these visitations. Prayer is our visiting God, as providence is Gods visiting
of us, and we should visit God by prayer, not only (as they, Isa. 26.) in
trouble, but in our peace: we should desire him to visit our estates, our
families, but especially our souls and spirits in their most flourishing
condition. The Apostle uses it as an argument to keep us from distracting
thoughts ( Phil. 4.2.) Let your moderation be known unto all men, The Lord is
at hand; be careful in nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication,
let your requests be made known unto God. The Lord is at hand, let not your
hearts be troubled. Visit God in duty, who is at hand to visit you in mercy.
Though there be an infinite distance between God and man, yet God is not far
from any man, and he is ever near some men. Let not us be strangers to God,
when we hear he makes continual visits to us. Thy visitation does preserve my
spirit.

Verse 13. And these things have thou hid in thine heart, I know that this is
with thee.
Some read the first clause (which adds sharpness to it) with an
interrogation. And have thou hid these things in thine heart? Is it so with
thee, or have thou dealt so with me indeed?

The heart of God, is the will, purpose or decree of God; These are a vast
repository, wherein all things are laid up.

And these things have thou hid, etc. What things? what is the antecedent to
these things?

1. Some say, His afflictions, These things, that is, these afflictions, which
thou have now laid upon me, were hid in thine heart: thou have showed me many
favors, while in secret thou did prepare rods for me.

2. The antecedent to these things is mercy, life, favor and visitation,
spoken of before, say others; As if Job had spoken thus, This bill of bl^ssings
now read, these privileges now reekoned up, were hidden in thi^e heart: thou
have had gracious intentions toward me, while thou have been smiting me.

I know all this is with thee. Scio quia universorum me m^eris Vulg.
That is, Thou remembrest all this, and keep a record of it by thee; The
Vulgar makes this the text, I know thou remembrest all things, or all men.

Some (supposing the antecedent to be his afflictions) make out this harsh and
unbecoming sense; Quasi haec mala velut in animo recondita in tempus opportunum
asservasset ut nec opinante^ opprimeret. Atrox querimonia. Merl*
As if Job had thus uttered his mind to God, I now perceive thou have had
coals of anger raked up in the ashes, while those warm beams of love did shine
upon me. Thou have held out mercy in thine hand, but somewhat else lay in thine
heart. This interpretation, in the common understanding of it, is most unworthy
of God. It is the wickedness of men to speak fair, and to do some courtesies,
while cruelty and revenges are hid in their hearts. When Esau (Genesis 27.41.) saw
himself defeated of the blessing by his brother, He said in his heart, The
days of mourning for my father are at hand, then will I slay my brother Jacob:
Here Is the character of malice, he gave neither brother nor mother ill
language, but he said in his heart. The holy God never speaks good to them, to
whom he intends evil. The Creator needs not daub or pervaricate with his
creatures.

I grant indeed that the Lord gives wicked men many outward favors, and
speaks them fair in his works, but he never speaks them fair in his Word, Say,
Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall
be given him (Isa. 3.11.) Men are apt to flatter, but flattery is much an
abomination to the Lord, as it is below him.

I grant also, That the Lord gives his own people many favors, and speaks
real kindenesses to them, while he hides affliction in his heart. What evil
soever he brings upon them, he has thoughts to do them good, and has nothing
but good for them in his thoughts.

We understand by those hidden things, the mercies which Job with his last
breath had enumerated: then the words import two things:

First, An argument to move the Lord not to destroy him, or or to assure his
own heart that he would not. As if he had said, Lord, I know thou remembrest
well, what thou have done for me, what cost thou have been at in making me at
first, and in preserving me hitherto; surely then thou will not pull all down
in a moment.

Secondly, The words may import that the Lord in afflicting Job had used only a
kind of sacred dissimulation. A dissembler carries himself, as if he had no
intent to do what he is resolved to do; It is usual with men thus to dissemble
hatred, and so have some their love. He that purposes much good to another,
hides it sometimes under sour language and unkindest usage. Joseph had most
endeared affection toward his brethren, yet he put a disguise of anger upon it,
acting the part of a severe man, who lies at catch to find out advantages and
pick quarrels. Joseph used many stratagems of love, to entangle his brethren,
and wrapped up his good will, in hard speeches and rough carriages: Nothing
appearing less then what indeed he most was, A loving brother, forgetful of
nothing but injuries; Job seems to have had such a conception of God, while he
says, These things have thou hid in thine heart; And then his sense rises
thus, Lord, I know thou bear favor and good will toward me still. The fire
of thy love is not extinct but covered. Thou do but personate an enemy, thou
art my friend: thou drawest a cloud betwixt me and the light of thy
countenance, but thy countenance is still as full of light toward me as ever,
and though I see nothing but sorrows on every side, yet I know mercies are hid
in thine heart. Thus the words are an assertion of Jobs faith and assurance,
that God loved him, while his chastnings lay most heavy upon him. Hence
observe, First,

That the Saints while they are strong in faith, are able to discern the favor
of God through the clouds and coverings of his most angry dispensations.

This they can do, and when they can, they are arrived at a great height in
grace. To maintain our interest in Christ through disadvantages, is strong
faith. The woman of Canaan (Mat. 15.26.) knew her pardon and acceptance were
hid in the heart of Christ, while he called her dog, and would scarce vouchsafe
to cast an eye upon her. Faith did this, and faith can do the like at this day.
But every true faith will not do it. There is a kind of miracle wrought in
such believing: So Christ concludes with that woman ( ver. 28.) O woman great
is thy faith. Truth of grace is not enough for every work of grace: some works
will not be done without strength, as well as truth. Weak faith is ready to
say, Mercy is lost, when it is but hidden, and that God means us no good, when
we do not enjoy good. But the strong faith speaks on this wise; Lord, I know
there is mercy in thine heart toward me, though I see nothing in thy face but
frowns, and feel nothing from thy hand but blows. Let God do what he pleases
with me, I will not have a jealous thought of him, or suspect his intentions
toward me, whatsoever his actions be. Secondly, observe,

We may gather arguments of support in our greatest sufferings from the
apprehension of concealed mercies.

The skill and holy subtilty of faith can wind it self in Gods bosom, and
from what it finds lying secretly there for us, encourages us to bear what is
openly laid upon us.

Lastly, Observe, A believer looks upon all his receipts, as coming out of the
heart of God.

As he can look into his own heart, and see all the Commandments and revealed
counsels of God hidden there, so he can look into the heart of God, and see all
the comforts he wants hidden there. Men of the world, take their comforts
only from the hand of God, Saints take theirs from the heart of God. It puts
the price upon every blessing, when we can look upon special love, as the
spring of it. Look how much of the heart of our friend we can see in a
courtesy, so much true value there is in it. Hence it is usual with man, when
he would express his freeness to those who desire a favor at his hands, to
say, Yes, Take it with heart and good will, you have it with all my heart: We
read of one, who complained he had received but a golden cup, when he saw
another receive a kiss from a noble Prince. A kiss is a better gift then a
cup of gold. Love is the richest present. How happy then are they, who have the
golden cup, and a kiss too? much from the hand, and all from the heart, from
the love of God.

Job having thus revised and read over the particular of his former mercies
received from the bounty and free love of God, revives his complaint about, and
renews his desire of deliverance from present sorrows in his next address to
God.

JOB Chap. 10. Verse. 14, 15, 16, 17. If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me from mine iniquity.

If I be wicked, woe unto me; if I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my
head: I am full of confusion, therefore see thou mine affliction.

For it increases; Thou huntest me as a fierce lion, and again thou show
thy self mavelous upon me.

Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and encreasest thine indignation upon
me, changes and war are against me.


THe connection of these words lies somewhat in the dark, and this inevidence
has caused diverse conjectures about it.

1. Some make the connection with the 13. verse, I know (said Job) that this is
with thee; and here he declares what was with him, namely, that, If I sin,
then thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me from mine iniquity.

2. The connection is made by others with the 12. verse, Thou have granted me
life and favor, and thy visitation has preserved my spirit, yet if I sin,
thou markest me, etc. As if Job had said, Though thou have been pleased to make
so many grants of favor, and have done all those things for me, which were
hidden in thine heart, yet I know thou will not bear with, or connive at me, If
I sin against thee: Thou have not given me these mercies, that I should be
imboldened to transgress the rule of thy justice; no, though thou have done
much for me, Yet if I sin, thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me from
mine iniquity.

3. A third goes higher, and makes these words depend upon the third verse,
where Job puts three Queries to God; the last of which is, Is it good unto thee
that thou should shine upon the counsel of the wicked? I know it is not, for
('it is like I might escape as well as another, yet) If I sin, thou markest me,
and thou will not acquit me from mine iniquity; If I be wicked, woe unto me.
Mine own experience proves thee far enough from shining upon the counsel of
the wicked. Behold clouds and darkness are upon me.

There is a fair sense in any of these connections; which to determine is not
easy; I shall leave all three before the Reader.

Verse 14. If I sin, then thou markest me.


If I sin. Sin stands here in opposition to wickedness; Thou will not
shine upon the counsel of the wicked. And, verse. 15. If I be wicked, then woe
unto me, for if I sin then thou markest me. Sin is any transgression against,
or deviation (though but an hairs breadth) from the rule, if I fail be it never
so little.

Then thou markest me. The Original has four significations, (...)
which occasion as many different interpretations of the text:

First, To preserve, and that two wales; first, by protecting from those evils
which others would bring upon us ( Psalm. 141.9.) Keep me from the snare which
they have laid. That is, Protect me from the danger which their snares threaten
me with. So at the 12th verse of this Chapter, Thy visitation does preserve my
spirit. Secondly, It is rendered to preserve by sparing, or not bringing those
evils upon us, which our own sins have deserved. So the Vulgar here, who to
make out his sense, Si peccavi and ad horam pepercisti mihi, etc. Vulg.
puts the later part into the form of an interrogation, If I have sinned, and
thou have spared me for a time, Wherefore then do thou not acquit me from
mine iniquity? As if the meaning of Job were this. When in former times I
sinned against thee, thou wast pleased to remit of thy severity, and deal
gently with me, Thou did spare me, as a father spares a son that serves
him. Why is the tenor of thy dispensations so much changed from what it was,
seeing thou art a God, that changest not, and I am but what I was, a weak and
changeable man? Why am I now charged with sin, and not set free as sometimes
(I have been) from sorrow, the fruit of it? Will thou deal with me, who sin
out of infirmity, or against my will, as with those who are wicked, and have a
will to sin?

Secondly, To prevent others from doing what they desire, or our selves from
what we fear ( Psalm. 18.23.) I was upright before him, and I kept my self from
mine iniquity; As if he had said, I have maintained such a strict watch over my
own heart, that I have prevented my self from falling into that sin which I was
most subject to, and in danger of, both in regard of my constitution and
temptation, Taking this meaning of the word, the whole verse is rendered thus,
If, or, when I am ready to sin, thou (stoppest or) preventest me, Why then
do thou not acquit me from mine iniquity? As if he had said, Lord, will thou
deal with me, as with a wicked man? Thou know that I am not wicked, for by
thy preventing grace, thou have kept me from all wickedness, and stopped me from
many sins.

Whence note,

That the remembrance of the power of God in keeping us pure from greater sins,
is an argument that he will spare us, though we have (through infirmity) fallen
into sin,

He that holds us from iniquity, will not destroy us for iniquity. Some are
stopped from sin, and storm when they are stopped, these have no reason to think,
God will spare them, because he has stopped them. Thousands are stopped from sin,
who neither know what it is to sin, nor that they have been stopped from sin.
These cannot plead this point: As it is no virtue to endure what is not
grievous to us: so no grace not to do what is not joyous to us, when we do it.
But to know we are stopped from a pleasing sin, and rejoice at it, to see how our
corruptions have been prevented, and to bless God for it; this is a great
degree of grace. As there is a preventing grace, which begins with us, while
we are strangers from God, and are walking on in the ways of sin; so there is
a preventing grace, watching over us after we are turned to God, lest we fall
into sin. Experience of this may be a sweet support unto the soul, under the
saddest afflictions, and in the darkest night of spiritual desertions.

Thirdly, The word signifies to keep in prison, or in safe custody. The Noun
is a prison in Hebrew. And thus the sense is given three ways, as an
Assertion, as an Interrogation, as an Imprecation. First, as an Assertion, If I
have sinned, thou will, or thou may imprison me, and not acquit me from mine
iniquity. Whence note,

That the best and dearest of Gods servants may look for straits, if they walk
loosly.

The Lord will shut them up, if they presume and take undue liberty, or grow
licentious. They shall be either humbled or destroyed, who turn the grace of
God (that is, the manifestation of his grace, either by his word or by his
works) into wantonness. God will not cocker his own children, and dandle them
so, as to forget to correct them, if they forget him and their own duty. If
Israel sin, Israel shall smart for it; and if Job sin, Job must look to be
laid in prison for it. Thus he speaks, acquitting God from shining upon the
counsels of wicked men, seeing he will not spare, no not his own children, if
they sin against him.

Secondly, The sense is given by an Interrogation, If I sin, Valde durum
videtur, ut si quid peccaverim perpetuo me in carcere custodiaque arctissima
dotineas, neque unquam peccati paenas rem^ttere velis. ^ined. An simulac pecco
observas me, etc. Jun. Verba jurantis and contestantis suam innocentiam, si
peccavi imprecor mihi durissimam custodiam. Bold.
Will thou therefore shut me up in prison? Will thou not acquit me from mine
iniquity? And so he pleads with God, as using too much severity and
harshnesse against him, What, shall I be laid by the heels for every fault?
Shall I be arrested and clapped up in irons for every sin? Will thou imprison
me, and not acquit me from mine iniquity? They who are most wicked, deserve no
worse then this, and shall I, if I do but sin, receive such measure? Where are
thy compassions, and the sounding of thy bowels? are they restrained? It should
seem so, else thou would not thus restrain and imprison me.

Thirdly, As an Imprecation, If I have sinned, according as I am charged,
imprison me as long as thou will, and do not acquit me from mine iniquity: If I
am such a man as my friends judge me to be, I expect no favor; let me be poor
and sick still, torture me, rack me, do what thou will with me. Like that of
David, Psalm. 7.4, 5. If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with
me, etc. Let the enemy persecute my soul and take it, yea let him tread down my
life upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust. I ask no favor, if I am
such a man as mine enemies have represented me: or if I have done that for
which they challenge me.

Fourthly, To observe and mark: and it imports a critical, a curious
observation; to mark exactly ( Psalm. 130.3.) If thou, Lord, should mark
iniquity, who shall stand? But does not the Lord mark iniquity? Does not he
take notice of every sin acted by any of the children of men, especially by his
own children? Why then does the Psalmist put it upon an If? If thou, Lord,
should mark iniquity. It Is true, the Lord marks all iniquity to know it, but
he does not mark any iniquity in his children to condemn them for it: So the
meaning of the Psalm is, That if the Lord should mark sin, with a strict and
severe eye, as a Judge to charge it upon the person sinning, no man could bear
it. Master Broughton translates, When I sin, thou do watch me; watching is
more then marking; Refertur ad exquisitam Dei observationem universarum humanae
vitae actionum. Rab. Abrah. Tygur. Reg 70. Observas me ne unquam lateant
peccata August. Quoties peccavi id diligentissime notasti. Merc.
as if the Lord had taken up a stand upon a high place, and did there compose
himself to see what is done; or to make annotations upon the whole text of men's
lives all the world over.

Whence observe,

That God takes notice of the sins and failings of his own people.

If I sin, then thou markest me; and in the 14th Chapter, verse 16. Thou
numbrest my steps, do thou not watch over my sin? Thou numbrest my steps,
What steps? He means not the steps of his outward, but of his inward man: or
the steps of his outward man in order to the inward. There is a moral walking,
Walk before me, and be upright: walking is conversing or acting: so, Thou
numbrest my steps, thou tellest my moral motions, the actings of my soul and
body, what I do, and what I think, Do thou not watch over my sin? And again
( Chap. 31.4.) Does not he see my ways, and count all my steps? That is, how
my conversation is ordered, both toward himself, and toward my neighbor? Thus
the Lord counts all our steps, we cannot step aside or tread awry, but he
observes us. There are two that keep a record of our lives.

First, God, he follows us up and down, as with pen, ink, and paper to write
our actings.

Secondly, Our own consciences (which are as God within us) keep a record too,
they write our lives, and count our steps. Many cannot read the book of
conscience, and so know little that is in it: But a time will come (if
conscience be not purged by the blood of Christ) when they shall perfectly read
all their sins in the book of conscience. And if conscience, which is Gods
deputy, then, much more God, who is the Judge of conscience marketh us if we
sin. God needs not judge upon information, but upon his own observation. He
will reprove every man whom he does not pardon: And is able to set before us in
order, whatsoever any of us have done. How then do some say, That God sees not
sin in his children? Job says, That God marked his sin; but according to
this doctrine, he should rather have said, If I sin, thou do not mark me.
Some through ignorance sin, and see it not, sin and perceive it not; but no man
(among all the multitudes of men) can sin unseen, or unperceived by God. If I
sin, then thou markest me.

And thou will not acquit me from mine iniquity. (...) Non purges me ut sim
immuni^ ab omni peccata
Will not the Lord acquit? Why have we a Gospel then? What Is the business of
mercy? And where is the efficacy of Christ's blood? Does not this purchase, and
do not they offer acquittances from iniquity? The words are interpreted three
ways.

First, That Job speaks from his unbelief, as if he could not see pardon
through the thick cloud of his troubles, or have any evidence, that God had
mercy in store for him, while he endured such plenty of miseries.

Secondly, That he speaks thus, upon a supposition of impenitency; As if he had
said, If I sin and humble not my self, thou will not acquit me.

Thirdly, That by iniquity he means his affliction, putting the cause for the
effect: So, Thou will not acquit me for mine iniquity, is, Thou will not take
away these afflictions, which are counted as the proceed or issue of mine
iniquity.

Hence observe,

First, Sin is a debt.

Every acquittance supposes an obligation. All men, as creatures, are in a
debt of duty to God, and when they fail in that, they are in a debt of penalty,
as sinners.

Observe, secondly,

When sin is pardoned, the sinner is acquitted, his debt is taken off, and
his bonds are cancelled.

Pardon is our discharge, our quietus est, sealed in the blood of Christ. All
process at law, or from the law, is then prohibited: there is no more to be
said, or done against us.

Again, The word signifies to cleanse and purge, as well as to acquit; Note
from it,

That as sin defiles the soul, so pardon cleanses it.

Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter
then snow, was David's prayer for pardon after his great defilement, Psalm. 5.1,
7. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9.

Fourthly, Forasmuch as Job groaning under burdens of sorrow, speaks so often
about the pardon of sin, we learn,

That while sin remains (to our sense) unpardoned, the soul sees no way to
get out of sorrows.

The removing of affliction is a sign that sin is forgiven, and the sense of
our forgivenes, is an argument that affliction shall be removed.

Fifthly, Taking the former words in conjunction with these, If I sin
(knowingly and wickedly, as they charge me) Thou will not acquit me from mine
iniquity. Observe,

That a persisting sinner, is an unpardoned sinner.

There is abundant mercy for returning sinners, but I know of none for those
that resolve to go on in sin. There is a promise of repentance, and a promise
to repentance, but there is no promise which does not either offer or require
repentance, Repent and thou shall be saved is the tenor of the Gospel, as well
as believe and thou shall be saved. Though many who are going on in their sins,
are overtaken by grace, yet there is no grace promised to those who go on in
their sins. The holiest are threatened with wrath, if they do; surely then,
none are put into an expectation of mercy, if they do. The promises either
find us repenting, or they cause us to repent. No sinner is pardoned for
repentance, nor without it. Job speaks that language more clearly in the words
following, which some make an exposition of these.

Verse 15. If I be wicked, Woe unto me.


If I be wicked. What it is to be wicked, has been showed, and the difference
between a wicked man and a sinner discovered, at the 7th verse, upon those
words, Thou know that I am not wicked.

Woe unto me. (...) ab (...) Ejulatu deducit. Rab Mos. Kimchi.
The word is derived (says one of the Rabbis) from a root signifying to houl:
Great mourning is a kind of houling; and they who are in woe, are bid to houl
( Isa. 13.6. chap. 23.1, etc.) Wicked men houl rather then pray in their
distress, because of their extreme worldly woe, They have not cried unto me
with their hearts, when they houled upon their beds, Hos. 7.14.

There are legal woes, and there are evangelicall woes. The Law cries woe, and
so does the Gospel: Gospel woes are the worser of the two; For if the Law say
woe to us, the Gospel may say mercy to us; but if the Gospel say, woe to us (as
it does to hypocrites, who abuse, and to unbelievers, who refuse mercy) where
shall we have mercy? All woes may be understood in this place, Law woes and
Gospel woes, temporal woes and eternal woes, If I be wicked, then woe unto
me. Hence observe,

Woe is the portion of wicked men.

Though they laugh, yet woe is their portion, yea they are therefore threatened
with woe, because they laugh ( Luke 6.25.) Woe unto you that laugh now, for ye
shall mourn and weep. Some wicked men are as merry, as if mercy were their
peculiar. But we may say to their mirth, What does it? Or if we should ask
them, What they do to make themselves so merry: David will resolve us what
their course is ( Psalm. 36.2.) The wicked flattereth himself in his own eyes,
until his iniquity be found to be hateful. He that would be flattered, shall
never want a flatterer, for if none will do it, he will do it himself. He
speaks well of himself, and therefore he thinks all is well. But usually he has
some others ready enough to speak well of him too. The true Prophets complained
of the false for crying peace, peace, when there was no peace, for saying all
is well, when they should say all is woe. But though wicked men flatter
themselves, and though they get their neighbors to flatter them, yea though
Ministers flatter them, yet God will not flatter them; and at last their own
consciences will not flatter them neither. Conscience will preach them a Sermon
of woes at last, though possibly it has been silent through ignorance, or
silenced through malice for a long time.

As all the promises of grace and mercy, hang over the heads of the godly and
sincere; which way soever they go, a cloud of blessings drops and distills upon
them: So clouds of wrath and blood hang over the heads of wicked men, dropping
upon them, yea dropping upon them when they suppose the Sun shines upon them.

Secondly, Consider who speaks this; If I (says Job) be wicked, then woe unto
me.

Hence observe, That

A godly man may put the worst cases to himself.

The Scripture puts such cases to godly men, therefore they may put such to
themselves ( Romans 8.13.) If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, says the
Apostle, writing to the Saints. Though such a supposition cannot be resolved
into this position, A godly man shall die, yet the supposition is true, If he
lives after the flesh he shall die. So the Apostle of himself, and his
fellow-Apostles, yea of the Angels. If we or an Angel from heaven, preach any
other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached, let him be accursed
(Gal. 1.9,) And as Paul prophesied a curse upon any, either Apostle or angel,
who should preach a false Gospel, so a woe upon himself, if he should neglect
to preach the true Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. They who are above all curses, may be
threatened with a curse. And they who shall certainly be preserved from doing
that which inevitably brings the curse, may be told of a curse in case they
should do it.

They put dangerous suppositions opposite to these, who say, Let a godly man be
never so wicked, yet it shall be well with him; let him sin as much as he
will, yet it shall be well with him. The Spirit of God never puts such
suppositions. As the Scripture speaks often to persuade; so sometimes to
terrify the godly from sin, but never a tittle which may be an encouragement
to sin. It speaks much to keep up their hearts in an assurance of pardon, in
case they fall into sin, and much more to keep down their corruptions, and to
preserve them from falling into sin. Though there be a truth in it, that how
much so ever a godly man sins, he shall be pardoned; yet the Scripture uses
no such language, and the form of wholesome words teaches every man rather to
speak thus, If I be wicked, then woe unto me, If I be righteous, yet will I not
lift up my head.

These words stand in an elegant opposition against the former. Here are
persons and states opposite: persons, The wicked and the righteous, If I be
wicked, if I be righteous: states, Woe, and lifting up the head, If I be
wicked, then woe unto me; If I be righteous, then will I not lift up mine head.
He does not say, If I be righteous I shall be happy, though that be a truth,
but (which was more suitable to his purpose) If I be righteous, yet will I not
lift up my head.

Some put this into a dilemma, or double argument, by which Job would aggravate
the greatness of his affliction; As if he had said, Let me look which way I
will, my case is very said, if I be wicked then woe be to me; If I be
righteous, yet I am so full of sorrows, that I am not able to hold up my head;
But I rather interpret this later part of the verse, as a description of Jobs
humility, in the best of his spiritual estate then as any aggravation of the
ilnes of his temporal estate.

If I be righteous. He speaks not as if he doubted whether he were righteous or
no. Job had showed the setlednesse of his spirit in that assurance more then
once before, but he puts the best of his case to show how low he was in his own
thoughts, when he was at best. There is a twofold righteousness; First, of
Justification. Secondly, of Sanctification, of sincerity or uprightness: and
so his meaning is, Suppose I am such, as I have asserted my self to be, and as
God himself has testified me to be, perfect and upright, yet I will not lift
up my head; Some read I cannot, others, I dare not lift up my head.

I will not lift up my head. Not lift up thy head, man, if thou were righteous?
Why, who in the world shall lift up their heads, if the righteous shall not?
Are there any that have such cause to lift up their heads as they? He might say
indeed, If I were rich, or if I were honorable, yet I will not lift up my
head, these are things which cannot, and therefore should not lift up any man's
spirit an inch from the ground: but to say, If I were righteous, I would not
lift up my head, seems a degradation or an abasement of righteousness. To
clear this I shall open the phrase a little.

To lift up the head of another man, is to advance him. Thus Pharaoh lifted up
the head of his chief Butler, Genesis 40.13. And the King of Babylon lifted up the
head of Iehojakin King of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison. Jer.
52.21. In this sense David calls God, The lifter up of his head, Ps. 3.3.

To lift up our own heads, is to prevail, and to get above pressing evils
victoriously, Judge. 8.28. Thus was Midian subdued before the children of
Israel, so that they lifted up their heads no more: That is, Gideon routed and
made so complete a conquest over the Midianites, that they were totally broken,
and could no more insult over Israel. The victory of Christ over all our
spiritual enemies, is thus described, Psalm. 110.7. He shall drink of the brook
in the way; that is, of the waters of affliction and sorrow, which either the
wrath of God, or the rage of men gave him to drink, while he was in the way of
perfecting the work of our redemption; and because he shall do this, Therefore
shall be lift up his head, that is, he shall prevail by his passion, and
overcome by dying, yea, he shall overcome death by a triumphant resurrection.

Attolere caput notat gaudium and fiducia^. Coc.
Again, There is a twofold lifting up of the head; First, a lifting up of the
head with joy and consolation ( Luke 21.28.) Secondly, A lifting up of the head
with pride and ostentation, Psalm. 83.2. Lo thine enemies make a tumult, and
they that hate thee have lift up the head; that is, they have proudly boasted
and vaunted themselves. The later is Jobs sense, If I be righteous, I will not
lift up my head in pride, he might and he did lift up his head in joy, because
he knew himself righteous.

Once more, There is a lifting up of our heads in our selves, and a lifting up
of our heads in Christ. Job disclaims the former here, but he all along assumes
the later. We cannot lift up our heads too high, in the thoughts of free grace,
nor hang them down too low, in the thought of our own works.

Non levabo caput h e. demisso capite ac mente coram te ambulabo.
Further, While Job says, I will not lift up my head, he means less then he
speaks. In Scripture there is sometimes less expressed then is intended, and
sometimes more. That of the Apostle (1 Cor. 15.58.) Your labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord, rises in sense higher then the expression, our labor in the
Lord shall not only not be in vain, but abundantly advantageous. This of Job, I
will not lift up my head, falls in sense below his expression, for his meaning
is, I will abase my self before God, I will be so far from priding my self,
or walking (as the daughters of Jerusalem are described by the Prophet, Isaiah
3.16.) with a stretched forth neck; that I will rather hang down my head.

M^seri and infoel^ces capite demisso, and in terram dejecto ambulant. S^nct.
To hang or hold down the head, in Scripture notes humbling and sorrow; when
Christ bids his people lift up their heads with joy, because the time of their
redemption was drawing nigh, it implied that their heads would hang down with
sorrow, wh^le that redemption was further off. The Jewish fasts are described
(in part) by this posture of sorrow ( Isa. 58.5.) Is it such a fast that I have
chosen? A day for a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a
bull-rush? Times of fasting are times of mourning, and then (it seems) they
used to hang down the head, as a sign of mourning.

Hence observe. That a godly man how upright and holy soever he is, walks
humbly with God.

The more holiness any soul has, the more humility it has. Humility is a
great part of our holiness; much more then is it an argument of holiness. The
Pharisee ( Luke 18.) who thought that he was righteous, lifted up his head full
high, he would not lose an inch of his commendation, and therefore commends
himself. He is his own reporter of what he had done, and who he was; but the
poor Publican durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, his spirit hung down as
well as his head, yet he was the righteous man, and went home justified rather
then the other. It is the scope and design of the Gospel to make and keep us
humble. God has set up the way of saving us by faith, that he might take away
boasting, and that no flesh might glory in his sight.

Secondly, If Job would not lift up his head, though righteous, what shall we
judge of those, who lift up and carry their heads so high, though they are
wicked? There is no reason any man should be proud of his goodness, what a
madness then is it for wicked men to be proud of, or in their naughtines!

Thirdly, Though Job was very thankful for, and joyful in, yet he durst not
lift up his head, or be proud of the white robes and costly raiment of imputed
righteousness. What then shall we say of them, who are proud of the dirty rags
and filthy raiment of their own inherent righteousness? A godly man walks
tremblingly, lest he should offend, therefore he says, If I am wicked, woe
unto me: and he walks humbly, when he does not offend, therefore he says,
though I am righteous, yet I will not hold up my head. Job has often breathed
out the humility of his soul in former passages, therefore I shall not insist
upon it here. Saturitas haec respicit animae ventriculum, qui tantam aerumnarum
copiam vix potuit concoquere Pined.


I am full of confusion, therefore see thou mine affliction.

I am full.

That is, my mind is full. The spirit has a stomach, or a capacious vessel
for the receiving either of good or evil, of joy or sorrow. Jobs spirit had
received in, as much evil and sorrow as ever it could hold, and more then he
could well digest. (...) Quod est cremare, ignominia enim efficit pudorem qui
est (...) in cord, and in vuliu sicut ignis.


I am full of confusion. The word signifies shame and burning heat, because
shame appears with a burning heat or blush in the face, which is also called
confusion of face. Blushing puts the face into a flame. Some take confusion
here for shame, rendering the text, I am full of shame, Erubescentes vultus
habent fla^mantes. Sanc.
or of ignominy: which ignominy might arise two ways; Either from that
reproach which his friends cast upon him, while they branded him for a wicked
man, and an hypocrite, I am full of reproach; so full, that I might justly be
ashamed, yea confounded, if I were such as they describe me. Or from that
reproach which his afflictions cast upon him. Poverty is no shame to a beggar,
who was born poor, but poverty is a shame to a man who has been rich, and
lived in honor. The original word holds this forth most properly, being
opposed to that which signifies weightinesse and honor, because honor is a
weighty thing, as this signifies lightness and shame, because shame is a light
thing, or a thing of naught.

Our Translatours rendering the word confusion, seem to intend somewhat else
besides shame.

Confusion notes a disorder, and an uncomposednesse of spirit. When a man knows
not what to do, or whose counsel to follow. When a man cannot make up his
thoughts, or bring them to any issue: When the mind is like a skain of
ravell'd silk which will neither wind nor draw, then we are in confusion. And
this I conceive was it, which Job chiefly intends, when he says, I am full of
confusion.

Hence observe,

Great sorrows distract the mind, and bring a man to his wits end.

While we suffer much, we scarce know what to do. Trouble upon the sensitive
part, troubles the understanding. Confusion upon our estates, makes a confusion
in our minds; It is very hard to keep our spirits in order, while our houses
and business are out of order: every affliction makes some confusion without
us; and it is exceeding rare if affliction make not much confusion within us. I
(says Job) am full of confusion.

See thou mine affliction. (...) Est imbecillitas, maxim quae est a majore vi
vim supprimente, statu^ miserum cum succumbentia notat.
There is a twofold sight of affliction; First, By a bare intuition, discerning
it. Secondly, By a gracious compassion, delivering us from it. The former sight
God always has of all our afflictions, neither our sins, nor our sorrows can
be hidden from him. The later he sometimes suspends, and will not see, what he
cannot but see. He will not see so as to relieve, what he cannot but see so as
to observe. It is this second kind of sight, which Job entreats and prays for
here, See thou my affliction, that is, pity me in my afflfction.

The word which we render affliction notes weakness, and casting down, or
that weakness which arises from casting down, an oppressing affliction, which
like some great weight lies heavy upon us.

There are different readings; some thus, Videt vexatione^ homo qui vexatur,
videt Deus qui eam respicit and propitius est. Dru^.
I am filled with affliction, and see my sorrows. The Chaldee thus, I will
satiate my self with shame, and I will see my affliction. Man sees his
affliction by feeling it. Sight which is the chief sense, is put for any sense.
And so the meaning is, Though I am righteous, yet I cannot hold up my head, or
take any comfort, because I am so full of confusion, and see so much
affliction; As if he had said, Can a man at the same time mourn and rejoice?
Can a man lift up his head, while he has such a load upon his heart?

Hence observe,

They who see much affliction, can hardly take in any consolation.

Come to a godly man, under great outward or inward troubles; tell him of the
love of God, of the pardon of sin, of an inheritance among the Saints in
light, as his portion; you can hardly fasten any of these things upon him:
sorrow within, keeps comfort out. As till sin be cast out we cannot act holily:
so till worldly sorrow, or the excess of godly sorrow be cast out, we cannot
act joyfully. The Saints in a right posture of spirit, are joyous in all their
tribulations; and Christ is able to make consolations abound, as tribulation
does abound, yet where there is abundance of tribulation, consolation is
usually very scarce. Drops will hardly be received, where rivers are offered
and poured forth.

Another reading of the words, represents Job bespeaking God in prayer, mixed
with complaining, If I were righteous, Satis habeas ignominiae and vide
impotentia^ meam. Coc.
yet cannot I lift up my head, be thou satisfied with confusion, and behold my
affliction. So M. Broughton. As if Job had said, Let it be enough, Lord let it
now suffice, give me some ease, that I may lift up my head, a little before I
lay it down for altogether. Thus David prayed ( Ps. 39.11, 12.) When thou with
rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away
like a moth, surely every man is vanity, O spare me, that I may recover
st^ength, before I go hence and be no more. When Nehemi^h was humbling himself,
and confessing his sin, and the sin of that people, he concludes according to
this interpretation, (Chap. 9.32.) Let not all the trouble seem little before
thee that has come upon us, on our Kings, on our Princes, and on our Priests,
and on all thy people; as if he had said, Lord, consider that now we have been
greatly punished, though we have been punished less then our sins deserve.
Thou may justly inflict more, but we are not able to endure more.

Rectius in imperativo, q. d. vide Domine quo sim statu tum cognosces ita esse
ut dico. M^rc.
Thirdly, We read imperatively, Therefore see thou mine affliction: So his
meaning is, Lord, take notice of my sad condition, I am full of trouble.

Hence observe,

That when sorrows are come to a great height, it is time for us to pray, that
God would cast a compassionate eye upon them.

When we are past the cure and help of man, we are fittest objects for God.
When the pressures of the people of Israel were greatly increased in Egypt,
then the Lord himself says, I have seen, I have seen (Exodus 3.7.) and when
affliction is boiled up to the height, then let us say, See Lord, see Lord.
When the rage and blasphemy of Rabshakeh, both by speaking and writing, reached
even unto heaven, Then Hezekiah went, and spread the letter before the Lord (2
King. 19.14.) As if he had said, Lord, do thou read this letter, Lord, bow down
thine ear and hear, Lord, behold and see, we are full of confusion, See thou
our affliction. And when the enemies of the Jews in Nehemiah's time fell to
scoffing and jearing the work they had in hand, and them in the work, then that
zealous Governor puts it unto God, Hear, O our God, for we are despised.

Secondly, Note, That when our afflictions are at the highest and greatest,
thou the Lord is able to master and subdue them.

I am full of confusion, see thou mine affliction; As if he had said, It is in
vain for me to show my diseases and my wounds to creatures, but I know I am not
past thy cure, though I come thus late; or thus, I have showed my wounds and my
diseases to the creature, I have made my moan to men, but they cannot help. Now
I bring them unto thee, O see my affiction. All our ruins may be under the
hand of God, he has bread and clothing for us, he can be our healer, when
none can either in heaven or earth.

Lastly, Observe,

When our afflictions are at the highest, then usually God comes to deliver.

When the waters of affliction swell over the banks, and threaten a deluge,
then God turns the stream, when our sores fester, and are ready to gangrene,
then God applies his balsome. He seldom appears in a business which others
can do, or undertakes that which is man's work. As in the sore travel of women
in childe-bearing, other helpers undertake it not, till (as they speak) it be
past women's work; so God seldom meddles eminently (he acts always
concommitantly) till our deliverance is past man's work, that so the whole
praise of the work may be his. When danger is upon the growing hand, then
desire God to take deliverance in hand: then pray, and pray earnestly, that God
would see your afflictions when you perceive them to be increasing afflictions.
So it follows in the next verse. See thou mine affliction.

Verse 16. For it increases: Thou huntest me as a fierce lion, and again thou
show thy self mavelous upon me.
This verse with the next, are an elegant and patheticall description of Jobs
yet growing and prevailing sorrows: for having closed the 15th verse with an
Assertion, and a petition, I am full of confusion, therefore see thou mine
affliction; he presses and pursues both in these words, For it increases:
Thou huntest me as a fierce lion.

For it increases. M. Broughton renders, How it flees up! (...) In bonum,
elev^t^^, eminuit, in malum, intumuit, superbiit, de inanimatis ^revit, auctus.
^uit.
The Hebrew word is taken sometimes in a good, and sometimes in an ill sense. In
a good sense it signifies to be lifted up, or to be eminent in excellency. In
an ill sense, it signifies to be lifted up, or exalted with pride. The word is
applied also to things without life, and then it signifies to augment by
addition or increase.

The Vulgar takes it in that ill sense, as noting pride and highmindednesse,
translating by the Noun, thus, For pride thou do catch me as a lion: or thou
do hunt me as a lion, because I am proud. A lion is a stout creature, and may
be an emblem of pride.

Another gives a sense near that. When it lifts up it self, then thou huntest
me as a fierce lion. When what lifts up it self? when my head lifts up it
self; he had said in the former verse, If I be righteous, yet will I not lift
up my head, for, if I do lift up my head in pride, then thou will hunt me as a
fierce lion; I shall be sure to smart for every proud thought and high
imagination. Both these translations render the meaning of Job thus, If I
should plead my own righteousness and innocence before thee, as thinking
therein to lift up my head, and so should wax confident in my self, I shall
presently pay for it, for I perceive that thou art preparing thine instruments
against me, as men do against fierce lions, and wild savage beasts, to hunt,
catch and destroy me. Here is a truth in thesi, God does resist the proud; if
any head lifts it self up against God, God can quickly lay such an head as
low as the ground. But, in Hypothesi, or in Jobs case, I cannot assent to it,
as a truth suting this Text.

A third translation puts it by an Interrogation, I am full of confusion, see
thou mine affliction, Can it be lifted up? That is, Can my head be lifted up,
when I am so full of sorrow and confusion? whatsoever my righteousness is, I
am not in case now to stand upon it, it is no time for me to talk great words;
Can I lift up mine head when thou pressest me with such a weight of affliction?
Great afflictions will keep down the greatest spirits, or break them down.
Affliction will make the stoutest heart stoop, and the highest head to bow.

But take the word according to our reading, as it refers to his
afflictions; it increases, that is, my affliction increases, and so a double
exposition is given.

First, As if Job had spoken his wish or his desire, I am (said he before) full
of confusion, see thou mine affliction, O that mine affliction might increase,
and that I might be fuller of confusion! O that my troubles might be
strengthened upon me, and that I might be weak enough to see an end of my
troubles, I am yet too strong for death, O that thou would quickly dispatch
me, more weight, deeper wounds, harder blows would be welcome. As if here again
Job had assumed and renewed that complaining desire mentioned ( Chap. 6.7, 8.)
O that I might have my request! and that God would grant me the thing that I
long for! (What was that?) Even that it would please God to destroy me, that he
would let loose his hand, and cut me off! But I shall let this pass; Job has
spoken these wishes plainly, and in the letter too often; I will not charge him
with another from a questionable interpretation.

Rather take the words declaratively, not for a wish of greater future
afflictions, but for a manifestation of the greatness of his present
afflictions: so we express them, I am full of confusion, See thou mine
affliction, for it increases. This is a clear and a fair sense: Job intending
to describe his estate more fully, shows it still upon the increase, waxing
worse and worse, greater and greater. As if he had said, mine are a pile or
heap of afflictions, and still more are piled up, and heaped on.

There is an elegancy in it, as taken in the other sense, Effert sese afflictio
mea Elega^ti autem figura dicit, quod sese efferat. Elationem and superbiam
morbo and dolori tribuit, cum totum bominem possidet. Merc.
for pride or lifting up. See my affliction, it waxes proud. For as the waves
of the sea are called proud waves, when they swell and increase: So an
affliction increasing and swelling may be called a proud affliction. Some
afflictions like a great sea rise above us, and stand over us; or like a cruel
master domineer and insult upon us. Jobs afflictions were proud ones, they came
upon him with a kind of authority, as if they would lay him at their very
feet. Hence observe.

They who have endured very great afflictions, may yet find their afflictions
greatning and increasing.

He had said before, I am full of confusion, and yet here he says, My
affliction increases. When we have as much as we think, our backs can bear,
yet (possibly) more weight may be laid on. When we hope our affliction is upon
the declining hand, that those waters are upon an ebb, and the fire slacking,
then they may flow higher, and the furnace may be heated seven times hotter
then before. The Lord threatens obstinate and rebellious sinners ( Levit. 26.)
I will punish you yet seven times more for your sins: Though I have brought
such calamities upon you, that ye have been ready to say, surely, now God has
done his worst, we are in as bad a case as we can be; no, says the Lord (who
has infinite wisdom to find out ways of afflicting, as well as of showing
mercy) I will punish you yet seven times more for your sins; no man knows how
much more God can punish him; His judgments in the executing of them, as well
as in the laying of them, are past finding out. We know not the beginning of
them, neither do we know when they will end. Now as the Lord afflicts some
seven times more for the punishment of their sins, so others seven times more
for the trial of their graces: Sufferings are sent in perfection, to make us
more perfect through sufferings; Afflictions swell with pride, to abate the
swellings of our pride, or to show how those swellings are abated into
humility. God has unsearchable riches and treasures of chastenings, as well
as of wrath or of love. And as when we think we have received as much mercy
as God can give us, he can yet give us more, and make our mercies sevenfold
greater to our apprehensions then before; so also he can dispense himself in
the matter of affliction.

For it increases. This increase is set forth by an elegant similitude. Though
similitudes prove nothing, yet they much illustrate what is already proved.

Thou huntest me as a fierce lion. Thou huntest me as the ramping Shakall: So
Mr Broughton. The word Shakall, sig^ifies a fierce assaulting lion; or, as we
speak, a lion rampant. Some translate a Lioness, others a Leopard, spoken of
in the fourth Chapter. We may take it in general for any fierce, cruel and
savage beast, of the one kind or of the other.

Thou huntest me as a fierce lion] For Thou, some render (it) referring to his
affliction, For it increases and it hunteth me (my affliction hunteth me) as a
fierce lion. Sorrows are compared to a fierce lion. Afflictions hunt and
follow, they tear and destroy like a wild beast. Effert se dolor meus ut leo,
nequaquam cedens Merc.
Like as a lion, or like the young lion, roaring on his prey (as the Prophet
speaks, Isa. 45.) when a multitude of shepherds is called out against him
(Christ is compared to such a lion there) will not be afraid of their voice,
nor abase himself for the noise of them: Such were the afflictions of
distressed, despised Job, they braved him to his very face, and would not
withdraw or turn away from him, Capior ficut leo ad occisionem. Sept. Tendis
mihi and expandis rete, non secus ac ad feram capiendam. Rab. Sal. Quidam
referu^t ad prioris status foelicitatem, nam superbum and imperiosum animal leo
est. regiaeque potentiae symbolum.
notwithstanding all the out cries and loudest lamentations which he made
against them.

Secondly, The comparison is laid between the lion and Job, Thou huntest me as
if I were a lion: So diverse of the Ancients, and the Septuagint understand it;
I am taken or catched like a lion; As if Job had said, Lord, Thou usest me as a
wild beast, thou huntest me as thou would hunt a lion or a bear, thou
set thy nets and toils, thou make snares and pits (as Nimrods do in the
hunting of lions, and other wild beasts) Thou dealest with me, as if there
were no taking, no taming of me, but by severest and roughest ways: Thou
dealest with me, as if in my prosperity I had been like a fierce lion,
oppressing and preying upon the poor; or, as if in my affliction I had provoked
thee to resolve, that thou will never leave off to afflict me, till thou have
destroyed me. Thou huntest me as a fierce lion; How are they hunted? Lions are
not usually hunted to be preserved, it is rare to hunt lions so, but because
they are hurtful and destroying creatures, Non capi^r ad vitam, ut animalia
quae solent haberi in delicili Bold.
therefore they are hunted that they may be destroyed, and do no more hurt; as
if he had thus expressed himself, Thou, Lord, seem to adjudge me not only as
an unusefull and unserviceable creature, but also as a dangerous, and a noxious
creature, as a natural bruit beast made to be taken and destroyed (2 Pet.
2.12.) yet I cannot assent that Job (though under the darkness of a sore
temptation) had such dark thoughts of God, as if he had no other end in
afflicting him, but to make an end of him.

I rather expound him in a third sense, that the comparison is made between God
and the lion; Thou, O God, like a lion, do hunt me, Consent of Scripture is
clearest for this interpretation, which often represents God in afflicting his
people under the notion of a lion, as will appear in the proof of the
observation arising from it; which is,

That the Lord seems sometimes to put off all pity and compassion toward his
people.

So the Church complains ( Lam. 3.10.) He was unto me as a bear lying in wait,
and as a lion in secret places. God threatened by the Prophet Hosea (Chap.
5.14.) I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of
Judah, I, even I, will tear and go away. I will afflict them fiercely and
terribly. Again ( Hos. 13.7.) I will be unto them as a lion, as a leopard by
the way will I observe them. Hez^kiah speaks the same language ( Isa. 38.13.) I
reckoned till morning, that as a lion, so will he break all my bones. As when
man deals cruelly with his brother, he is a wolf to him, or a lion to him (
Psalm. 17.12.) (Man's acting of beastly lusts, is all the metamorphosis or change
of men into beasts, which Heathen Poets have so much fancied, or the holy
Scriptures so often mentioned.) Now, I say, as man acting cruelly upon man, is
called a lion, so also is God. When God would show the abatements of his wrath,
then he says, I am God, and not man (Hos. 11.8, 9.) How shall I give thee up
Ephraim? etc. Thus he debates, by and by he votes and resolves negatively, I
will not execute the fierceness of mine anger: I will not return to destroy
Ephraim, for I am God, and not man. But when he would show the highest workings
of his wrath, then he denies to show himself so much as man: Thus old Babylon
and Chaldea are terrified, ( Isa. 47.1.) Come down and sit in the dust, O
virgin daughter of Babylon, etc. Why so? Babylon had set so long upon a throne,
that she knew not how to think of sitting in the dust, yet she must; for (
verse. 3.) I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man: How then? I
will meet thee as if I were a beast, or a lion, Thou shall find no kind of
humanity at all from me, not only not the kindenesses and mercies of a God, but
not so much as the kindness and mercy of a man. Thus the Lord met with that
literal Babylon, and so at last he will meet with mystical Babylon. And as he
will be to all his proud enemies, a destroying and devouring lion: so he
appears often to his own people; he says even to Jerusalem, and to Zion, I
will not meet you as a man, when you are carnal and walk as men. The usual
dealings of God with his people are full of compassion, In measure (peck-peck)
when it shoots (or when thou sendest it) forth, thou will debate with it, He
staieth his rough wind in the day of the East-winde (Isa. 27.8.) He will not
bluster against, and storm his people, when their enemies storm against them;
he also measures out their afflictions, and marks what is fit and proportionate
to their strength, and for their good, as a Physician measures and weighs all
the ingredients, which he mingles in a potion for his sick patient: so the next
words intimate, By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and
this is all the fruit to take away his sin. Yet at another time he afflicts
without measure, as if he intended to kill rather then to cure, and to take
away their lives, rather then to take away their sins. I grant his greatest
afflictions are as exactly measured and weighed as the least. God knows to an
hairs breadth, the length and breadth, and to a grain the weight and burden of
the longest, broadest, and weightiest affliction: but when he afflicts greatly,
he is said to afflict without measure, because things unmeasurable, or which
cannot easily be measured, are very great. And if ever the Lord afflicted any
of his (in this sense) without measure, surely he afflicted Job so, who thus
cries out, Thou huntest me like a fierce Lion, (...) Et redis, licet
aliquantisper remittas tamen statim redi^, etc.
And again thou show thy self mavelous (or wonderful) upon me.

Again.



We render it as an Adverb; others, as a Verb, Thou returnest, and show thy
self wonderful upon me. The sense is the same in both, noting the continued or
repeated acts of his affliction. Vna vice post aliam Ab. Ezr Iterum iterumque
ostendis miranda tua facta in me. Drus.
Thou art still and still wonderful against me; As if Job had said, Lord, Thou
no sooner ceasest, but thou beginnest again, thou no sooner take off thy
hand, but I feel it again; if thou grantest me a little breathing, and
withdrawest from me, thou returnest again; if thou give over the chase a
while, thou pursuest it again, with as loud a cry, with as fierce assaults as
ever; my sorrows know no intermission, In me non caret emphasi, q d. in me jam
seme^. mortuo and pene confecto. Merc.
my pains know not only no period, but no pause, I have storm upon storm, grief
upon grief, here much and there much, I am all ways and everywhere again
afflicted, though already half-dead with affliction.

Whence observe,

God does often renew the same, or send new afflictions upon his choicest
servants.

One would think that light should follow darkness, and day succeed the night,
that though sorrow continue all the night, yet joy should come in the morning,
that after wounding we should have healing, and after sickness, health. So
they promised themselves ( Hos. 6.1.) Come, and let us return unto the Lord,
for he has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us
up: yet many have felt, wounding after wounds, and smiting after blows;
darkness has stepped after darkness, and their sorrow has had a succession of
greater sorrows. It was a special favor to Paul, when Epaphroditus was
restored (Phil. 2.27.) He was sick nigh unto death, but (says he) God had
mercy on him, and not on him only, but on me also; and why? Lest I should have
sorrow upon sorrow. God would not do what some of his enemies thought to do,
add affliction to his bonds; therefore he healed Paul's helper, and kept him
alive, in whom he so much delighted. Sorrow upon sorrow is a mournful bearing,
yet many a precious Saint has born that coat. The promise to the Church is,
That her peace shall be as a river, and her prosperity as the waves of the sea
(Isa. 66.12.) When the Church shall come to her full beauty, and attain a
perfect restoration, then her peace shall be a continued peace, she shall have
peace upon peace, everlasting successions of peace; a river, being supplied,
and fed with a constant stream, the waters that flow to day, will flow again to
morrow; peace like a river is peace, peace, or perpetual peace. Sions peace
shall not be as a land-floud, soon up, and as soon down again, but as a river,
and (which yet heightens it) her prosperity shall be as the waves of the sea.
If the wind do but stir upon the face of the sea, you shall have wave upon
wave, waves rolling and riding one upon the back of another. Such shall be the
prosperity of Zion on earth for a time, and such it will be for ever in heaven:
there peace shall be as a river to eternity, and prosperity as the waves of the
sea, joy upon joy, and comfort upon comfort, riding and rolling one upon the
back of another. As it shall be thus with the peace of the Church at last: so
it may be with the afflictions of the Church, or of any member of the Church at
present. Their afflictions may be as a river, and their sorrows as the waves of
the sea, coming on again and again, renewed as often as abated.

(...) Mirabilis sis in me.
Again, Thou show thy self wonderful, or, mavelous against, or upon me.
Both renderings are consistent with the original.

Mavelous upon me. That is, thou do not punish or afflict me in an ordinary
way. Marvels are not every days work. Thou take a new, a strange course to
try me: such afflictions as mine have no parallel, such have scarce been heard
of, or recorded in the history of any age. Who has heard of such a thing as
this? thou seem to design me for a president to posterity, Mirificum fit
spectaculum homo, qui tam dira patitur tam constanti invictoque animo.
or to show in my example what thou can do upon a creature, Thou show thy
self mavelous upon me. As Moses speaks concerning Korah, Dathan and Abiram,
when they murmured, and mutined against him, and against Aaron, If these men
die the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of
all men, then the Lord has not sent me; but if the Lord make a new thing, and
the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, then, etc. The Lord to manifest
his extreme displeasure against those mutineers, did (as it were) devise a new
kind of death for them, If these men die the common or the ordinary death of
all men, then the Lord has not sent me; These men have given a new example of
sin, and surely God will make them a new example of punishment. Job speaks
the same sense, Thou show thy self mavelous upon me; thou will not be
satisfied in afflicting me after the rate or measure of other men; All the
Saints should do some singular thing, and many of them suffer some singular
thing. The Apostle assures his Corinthians (1 Cor. 10.13.) There has no
temptation taken you, but that which is common to man. Job seems to speak the
contrary. A temptation has taken me, which is not common to man.

Further, These words, Thou art mavelous upon me, have reference to God who
sent those afflictions, as well as unto the afflictions, which he sent; As if
he had said, Lord, thou actest now besides thy nature and thy custom; thou art
merciful, and thou delightest in mercy; Thou art good, and thou do good,
how or whence is it then, that thou art so fierce against me, and pourest out
so many evils upon me? I could not (knowing thee as I do) have believed, though
it had been told me, that thou would have been so rigorous and
incompassionate; if a professed enemy had done this, he had done like himself,
and had been no wonder unto me; But now as thou have afflicted me, till I am
become a wonder unto many, so thou, O Lord, art become a wonder unto me, and to
all who hear how thou have afflicted me. Meek Moses made himself a wonder, when
he broke out in anger. Every man is wondered at, when he does that which he is
not inclined to do, or not used to do. Is it not a wonder to see the patient
God angry, the merciful God severe, the compassionate God inexorable? Thus,
says Job, Thou show thy self mavelous upon me.

Hence observe,

First, That some afflictions of the Saints are wonderful afflictions.

As God does not often send his people strange deliverances, and works wonders
to preserve them; so he sends them many strange afflictions, and works wonders
to trouble them. And as many punishments of sin upon wicked men, so some trials
of grace upon godly men are very wonderful. The Lord threatens the Jews (
Deuteronomy. 28.59.) that he would make their plagues wonderful* he would make
strange work among them. And he says of Jerusalem, I will wipe it, as a man
wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it up-side down, or wiping it and turning
it upon the face thereof, (2 King. 21.13.) To see a great City handled like a
little dish, or a strong Nation turned topsie turvy (as we say) or the bottom
upwards, is a strange thing. It is an ordinary thing to see cups and platters
turned up-side down, but it is not ordinary to see Kingdoms and Nations turned
up-side down. To wipe Jerusalem as a dish, was to do that which was never done
before. Some expound that place of the frequency of affliction, that God would
smite them again and again; as they that make clean a dish, wipe it over and
over, that no filth may stay in it. The Seventy and the Vulgar translate,
Delebo Jerusalem sicut deleri sole^t tabulae. Vulg.
I will blot out Jerusalem as they use to blot out a table book that is written
all over; He that has a table book full of writing, and would write more,
takes a cloth or a sponge, and blotteth out what was written: and that he may
thoroughly wipe his table book, he rubs it often with his sponge, to get the
letters clear out. Thus God threatened to do with Jerusalem, He would wipe or
blot out, her golden characters and honorable inscriptions, till nothing of
Jerusalem but her shame, and her sin should remain unblotted out. Was not the
judgment brought upon Jerusalem a wonder? when the Prophet says ( Lam. 4.12.)
The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would not have
believed it. The Apostle speaks thus of his own, and of his fellow-Apostles
afflictions (1 Cor. 4.9.) We are made a spectacle (as upon a theater) unto the
world, (...).
and to Angels, and to men. All begin to wonder at us, what the matter is, what
strange creatures we are, whom the Lord suffers to be thus used. The people of
God are often a gazingstock to the world in regard of what they do, and, not
seldom in regard of what they suffer.

Secondly, Observe,

That when God does greatly afflict his own people, he goes out of his ordinary
way.

He shows himself mavelous or wonderful: a man is never marvelled at, when
he goes his old pace in his old path. God loves to have his hand in the
hony-pot, therefore it is strange to see him give his people a bitter cup to
drink, or feeding them with wormwood and with gall. Judgment is the strange
work of God ( Isa. 28.21.) The Lord shall be wrath in the valley of Gibeon,
that he may do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass his act, his
strange act. And if every work of judgment be his strange work, a work he
delights not to be conversant in, what then are great and sore judgments?
Though the Lord be infinitely pleased in the executions of judgment, yet
because (if a more may be conceived in infinity) he is more pleased with mercy,
therefore judgment is called his strange work, his strange act. To see a
Prince renowned for clemency and pity, passing a severe sentence, is a strange
sight. We say, he has showed himself mavelous, he has gone against both his
practice and his nature, his custom and his inclination. To see any man do
what he uses not, has somewhat of wonder in it; much more, to see God do so.
When he takes up his rod we begin to start, how much more when he takes up
his sword, when he hunts those like a lion, whom he dearly loves, and uses
those as wild beasts, who are his precious children; when he smites them with
rigor, whom he carries in his own bosom. These, these are acts which
represent him to admiration: as many acts of his power and mercy, cause the
Saints to cry out, admiringly, yet joyfully, Who is a God like unto thee? So
some acts of his visible severity cause others of them to cry out admiringly,
yet sorrowfully, Why, O God, do thou act, in appearance, so unlike thy self?

Verse 17. Thou renewest thy witnesses against me (or thou bring new
witnesses against me) and encreasest thine indignation upon me; changes and war
are against me.
This 17th verse is but a further amplification of what he had spoken before,
setting forth the greatness and frequent returns of his trouble.

Thou renewest. The first day of the month is called Chodesh Chodesh
novilunium, primus dies mensis, quo quasi luna innovatur.
in the Hebrew from the word here used, because then there was a new moon, or a
change of the moon; so, Thou renewest, thou make a change, I have many new
moons, but they are all and always at full in sorrow, Thou renewest Thy
witnesses.

The Septuagint says, Thy examinations; so it is an allusion to the trial of
a malefactor, who is examined by the Judge, and if he deals not plainly in
confession, then his examination is renewed. Thus, says Job, Thou sendest (as
it were) new examiners with more articles and additionall Interrogatories, as
if I had concealed somewhat, and had not told thee my whole heart.

We translate (and so the word most properly bears) witnesses; the sense is
the same. As some malefactors are often examined, so more evidence and new
witnesses are brought against them: though in the mouth of two or three
witnesses, every word shall be established, yet where there are more witnesses,
then two or three, there is more establishment.

Again, As they who are of a wrangling and unquiet disposition, will never sit
down in a suit; when by the examination of some witnesses, they have brought
the matter to a trial, and are cast, yet this does not satisfy them, they
will have their writ of error, Non tam videtur de instauratione plurium
testium queri, quam de sententiae ferendae dilatione and mora. Pined.
and bring the matter about again, in another Court. Thus (says Job) as if the
Lord were resolved, this suit should never have an end, He renews his
witnesses against me. When I think all is concluded and agreed between us, I am
as much to seek as ever: he brings all about again. So that after all my
travel, I am as far from an end, as I was at the beginning, I am where I
was, and am like to continue there, for I see the Lord renewing his witnesses
against me still.

The doubt is, What or whom he means by these Witnesses?

Philippus in lo.
One says, These witnesses were devils. Satan accused him at first, and he is
not alone, either in tempting or accusing, he can soon have a legion to join
with him in any design of wickedness. But I pass that opinion.

Secondly, Others say, The Witnesses were Jobs three friends, they all
testified against him, Eliphaz began and Bildad was his second, Zophar stood
ready to follow; all against Job.

Poena ^^ius peccati, quasi destatione decede^te, aliam quasi succenturiatam
suffecturus es. Coc.
Thirdly, By Witnesses, most (and they most clearly) understand his afflictions,
Thou renewest thy witnesses; that is, thou bring new troubles to testify
against me. When one affliction has spoken at thy bar against me, thou call
for the testimony of another, and of another, and when there will not be
another, I know not, unless it be, when I am not. When Naomi was become Marah,
(her former pleasures being turned into bitterness) she says ( Ruth 1.21.)
The Lord has testified against me. Job is very express in the point at the
sixteenth Chapter of this book, and the eighth verse, which may be a Commentary
upon this, Thou have filled me with wrinckles, which is a witness against me:
and my leanness rising up in me, bears witness to my face. Afflictions bring
in evidence, and testify many ways.

They sometimes witness for us, evidencing our graces, our faith, patience,
sincerity and submission to the hand of God, they are witnesses also of our
adoption or spiritual sonship ( Heb. 12.8.) If you be without chastisement
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons. It is no good
sign to be free from sufferings. Hear ye the rod, says the Prophet Micah: as
we ought to hear it, calling us from sin: so we may hear it calling us sons.
Chastenings speak our privileges, as well as our duties.

They often witness against us;

First, That sin is seated in us, and has been acted by us. If we had no sin,
we should know no sorrow. Though some afflictions are not sent out directly
against sin, yet every affliction is both a consequent and a testimony of
remaining sin. The bundle of rods at our backs, says, there is folly and sin
bound up in our hearts: and when once we are purged from all sin, we shall
hear no more of any affliction, of any rod. We shall be past suffering, as soon
as we are past sinning.

Secondly, They are vvitnesses in special, of that great sin, the pride of our
hearts and lives. If there were not swellings and impostumations of pride in
our spirits, we should not feel such lancings. Paul himself acknowledges that
they were growing upon him, if God had not taken a severe course to keep them
down, Lest I should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of
revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan
to buffet me (2 Cor. 12.7.) Hence afflictions are called humiliations, both
because an afflicted person is humbled, or laid low by the hand of God, as
also, because afflictions are sent to humble, and lay us low in our selves.
Now, if one special business which affliction has with us, be to humble
us, then doubtless affliction witnesses that there is pride in us. That
which is sent to remove an evil, shows the presence of it.

Thirdly, They are vvitnesses, by bringing to our remembrance the acting of
forgotten sins. Affliction is a help to memory. That which we forget we have
done or spoken, vvitnesses coming in, make us remember; so also do our
troubles. When the brethren of Joseph had been put in ward three days, and
heard him demand one of them to be left, as an hostage in prison, till they
brought Benjamin: This distress caused them to say, We are verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he
besought us, and we would not hear, therefore is this distress come upon us
(Genesis 42.21.) The guilt of that sin was about twenty years old, but they felt
not the smart of it, till themselves smarted for it; their imprisonment set
their memories at liberty, and when they saw themselves in danger to become
bondmen to the Egyptians, they had witness enough of their selling Joseph
for a captive to the Ishmaelites.

Fourthly, Afflictions witness obstinacy and resolvednesse in the ways of
sin, or, that afflicted persons or Nations turn not for sin. Every vvound
will open it is mouth as a witness, and every stroke will bring an evidence
against the impenitent. The troubles which God brought upon Ahaz witnessed
emphatically (2 Chronicles. 28.22.) This is that King Ahaz, who in the time of his
distress, did trespass yet more against the Lord. If we are not bettered by
our distresses, our distresses testify that we are naught, how much more when
we are worse in our distress? As all good things which we have received, so
all evils which we have suffered, will rise up in judgment against those who
still continue evil.

Fifthly, Afflictions witness two things concerning God: First, That he has
an eye upon us, and care of us. He will not let us want any thing that is
needful for us, no not affliction. Due chastisement given a child, is an
argument that his father loves him, and looks to him. Secondly, They are
witnesses of Gods fatherly displeasure. Some say, God cannot be displeased with
his children, because his love is everlasting. But will any man say, A father
does not love his child, because he corrects him? yet a father never
corrects his child, but when he is displeased with him: Parents may not
strike unprovoked, and it is rare that God does so. A man may be much displeased
with, and much love the same person at the same time, and it is very usual for
God to do so. Afflictions never testify any the least hatred of God against
his people, but they often testify some, and sometimes great displeasure,
against his people.

Lastly, Afflictions upon the godly are reckoned very sufficient, and credible
witnesses by the world, that either they are not godly, or that surely some
great ungodliness has been acted by them. How many precious men have been
cast upon this evidence, for traitors and rebels against God. Jobs friends took
this for proof enough that he was wicked. They could not be persuaded he was
good, because he endured so many evils. As the high Priest cried out against
Christ, what further need have we of witnesses? behold now ye have heard his
blasphemy, so said Jobs friends concerning him, What need have we of further
witness? Behold we have seen his misery. What do these losses in his estate,
and ruins upon his family? What do these sores upon his body, and sorrows in
his soul, but publish unto us (what he has kept close and concealed) the
profaneness of his spirit, and the hypocrisy of his former profession. Job
perceiving his friends making use all along of this proof, as of their chiefest
and strongest medium, might well complain to God, upon the renewall of every
days affliction; Thou renewest thy witnesses against me.

And encreasest thine indignation upon me, or, Thy indignation increases upon
me. In the beginning of the verse his own afflictions did increase, but here
the indignation of God. Indignation is more grievous then affliction, and the
indignation of God is the most grievous indignation.

The word signifies wrath, displeasure, fierce, fiery wrath, hot, (...)
consuming displeasure.

Increasest. There is a double increase here noted. First, Extensive. (...)
Secondly, Intensive; an increase both in multitude and magnitude; As if he had
said, I have more troubles in number, and more in weight.

Indignation is here put for the effects of indignation; neither the wrath, nor
the love of God do ever increase in him, but in their exertions or in the
putting of them forth toward us.

Observe from it,

First, That a godly man may conceive himself under the indignation of God.

The Church stoops to it ( Mich. 7.9.) I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him.

Secondly, Observe,

That the more we see of the indignation of God in any affliction, the sorer is
the affliction.

As the love and smiles of God comfort the Saints, more then all the outward
comforts he heaps upon them, a little with much sensible love, is to us huge
mercy. So the disfavour and frowns of God, trouble the Saints more then all the
troubles, which he heaps upon them. A little with much sensible disfavour, is
to us a heavy cross. Let trouble increase, yet if displeasure abate, the
spirit of a man will bear and stand under it, though his flesh and outward man
fall under it. Though the furnace should be heated seven times hotter, yet if
the Lord do but let down one beam or ray of his love into the soul, all that
burning fire will be but like a warm Sun. But when the scorchings of
indignation mingle with affliction, this is dreadful. The anger of a fool
(says Solomon) is very heavy; yet that is not so much as a feather to a
millstone or a mountain, compared with the anger of God. And though believers
are freed from that anger and indignation which he darts upon his enemies, yet
they to sense, yea and to their present opinion, may be dealt with as enemies.
And though the indignation which God pours upon his own people, and that upon
the wicked, be as different as their states are; yet the one may be under as
much temporary pain and sorrow as the other is. For as an hypocrite may for a
time taste as much of the goodness of God, and feel as much joy in his
service, and sometimes more, then a man who is godly and sincere, so also may
one who is godly and sincere, taste more of the displeasure of God for a time,
and feel as much sorrow in his sufferings, and sometimes more, then a wicked
man.

Job concludes with the same thing, in a different habit of words. Changes and
war are against me. I have variety of afflictions, a multitude of afflictions,
and afflictions in their strength, these three things are implied in those two
words, Poenae militant in me. Vulg.
Changes and war; He had variety of afflictions, for changes were upon him.
He had many and strong afflictions, For war was upon him. One strong man
cannot make a war, nor many weak ones. And it is as strange that this should be
called a war, which was but against one weak man. The Roman stories cry up
the honor of a man, who alone upon a narrow pass made a stand against a whole
army, till supplies came, what shall we say then of Job, who single and alone
maintained his standing against many armies, and held out a long war? (...)
Excidere, quod exciditur immutatur a statu suo.

(...) Est tempus quoquis in statione aut militari officio est. Citra hos
tantos dolores, mihi certum tempus est praescriptum, intra quod sum moriturus
Mer.


Changes and war are upon me.

The first word which signifies changes, signifies also destruction or cutting
off. Some render it so here, excision or cutting off (by which he means
death) is upon me. The other word which we translate war, notes also a set
or an appointed time, as was showed at the first verse of the 7th Chapter, Is
there not an appointed time to man upon earth? So some translate it here,
putting all together thus, Excision (or death, the cause being put for the
effect) is upon me, and a determined time of my life.

M. Broughton translates, Changes and stayed army have I. Taking in both
interpretations of the word, so his sense may be expressed in this tenor,
Lord, have not I a settled and determined time to die? Why then are such extreme
afflictions prepared against, and charged upon me, as if by those thou would
hasten my death, and bring me to my grave sooner then thou thy self have
appointed? I shall die at the time thou have determined, though thou should
not distress my life, and even force out my breath with such pressing
extremities.

Further, Taking the later word for a prescribed time: some conceive Job
carrying an allusion to those who are surprised with fevers and agues: they
have changes, some well days, Hunc sensum a^^p^ctu^tur, Ab^^-Ezra. Rab. Sal.
and some sick days, yet the fever returns upon a set time, or in a constant
recourse, till the distemper is checked; As if he had said, My afflictions are
like fever fits; though I have some intermission, yet I find a regression, the
fit comes upon me again; Changes, at set times, are upon me.

But rather, according to the letter of our translation, Changes and war are
against me, that is, I am exercised with variety of wars. The word imports any
kind of change, change of times or change of things, it signifies also change
of garments. Exerceor contrariu and interse compugnantibus malis vel potius
varijs and sibi invicem succedentibus malorum agminibu. Merc.
( Judge. 14.12) That notion of the word, has an elegancy in it in reference to
Jobs condition. He was a man clothed with affliction, sorrow encompassed him
as a long mourning cloak, and Job had changes of this raiment, he went not
always in one suit, though his suits were still of one color, for he went
always in blacks.

Again, We may interpret this change, of his change from one estate to another,
from joy to sorrows, from peace to trouble, from plenty to want, from costly
robes to filthy rags. Time was when Job went in scarlet, and fine linen, and,
if he pleased, might have fared deliciously every day, but when he spoke this,
(...).
he was in another state and habit, clothed with sackcloth, and lying in the
dust. It is said of wicked men ( Psalm. 55.9.) Because they have no changes,
therefore they fear not God. Every creature is subject to change, and has some
changes every day; God only is unchangeable. Yet some men seem to have no
changes, and though they cannot be free from natural changes one moment, yet
they may be free from many years civil changes: they maybe so far from such
changes as Job felt, from good to evil, that all the changes they are
acquainted with, may be only from good to better, from strong to stronger, from
rich to richer: that is the intent of the Psalm; They have no changes from joy
to sorrow, from health to sickness, from riches to poverty, from honor to
disgrace, therefore they fear not God; their hearts were hardened, because their
estates prospered.

So then, these changes import, either diverse sorts of afflictions, or diverse
returns and charges of the same afflictions. The second word carries that
allusion, Agmen quidda^ malorum, ut etiam dicitur, lerna vel Ilias malorum.
Mer. Vexationes turmatim me invadunt Drus. Sagittandi and militandi verba saepe
and eleganter in scripturis declarant Dei contra impios per flagella conflictum.
Changes and war are upon me; that is, such changes as there is in war, when
first one regiment charges, and another seconds, and so regiment after
regiment, company after company, file after file, now the right wing, and then
the left, at last the reserve. Thus the Lord seemed to bring up his bands and
troops of afflictions to assault Job in turns and changes, till his whole army
had assaulted and skirmished with him. Those military terms of shooting and
warring, are frequent figures in Scripture, showing how God conflicts with
sinful, weak man, after the manner of men. Observe hence,

First, That afflictions are at the command of God.

He marshals and disposes them, as armies are by their Generals in times of
war. He can say to one affliction, as the Centurion to his soldiers, Go, and
it goes, to another, Come, and it comes, to a third, Do this, and it does it.
All armies of sorrow are led by God in chief. They charge whom he pleases, and
where he pleases, high or low, person or nation: if he gives the word they
fall on presently, nor will they return till he orders their retreat.

Secondly, Note, That the Lord has variety of ways and means to afflict and
try his people.

Changes and war are against me. The Physician has variety of medicines for
his sick patient, if one removes not the distemper, he changes, and tries a
second. There is nothing so full of changes, as war, not only in regard of
the uncertainty of events, but variety of means, new forces being raised, and
new stratagems used, from day to day. Have thou but one blessing? said Esau to
his father Isaac; the hand of man may be straightned to one blessing, or one
blow, but the hand of God is never straightned. As he has store of blessings,
so of blows, and can give both out, both in degree and kind diversified; if
one army of evils does not humble and conquer us to his obedience, he can
quickly levy a new one. All creatures will come in to his help, if he do but
set up his standard, or give command to beat his drum. He changed his armies
ten times against Pharaoh; Pharaoh had indeed changes and war upon him, yet
no change wrought in him: therefore the war was changed, till he was destroyed.
This war with ^ob was not a destroying one, but it was a terrible one, so
terrible that he cries out in the language of his former complaints, Wherefore
then have thou brought me forth out of the womb?

JOB Chap. 10. Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Wherefore then have thou brought me
forth out of the womb? O that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me!

I should have been as though I had not been, I should have been carried from
the womb to the grave.

Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone, that I may take comfort a
little,

Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness, and the
shadow of death;

A land of darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of death, without
any order, and where the light is as darkness.


THese five verses are the conclusion of Jobs reply to Bildad; there are four
things remarkable in them.

First, He complains that ever he lived a day or an hour in the world, at the
beginning of the 18th verse, Wherefore then have thou brought me forth out of
the womb?

Secondly, He wishes that he had died speedily: seeing he could not have that
(supposed) happiness not to be born into the world, his next request is, that
he might not have stayed long in the world; he would not have appeared as a
man, no nor as a child, but that birth and burial might have been contiguous,
not knowing the distance of a day, verse. 18, 19. O that I had given up the
ghost, and no eye had seen me! I should have been as though I had not been, I
should have been carried from the womb to the grave.

Thirdly, He shows, that however he had been disappointed of both those
votes, yet he could not live long; As if he had said, Though I have found much
trouble in the world, yet I shall not much trouble the world, the time of my
departure is at hand, I have lived most of my days already, and all my days
are not many, verse. 20. Are not my days few?

Fourthly, He entreats and sueth that the few days of those few days which
he had to live, might be good days, Are not my days few? Cease then, and let
me alone, that I may take comfort a little, before I go whence I shall not
return, etc.

The 18th and 19th verses carry a sense very like to that which has been
opened at the third Chapter of this book, where Job complained of his birth,
and was troubled that he had the favor of a being, Sui obliviscitur ut supra
vi doloris. Merc.
(because he found such an il-being) in the world. His passion runs out here
into a vehement expostulation,

Wherefore have thou brought me forth out of the womb? As there, Why died I not
from the womb? ver. 11.
Job puts the Question, and demands an account of God, Why he came out of the
womb? There are three sorts of questions.

First, Such as arise from a desire of necessary information; It Is good to ask
that we may learn.

Secondly, Such as arise from a needless curiosity. It Is not good to ask what
no duty enjoins us to learn.

Thirdly, Such as arise from pure passion, or rather, from mudded perturbation,
not so much desiring information from others, as to vent our selves. It Is very
ill to ask when we care not to learn. Such is the question here put (say some)
a passionate question, arising from the fume and vapors of a distempered
mind, desiring to ask, rather then to be answered, Wherefore have thou brought
me forth out of the womb? As if he had said, Was I born only to be an object of
evil? Came I into the world to be made a sad spectacle to the world, to Angels
and to men? Have my days been lengthened out on purpose, that my troubles
might be lengthened? Such a troubled sense there is in these words. The
complaints of Saints may sometimes look like the blasphemies of wicked men.

Job complains of his birth, and seems forgetful of all former benefits.

Hence observe,

Dum ita agis mecum, fit ex beneficio tuo no^ beneficium Coc.
When we want the mercies we would have, we grow angry with the mercies which
we have had.

David speaks it to the praise of God, Thou art he that tookest me out of my
mothers womb (Psalm. 22.) Job speaks it as a damage to himself, Wherefore have
thou brought me forth out of the womb?

Secondly, observe,

We are ready to think we live to no end, if we have not our own ends.

That Is the voice of nature, and so far as nature prevails in us, it speaks in
us.

Thirdly, Man is apt to say, there is no reason for that, of which he sees not
the reason.

When we are at our wits end, and at our reasons end, we think there is an end
of all wisdom and reason, as if neither God nor man could give an account
beyond ours, or answer, when we are non-plust.

Yet we may conceive Job had a further sense, which yields a more mollifying
meaning of these words, for though he (as all the Saints in the old Testament)
was much in the dark about the benefit of sufferings, which the Gospel has now
more clearly revealed to us, and called us unto; yet he might have some other
intendment in these expostulations: We may charitably suppose him troubled that
he was in a condition of life, which (as he conceived) hindered the main end of
his life, the glorifying of God, Wherefore have thou brought me forth out of
the womb? As if he had said, Lord, I am in a state, wherein I know not how to
honor thee, and then what is my life worth unto me? Thy justice is greatly
obscured toward me, many are ready to say, for my sake, that surely thou art a
hard Master, leaving them to reap evil who have sowed good, and paying thy
faithful and most active servants their wages in sufferings. And as for mercy,
I taste little of that; Nunc in me justitia tua obscuratur, and ego non sentio
fructum gratiae tuae, qua in re ergo gloriae tuae inservire potest vita mea?
Coc.
comforts are dainties with me: my cup is bitter, my sorrows are multiplied:
Now when neither justice nor mercy move visibly toward me, how shall I
glorify thee? And wherein can my life be useful or advantageous to thee? Am I
not like a broken vessel, a vessel wherein there is no pleasure? Wherefore then
was I brought forth out of the womb?

This exposition teaches us, That

A godly man thinks he lives to no purpose, if he do not live to the praise
and glory of God.

God has made all things for himself, and it is the design of the Saints to be
for him. While that end is attained they can easily part with all their own;
and where that is crossed, they cannot be pleased in the attainment of any of
their own. The interest of Christ is not only their greatest, but all their
interest. Any stop of, much more a disservice to this, causes an honest heart
to cry out with Job, and ('it is easy to conceive) it caused Job to cry out,
Wherefore then have thou brought me forth out of the womb?

O that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me!
O that I had given up the ghost!
(...) Facilem and sine dolor mortem innuit.
The original signifies usually a gentle and an easy kind of death; Giving up
the ghost, is not a pulling or a violent rending of life away from us, but our
laying it down, our surrender or willing resignation of it. Some read this
clause, not as we optatively, O that I had given up the ghost! but
declaratively, Wherefore have thou brought me out of the womb? for then I had
quickly given up the ghost. But rather take it as a wish, O that I had given up
the ghost!

And no eye had seen me. That is (say some) I would I had died before I had
been born, for then no eye had seen me. Or more generally thus. O that I had
died speedily, so speedily that I might have gone out of the world, before I
was observed to have been there: Who delights to see the dead? especially a
child dead-born, or dying as soon as born? Sarah was the delight of Abraham's
eyes, whiles she lived, and yet as soon as she was dead, he gives any money for
a sepulcher to bury her out of his sight. Or again, Job that he might show how
little he regarded life, disregards that which is most desirable in life.
Innatum est omnibus ut cognosci se velint, and studio teneantur res alias
cognoscendi.
Man naturally desires, To see, and to be seen, to know, and to be known. That
which carries a great part of the world, is an affectation to be pointed at,
and taken notice of, as Some-bodies in the world. He that lives unseen in the
world, is as a man out of the world, or as one buried alive. To be in prison is
a great punishment, because a prisoner lives out of view; he cannot freely see
or be seen. Job wishes no eye had seen him, rather then his eyes should have
seen so much evil, or that others should have seen him in the midst of so many
evils.

Hence note,

First, That undue and unreasonable questions, are usually followed and fruited
with undue and unreasonable wishes.

Having put the question, Wherefore have thou brought me forth out of the womb?
See what a wish comes upon it, O that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had
seen me! He that takes undue liberty to speak or do, knows not where he shall
restrain himself. They who always act as far as they may, shall often act
beyond what they ought. And they who act at all beyond what they are directed,
are often carried beyond what themselves intended.

Secondly, Observe, Man had rather not be seen at all, then to be seen
miserable.

To be seen is a great part of the comfort of this life, but who would not
gladly exchange it for ease in obscurity? It is an honor to be seen, but who
would be seen clothed with dishonor? When Christ is prophesied of, as the
great pattern of patience and self-denial, it is said, He hid not his face from
shame and spitting, Isa. 50.6. To be a spectacle of misery, is to some worse
then their being miserable. They would count it a piece of their happiness, to
be unhappy in a corner; and their troubles half removed, if they might steal
their troubles. As to be in a good estate, and to know that we are so, makes
our estate better to us: So to be in an ill estate, and to be known that we are
so, makes it to some tempers a great deal worse. As the hypocrite hopes when he
sins, that no eye sees him: so many wish when they suffer, O that no eye had
seen me!

Verse 19. I should have been, as though I had not been, I should have been
carried from the womb to the grave.
Some read this verse also as a wish; O that I had been, as though I had never
been! O that I had been carried from the womb to the grave.

He confirms what he had said, by a further declaration of his condition, in
case he had not been brought forth out of the womb, or had died before he had
been seen in the throng of the world; Why, what then Job? Then, I should have
been as though I had not been, and my afflictions should never have had any
being: so speedy a death had quitted me of all the evils of my life. I should
not have sipt or tasted, Est and non est Octimestris partus. Hippocr.
much less have drunk so deep of this cup of sufferings. It is said of
Abortives who die in the womb, and of such as die immediately after they are
born, They are, and they are not; they who live but a moment in nature, shall
live for ever. A life here less then a span long, Abortivu^ pro non nato
ce^setur in jure.
will be eternity long: yet as to the world, such a life is no life, such a
being no being. Lawyers say, They who die before, or as soon as they are born,
are reckoned as unborn; they make no change in states, they never had a name,
or an interest in the world, and so they go for nothing in the world. The
Prophet Obadiah (verse 16.) threatens Edom, That they shall be as though they
had not been; that is, they must perish, and their memorial with them. Some
are so thrust out of the world, that they shall be, as if they had never been;
and some come into the world so, that their being was, as if they had never
been.

A short life is by common estimation no life.

As in heaven, where we shall live for ever, we shall be, as if we had ever
been: So on earth, some live so little, that they are as if they never were:
That which has an eternal duration, and shall never end, is as if it had ever
begun; and that which is but of a short duration and ends quickly, is as if it
had never begun. The reason why the fruit of sin goes for nothing, is,
because the pleasure of sin is but for a season, and that a very little
season, What fruit have ye of those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? That
is, Ye have no fruit, or your fruit was nothing: we may say of all the
pleasures of sin, their cradle is their grave, or more near Jobs language, they
are carried from the womb to the grave. So he speaks next of himself, I should
have been carried from the womb to the grave.

I should have passed without noise or notice. There would have been little
trouble with me in the world, I should have made but one journey, and that a
short one. The speech is proverbiall: From the womb to the grave, Proverbiale
est, ab u^ero ad sepulchrum, cum quis simulac natus est moritur.
is the motto of Infant-death. The Septuagint read it as an expostulation,
Wherefore was I not carried out from the womb to the grave? It would have been
a happiness to me, either not to have been at all, or to have had a being but
equivalent (in common account) to a not being. And thus it had been with me, if
my first step out of my mothers womb, had been into the womb of that
grandmother the earth. Job is often upon the same point, renewing his desires
after death: he did so (as has been touched) at the third Chapter, and at the
sixth, and now he is as fierce and fresh upon it as ever.

A godly man may often discover the same infirmity.

Whilst the same stock of corruption remains in us, it is productive of the
same corrupt fruit. There is a seminall virtue in the earth, look how often it
is plowed and sowed, so often it sends forth a crop; there is a seminall virtue
in the earthly part of man, which makes him to put forth evil, as often as
occasion plows, and temptation sows his heart.

Verse 20. Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone, that I may take
comfort a little.


Are not my days few? There is a difference in the reading: (...) Primo
adjungunt colo. Numquid non paucitas dierum me^rum finiatur brevi? Vulg. Annon
pauci dies mei cessantes, sc. deficientes? ^arg. Annon paulisper diebus meis
cessabit? Ju^.
Many translatours join the verb Cease, with this clause: so that whereas we
read, Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone; they read, Will not
my few days cease? then let me alone that I may take comfort a little. M
Broughton, and he has a second, varieth yet further, Will not he leave off a
little in my days? Instead of applying the word few unto days, Are not my
days few? they (taking in the verb) join it to the act of God, Will not he
leave off a little in my days? That is, Will not God forbear a little to
trouble me? Will not he give me a breathing time in my days, which are but
few? Surely he will, he will not be so strict with me, I doubt not of a
gracious answer to this humble petition.

But rather follow our sense, and let the first clause be a question, Are not
my days few? And then the next words are an inference or use which he makes
from it, Cease then, and let me alone, etc.

Are not my days few?] The question does affirm, Yes, my days are few. The
sense may be made out one of these three ways, and not unprofitably by all
three,

First thus, As a justification of his former wishes and desires to die: Have I
not upon good reason wished that I had never lived? Who can be in love with a
short life, and a long trouble? Are not my days few? Or

Secondly, As an answer to such as objected against him for wishing he had not
lived: Do you know (said they) what you have said? Is life such a small matter
with you? Or do you understand what you desire, when you desire death? Is
deformed death become a beauty in your eye? What ever you think of it, life is
a precious jewel? Yes (says Job) I know very well what life is, and I know of
I had died before I was born, I had not lost much life; What Is the life of a
few daiis? The life of eternity is worth the having and esteeming; but why
should you think I have wished away a matter of moment, when I wished away this
life? For are not my days few?

Whence observe, The loss of a whole life in this world, is no great loss.

We cannot lose a great deal, when all is but a little, nor many, when we have
but a few in all. He loses but a few days, who dies the first day; then,
what have we got, when we have lived according to the calculation of nature,
many days? Job makes this an argument to satisfy others about his wish, that
all his days had bin cut off: May not we satisfy our selves by it, when a
piece, or a part, an end, the worst end of our days is cut off? What if we
have abated ten or twenty of those years which possibly we might have lived;
Twenty years are but a few days; for, a whole life, consisting of three
twenties and ten, is but a few days. This we are sure of, that the few days
we loose on earth, shall never be missed in heaven; it will be no abatement to
our comfort there, to think we lived but a little here; all the sorrows of this
life will be swallowed up in the next, and so will our sudden parting with this
life.

Thirdly, The clearest sense of these words [Are not my days few?] is, that
they are the ground of a petition for the mitigation of his troubles; As if he
had said, Lord, I have but a while to live in the world, my days are few,
therefore do not think much that I should have a little comfort and refreshing
in these my days; Consider my life is short, O that thou would slack thy
hand, and yield me some ease and comfort in this short life. He had used this
argument at the seventh Chapter, verse 16. Let me alone for my days are
vanity; Paucitas dieru^, i. e. paucissimi dies Abstracta significationem
incitant and acuunt. (...) Imminutionem decrementumque significat. q d nunquam
crescit, sed descrescit, and ad angustias majores indies reducitur, and in
perpetua consumptione evanescit. Bold. (...) Quanti aevi ego Mont.
here, Let me alone, for my days are few. The fewness of our days is one of
the vanities of our days.

Are not my days few? The Hebrew is, Is not fewness of days mine? Yes,
That Is my portion. Abstracts often increase, and sometimes they diminish the
sense. Here the sense is diminutive; as if he had said, My days are so far
from many, that they are fewness it self: Mine are not increasing and growing,
but declining and abating days. My days are going down, they are brought into
a lesser, and a narrower compass every day. The Chaldee renders, Are not my
days ceasing? My days fade and wear out every day, Show me how short my life
is (closer to the original) how soon ceasing I am, or as others, What, or of
what quantity mine age is, how transitory, how temporary I am.

Cease then, and let me alone. Some read it in the third person, Therefore let
him cease from me, and let me alone; we in the second, Cease then, (...)
Deponat a me, sc. flagellum aut supplicium. Deponat exercitus suos procul a me,
Jun.
and let me alone. Job looks upon himself as one besieged and straightened with
afflictions: Now (says he) I beseech thee raise thy siege, and draw off thy
force from me: or if thou will not make a final peace with me, yet grant me a
cessation, let me have a truce for a limited time, let me not have such
continual alarms, or be forced to stand armed continually; Let me rest, says
the Septuagint; Issachar stooped to burdens, because he desired rest. Some are
so burdened that they cannot rest, how much soever they desire it. Job desires
God to give him rest, because his days were few.

Hence observe,

First, It is an argument moving the Lord to forbear sending us many troubles,
because we have but few days.

Thus David prays ( Psalm. 89.47.) Remember how short my time is, wherefore
have thou made all men in vain? Lord, I have but a few days, and shall my
days be nothing but clouds and darkness? The same argument is used, Psalm. 39.
ult. O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no
more. I shall soon be gone, let me have some ease, while I stay here. Observe,

Secondly, That except the Lord withdraw his hand, nothing in the world can
give us ease.

Cease then, and let me alone that I may take comfort; as if he had said, If
thine hand be upon me, in vain do friends comfort me; creatures offer me their
help in vain, Cease then, and let me alone.

From the matter of his argument, Observe,

The life of man is short.

It is a common theme, and every man thinks he can declaim upon it, and speak
to it; but there are very few can live to, or act by it. A multitude of
instructions arise to us from the fewnes of our days: And did men know indeed
that their days are few, their evil deeds would not be so many, and their good
would be more.

Again, That man's days are so few, yields us not only many instructions, but
many wonders. Is it not strange that we who have but a few days in our lives,
should have so many afflictions in our lives? That we should have few days and
many sorrows? Is it not strange that we should have few days in our lives, and
many cares about our lives? Many cares and few days, yea many cares upon one
day! Thou art careful about many things, says Christ to Martha. Is it not
strange that we should have so few days, and so many sins? Few days and
innumerable sins, so many sins as no man can number them, and so few days that
a child may number them? And is not this a wonder above all the rest, that we
should have but a few days, and yet be gravelled and puzl'd so as we are in
numbering them? A little humane learning will serve to number our days, but we
need a great deal of spiritual learning to number them. A little study in the
Mathematics will do it, but we need more then study, experience in Divinity
before we can do it, and yet neither study nor experience can do it, unless
God himself be our Tutor, He only can teach us so to number our days, that we
may apply our hearts unto wisdom. We shall commence fools at last, if we have
not one wiser then the wisest upon earth, to teach us this truth.

That I may take comfort a little. (...) Roboravit, confortavit, respiravit,
vires collegit.
The word which we translate to take comfort, signifies such comfort as they
find, who being heated extremely, and extreme thirsty, come to drink at a
fountain of sweet waters. The Vulgar reads it, Let me alone that I may mourn
a little; yet taking in the former sense, He seems thus to explain himself: If
the Lord would let me alone. I would go and ease my self with complaining, the
waters of my head, the fountain of mine eyes would be a refreshing to my
wearied soul. Sorrows are sometimes joyous, and moderate mourning gives the
mind a reviving.

But rather, Take it in the general, Let me alone that I may comfort my self,
and that these sorrows may abate; I desire to rally, and recollect my scattered
thoughts a while, and so take in somewhat of the sweetness of this life before
I die, Si dolorem amov re non vult, respirandi locu^ aliquem and spacium
concedat. Merc.
Cease from me for some refreshing, says M. Broughton. I do not expect much,
Lord, let me have some before I go, whence I shall not return.

Here observe one common principle of nature,

Man desires his own good. A well-being, as well as a being. What is there in
life for nature to prize, if there be nothing but sorrow in it?

Secondly, Observe, That great sufferings make us very modest in our demands.

Job was in great affliction, and now a little comfort would go a great way
with him. When the people of Israel were in bondage under Pharaoh and his
taskmasters, and had heavier burdens laid upon them, they do not so much as
move for a total release from their task, but modestly complain, There is no
straw given unto thy servants, and they say to us, Make brick; As if they had
said, Let us have straw, and we are willing to make brick. A poor man cries out
for a halfpenny, for a farthing, not for hundreds or thousands. He that is
ready to starve will not ask good cheer, or a plentiful feast, but let me have
a crust of bread, or a little water. When Dives was in hell, what did he desire
of Abraham? Did he beg to come into his bosom? Does he say, Lazarus is in a
good place, let me come too? No, he desired but a drop of water, and what was a
drop of water to flames of fire? O how would it delight the damned in hell to
think of a cessation, but for one hour from their pain! What a joy would it be
unto them, if it should be told them, that a thousand, or ten thousand years
hence, they should have one good day, or that they might be let alone to take
comfort a little! They who are low, make low demands. Think of this ye that
enjoy much comfort, and swim in rivers of pleasure. Let not the great
consolations of God be small to you, when you hear Job thus instant and
importunate for the smallest, Let me alone, that I may take comfort a little.

But why is he in such haste for a little comfort? One ground is in the former
words, My days are few; and he backs it with a second in the next. If it come
not quickly, it will come too late. I am ready to take my last journey,
Therefore let me take a little comfort.

Verse 21. Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of
darkness, and the shadow of death.


Before I go. That is, before I die. Death is a going out of the world:
Periphrasis moriendi, qui m ritur dicitur abire, unde abitionem pro morte
veteres usurparunt, Drus.
Christ intimates his death under this notion ( Joh. 16.7.) If I go the
Comforter will come. And, I go from you, etc. Dying is a journeying from one
region to another. Death is a changing of our place, though not of our company.
Before I go; Whether?

Whence I shall not return. That Is a strange journey indeed. That which
pleases us in our longest journeys while we live, is a hope of returning to
our own homes again. But when we die we take a journey from whence there is no
returning. Not return? Shall not man return when he dies? Is death an
everlasting departure, an eternal night? No, Man shall return, but he shall
not return to such a life or state as he had before. Fidem resurrectionis non
laedit. Pin.
He is gone for ever out of this world, and out of all worldly interests. Job
believed a resurrection, or a returning from the grave by the power of God, and
he knew there was no returning by the power of nature, or by the help of any
creature: In that reference, we go, whence we shall not return. So David speaks
of his dead Infant, I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me, Indicat
nullam esse vim in natura cui pareat mors, and cui receptacula animarum
obedia^t, reddereque coga^tur, quem semel receperunt. Pin.
2 Samuel 12.25. When once we are shut up in those chambers of death, and made
prisoners in the grave, though all the Princes in the world send warrants for
our release, we cannot get released. The pertinacy and stiffnesse of the grave
is such as yields to none. We are fast shut up when we are shut up there. Love
and the grave will hardly part with that, which they have closed with, and are
possessed of. The grave is one of those three things which are never satisfied,
or say it is enough, Prove. 30.15. And as it is unsatiable in receiving, so it
is as close in keeping, it will part with nothing. A grave is the Parable of a
covetous man; he is greedy to get, and watchful to hold: when his money goes
into his purse, he says it shall not return: The grave has a strong appetite
to take down, and as strong a stomach to digest. Till God (as I may so speak)
by his mighty power gives the grave a vomit, and makes the earth stomack-sick
with eating man's flesh, Veteres Romani dicere solebant, ab^it and reversurus
est, resurrectionem carnis haud obscure innuentes. Ter. Salve aeternum mihi
maxim Palla Aeternumque vale Virg. Aenead.
it will not return one morsel. At the resurrection this great Eater shall cast
up all again. And as they who take strong vomits, are put into a kind of
trembling convulsion, all the powers of the body being shaken; such will the
prognostics be of the resurrection; there was an earthquake when Christ
arose, God made the earth shake, and commanded it to give back the prisoner,
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it. And when God speaks
the word, it will not be possible for the grave to hold us prisoners: till then
it will. It was usual among the Ancients, to say of a dead friend, He is gone,
and he will come again, intimating a resurrection. Heathens not knowing nor
believing it, call earth, Valiant qui inter nos dissidiu^ volunt. Terent.
An eternal leave-taking or farewell, never to meet again.

Observe from this description of the grave,

That the statutes of death are unrepealable.

Death is an everlasting banishment from the world, I shall go^ whence I shall
not return. This may lie very sad upon their spirits, Animula vagula, blandula,
etc. quae nunc abibis in loca? A^r.
who have not a better place then the world to go to, when they go from the
world. To go whence we shall never return, and yet where we cannot endure to be
a moment, is deepest misery: Such a man cannot choose but set out with a sad
heart. And that is the reason why wicked men, whose consciences are awakened, go
so unwillingly to this sleep, they know whither they are going, only they know
they cannot return. Make ye friends ('it is Christ's counsel) of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail they may receive you into everlasting
habitations (Luke 10.9.) Mammon of unrighteousness, that is, say most
Interpreters, Mammon gotten unrighteously; but surely Christ would not teach
any to make men our friends, by that which makes God our enemy. Quod est falsum
(...) ab Hellenistis usu Hebraeoru^ dicitur. Hens. exercit. Sacr.
They translate better, who render it, Make ye friends of the false or
unfaithful Mammon, that is, of that Mammon which will deceive and leave you
shortly, therefore make you friends of it, while you have it; that when ye
fail, that is, when you die or go out of the world, they may receive you, that
is, ye may be received into everlasting habitations; leave not this habitation,
till ye have got interest in a better. The Saints arm themselves against death
by this argument, We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hand, eternal in
the heavens (2 Cor. 5.1.) We know there is no return to buildings made with
hands, we must leave our houses for ever, our lands for ever, and our relations
for ever, but we are assured of a building of God, an house not made with hand,
eternal in the heavens. This supported their hearts, when their earthly houses
were falling.

Job having thus described death it self, proceeds to describe the grave, which
is the place of death, or the Black-^all of the King of terrors. Would you
know what this place is, from whence there is no returning? It is, says he (in
the close of this verse) even the land of darkness, and the shadow of death.
And in the last verse,

Verse 22. A land of darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of
death, without any order, and where the light is as darkness.
This is the place where death dwells, or the seat of death, and here is a
description of it, which exceeds the fancy of Poets, and the rhetoric of all
Heathen Orators. The Spirit of God rises to the height of eloquence, in
discovering that unpleasant region.

This subterranean Geography, gives a double character of it. 1. A land of
darkness. 2. A land of the shadow of death; both which are aggravated by their
additions. It is a land of darkness, but not of any ordinary darkness, It is a
land of darkness, as darkness it self. It is a land of the shadow of death,
not of an ordinary shadow of death, but of the shadow of death, 1. Without any
order. 2. Where the light is as darkness.

A land of darkness. That is, abounding with darkness, a land where darkness
is the staple, and the only commodity to be had. Darkness is the hangings and
ornament of the house of death. The grave is elsewhere called, A land of
forgetfulness (Psalm. 88.12.) because there all things are forgotten. We read (
Jer. 12.5.) of a land of peace, that is, a land where peace abounds, a land in
every corner whereof peace springs and grows up. Canaan (Deuteronomy. 8.8.) was
called, A good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths, that
spring o^t of the valleys and hills, A land of wheat and barley, and vines, and
fig trees, and pomegranates; A land of oil olive, and of honey: That is, a land
where these good things were natural and plentiful. A land where neighbor
Nations might furnish themselves, and freight their ships with those
commodities. Cum sepulchru^ dicitur terra tenebrarum, ibi tanquam in nativo
solo obs^uritas intelligitur provenire.
In such a sense Job calls the grave, A land of darkness; As if he had said,
Would you know what the merchandise of the grave is? I will tell you, it is
darkness, there you may have darkness as much as you desire, and besides that
nothing, how much so ever you desire it.

This shows the terror of death to a mere natural understanding. Many are
afraid to be at all in the dark, how much more to be always in darkness: As
light is put for joy, so darkness for sorrow. Darkness, whether spiritual or
natural, is afflictive. Dark houses are unpleasant, what then is a land of
darkness? The face of a man is darkened with sorrow, and joy is the light of it.
It has bin observed that some great Princes have had light beaming out from
their eyes. Augustus had so sparkling an eye, Suetonius in Augusto, c, 7 9.
that few could look upon him: his eye cast forth rays like the Sun, dazzling
the beholders. Good, gracious Princes cast out beams of favor upon their
people, which refresh them as the light. Death and the grave have no light in
their faces. Death looks black and grim, hell is extremest darkness, and the
pains of hell are chains of darkness.

And of the shadow of death. There is more then the shadow of death in the
grave, death it self dwells there. The words sound an abatement of the sense,
Terra cujus palpebrae sunt, sicut caligo umbrarum mortis. T^rg.
but indeed they heighten it. The shadow of death is thick darkness, thickest
darkness, the very strength of darkness. This shadow is the substance of death,
or death with addition of greatest deadlines.

Job having given the land this dreadful name, A land of darkness, and of the
shadow of death, makes it yet more dreadful by this further explication.

A land of darkness, as darkness it self] Or, (...)
A land of darkness, which looks like darkness. The word signifies
weariness, restlessenesse, and vexation of spirit. To be in a dark condition,
is to be in a wearisome condition. The Vulgar reads it, A land of misery. Some
darkness has a degree of light mingled with it, but this is pure or unmixed
darkness, darkness in it is proper hue, darkness it self. When a man of skill
acts skilfully, we say, he acts like himself; and when a wicked man does very
wickedly, we say, he does like himself. The darkness of the grave looks like
nothing but it self.

Every evil the more like it is to it self, the worse it is. When the Apostle
would show sin in its colors, he calls it sinful sin (Romans 7.13.) Sin by
the commandment became exceeding sinful, the commandment caused it to look
like it self. Sorrowful sorrow, and painful pain are the worst of pains and
sorrows. There is sorrow which may consist with some joy and pain, which may
cohabit with some ease: but he that has sorrow like sorrow it self, and pain
like pain it self, has the extremity of both. Thus also every good, the more
like it is to it self, the better it is; holiness like it self, is the purest
holiness; grace like it self, is the sweetest grace. When a holy man works
like himself, his work is best. God is ever like himself in all he does, and
every thing we do is then best, when it is done most like to what God does.

And of the shadow of death, without any order, or, The shadow of death, and
not orders. (...) Et non ordines.
The word which we translate order, is frequent in the Rabbis: the holy Text
has it only in this place, and here in the plural number, A land of
darkness, and the shadow of death, and without any orders, a land unordered.
There Is no government, no method in the grave. And if it has no order, then it
has nothing in it but confusion, nothing but disorder. That the grave, or the
state of death is without any order, may be understood two ways,

Hebraei ad vices diei and noctis, aestatis and hiemis etc. referu^t. Expertem
vicissitudinem. Jun.
First, Without order, because it has no changes, or vicissitudes in it, there
is no difference in the grave between night and day, winter and summer, hot and
cold, wet and dry, between the rising and setting of the Sun: This is the order
which God has set in nature; and when the flood had put all things into a
kind of confusion, God promised, That seed-time and harvest, and cold and
heat, summer and winter, day and night should not cease, that is, there should
be an everlasting order continued in the creature. The dead know none of those
changes and vicissitudes; as much of the vanity, so some of the comforts of
this life consist in changes; but all is alike in death.

Secondly, There is no order in going to the grave; men do not keep to a rule
in dying, nor observe their ranks. The old go not always first, and then the
young; the great before, and the mean following after. Death has no master of
the Ceremonies; but takes promiscuously, here a child, and there a man, here a
rich man, and there a beggar. And as there is no order in going thither, so
none when we are there: the grave mingleth the dust, and bones of one with
another. We cannot distinguish the rich man's dust from the dust of the poor,
nor the bones of Kings from those of the lowest subject. Though rich men are
buried in more eminent places, and Kings under stately Monuments, though their
Tombs differ from their inferiors, yet their bones do not. An old Philosopher
was observed searching a caemitery, and prying busily among the Tombs, and
being asked, what he looked for, answered, I come to see if I can find the
dust of rich men, and the bones of Princes, but I cannot see which is which;
the dust of the rich and of the poor, of Princes and pesants, are all alike to
my eye.

And seeing Job makes this an aggravation of the misery of death, that it is
without order; We may observe,

That order has an excellency, and a beauty in it.

The less order there is in any place or state, the worse it is, and where is
no order, there it is worst of all. Civil order is the beauty of
Commonwealths, and spiritual order is the beauty of the Church. The Apostle
rejoiced to behold the order of the Colossians, as well as their faith ( Col.
2.5.) His charge to the Corinthians is, Let all things be done decently and in
order (1 Cor. 14.40.) He had warned them ( ver. 33.) to take heed of disorder,
because God is not the God of confusion, but of peace; where order is not kept,
the peace cannot be kept. Death is evil, and that is without order; hell is
worst of all, and there is no order at all. It is a kind of death to see any
disorder, and a very hell to see all in disorder.

And where the light is as darkness. Some read by the verb, where it shines
like darkness, or thus, (...) a^radice (...) Floruit, splenduit fulgorem and
magnifi^entiam exercuit. Tenebrescet, ficut caligo Mon. Quod in ea
sp^endidissimum est caligini fim le est.
where it lights like darkness. The Vulgar paraphrases rather then
translates, Where there is everlasting horror. Job said before, it was a land
of darkness, and of darkness, like darkness it self: yet now he seems to
affirm, that there is light in the grave, and if there be, how is that darkness
like darkness it self? His meaning is, that which looks most like to light in
the grave, is darkness, and it is therefore darkness, like darkness it self,
because if you can imagine any thing to have a show of light in the grave, that
very light is as darkness. When the Apostle would invincibly argue the infinite
wisdom and strength of God, he says, The foolishness of God is wiser then
men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men (1 Cor. 1.25.) God is only
wise, only strong, how then speaks this Apostle of the foolishness or weakness
of God? His meaning is, look what act soever of God appears to man, as having
foolishnes or weakness in it, even that foolishnes is wiser, and that weakness
stronger then men. In what sense Paul says, The foolishnes of God is wisdom,
the weakness of God is strength, or (which is all one) the darkness of God is
light: in the same Job says, The light of the grave is darkness. For as God is
wisdom, and in him there is no foolishnes at all, strength, and in him there is
no weakness at all, light, and in him there is no darkness at all: So Job
supposes of the grave, that in it there is darkness, and no light at all, while
he affirms, the light found there is as darkness. Christ speaks near this
language of Job (Mat. 6.23.) If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness,
how great is that darkness! he had said before, The light of the body is the
eye, and if the eye be single, the whole body is light, that is, if a man have
right aims and pure ends, these will keep him right in all his course, but if
his eye be dark, his ends base, how base will his actions be, how great his
darkness? We may argue thus to the point in hand, if the light of the grave be
darkness, how great is that darkness? The Prophet Amos sets forth great changes
in States and Kingdoms by prodigious changes in the air, Lo, he makes the
morning darkness, Cha. 4.15. Again, He turns the shadow of death into the
morning, and makes the day dark with night, Chap. 5.8.

When either civil or moral good is turned into evil, we are past all hope of
good; if once our light be dark, we must expect nothing but darkness. The best
works of hypocrites will be found wickedness, how wicked then will they be in
their worst? If their holiness be unclean, how unclean is their unholines? All
their moral light is as darkness, and all their civil light shall be turned
into darkness.

Some (especially Popish) Interpreters understand this description not of the
grave, but of hell. The same word in the Hebrew serves both hell and the grave.
Death looks like hell, and bears much of it is image. What is there in hell, but
the agonies and sweat of death, the pangs and palenes of death? the chains and
bonds of death? The state of the damned in hell, is an eternal act of dying.
And all that Job speaks of the grave, is fulfilled there to the utmost. There
is darkness, like darkness it self, called therefore utter darkness; there is the
shadow of death without any order, there the light is as darkness. But though
the Text be true of hell, yet Job had nothing to do or suffer beyond the grave,
and I shall carry his discourse no further, keeping within those confines: We
may learn,

That death in it self is no way desirable.

Is there any beauty in darkness, in thick darkness, where there is no order, in
darkness, where the very light is darkness? One of the greatest plagues upon
Egypt, Nostri theologizantes ad infernum referu^t, sed Job ad sepulchrum
respexit Merc.
was three days darkness, what then is there in death (naturally considered)
but a plague, seeing it is perpetual darkness?

If death be such in it self, and such to those who die in sin, how should our
hearts be raised up in thankfulness to Christ, who has put other terms upon
death and the grave by dying for our sins! Christ has made the grave look like
a heaven to his. Christ has abolished death, not death it self (for even
believers die) but all the trouble and terror of death, the darkness and the
disorder of it, are taken away. Christ has mortified death, killed death, so
that now death is not so much an opening of the door of the grave, as it is an
opening of the door of heaven. Christ, who is the Sun of righteousness, lay in
the grave, and has left perpetual beams of light there for his purchased
people. The way to the grave is very dark, but Christ has set up lights for
us, or caused light to shine into the way. Christ has put death into a method,
yea Christ has put death into a kind of life, or he has put life into the
death of believers. All the gastlinesse, horror, yea the darkness and death of
death is removed. The Saints may look upon the grave as a land of light, like
light it self; yea as a land of life, like life it self, where there is nothing
but order, and where the darkness is as light.

Jobs reply to Bildad and complaints to God have carried his discourse as far
as death and the grave, he gives over in a dark disordered place, God still
leaving him under much darkness, and many disorders of spirit. As his great
afflictions are yet continued, so his weaknesses continue too. His graces break
forth many times, and sometimes his corruption: Both are coming to a further
discovery, while his third friend Zophar takes up the bucklers, and renews the
battle; upon what terms he engages with Job, how Job acquits himself, and comes
off from that engagement, is the sum of the four succeeding Chapters.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 18. for (...) r. (...) p. 63. l. 5. for 29. r. 19. p. 69 l. 39. for. 7.
r. 29. p. 152. l. 21. for need r needs. p. 201. in marg. for Apollo r. Achilles
in some copies. p. 311 l 17. dele the. p. 331. l. 2. dele in p 430. l 22. for
affliction r. afflictions. p 361. l. 37. for Apologues r. Apologies. ib. l. 38.
put in to after arguments. p. 366. in m^rg. for polluerunt r. polluerent. p.
401. l. 27. for an idol u, r. idols are. p 413. l. 22. for wearied, r. weary.
p. 418. l. 27. dele not.

A TABLE, Directing to some special Points noted in the precedent EXPOSITIONS.
A
ABib, the Jewish month, why so called, p. 73: Adamant, why so called, 160.
Affliction, A good heart give ^ testimony to the righteousness of God, in the
midst of greatest afflictions, p. 14; God lays very sore afflictions upon them
that are very dear to him, p. 279. Afflictions continued cause ^s to suspect
that our prayer is not answered, p. 280. A godly man may be much oppressed with
the fears of affliction, p. ^54. There was not such a spirit of rejoicing in
affliction among the Saints of the old Testament, as is under the New, p. 358.
After purgings God goes on sometimes with afflictions. p. 372. It is lawful to
pray against affliction, p. 399. Affliction removed three ways, p. 400. Great
afflictions carry a charge of wickedness upon the afflicted, p. 432. An
afflicted person is very solicitous about the reason of his afflictions, p.
436. Afflictions are searchers, p. 469. Afflictions affect with shame, p. 573.
Under great afflictions our requests are modest, p. 579. Age, what meant by it?
taken three ways, p. 55. Ancient of days, why God is so called, p. 460.
Angels falling, why their sin greater then man's, and God so irreconcilable to
them, p. 506. Anger in man, what it is, p. 180 How God is angry, p. 181. The
troubles that fall upon the creature are the effects of Gods anger, p. 181. It
is not in the power of man to turn away the anger of God, p. 247. How prayer is
said to do it, 10. The anger of God is more grievous to the Saints, then all
their other afflictions, p. 433. Answering, of two kinds, p. 250. Antiquity,
True antiquity gives testimony to the truth, p. 58. What true antiquity is, p.
59. Appearance, we must not judge by it, p. 360. Arcturus described, p. 209.
Assurance that we are in a state of grace possible, and how wrought, p. 479.
Awake, In what sense God awakes, p. 37, 38. His awaking and sleeping note only
the changes of providence, p. 39. Two things awaken God, the prayer of his
people, and the rage of his enemies, p. 40.
B
Bitterness put for sorest affliction, p. 285. The Lord sometime mixes a very
bitter cup for his own people, p. 286. Body of man the excellent frame of it,
p. 516. Five things show this, p. 517. Body of man an excellent frame, p. 494.
How called a vi^ body, ib. Bones and sinews, their use in the body of man, p.
516.
C
CAbits a sect of babbling Poets p. 7. Cause. Second causes can do nothing
without the first, p. 493. Chambers of the South, what, and why so called, p.
210. Chistu the tenth month among the Jews, why so called, p. 209. Christ is
the medium by which we see God, p. 231 Clay. that man was made of clay,
intimates three things, p. 504. Commands. God can make every word he speaks, a
command p. 192. Every creature must submit to his command, ib. God has a
negative voice of command to stay the motion of any creature, p. 193. Comfort
comes only from God, p. 348. Yet a man in affliction may help on his own
comforts or sorrows, p. 351. Comforts put off upon two ground, ib.
Commendation, To commend our selv^s very unseemly, p. 296, 297. Con^emnation
has three thing in it, which make it very g^evous, p. 432. It is the adjudging
a man to be wicked, p. 434. Conscience, A good conscience to be kept rather
then our lives, p. 303. God and conscience keep a record of our lives, p. 540.
Consent to sin how proper to the wicked, p. 478. Contention, Man naturally
loves it, p. 150. Man is apt to contend with God, p. 152. Especially about
three things, p. 153. Man is unable to contend with God in any thing, p. 154.
Counsels of wicked men not shined on by God, p. 447. Custom in sin, what, p.
476.
D
DAies-man, who, p. 385. why so called, p. 386. Five things belonging to a
daies-man, p. 387. A threefold posture of the daies-man in laying on his hand,
p. 389. No creature can be a daies-man between God and man, only Christ is, p.
392. Days of God not like the days of man, p. 459. Death, Sudden death, or to
be slain suddenly, in what sense a mercy, p. 313. Death, Man dies by statute,
p. 508. Whether death was natural to man or no, p. 509. Death without order
two ways, p. 584. No natural return from it, p. 580. Delight in sin worse
then the committing of sin, p. 478. Despair is the cutting off of hope, p. 88.
Duties, dangerous to lean upon them, p. 97. How hypocrites duties fail, p. 98.
How we must hold duties fast, and how not, p. 99.
E
EAgles flight, time compared to it, p. 339. Earth taken five ways in
Scripture, p. 321. How the earth is given to wicked men, p. 322. Earthquake,
the force of it, p. 183. The cause of it, ib. Eclipse of the Sun when Christ
suffered was miraculous in two respects, p. 190. Egypt called Rahab in
Scripture, and why, p. 245. Eternity is Gods day, p. 462. Difference between
eternity, eviternity and time, ib. God has time enough to do his work in, p.
463. Evildoers who, p. 127. God will not help such, ib. How God concurs with
evildoers, and how not, p. 128, 129. God resists them, a twofold resistance,
p. 131. Example, The examples of others falling into sin, or under punishment,
should be our warnings, p. 31. Eyes of God what, p. 451. Seven differences
between the eyes of God and man, p. 452.
F
FAces of Judges covered, what it imports, p. 326. Face put for anger, etc.
why, p. 346. Faith must have somewhat to lean upon, p. 93. Faith necessary in
prayer, p. 273. Faith in prayer does not deserve an answer, though it get one,
p. 274. Faith has its decaies, page 276. Fear taken two ways, p. 404. Sutream
fear binders speech, p. 405. Forgetfulness of God consists in four things, p.
78. Hypocrites are forgetters of God, p. 79. To forget God is a very great
sin, p. 80. Forgetfulness of God is a mother sin, p. 81. Forgetfulness of
three sorts, p. 345. Some things can hardly be forgotten, others as hardly
remembered, p. 346.
G
GIfts not to be trusted to, p. 95 God gives to men two ways, p. 322. God, The
best way for man to get his heart humbled is to look up to the holiness of
God, p. 148. God is invisible and incomprehensible, p. 229. As God is, so he
works above man, p. 375. The consideration that God is above man, should humble
man, p. 376. The unevenness of man's acting toward God, arises from thoughts
of his evennesse with God, p. 377. 378. Man was made in the image of God, but
God is not in the image of man, p. 380. Man should take heed of measuring God
especially in three things, p. 381. Man cannot contend with God, showed in
seven things, 384. Why it is so fearful to fall into the hands of God, p, 394.
Presence of God both joyful and terrible, p. 402, 403. Man cannot bear the
anger of God; p. 403. God knows the state of every man, p. 471. God knows all
things, in and of himself, p, 473. Godly man shall never be cast away, p. 122.
How God may be said to east his people away, p. 123 God highly honors them, p.
124. A godly man exalts God, while God is casting him down, p. 222. Godly men
are a safety and a support to the places where they live, p. 244. Yet sometimes
God will not be entreated by the godly, ib. A godly man may put the worst cases
to himself, p. 543. Good and bad, alike dealt with by God in outward things, p.
310. Grace acts always like it self, but a gracious man does not, p. 364.
Guilt, Till guilt be removed, fear will not, p. 357. Guilt of sin wearieth the
soul, p. 413.
H
HAnd, Putting forth the hand notes three things in Scripture, p. 125, 126.
Hand put for outward conversation or action, p. 367. Washing hands an emblem of
freedom from guilt, p. 368. Laying on of the hand, what it signifies, p. 387.
Hands, How ascribed to God, his hand implies two things, p. 442. Hands of God
what. p. 489. Hardening the heart, what, 160 A hardening the heart to do either
good or evil, ib. The heart hardened appears in six things, p. 161. A threefold
hardness of heart, p. 162. Man hardens himself against God upon four grounds,
p. 163. Nine degrees or steps of hardness of heart, p. 164, 165. None ever
prospered by hardening themselves against God, p. 166. A hard heart is Satan's
cushion, p. 166. Hatred taken two ways, 137. Wicked men haters of the
righteous, p. 141. Harkening is more then hearing, p. 272. Head, Lifting up of
the head, what it imports in Scripture, 545. Heart the best repository for
truth, p. 70. Heaven, The various acceptations of it in the Scriptures, 199.
Heaven is a building of three stories, p. 200. Help given by God, twofold, p.
128. Holy persons fit for holy duties, p. 34. It is not contrary to free grace,
to say we must be holy, if we would be heard, p. 35. Hopeless, To be so is the
worst condition, p. 84, 88. Where hope fails, endeavor fails also, 364
Humility, a godly man's thoughts are lowest of himself, p, 251. The more
holiness any man has, the more humility he has, p. 547. Hypocrite compared
to a rush in six particulars, p. 75, 76, 77. What an hypocrite is, p. 82. Two
sorts of hypocrites, p. 83. They are filthy, they may be full of hopes, their
hopes will deceive them, p. 84 He shall loath himself, p. 85, 86. his whole
course is nothing but foolishnes, p. 87. He shall be hopeless, 88. His hope
like a spiders-web, showed in five things, p. 90, 91. He has two houses, p.
94. His hopes may be very strong, p. 96. He has three witnesses, ib. All he
trusts to shall fail, p, 97. He may abound in outward blessings, p. 104. They
do all to be seen, p. 105. They may endure persecution a while, p, 105. They
care not whom they wrong, so they may thrive, 108. They are often destroyed in
the height of their prosperity, 110. They shall be forgotten or remembered with
disgrace, p. 113, 114 He may have much joy. p. 115. His joy is most from
outward things, 116. His joy is short, ib.
I
IDol. The same word in Hebrew signifies sorrow and an idol, two reasons of it,
353. Idols, why called Emims, p. 401. Immortality threefold, 510. Instruments
and second causes. What God does by them is to be reckoned as his own act, p.
235. Joy is the portion of the Saints, and they shall receive it in good time,
p, 135. They rejoice in the works of Gods mercies to themselves, judgments on
enemies, 136 Justice and judgment, how they differ, p. 12. Judgment opposed
to three things, ib. Judgment subverted two ways, p. 14. To pervert judgment
what, p. 13, 15. Judgments of God find most men secure, p. 178. Judgment
taken three ways, p. 291. Judgment of God unlike man's in four things, p. 455,
456. God is most exact in justice, p. 15. Three things cause men to pervert
justice. p. 16. Justice of God how acquitted, when he afflicts us without
cause, p. 282. Justice or righteousness twofold, p. 148. Justification cannot
be by works, p. 155 299. Self-justification will prove self-condemnation, p.
295. Three reasons of it, ib. Justification sure, though the person justified
have doubts concerning it, p. 359. We are never so black in Gods eye, as when
we are whitest in our own, p. 369.
K
KNowledge, Life of man so short that he cannot get much knowledge, p. 64. We
should have humble thoughts of our own knowledge, ib. A godly man is a knowing
man, p. 146. The more we know God, the more humble we are, p. 252. Knowledge of
ourselves twofold, p. 301. Knowledge of God concerning man, and all other
things described, p. 471, 472. 473. etc. It is matter of great consolation to
the Saints, that God knows them, p. 475. His knowledge of us, gives us an
assurance of four things, ib. and 476.
L
LAughter, Filling the mouth with it, what, p. 133. Laughter of two sorts, ib.
How the Lord laughs at the afflictions of his people, opened, p. 315, 316, etc.
Law, Why God calls his laws, judgments, 12. Good laws without good men, never
made a happy people, p. 48. Law-sutes to be avoided, 392. Life, What it is, p.
412. Life taken two ways, ibid. Life may grow to be a burden, p. 419 Grounds
of this burdensomnes of life both in wicked and godly men showed, p. 419, 420,
etc. Life is the gift of God, p. 521. a favor, p. 523. Loathing twofold, p.
86. Lion, God comes forth as a lion against his own servants, p, 555. Losses,
Great losses have great repairs, p 50. Love of God everlasting, 132. Lust, The
shortest time is too long to serve any lust in, p. 5.
M
MAle children, why expressed in the Hebrew by a word which signifies memory,
p. 500. Man is the work of Gods hands, p. 443. Three cautions from it, p. 444.
It moves the Lord to compassion, to tell him we are the work of his hands, p.
445. Memory or remembrance, how ascribed to God, p. 55. It implies two things,
ib. Mercies come in by degrees; we may be over-mercy'd as well as over
afflicted, p. 51. Misery, vid. Afflictions. Mountains, Figurative mountains of
two sorts, p. 171, 172. To remove a mountain, used proverbially for doing the
most difficult things, p. 174. 175.
N
NAtural things are shadows to us of spiritual, p. 74. Negative voice, God
has one upon all creatures, p. 193. Where the negative voice lies, there is
the greatest power, p. 194
O
OLd-men are presumed to know much, p. 69. Oppression twofold, p. 439. Orion
described, p. 209.
P
PAnther, His fiercenes against mankind, p. 141. Pardon of sin is our
acquittance from sin, p. 542. Passions ascribed to God, have no power over him,
p. 247. Path, Our ordinary course of life compared to a path, p. 77, 78.
Perseverance in evil, is worse then the doing of evil, p. 4. Pleiades, what,
and why so called, p. 209. Pillars, Two set up before the flood, p. 56. Pillars
of the earth, what, p. 185. The real pillar of the earth is Gods power, p.
186. Metaphorical pillars of the earth, who, p. 187. Power of God as visible in
changing, as in settling the course of nature, p. 76. Power of God can do
greater things then ever he has done, p. 184. Power of God such, that he needs
not the help of any creature, p. 202. None can rescue from the hand of his
power, p. 236. His power is absolute, p. 241. Prayer, early in the morning, p.
28. Prayer is a seeking of God, ib. God must be sought speedily and diligently,
29. In prayer we must expect all from free grace, p. 30. Prayer of the upright
prevails, p. 35. Holy prayer is certainly and presently heard, p. 39. Prayer
awakens God, p. 40. It should be fervent, p. 40. Prayer cannot stay the anger
of God sometimes against a people, p. 237. How prayer is said to prevail with
God, p. 247. Prayer a reasoning with God, p. 256. Nothing of man so prevailing
with God as prayer, p. 367. Faith in prayer, p. 273. Prayers may be answered,
while we are still afflicted, p. 278. Preservation the work of God, p. 529. He
preserves both natural and spiritual life, p. 530. Pride, we are apt to be
proud of strength, p. 243. Pride comes from ignorance of our selves, 300.
Prognostication by the stars sinful and vain, p. 219. Providence of God orders
the greatest confusions in the world, p. 331. Confusions argue the power of
God, p. 332. Purposes to sin, how proper to wicked men, p. 477.
Q
QUestions, In all disputes and questions we should yield as much as without
wrong to truth may be yielded to, p. 146. Three kinds of questions, p. 570.
Extravagant questions, what fruit they produce, p. 572.
R
REasoning with God twofold, how we may or may not reason with God, p. 255.
Reasoning with god in prayer, p. 256. Remembrancer, A great honor to be so to
God, 501. Saints use to put God in remembrance of four things, ib. etc.
Repentance twofold, sinful and for sin, p. 377. Reproofs are often grounded
upon mistakes, p 6. Righteousness, what it is, p. 44. Righteousness the
mother of prosperity, p. 46. Two things make a Nation an habitation of
righteousness, p. 47, 48. Man is called righteous in a twofold opposition, p.
261. Two sorts of righteousness, p. 262. How a righteous person may answer
God, and how not, 262. Man's righteousness is not pleadable before God, p. 264.
A godly man reckons his righteousness as nothing, p. 265 Rod, What it
signifies in Scripture, p. 395. Affliction called a rod in a threefold
consideration, p. 398.
S
SCourge put for any kind of affliction, p. 312. A sudden scourge, what, p.
313 Sea, The sea in its highest rage is under the command of God, p. 204.
Sealing of a thing imports two things, p. 197. Shaddai, Three significations of
it opened in reference to justice, p. 11. Shadow notes things, p. 66. Man's life
how like a shadow, 67. Shame, The fruit of sin, what shame is, and how caused,
p. 137, etc. Three degrees of Scripture expression about shame, p. 139. To be
clothed with shame notes four things, p. 140. Ship, How time passes like a
ship, p. 337, 338. Sincerity causes us to rate our selves low, p. 407. Sin,
God gives men up to the power of sin, p. 25. Sin is a punishment, p. 25. Sin
shall not go long unpunished by outward evils, p. 27. They who are equal in
sin, may be unequal in punishment, p. 32. How God assists, and how not in the
committing of sin, p. 128, 129. All sin is resisted by God, p. 131, All our
weaknesses are the effects of sin, p. 263. A godly man may relapse into sin, p.
417. Sin is a debt, p. 541. Small and great in a twofold sense, p. 49. We must
not despise small beginnings, p. 52. Sorrow is not easily shaken off, p. 347.
Sovereignty of God, p. 284. Soul taken two ways in Scripture, p. 412. Three
things weary and load the soul, p. 413. Soul and life in man are distinct, 418.
Spirit, A threefold work of the spirit, p. 480. Spirit of man taken three
ways, p 528. Star, what it is, p. 207. The differences of the stars, ib. and
208. The number of the known stars, p. 208. The known stars represented in
forty one images, ibid. All the stars are particularly placed in the heavens
for the good of man, p. 212. Man very apt to commit idolatry with the stars, p.
212, 215. God knows the number and names of all the stars, p. 213. Some stars
more excellent then others, ib. The power and wisdom of God shine forth from
the stars, p. 214. Six things show the power and wisdom of God in making and
ordering the stars, p. 215. Stars can do nothing of themselves, but as God
orders, p 217. They are for signs, but not for infallible signs, p. 219. It is
a duty to study the stars, p. 220. Strength, of two sorts, p. 158. Strength
of God opened, ibid. Strength signified by five distinct words in the Hebrew,
page 289. Strength of God insuperable, p. 289. The strength of God appears in
three things, page 290. Sun at Gods command, p. 189. Shadow of the Sun
going back in Hezekiahs time, p. 193. The rising of the Sun is an act of
favor renewed to the world every day, p. 196 Supplication, The nature of it,
p. 29. Supplication, properly what it is, p. 266.
T
TEmptation makes the Saints sometimes weary of their lives, p. 420. Great
afflictions lay us open to great temptations, p. 430. Thousand, How taken in
Scripture, p. 151. One of a thousand, what it means, ib. Time is very swift, p.
334. Swift as, and swifter then a Post, showed in ten particulars, p. 335.
Tradition and immediate revelation the rule, till the Word was written, p. 56.
Trust, what it is, p. 89. A twofold effect of trust, ibid. Trust of hypocrites
like a Spiders web in five things, p. 90, 91. Truth is more ancient then
error, p. 59. Truth cannot be had with ease, page 61. Four things fit us for
the search of truth, ib. Truth is to be highly esteemed, p. 71. We should yield
to one another in controversies, as far as truth will let us, p. 146. Truth
is ever the same, and we should be the same to truth, p. 307. Great truths must
be resolutely maintained, p. 308. Type, what it is properly, p. 32.
V
Vision of God in heaven, not in his Essence, p. 231. We cannot see God fully
on earth in his Word and works, p. 228, 232. That we see so little of God
should humble us, p. 233. Visitation of God threefold, p. 527. Until, notes a
continued act, p. 132.
W
WAshing, What it imports, ceremonial washings, p. 365, 366. Wicked men have
their name from unquietness, p. 309. They often abound with earthly things, p.
324. They have a just title to the earthly things which they enjoy, p. 325,
326. How it is in vain for a wicked man to seek unto God, and how not, p. 362.
363. To be accounted wicked, is a sore affliction, p. 434. Wicked men in what
sense they may be said to have prosperity, p. 448. To be wicked, or to do
wickedly is inconsistent with grace, p. 476. A wicked man, who, described in
five particulars, p. 476, etc. All men are either godly or wicked, p. 482.
Wise, What it is to be wise in heart, p. 156. God is infinitely wise, p. 157.
Witness and party must not be the same man, p 295. Woes of two sorts, page
542. Woe is the portion of the wicked, p. 543. Words, It is our duty to watch
over our words, p. 5. It is a duty to give check to the idle or evil words of
others, ib. Words like a strong wind, showed in six particulars, p. 8, 9. God
is not taken with fine words, p. 259. Worldly things have no consistence, They
are always in motion p. 336, 337. They pass as if they had never been, 341.
Worldly estate of good men, as transitory as that of evil men, p 342. Works of
God are to be recorded for after times, p. 57. It is our duty to enquire into
former times, p. 58. It is but little of God that we are able to see in his
works, p. 228, ^32.
Y
YEsterday, Taken three ways in Scripture, p. 62.
A TABLE OF THOSE SCRIPTVRES Which are occasionally cleared, and briefly
illustrated in the foregoing EXPOSITIONS.
The first number directs to the Chapter, the second to the Verse, the third to
the Page of the Book.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 1. 199. 1. 8. 201. 1. 14. 207. 2. 2. 442. 3. 16. 277. 4.
6. 25. 4. 10. 371 6. 6. 498. 7. 23. 99. 11. 5. 15. 11. 15. 474. 18. 21. 474.
18. 25. 11. 19. 16. 126. 22. 12. 474. 25. 23. 49, 289 25. 32. 524. 27. 33. 331.
28. 19. 133. 29. 31. 137. 31. 24. 194, 385 31. 47. 106. 32. 9, 10, 11. 256 42.
11, 19, 31. 406

Exodus.
Chap. Verse. Page 10. 28. 166. 13. 4. 73. 15. 11. 380. 20. 6. 31. 23. 1. 389.
23. 1. 125. 23. 2. 164. 33. 20. 229. 34. 7. 36^

Leviticus.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 4. 388, 390 4. 15. 388 19. 15. 48 26. 44. 123.

Numbers.
Chap. Verse. Page 8. 10. 389. 23. 21. 135. 24. 17. 204.

Deuteronomy.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 11. 401. 3. 23. 30 4. 19. 212 8. 2. 474 10. 12. 54. 11.
24. 204. 18. 9. 218. 21. 6, 7. 368. 29. 26. 213. 32. 13. 204. 33. 9. 303

Joshua.
Chap. Verse. Page 6. 5. 134. 7. 7, 8. 240. 10. 12. 190.

Judges.
Chap. Verse. Page 5. 20. 217 6. 21. 150 7. 31. 134 14. 12. 140

1 Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 18. 346. 1. 19. 501 15. 29. 242, 377 15. 32. 286. 17. 33.
375. 22. 18. 289. 24. 14. 26 28. 19. 63

2 Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page 5. 8. 495. 12. 12. 102. 19. 24. 217 21. 1. 437. 22. 19. 93.

1 Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page 4. 32, 33. 75 7. 21. 100 8. 29. 24.

2 Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page 4. 29. 285 9. 26. 62 14. 9. 150 20. 9, 10. 193 21. 13. 55^

2 Chronicles.
Chap. Verse. Page 30. 5. 60

Nehemiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 6. 9. 126

Esther.
Chap. Verse. Page 7. 8. 327 9. 29, 31. 99

Job.
Chap. Verse. Page 12. 12, 13. 473 13. 3. 255 14. 18. 173 15. 19. 322 18. 4. ^74
19. 6. 14 20. 22. 111 21. 2. 171 23. 13. 243 26. 7. 186 26. 12. 245 30. 23. 293
33. 11. 77 33. 19. 416 33. 23. 151 34. 29. 327 37. 18. 200, 201 38. 22. 202 38.
31. 217 40. 13. 327 42. 5, 6. 252

Psalms.
Psalm. Verse. Page 2. 1. 205 2. 9. 503 4. 2. 4 8. 3. 221 9. 18. 501 14. 5. 55
17. 14. 324 18. 7. 102 18. 25, 26. 35 19. 1. 221 19. 4. 9, 221 19. 5. 194 22.
29. 507 24. 1, 2. 185 33. 6. 7 36. 6. 175 36. 9. 501 46. 2. 175 50. 16. 363 50.
18. 377 51. 4. 21 51. 9. 367 56. 5. 352 58. 8. 177 61. 7. 55 69. 6, 7. 139 73.
4. 313 73. 9. 9 73. 15. 33 ^^^ ^^^ 187 76. 6. 195 77. 9. 501 77. 9. 78 81. 12.
129 82. 5. 329 89. 15. 134 89. 25. 389 90. 6. 151 90. 11. 403 91. 13. 203 94.
9. 487 95. 10. 88 100. 3. 444 102 27. 225 103 14. 505 104. 32. 174 105. 15. 195
106. 23. 137 108. 1. 57 108. 9. 203 110. 7. 545 119. 116. 139 119. 121. 12 121.
5. 529 130. 3. 539 139. 14, 15. 443 143. 2. 154 144. 5. 172 148. 8. 192

Proverbs.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 22. 4 1. 32. 26 7. 27. 210 8. 27. 202 18. 23. 30 19. 11.
226 24. 4. 21^ 23. ^ 28. 234 27. 19. 250 28. 14. 161 29. 15. ^23 31. 8. 225

Ecclesiastes.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 16. 13 2. 18. 117 5. 2, 259 6. 10. 379 7. 13. 14 8. 4. 241
8. 11. 163 9. 2. 482 10. 7. 328 12. 1. 78

Canticless
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 6. 458 2. 4. 274 5. 10. 151 5. 12. 367

Isaiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 18. 255, 367 3. 1. 93 3. 9. 138, 347 6. 5. 230. 252 8. 9.
167 10. 26. 312 11. 4. 7 11. 3. 425 14. 23. 91 19. 25. 444 24. 20. 187 25. 4.
278 26. 19. 507 27. 8. 556 27. 11. 446 27. 4. 167 28. 15. 312 28. 7. 110 28.
21, 560 30. 7. 246 30. 13. 314 32. 17. 46 32. 2. 454 33. 14. 91 38. 10, 12. 414
38. 3. 265 40. 31. 340 40. 4. 173 40. 28. 158 41. 15. 172 42. 25. 179 43. 26.
258 43. 13. 194 44. 20. 390 44. 24, 25. 218 45. 11. 240, 446 47. 3. 556 49. 15,
16. 80, 81 49. 23. 246 51. 9. 41, 245 53. 8. 55 53. 9, 12. 359 55. 6, 7, 8. 378
57. 17. 77 57. 20. 206 57. 1^^ 404 58. 3. 82, 154 59. 6. 97 62. 6. 501 64. 1.
174 64. 6, 7. 25, 350, 484 65. 24. 39 66. 5. 124 66. 12. 557

Jeremiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 22. 370 2. 29. 154 2. 31. 80 2. 32. 79 2. 34. 467 7. 1, 2.
97 7. 4, 9. 363 8. 6. 406 8. 14. 239 10. 24. 403 11. 13. 141 12. 1. 153 15. 2.
26 15. 1. 238 18. 4. 503 22. 24. 17 23. 10. 4^6 23. 14. 126 27. 6. 323 30. 14.
^79 31. 35. 216 31. 28. 36 50. 20. 467 50. 7. 45 ^^^ ^^ ^^^

Lamentations.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 36. 18 3. 59. 14 3. 37. 195 4. 6. 313.

Ezekiel.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 8, 9. 160 6. 9. 88 16. 49. 126 18. 25. 154 20. 47. 311 21.
3. 310 32. 7. 191 36. 31. 413

Daniel.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 35. 112. 4. 35. 239 7. 9. 460 8. 5. 109, 341 9. 14. 37^

Hosea.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 2. 154 2. 21, 22. 217 4. 14. ^6


