AN ELEGANT And Learned DISCOURSE Of the Light of Nature, With several other
TREATISES: Viz. The Schism. The Act of Oblivion. The Childs Return. The
Panting Soul. Mount Ebal. The White Stone. Spiritual Optics. The Worth of
Souls.

By NATHANAEL CULVERWEL, Master of Arts, and lately Fellow of EMANUEL College
in CAMBRIDGE.

Imprimatur, EDM. CALAMY.

London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Rothwell at the Sun and Fountain
in Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

To the Reverend and Learned ANTHONY TVCKNEY D. D. Master of Emmanuel College
IN CAMBRIDGE, And to the Fellows of that Religious and happy Foundation.
Honored Sirs,
THe many testimonies of your real affection toward this pious and learned
Author, (especially while he lay under the discipline of so sad a Providence)
deserve all thankful acknowledgement, and grateful commemoration: which I doubt
not but himself would have made in most ample manner, had it pleased God to
have granted him longer life, and farther opportunity. But since Divine
Providence has otherwise disposed; I thought it no solecisme in friendship to
undertake the Executorship of his desires, and so far to own his debt of
gratitude, as to endeavor some Public acknowledgement of it, though the
greatness of your benefits admit not of just reompence and satisfaction.
Having therefore the disposal of his papers committed to me by his nearest and
dearest friends, and finding them to be of such worth and excellency as ought
not to be smothered in obscurity; I interpreted this a fit opportunity to let
both your selves and others understand, how deep an impression your kindness
to him has left in the apprehensions and memories of those his friends, whom
God and Nature had given the advantage of being more peculiarly interessed in
his welfare. Upon which account I do here present you with this Elegant issue
of his noble and gallant abilities; which, besides the relation it has to you
by the Fathers side, would gladly entitle it self unto your acceptance and
protection, as having been conceived in your College, and delivered in your
Chapel; and therefore hopes that you, who with much delight were sometimes
ear- witnesses of it, will now become its Susceptours.

And thus having lodged it in its Mothers arms, I leave it to her embraces. On
whose behalf I shall only offer up this serious and hearty wish; That as, by
the blessing of heaven upon her fruitful womb, she has been made a Mother of
many profitable instruments both in Church and Commonwealth: so God would be
pleased to make good her name unto her, and delight still to use her as the
handmaid-instrument of his glory; that he would lay her topstone in his
blessing, as her foundation was laid in his fear.

So prays WILLIAM DILLINGHAM.
Aug. 10. 1652.
TO THE READER.
COURTEOUS READER;
NOt many months have passed since I sent abroad into the world a little
Treatise, which knew it self by the name of Spiritual Optics, with intention
only to make some discovery of the minds and affections of men toward pieces
of that Nature; which having met somewhere (it seems) with kind
enentertainment, and acceptance beyond its expectation; has now persuaded all
its fellows into a resolution to take wing, and adventure themselves upon thy
candor and ingenuity. I intend not here to hang out Ivy; nor with my Canvase
to preface this cloth of gold. The work is weaved of Sunne-beams, to hang any
thing before it, were but to obscure it; yet something here must needs be said
for mine own discharge, and thy better satisfaction. Know therefore, (gentle
Reader) that these pieces were first intended as Scholastic Exercises in a
Colledge-Chappel, and therefore more properly suited to such an Auditory; yet I
make no question but some of them, the White Stone especially, may be read with
much profit, by those who are of meaner capacities, and less refined
intellectuals. The Discourse of the Light of Nature (which, though here it
bear the torch before the rest, is younger brother to them all) was written
above six years ago; the design of it was, as on the one hand to vindicate the
use of Reason in matters of Religion from the aspersions and prejudices of some
weaker ones in those times, who, having entertained erroneous opinions, which
they were no way able to defend, were taught by their more cunning seducers to
wink hard, and except against all offensive weapons: so on the other hand to
chastise the sauciness of Socinus and his followers, who dare set Hagar above
her Mistress, and make Faith wait at the elbow of corrupt and distorted
Reason; to take off the head of that uncircumcised Philistim with his own
sword, but better sharpened; and then to lay it up behind the Ephod in the
Sanctuary. An enterprise I confess, of no small import; which yet he hoped,
with Gods assistance, to have effected by giving unto Reason the things that
are Reasons, and unto Faith the things that are Faiths. And had the world been
favored with his longer life, the height of his parts, and the earnest he
gave, had bespoken very ample expectations in those who knew and heard him: But
it pleased God (having first melted him with his love, and then chastised him,
though somewhat sharply) to take him to himself; from the contemplation of the
Light of Nature, to the enjoyment of one supernatural, that (...), Light
inaccessible, which none can see and live; and to translate him from snuffing a
Candle here, to be made partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in Light. So
that all he finished toward that undertaking was this Discourse of the Light of
Nature in general, not descending so low as to show how the Moral Law was
founded in it, or that Gospel-revelation does not extinguish it. Wherein, if,
standing in the midst between two adversaries of extreme persuasions, while he
opposes the one, he seem to favor the other more then is meet; when thou
shall observe him at another time to declare as much against the other, thou will then be of another mind. Judge heartily, and take his opinion, as thou
would do his picture, sitting; not from a luxuriant expression (wherein he
always allowed for the shrinking) but from his declared judgment, when he
speaks professedly of such a subject. For instance, if any expression seem to
lift Reason up too high; you may, if you please, otherwhere hear it confess
and bewail its own weakness; [chap. 12.] you may see it bow the head and
worship, and then lay it self down quietly at the feet of Faith; [chap. 18.] So
that if thou read but the whole discourse, thou will easily perceive (as
himself would often affirm) that he abhorred the very thought of advancing the
power of Nature into the throne of Free Grace, or by the light of Nature in the
least measure to eclipse that of Faith.

I would not willingly by any Prolepsis forestall thy reading, yet if thou
should desire a foretast of the Authors style, I would turn thee to the
beginning of the seventeenth chapter; never was light so bespangled; never did
it triumph in greater bravery of expression. But I detain thee too long. Let
this suffice thee as a course List to a finer Webb; or as waste paper to defend
this Book from the injury of its covers.

Farewell. Cambr. Aug. 10. 1652.
The Discourse of the Light of Nature conteines
CHap. 1. The Porch, or Introduction page 1 Chap. 2. The explication of the
words p. 9 Chap. 3. What Nature is p. 14 Chap. 4. Of the nature of a Law in
general p. 20 Chap. 5. Of the Eternal Law p. 28 Chap. 6. Of the Law of Nature
in general, its Subject Nature
p. 34 Chap. 7. The extent of the Law of Nature p. 54 Chap. 8. How the Law of
Nature is discovered? not by tradition p. 62 Chap. 9. The Light of Reason p. 68
Chap. 10. Of the consent of Nations p. 77 Chap. 11. The Light of Reason is a
derivative Light p. 87 Chap. 12. The Light of Reason is a diminutive Light p.
122 Chap. 13. The Light of Reason discovers present, not future things p. 131
Chap. 14. The Light of Reason is a certain Light p. 141 Chap. 15. The Light of
Reason is directive p. 154 Chap. 16. The Light of Reason is calm and peaceable
p. 166 Chap, 17. The Light of Reason is a pleasant Light p. 175 Chap. 18. The
Light of Reason is an ascendent Light p. 198
The most material escapes of the Impression, be pleased (Reader) thus to amend.
PAge 6. line 16. for there that read their, p 10. l 14. for to r. into, p 13.
l. 22. for Sooth. worth r. somewhat worth, p. 25 l. 21. for is r. it is, p. 33.
l. 19 for primae practicae r. prima practica, p. 48. l. 21. for where r.
whence, p 62. l. 3. nor an intellectus ^gens dele, p. 68. l. 22. for
Evangelistical r. Evangelical, p. 70. l. 14. for its r. their, p. 71. l. 29.
Antonius r. Antoninus, p. 92 l. 16. many r. any, p. 93. l. 7. him a r. him in
a, p. 107. l. 20. should r. sold, p 128 l. 31. this r. his, p. 132 l. 23. and
per r. and non per, p. 137. l. 16. these r. those, p. 140. l. 24.
Jurispositorum r. Jurisperitorum, p. 145. l. 16 (...), p. 147. ult. theirs r.
this, p. 154. l. 17. certainly r. certainty, p 157. l. 21. r. them as Gods, p.
16^. l. 20. r. judice, p. 165. l. 9. the r. that, p. 166. l. 26. persecutions
r. prosecutions, p. 178. l. 31. choyest r. choycer, p. 194. l 34 be r. not be,
p. 202. l. 8. is r. if, p. 210 l. 22. maintenency r. manu-tenncy.

P. 1. l. 20. casus r. caput, 3. 1. r. omrtality r. morality, 5. 23. r. (...),
so the Scholiast, 8. ult. his r. its, 10. 13. painted r. pointed, 18. in marg.
Fox dele, 22, 2. have dele, 47. 17. to not r. not to, 48. 3. them r. him, 54. 3
not only r. only, ibid. l. 15. ^re r. were, 66. 4. Polltitian r. Politian, ibid
l. 31. historistia r. historia, 77. 25. deglutiemur r. deglutiemus, 123. 17.
with r. what, 127. 36. brim then r. brim, then was the, 129. 37. examination r.
exinanition, 150. 14. and then dele.

The rest, I hope, will not disturb the sense.

Courteous READER.
THis Discourse, which had my Brother for the Author; might justly have
expected me to have been the publisher: And I should think my self inexcusable,
in this particular, did not the remote distance of my present abode, and the
frequent avocations from study, by attendance upon my Ministry, together with
the ruins of a crazy body, somewhat apologize in my behalf.

That is obvious and (...) in every man's mouth, that the Brother should raise
up seed to the Brother; but here, lo a friend that is nearer then a brother,
who reares up this living monument, to the memory of his deceased friend.

In this Treatise we may perceive, how the Gentiles Candle out-went us with our
Sunbeams: How they guided only by the glimmering twilight of Nature,
out-stript us who are surrounded with the rays of Supernatural light, of
revealed truth. Thou may here find Plato to be a Moses Atticissans, and
Aratus, Menander, and Epimenides called into the Court, to bring in their
suffrages to Saint Paul's Doctrine.

Here we may find Reason like a Gibeonite hewing wood, and drawing water for
the Sanctuary: Jethro giving counsel to Moses. God draws us with the cords of
a man; he drew professed Star-gazers with a Star to Christ. Galen a Physician was
wrought upon, by some Anatomicall observations to tune an hymn to the praise
of his Creator, though otherwise Atheist enough.

Reason though not permitted (with an over-daring Pompey) to rush into the Holy
of Holies, yet may be allowed to be a Proselyte of the gate, and with those
devote Greeks, to worship in the Court of the Gentiles.

Natural Light, or the Law written in the heart, emproved by that (...) which
is written in the book of the creature in capital letters, so that he that
runs may read, is that which this Treatise bears witness to; where these
(...), those heaven-borne-lights are set up in the soul of man, like those twin
flames on the Mariners shroud, they presage a happy voyage to the fair Havens.

As for the bosome-secrets of God, Gospel-mysteries, the Mercy-seat it self
into which the Angels desire (...), Reasons plum-line will prove too short to
fathom them; here we must cry with the Apostle (...)! Reason may not come into
these Seas, except she strike her top-saile; here we may say with Aristotle, at
the brinke of Euripus, not being able to give an account of the ebbes and
flows, If I cannot comprehend thee, thou shall me.

It is storied of Democritus, that he put out his eyes that he might
contemplate the better: I do not counsel you to do so; but if you would wink
with one, the eye of Reason (captivate every thought to the obedience of
Christ) you might with that other of Faith, take the better aim at the mark,
to obtain the price of the high calling in Jesus Christ.

Possibly an expression or two (more there are not) may seem to speak too much
in Reasons behalf; but if well examined, will prove nothing to the prejudice
of free Grace: The whole scope of the book endeavoring to fill those landmarks
and just bounds betwixt Religion, and Reason, which some (too superciliously
brow-beating the handmaid, and others too much magnifying her) have removed.

These exercises suit well with the place where, and the auditors to whom they
were delivered, but like Aristotle's (...) these are not for vulgar ears; These
Lucubrations are so elaborate, that they smell of the Lamp, The Candle of the
Lord.

As concerning the Author of this Treatise, how great his parts were, and how
well improved (as it may appear by this work) so they were fully known, and the
loss of them sufficiently bewailed by those among whom he lived and conversed;
and yet I must say of him (...): And as it is hard for men to be under
affliction, but they are liable to censures, Luke 13. 2, 4. so it fared with
him, who was looked upon by some, as one whose eyes were lofty, and whose
eyelids lifted up; who bare himself too high upon a conceit of his parts
(although they that knew him intimately, are most willing to be his
compurgatours in this particular.) Thus prone are we to think the staff under
the water crooked, though we know it to be straight: However, turn thine eyes
inward, and censure not thine own fault so severely in others. Cast not the
first stone, except thou find thy self without this fault: dare not to search
too curiously into (...) of God; But rather learn that lesson of the Apostles
in that elegant Paranomasy, (...). Romans 12. v. 3.

Thus not willing longer to detain thee from the perusal of this Discourse; I
commend both thee and it to the blessing of God, and rest

Thine to serve thee in any spiritual work, or labor of love, RICH. CULVERWEL.
From my study at Grundisburgh in the County of Suffolk. August, 18. 1652.
A DISCOURSE Of the LIGHT of NATURE.
PROVERES 20. 27. (...) Men's hominis lucerna Domini, The understanding of a man
is the Candle of the Lord.

(...). Septuag. (...). Aqu. Symm. Theod. (...). Sic alii.
CHAP. I.
The Porch or Introduction.
It Is a work that requires our choycest thoughts, the exactest discussion that
can be; a thing very material and desirable, to give unto Reason the things
that are Reasons, and unto Faith the things that are Faiths; to give Faith her
full scope and latitude, and to give Reason also her just bounds and limits;
this is the firstborn, but the other has the blessing. And yet there is not
such a vast hiatus neither, such a (...) between them as some would imagine:
there is no such implacable antipathy, no such irreconcilable jarring between
them, as some do fancy to themselves; they may very well salute one another,
(...), osculo Pacis; Reason and Faith may kiss each other. There is a
twin-light springing from both, and they both spring from the same fountain of
light, and they both sweetly conspire in the same end, the glory of that being
from which they shine, and the welfare and happiness of that being upon which
they shine. So that to blaspheme Reason, it is to reproach heaven it self, and
to dishonor the God of Reason, to question the beauty of his Image, and by a
strange ingratitude to slight this great and Royal gift of our Creator. For
it is he that set up these two great Luminaries in every heavenly soul, the Sun
to rule the day, and the Moon to rule the night; and though there be some kind
of creatures that will bark at this lesser light, and others so severely
critical, as that they make mountains of those spots and freckles which they
see in her face; yet others know how to be thankful for her weaker beams, and
will follow the least light of Gods setting up, though it be but the Candle of
the Lord.

But some are so strangely prejudiced against Reason, and that upon sufficient
reason too (as they think) which yet involves a flat contradiction, as that
they look upon it not as the Candle of the Lord, but as on some blazing Comet
that portends present ruin to the Church, and to the soul, and carries a fatal
and venomous influence along with it. And because the unruly head of Socinus
and his followers by their mere pretenses to Reason, have made shipwreck of
Faith, and have been very injurious to the Gospel; therefore these weak and
staggering apprehensions, are afraid of understanding any thing, and think that
the very name of Reason, especially in a Pulpit, in matters of Religion, must
needs have at least a thousand heresies coucht in it. If you do but offer to
make a Syllogism, they will strait way cry it down for carnal reasoning. What
would these men have? Would they be banished from their own essences? Would they
forfeit and renounce their understandings? Or have they any to forfeit or
disclaim? would they put out this Candle of the Lord, intellectuals of his own
lighting? or have they any to put out? would they creep into some lower
species, and go a grazing with Nebuchadnezar among the beasts of the field? or
are they not there already? Or if they themselves can be willing to be so
shamefully degraded, do they think that all others too are bound to follow
their example? Oh, what hard thoughts have these of Religion? do they look upon
it only as on a bird of prey, that comes to peck out the eyes of men? Is this
all the nobility that it gives, that men by virtue of it must be beheaded
presently? does it chop off the intellectuals at one blow? Lets hear awhile
what are the offenses of Reason; are they so heinous and capital? what has it
done? what laws has it violated? whose commands has it broken? what did it
ever do against the crown and dignity of heaven, or against the peace and
tranquillity of men? Why are a weak and perverse generation, so angry and
displeased with it? Is it because this daughter of the morning is fallen from
her primitive glory? from her original vigor and perfection? Far be it from me
to extenuate that great and fatal overthrow, which the sons of men had in their
first and original apostasy from their God; that under which the whole
Creation sigh's and groans: but this we are sure, it did not annihilate the
soul, it did not destroy the essence, the powers and faculties, nor the
operations of the soul; though it did defile them, and disorder them, and every
way indispose them.

Well then, because the eye of Reason is weakened, and vitiated, will they
therefore pluck it out immediately? and must Leah be hated upon no other
account, but because she is blear-eyed? The whole head is wounded, and aches,
and is there no other way but to cut it off? The Candle of the Lord does not
shine so clearly as it was wont, must it therefore be extinguished presently? is
it not better to enjoy the faint and languishing light of this Candle of the
Lord, rather then to be in palpable and disconsolate darkness? There are
indeed but a few seminal sparks left in the ashes, and must there be whole
floods of water cast on them to quench them? It Is but an old imperfect
Manuscript, with some broken periods, some letters worn out, must they
therefore with an unmerciful indignation rend it and tear it asunder? It Is
granted that the picture has lost its gloss and beauty, the oriency of its
colors, the elegancy of its lineaments, the comeliness of its proportion;
must it therefore be totally defaced? must it be made one great blot? and must
the very frame of it be broken in pieces? Would you persuade the Lutanist to
cut all his strings in sunder, because they are out of tune? and will you break
the Bow upon no other account, but because it is unbended? because men have not
so much of Reason as they should, will they therefore resolve to have none at
all? will you throw away your gold, because it is mixed with dross? Thy very
being that is imperfect too, thy graces, they are imperfect, will thou refuse
these also? And then consider, that the very apprehending the weakness of
Reason, even this in some measure comes from Reason. Reason, when awakened, it
feels her own wounds, it hears her own jarrings, she sees the dimnesse of her
own sight. It Is a glass that discovers its own spots, and must it therefore be
broke in pieces? Reason her self has made many sad complaints unto you; she has
told you often, and that with tears in her eyes, what a great shipwreck she
has suffered, what goods she has lost, how hardly she escaped with a poor
decayed being; she has shown you often some broken relics as the sad
remembrancers of her former ruins; she told you how that when she swam for her
life, she had nothing but two or three Jewels about her, two or three common
notions; and would you rob her of them also? is this all your tenderness and
compassion? Is this your kindness to your friend? will you trample upon her now
she is so low? Is this a sufficient cause to give her a Bill of divorcement,
because she has lost her former beauty and fruitfulness?

Or is Reason thus offensive to them, because she cannot Reason cannot reach to
the depths, to the bottomes of the Ocean, may it not therefore swim and hold up
the head as well as it can? What though it cannot enter into the Sanctum
Sanctorum, and pierce within the Veil; may it not notwithstanding lie in the
Porch, at the gate of the Temple called beautiful, and be a doorkeeper in the
house of its God? It Is wings are clipped indeed, it cannot fly so high as it
might have done, it cannot fly so swiftly, so strongly as once it could, will
they not therefore allow it to move, to stir, to flutter up and down as well
as it can? the turrets and pinacles of the stately structure are fallen, will
they therefore demolish the whole fabric, and shake the very foundations of
it? and down with it to the ground? though it be not a Jacobs ladder to climb
up to heaven by, yet may they not use it as a staff to walk upon earth
withal? and then Reason it self knows this also and acknowledges, that it is
dazzled with the Majesty and glory of God; that it cannot pierce into his
mysterious and unsearchable ways; it never was so vain as to go about to
measure immensity by its own finite Compass, or to span out absolute eternity
by its own more imperfect duration. True Reason did never go about to comprize
the Bible in its own Nutshel. And if Reason be content with its own sphere, why
should it not have the liberty of its proper motion?

Is it because it opposes the things of God, and wrangles born it; but it is
thou her friend and companion, ye have took sweet counsel together, and have
entered into the house of God as friends, it is you that have your dependence
upon her; that cannot speak one word to purpose against her, without her help
and assistance. What mean you thus to revile your most intimate and inseparable
self? why do you thus slander your own beings? would you have all this to be
true which you say? Name but the time if you can, when ever right Reason did
oppose one jot or apex of the word of God. Certainly, these men speak of
distorted Reason all this while. Surely they do not speak of the Candle of the
Lord, but of some shadow and appearance of it. But if they tell us that all
Reason is distorted, whether then is theirs so, in telling us so? if they say
that they do not know this by Reason, but by the Word of God; whether then is
there (...) Reason, when it acknowledges the Word of God? whether is it then
distorted, or no? Besides, if there were no right Reason in the world, what
difference between sobriety and madness, between these men and wiser ones? how
then were the heathen left without excuse, who had nothing to see by but this
Candle of the Lord? and how does this thrust men below sensitive creatures, for
better have no Reason at all, then such as does perpetually deceive them, and
delude them.

Reason thus displease them, because the blackest Errors sometimes come under
the fair disguise of so beautiful a name, and have some tincture of Reason in
them? But truly this is so far from being a disparagement to Reason, as that
it is no small commendation of it, for (...), Men love to put a plausible title,
a winning frontispiece upon the foulest Errors. Thus licentiousness would
feign be called by the name of liberty, and all dissoluteness would feign be
countenanced and secured under the Patronage and protection of free grace. Thus
wickedness would willingly forget its own name, and adopt it self into the
family of goodness. Thus Arminianisme pleads for it self under the specious
notion of Gods love to mankind. Thus that silly Error of Antinomianisme will
needs style it self an Evangelical Honeycomb. Thus all irregularities and
anomalies in Church affairs must pride themselves in those glittering titles of
a New Light, A Gospel way, An Heaven upon Earth. No wonder then that some also
pretend to Reason, who yet run out of it, and beyond it, and besides it; but
must none therefore come near it? because Socinus has burnt his wings at this
Candle of the Lord, must none therefore make use of it?

May he not be conquered with his own weapons, and beat out of his own strong
holds? and may not the head of an uncircumcised Philistine be cut off with his
own sword?

Or lastly, are they thus afraid of Reason, because by virtue Reason it self
tells them that it may be thus, and so prepares and fortifies them against such
a trial; and then, this only shows that some men's Reason is not so well
advanced and improved, either as it might be, or as others is; a sharper edge
would quickly cut such difficulties asunder. Some have more refined and
clarifi'd intellectuals, more vigorous and sparkling eyes then others, and one
soul differs from another in glory; and that reason which can make some shift
to maintain Error, might with a great deal less sweat and pains maintain a
truth.

There Is no question but that Bellarmin, and the rest of the learned Papists
could have if they had pleased, far more easily defended the Protestant
Religion then that of their own. Besides, the vigor and triumph of Reason is
principally to be seen in those firstborn beams, those pure and unspotted
irradiations that shine from it; I mean those first bublings up of common
principles that are owned and acknowledged by all; and those evident, and
kindly derivations that flow from them. Reason shows her face more amiably and
pleasantly in a pure and clear stream, then in those mudded and troubled
waters, in which the Schoolmen (that have leisure enough) are always fishing.
Nay, some of their works are like so many raging seas, full of perpetual
tossings, and disquietings, and foamings, and sometimes casting up mire and
dirt; and yet these vast and voluminous Leviathans love to sport therein, and
that which is most intolerable, these grand (...), that seemed so zealous for
Reason, at length in express terms disclaim it; and in a most blindfold and
confused manner, cry up their great Diana, their Idol of Transubstantiation;
and the Lutherans are very fierce against Reason too, much upon the same
account, because it would never allow of that other monstrous and misshapen
lump of Consubstantiation.

But why have I all this while beaten the air, and spilt words upon the ground?
why do I speak to such as are incurable and incapable? for if we speak Reason
to them, that is that which they so much disclaim: if we do not speak Reason to
them that were to disclaim it too.

But I speak to men, to Christians, to the friends of learning, to the
professors of Reason: to such as put this Candle of the Lord into a golden
Candlestick, and pour continual Oil into it. Yet lest any among you
Athenians, should erect an Altar to an unknown God; lest you should ignorantly
worship him, we will declare him to you.

And that which we have now said may serve as a Porch and preamble, to what we
shall speak hereafter out of these words.

Where we shall see

1) How The understanding of a man is the Candle of the Lord.

2) What this Candle of the Lord discovers; where we shall find

1) That all the Moral Law is founded in natural and common light, in the light
of Reason.

2) That there is nothing in the mysteries of the Gospel contrary to the light
of Reason; nothing repugnant to this light that shines from the Candle of the
Lord.

CHAP. II.
The Explication of the words.
NOw as for the words themselves, we cannot better judge of the fitness of
this expression, then by considering who it was that spoke it.

Now these words were spoke by him that had a large portion of intellectuals,
one that was (...), they were spoken by Solomon in whom the Candle of the Lord
did shine very clearly; one that had asked this as the choicest favor that he
could expect from the bounty of heaven; to have a glorious lamp of knowledge
shine in his soul for the enlightening of it. And though the envious Jews would
fain persuade the world that he lighted his candle at hell it self, for they
esteemed him no better then a Magician; as they esteemed him also that was
greater then Solomon; yet we know very well, that Solomon's was a purer Candle
then to be lighted at a Lake of fire and brimstone; 'twas not of Lucifers
setting up, but it came from the Father of lights, 'twas lighted with Sunbeams
from heaven.

And it is a modest and humble expression in him to call his understanding the
Candle of the Lord, when as the world looked upon him as a star of the first
magnitude, nay as a Sun shining in the firmament, gilding the world with
knowledge, scattering beams of light, sparkling out in wise and proverbial
sayings, so that the bordering Princes and Nations are ready to adore such an
orient light; and the Queen of the South thinks it no small happiness to sit
under the shadow of it. But yet to be sensible of his own narrow sphere, of his
own finite compass and influence, did not at all take from his luster, but did
rather set it off, and add to his glory.

Thus that wise man among the Heathen Socrates did so far complain of the
weakness of his candlelight, as that he tells us his lamp would show him
nothing but his own darkness. And though a wiser then Socrates be here, yet he
is much in the same measure sensible of the dimnesse of his own intellectuals.
And yet he was one that had made many discoveries with this Candle of the Lord,
he had searched into the mines, and several veins of knowledge; he had searched
into the hid treasures of wisdom, he had searched to the depth of
State Affairs, he had searched into the bowels of natural causes, into the
Magnalia and Mysteria of Nature; as if among many other wives he had espoused
Nature also to himself, he had searched into the several tempers and
intellectual complexions of men; he had searched long enough with this Candle of
the Lord, to see if he could find any good under the Sun, he went with his
Candle to find out a summum bonum; he searched into all the corners of being;
and at length being sufficiently wearied; you may see him sitting down; you may
hear him complaining that he had but spent and wasted the Candle of the Lord in
vain; for so much is employed in (...)* this was but depastio spiritus, as he
himself calls it.

Yet he was one that showed others how they might make better improvement of
their intellectual lamp; and this was his wisest advice that he gave upon his
most mature and concocted thoughts, this was tanquam mox emoriturae lucernae
supremus fulgor: that men would only follow this Candle of the Lord, as it
directs them in the ways of God, which are ways of sweetness and
pleasantness, for this was (...) the very end why God set up such a light in
the soul, that it might search out his Creator with it.

And as for the mind of the words, though one would think they were very
clear, and shining with their own light, yet interpreters are pleased to cloud
them, to turn light it self into a Chaos, and to cast darkness upon the face
of the Text; like some unskilful ones, while they go about to snuff the Candle,
they put it out, but we will try whether it can be blown in again.

We shall reduce their several meanings to these three heads.

1) Some would have it thus. The Candle of the Lord ^s in the understanding of
a man, as if the words did run thus, (...) Lucerna Domini in mente hominis,
that is, God with his Candle discovers the very thoughts and intentions of men,
he searches into every corner of the heart; he has lucernam in cord, he spies
out every Atome, he perceives the first starting of a motion, the first peeping
out of a thought, but this, though it be very true, yet is nothing to the
purpose here.

2) Some gloss upon the words thus, the understanding of man when it is
enlightened with supernatural knowledge, is then the Candle of the Lord: but
these do rather dictate to Solomon, and tell him what they would have him say;
they do rather frame and fashion a Proverb to themselves, then explain his
meaning: and these are they that are afraid to give natural light, and natural
reason their due. But

3) I shall fully agree with them that take this for the proper and genuine
meaning of the place, that God has breathed into all the sons of men,
Reasonable souls which may serve as so many Candles to enlighten and direct
them in the searching out their Creator, in the discovering of other inferior
beings, and themselves also; and this is that which is here employed by (...),
that same spiraculum vitae, nay that same immortal breath, that same rational
breath quickened by God himself, and flowing from him as a pure derivation from
his own being, and thus the Hebr. Doctors do still look upon this word (...),
as that which does express (...), animam rationis participem, and (as they
observe) it has a plain vicinity with (...), but to be sure the being is
derived from thence whether the word be or no. So then (...) it points out the
supreme region, the very top and flower of a reasonable soul, (...); as (...)
does speak nothing but the dregs and bottom of it, the inferior and sensitive
soul. The Apostle Paul in his learned speech to the Athenians mentions them
both, and calls them very significantly, (...), and so some also take that
other place of the Apostle in that accurate discourse of his to the
Corinthians, that which he calls (...), they call it (...), and that which he
terms (...), they render it (...), though it be true also that sometimes they
take the word (...) in a more generical sense, for thus they tell us, there are
in man 3 (...). (1) (...) the vegetable soul, a soul in the bud, the very
blossom and flower of life. (2) (...) anima bruti, a soul looking out at the
window of sense. (3) (...) a soul sparkling and glittering with intellectuals,
a soul crowned with light, and this is the same with (...)* Now as for that
other word (...) though sometimes the mind of man his intellectual part be
expr^st by it, yet the word in its own nature is a great deal more large and
comprehensive, and as it extends to some material beings, so it reaches to all
spirituals; hence (...)* and the Angels both good and bad frequently come under
this name, but when it is put for the mind and spirit of man, yet I find it
very well differenced from (...) for (...) does properly import impetum animi,
motum mentis, the vigor and energy of the soul, (...), rather then (...), and
the Hebrew Doctors are pleased to tell us the several situations of these,
(...) they say is in cord, (...) in cerebro, (...) in hepate. Now though I
know that some places in the New Testament which speak of soul and spirit meet
with this interpretation, that spirit there is the purest eminency, the most
refined part of the soul; yet this is not at all prejudicial to what we now
speak of; for first, they may take it for the regenerate part of the soul, that
which the Apostle calls the new creature; or else (2) suppose it be spoke of the
soul in its natural condition, it is worth the considering then whether it would
not be better rendered by (...) then (...), as (...) here is rendered the
spirit of a man; but (3) grant that (...) be more answerable to it, and that
(...) should have the worth and precedence of (...) which yet will scarce ever
be shown or explained; yet this is very sure and unquestionable, that (...)
does very properly speak a reasonable soul, and that the more peculiarly,
because when Moses speaks of that very moment when 'twas created, and breathed
into man, he calls it (...) and the Arab. interpreter keeps as close to the
words, as so vast a Dialect will give leave, and styles it (...) halitus vitae.
And it is soothworth, the wondering at that that learned interpreter of Genesis,
who is so well verst in Rabbinical writings should yet expound that of the
sensitive; but they run as far into the other extreme that would understand
(...) of a soul advanced above it self by supernatural principles, and I think
this sense will scarce be owned by any that can construe Hebrew.

So then, these words are a brief commendation of natural Light, of the Light
of Reason. For the farther clearing of which we must enquire. (1) What Nature
is. (2) What the Law of Nature is. (3) What the Light of Nature is.

CHAP. III.
What Nature is.
THe words being to be understood of Lumen Natural, according to the minds of
the best and most interpreters; it will be very needful to enquire what Nature
is, and here we will be sure not to speak one word for Nature, which shall in
the least measure tend to the eclipsing of Grace; nay, nothing but what shall
make for the greater brightening and amplifying of the free Grace and
distinguishing goodness of God in Christ; and nothing but what an Augustine, or
a Bradwardin those great Patrons of Grace would willingly set their seals unto.

Well then, as for Nature, though it be not far from any one of us, though it
be so intimate to our very beings; though it be printed and engraved upon our
essences, and not upon ours only, but upon the whole Creation; and though we
put all the letters and Characters of it together as well as we can, yet we
shall find it hard enough, to spell it out, and read what it is; for as it is
in corporeal vision, the too much approximation and vicinity of an object does
stop up and hinder sight, so it is also many times in Intellectual Optics; we
see something better at a distance; the soul cannot so easily see its own face,
nor so fully explain its own nature. We need some Scholiast or Interpreter, ^o
comment upon our own beings, and to acquaint us with our own Idiomes; and I
meet with many Authors that speak of the light of Nature, but I can scarce
find one that tells us what it is. Those famous and learned Triu^viri; SELDOM,
that has made it his work to write De Jure Naturali; and Grotius that has said
somewhat of it in his book De Jure Belli and Pacis: and Salmasius that has
touched it in his late Treatise De Coma, and in his little Dialogue subordinate
to it, in either of which, if he had pleased, he might have described it
without a digression; yet none of these (as far as I can find) give us the
least adumbration of it; which notwithstanding was the rather to be expected
from them, because the Philosophers had left it in such a cloudy and obscured
manner, as if they had never seen Nature face to face, but only through a
glass darkly, and in a riddle. And as we read of a Painter that represented
Nature appearing to Aristotle with a veil and mask upon her face; so truly
Aristotle himself painted her as he saw her, with her veil on, for he shows
her only wrapped up and muffled in matter and form, whereas methinks he that
could set Intelligences to the wheel to spin out time and motion, should have
allowed them also some natural ability for performing so famous a task and
employment, which his head set them about. And truly why Angelical beings
should be banished from the Commonwealth of* Nature; nay, why they should not
properly belong to Physics as well as other particular beings; or why bodies
only should engrosse and monopoliz^ natural Philosophy, and why a soul cannot
be admitted into it, unless it bring a certificate and commendamus from the
body, is a thing altogether unaccountable, unless it be resolved into a mere
Arbitrary determination, and a Philosophical kind of Tyranny.

And yet Aristotle's description of Nature has been held very sacred, and some
of the Schoolmen do even dote upon it. Aquinas tells us in plain terms,
Deridendi sunt, qui volunt Aristotelis definitionem corrigere. The truth is, I
make no question but that Aristotle's definition is very commensurate to what he
meant by Nature; but that he had the true and adaequate notion of Nature, this
I think Aquinas himself can scarce prove; and I would fain have him to explain
what it is for a thing innotescere lumine Naturae, if Nature be only principium
motus and quietis. Yet Plutarch also in this point seems to compromise with
Aristotle, and after a good, specious and hopeful Preface, where he says that
he must needs tell us what Nature is, after all this preparation he does most
palpably restrain it to corporeal beings, and then votes it to be (...). And
Empedocles, (as he is quoted by him) will needs exercise his Poetry and make
some Verses upon Nature, and you would think at the first dash that they were
in a good lofty strain, for thus he sings -- (...). 'Twas not of a mortal
withering offspring, nor of a fading Genealogy; but yet truly his Poetical
raptures were not so high as to elevate him above a body, for he presently
sinks into (...), he falls down into matter, and makes Nature nothing else but
that which is ingenerable and incorruptible in material beings; just as the
Peripateticks speak of their materia prima. But Plato who was more spiritual in
his Philosophy, chides some of his contemporaries, and is extremely displeased
with them, and that very justly, for they were degenerated into a most stupid
Atheism, and resolved all beings into one of these three Originals, that they
were either (...). They were either the workmanship of Nature, or of Fortune,
or of Art. Now as for the first and chief corporeal beings, they made them the
productions of Nature, that is, (say they) they sprung from eternity into being
by their own impetus, and by their own virtue and efficacy, (...), like so
many natural automata, they were the principles of their own being and motion,
and this they laid down for one of their axioms. (...). All the Masterpieces
of being, the most lovely and beautiful pictures were drawn by Nature, and
Fortune; and Art only could reach to some poor rudiments, to some shadows, and
weaker imitations, which you will be somewhat amazed at when you hear by and by
what these (...) were.

The foundation of being, that they said was Natural, the mutation and
disposing of being, that they made the employment of Fortune, and then they
said the work of Art was to find out Laws, and Morality, and Religion, and a
Deity; these were the (...) they spoke of before.

But that Divine Philosopher does most admirably discover the prodigious folly
of this opinion, and demonstrate the impossibility of it in that excellent
discourse of his, in his 10 De Legibus. Where he does most clearly and
convincingly show, that those things, which they say were framed by Art; were
in duration infinitely before that which they call Nature, that (...): that
spirituals have the seniority of corporeals. This he makes to appear by their
(1) (...) (2) (...) (3) (...), for these three though they be not expressly
mentioned in him, yet they may very easily be collected from him. Souls they
move themselves, and they move bodies too, and therefore must needs be first in
motion; so that (...). Reason and Religion, Laws and Prudence must needs be
before density and rarity, before gravity and levity, before all conditions and
dimensions of bodies. And Laws and Religion they are indeed (...); that is, the
contrivances and productions of that eternal (...) the wisdom of God himself.

So that all that Plato will allow to Nature, amounts to no more then this,
that it is not (...) opifex rerum, but only Dei (...) famula and ministra; As
the eyes of a servant wait upon his master, and as the eyes of an handmaiden
look up to her mistress, so wait her eyes upon the Lord her God. And he does
fully resolve and determine that God is the soul of the world, and Nature but
the body; which must be took only in sensu florido, in a flourishing and
Rhetorical sense: that God is the fountain of being, and Nature but the chanel;
that he is the kernel of being, and Nature but the shell. Yet herein Plato was
defective, that he did not correct and reform the abuse of this word Nature;
that he did not scrue it up to an higher and more spiritual notion. For it is
very agreeable to the choycest, and supremest being; and the Apostle tells us
of (...). So that it is time at length to draw the veil from Natures face, and
to look upon her beauty.

And first, it is the usual language of many, both Philosophers and others, to
put Nature for God himself, or at least for the general providence of God; and
this in the Schoolmens rough and unpolisht Latin, is styled Natura naturans;
thus Nature is took for that constant and Catholic Providence, that spreads
its wings over all created beings, and shrouds them under its warm and happy
protection. Thus that elegant Moralist Plutarch speaks more like to himself
then in his former description. (...); Nature is in all things accurate and
punctual, it is not defective nor parsimonious, nor yet sprouting and luxuriant:
and consonant to this is that sure axiom, Natura nihil facit frustra. Thus God
set up the world as a fair and goodly clock, to strike in time, and to move in
an orderly manner, not by its own weights (as Durand would have it) but by
fresh influence from himself, by that inward and intimate spring of immediate
concourse, that should supply it in a most uniform and proportionable manner.

Thus God framed this great Organ of the world, he tuned it, yet not so as that
it could play upon it self, or make any music by virtue of this general
composure, (as Durand fancies it) but that it might be fitted and prepared for
the finger of God himself, and at the presence of his powerful touch might
sound forth the praise of its Creator in a most sweet and harmonious manner.

And thus Nature is that regular line, which the wisdom of God himself has
drawn in being (...), as he speaks, whereas that which they miscalled Fortune,
was nothing but a line fuller of windings and varieties; and as Nature was a
fixed and ordinary kind of Providence; so Fortune was nothing but a more
abstruse, and mysterious, and occult kind of Providence, and therefore Fortune
was not blind, as they falsely painted and represented her; but they
themselves were blind and could not see into her. And in this sense that
speech of that grave Moralist Seneca is very remarkable, Providentia, fatum,
natura, casus, fortuna sunt ejusdem Dei varia nomina.

But then secondly, Nature as it is scattered and distributed in particular
beings, so it is the very same with essence it self, and therefore spirituals,
as they have their essence, so they have their Nature too, and if we gloried in
names, 'twould be easy to heap up a multitude of testimonies in which these
two must needs be (...).

And thus Nature speaks these two things.

1) It points out Originem entis, it is the very Genius of Entity, it is present
at the nativity of every being, nay it is being it self. There is no moment in
which you can imagine a thing to be, and yet to be without its Nature.

2) It speaks Operationem entis, and it is a principle of working in spirituals,
as well as principium motus and quietis in corporeals. All essence bubbles out,
flows forth, and paraphrases upon it self in operations. Hence it is that such
workings as are facilitated by custom, are esteemed natural. Hence that known
speech of Galen, (...); Customs are frequently adopted and ingraffed into
Nature. Hence also our usual Idiom calls a good disposition a good nature. Thus
the Moralists express Virtues or Vices that are deeply rooted, by this term
(...).

And so some, and Grotius amongst the rest, would understand that place of the
Apostle, Does not even Nature it self teach you, of a general custom: but that
word (...) does plainly refuse that interpretation; and the learned Salmasius
does both grant and evince, that it cannot be meant of custom there. And thus
having seen what Nature is, 'twill be very easy in the next place to tell you
what the Law of Nature is.

CHAP. IV.
Of the nature of a Law in general.
BEfore we can represent unto you the Law of Nature, you must first frame and
fashion in your minds the just notion of a Law in general. And Aquinas gives
us this shadowy representation of it; Lex est quaedam regula and mensura,
secund^m quam inducitur aliquis ad agendum, vel ab agendo retrahitur. But
Suarez is offended with the latitude of this definition, and esteems it too
spreading and comprehensive, as that which extends to all Naturals, I, and to
Artificials too; for they have regulas and mensuras operationum; Thus God has
set a Law to the waves, and a Law to the winds; nay, thus clocks have their
laws, and Lutes have their Laws, and whatsoever has the least appearance of
motion, has some rule proportionable to it. Whereas these workings were always
reckoned to be at the most but inclinationes, and pondera, and not the fruits
of a legislative power. But yet the Apostle Paul, to stain the pride of them
that gloried in the Law, calls such things by the name of Law as were most
odious and anomalous. Thus he tells us of (...), and (...), though sin be
properly (...): Thus he mentions Legem membrorum, the same which the Schoolmen
call Legem fomitis.

And yet this is sure, that a rational creature is only capable of a Law, which
is a moral restraint, and so cannot reach to those things that are necessitated
to act ad extremum virium.

And therefore Suarez does give us a more refined description, when he tells us
that Lex est mensura quaedam actuum moralium, it a ut per conformitatem ad
illam, Rectitudinem moralem habeant, and si ab illa discordent, obliqui sint. A
Law is such a just and regular tuning of Actions, as that by virtue of this
they may conspire into a moral music, and become very pleasant and harmonious.
Thus Plato speaks much of that (...) and (...) that is in Laws, and in his
second book De Leg. he does altogether discourse of harmony, and does
infinitely prefer mental and intellectual music, those powerful and practical
strains of goodness, that spring from a well-composed spirit, before those
delicious blandishments, those soft and transient touches that comply with
sense, and salute it in a more flattering manner; and he tells you of a
spiritual dancing that is answerable to so sweet a music, to these (...).
Whilst the Laws play in consort, there is a Chorus of well ordered affections
that are raised and elevated by them.

And thus as Aristotle well observes, some Laws were wont to be put in verse,
and to be sung like so many pleasant odes, that might even charm the people
into obedience.

It Is true, that learned Philosopher gives this reason of it, they were put
into verse, (...), that they might remember them the better: but why may not
this reason also share with it, that they might come with a greater grace and
allurement, that they might hear them as pleasantly as they would do the voice
of a Vial or an Harp, that has Rhetoric enough to still and quiet the evil
spirit? But yet this does not sufficiently paint out the being of a Law, to say
that it is only regula and mensura; and Suarez himself is so ingenuous as to
tell us that he cannot rest satisfied with this description, which he drew but
with a coal as a rudiment rather then a full portraiture; and therefore we'll
give him some time to perfect it, and to put it into more orient colors.

And in the mean time we'll look upon that speculative Lawgiver, Plato I
mean, who was always new modelling of Laws, and rolling Political Ideas in
his mind.

Now you may see him gradually ascending and climbing up to the description of
a law, by these four several steps, and yet he does not reach the top and (...)
of it neither. First, he tells us that Laws are (...), such things as are
esteemed fitting; but because this might extend to all kind of customs too,
his second thoughts limit and contract it more, and tell us that a Law is
(...), Decretum civitatis, yet because the mass and bulk of people, the rude
heap and undigested lump of the multitude may seek to establish (...), as he
calls it; therefore he bethinks himself how to clarify a Law, how to purge out
the dross from it, and tells us in the next place, that it is (...), inventio
ejus quod vere est, where it is very remarkable what this Philosopher means by
(...), by which he is wont usually to point out a Deity, which is styled by
Aristotle (...), but it is not capable of this sense here, for thus Laws are
not (...), but rather (...). Lex est inventio, vel donum Dei, as the Orator
speaks. (...)* therefore in this place speaks these two particulars. (1) (...),
for all rectitude has a being, and flows from the fountain of being, whereas
obliquities and irregularities are mere privations, and non-entities; and it is
a notable speech of Plato, (...), the very same expression which the Apostle
gives to the Law of God, when he calls it the royal Law. (2) (...) implies
(...), every thing that is profitable has a being in it, but you can gather no
fruit from a privation; there is no sweetness in an obliquity, and therefore a
Law is an wholesome mixture of that that is just and profitable, and this is
(...), as Plutarch speaks. Whereas turpe praeceptum non est lex, sed iniquitas,
for obligation that is the very form and essence of a Law; Now every Law
obligat in Nomine Dei; but so glorious a name did never bind to any thing that
was wicked and unequal. (...), and (...), and that only is countenanced from
heaven. The golden chain of Laws, it is tied to the chair of Jupiter, and a
command is only vigorous as it issues out, either immediately or remotely, from
the great Sovereigne of the world. So that (...) is the sure bottom and
foundation of every Law. But then because he had not yet expressed who were the
competent searchers out of this (...), therefore he tells you in the last place
that Laws are (...), which he clears by other things; for (...), are (...), and
(...) are (...). And he resolves it into this, that in all true kinds of
government there is some supreme power derived from God himself, and fit to
contrive Laws and Constitutions agreeable to the welfare and happiness of
those that are to be subject to them; and (...) (as he speaks) are the fittest
makers of Laws.

Yet you must take notice here of these two things. (1) That he did not lay
stresse enough upon that binding virtue, which is the very sinew, nay the life
and soul of a Law. (2) That these three descriptions (...) intend only humane
Laws, and so are not boild up to the purer notion of a Law in general.

And though that same other branch (...) may seem to reach farther yet, it is
too obscure, too much in the clouds to give a clear manifestation of the nature
of a Law. And yet Aristotle does not in this supply Platoes defects, but seems
rather to paraphrase upon these descriptions of humane Laws, and tells in more
enlarged language, that (...). Where yet he cannot possibly mean that every
individuum should give his suffrage, but certainly the representative consent
of the whole will content him.

But I see these ancient Philosophers are not so well furnished, but that we
must return to the Schoolmen again, who by this time have lickt their former
descriptions into a more comely form. We will look upon Aquinas his first.

Lex (says he) est ordinatio rationis ad bonum commune ab eo qui curam habet
Communitatis, Promulgata. It is a rational Ordinance for the advancing of
public good, made known by that power, which has care and tuition of the
public.

And Suarez his picture of a Law, now that it is fully drawn, has much the same
aspect. Lex est commune praeceptum, justum ac stabile, sufficienter
promulgatum. A Law is a public command, a just and immovable command, lifting
up its voice like a trumpet, and in respect of the Lawgiver, though it do
praesupponere actum intellectus, as all acts of the will do; yet it does
formally consist in actu voluntatis; not the understanding, but the will of a
Lawgiver makes a Law. But in respect of him that is subject to the Law it does
consist in actu rationis, it is required only that he should know it, not in
actu voluntatis, it does not depend upon his obedience. The want of his will is
not enough to enervate and invalidate a Law when it is made; all Laws then
would be abrogated every moment. His will indeed is required to the execution
and fulfilling of the Law, not to the validity and existence of the Law: and
thus all the laws of God do not at all depend upon the will of man, but upon
the power and will of the Lawgiver. Now in the framing of every Law there is
to be

1) Intentio boni communis, and thus that speech of Carneades, Vtilitas justi
prope matter, and aequi, if it be took in this sense, is very commendable;
whereas in that other sense (in which it is thought he meant it) is not so much
as tolerable. Lawgivers should send out laws with Olivebranches in their
mouths, they should be fruitful and peaceable; they should drop sweetness and
fatness upon a land. Let not then Brambles make laws for Trees, lest they
scratch them and tear them, and write their laws in blood. But Lawgivers are
to send out laws, as the Sun shoots forth his beams, with healing under their
wings: and thus that elegant Moralist Plutarch speaks. God (says he) is angry
with them that counterfeit his thunder and lightning, (...); his Scepter, and
his Thunderbolt, and his Trident, he will not let them meddle with these. He
does not love they should imitate him in his absolute dominion and sovereignty;
but loves to see them darting out those warm, and amiable, and cherishing
(...), those beamings out of Justice, and goodness, and clemency. And as for
Laws, they should be like so many green and pleasant pastures, into which
these (...) are to lead their flocks, where they may feed sweetly and securely
by those refreshing streams of justice, that runs down like water, and
righteousness like a mighty torrent. And this consideration would sweep down
many cobweblawes, that argue only the venom and subtilty of them that spin
them; this would sweep down many an Achitophels web and many an Hamans web,
many an Herod's web; every spiders web that spreads laws only for the catching
and entangling of weaker ones; such Lawgivers are fit to be Domitians
play-fellows, that made it his Royal sport and pastime to catch flies, and
insult over them when he had done. Whereas a Law should be a staff for a
Commonwealth to lean on, and not a Reed to pierce it through. Laws should be
cords of love, not nets and snares. Hence it is that those laws are most
radical and fundamental, that principally tend to the conservation of the
vitals and essentials of a Kingdom; and those come nearest the Law of God
himself, and are participations of that eternal Law, which is the spring and
original of all inferior and derivative laws. (...), as Plato speaks; and
there is no such public benefit, as that which comes by laws; for all have an
equal interest in them, and privilege by them. And therefore as Aristotle
speaks most excellently, (...). A Law is a pure intellect, not only without a
sensitive appetite, but without a will. It Is pure judgment without affections,
a Law is impartial and makes no factions; and a Law cannot be bribed though a
Judge may. And that great Philosopher does very well prosecute this; If you
were to take physic, (says he) then indeed it is ill being determined by a
book, it is dangerous taking a printed recipe, you had better leave it to the
breast of the Physician, to his skill and advice, who minds your health and
welfare, as being most for his gain and credit. But in point of justice the
case is very different; you had better here depend upon a Rule, then to leave
it to the arbitrary power of a Judge, who is usually to decide a controversy
between two; and if left to himself, were apt to be swayed and bias^ed by
several interests and engagements, which might incline him to one more then
another. Nay now that there is a sixth rule, an immovable law, yet there is too
much partiality in the application of it; how much more would there be, if
there were no rule at all?

But the truth is, the Judge should only follow the ultimum and practicum
dictamenlegis; his will like a ^ae^a potentia is to follow the novissimum lumen
intellectus of this (...) that is to rule and guide him, and therefore justice
was painted blind, though ip^a lex be oculata, for (...), and the will is to
follow the ultimum nutum capitis, the meaning of the Law in all circumstances.

2) In a Lawgiver, there is to be judicium and prudenti^ Architectonica ad
ferendas leges, the Egyptian Hieroglyphick for legislative power, was Oculus
in sceptra; and it had need be such an eye that can see both (...). It had need
have a full and open prospect into public affairs, and to put all advantages
into one scale, and all inconveniences into another.

To be sure the Laws of God, they flow from a fountain of wisdom, and the
laws of men are to be lighted at this Candle of the Lord, which he has set up
in them, and those laws are most potent and prevalent that are founded in
light, (...). Other laws are (...), they may have an iron and adamantine
necessity, but the others have a soft and downy persuasion going along with
them, and therefore as he goes on (...). Reason is so beautiful, as that it
wins and allures, and thus constrains to obedience.

3) There is to be sigillum Legis, I mean Electio and Determinatio Legis,
after a sincere aim at public good, and a clear discovery of the best means
to promote it, there comes then a fixed and sacred resolution; Volumus and
statuimus, this speaks the will of the Lawgiver, and breaths life into the
Law, it adds vigor and efficacy to it. But yet notwithstanding,

4) There must be vox tubae, that is, promulgatio and insinuatio Legis; The Law
it is for a public good, and is to be made known in a public manner; for as
none can desire an unknown good, so none can obey an unknown Law; and therefore
invincible ignorance does excuse; for else men should be bound to absolute
impossibilities. But whether it be required to the publishing of a Law that it
should be in way of writing, which is more fixed and durable, or whether the
manifestation of it in a Vocal and Oral manner will suffice, (which yet is more
transient and uncertain) I leave the Lawyers and Schoolmen to dispute it. This
I am sure, that all the Laws of God are proclaimed in a most sufficient and
emphatical manner.

CHAP. V.
Of the Eternal Law.
HAving thus looked upon the being of a Law in general, we now come to the
spring and original of all Laws, to the eternal Law, that fountain of Law, out
of which you may see the Law of Nature bubbling and flowing forth to the sons
of men. For, as Aquinas does very well tell us, the Law of Nature is nothing
but participatio Legis aeternae in Rationali creatura, the copying out of the
eternal Law, and the imprinting of it upon the breast of a Rational being, that
eternal Law was in a manner incarnated in the Law of Nature.

Now this eternal Law it is not really distinguished from God himself. For Nil
est ab aeterno nisi ipse Deus, so that it is much of the same nature with those
decrees of his, and that Providence which was awake from everlasting. For as
God from all eternity by the hand of infinite wisdom did draw the several
faces and lineaments of being, which he meant to show in time: So he did then
also contrive their several frames with such limits and compass as he meant to
set them; and said to every thing, Hither shall thou go, and no farther.

This the Platonists would call (...), and would willingly heap such honorable
titles as these upon it, (...). And the greatest happiness the other Laws can
arrive unto, is this, that they be (...), ministering and subservient Laws;
waiting upon this their Royal Law. (...); Or as they would choose to style
them, (...), some shadows and appearances of this bright and glorious Law, or
at the best, they would be esteemed by them but (...), the noble offspring and
progeny of Laws; blessing this womb that bare them, and this breast that gave
them suck.

And thus the Law of Nature would have a double portion as being Lex
primogenita, the firstborn of this eternal Law, and the beginning of its
strength. Now as God himself shows somewhat of his face in the glass of
creatures, so the beauty of this Law gives some representations of it self in
those pure derivations of inferior Laws that stream from it. And as we ascend
to the first and supreme being, by the steps of second causes; so we may climb
up to a sight of this eternal Law, by those fruitful branches of secondary
Laws, which seem to have their root in earth, when as indeed it is in heaven;
and that I may vary a little that of the Apostle to the Romans, The invisible
Law of God long before the creation of the world, is now elearly seen being
understood by those Laws which do appear; so that (...) is manifested in them,
God having shown it to them. Thus, as the Schoolmen say very well, Omnis lex
participata supponit legem per essentiam, every impression supposes a seal from
whence it came; every ray of light puts you in mind of a Sun from which it
shines. Wisdom and power, these are the chief ingredients into a Law; now
where does Wisdom dwell, but in the head of a Deity? and where does power
triumph, but in the arm of Omnipotency?

A Law is borne ex cerebro Jovis, and it is not brachium seculare, but Coeleste
that must maintain it, even humane Laws have their virtue radicaliter, and
remote (as the Schools speak) from this eternal Law. Thus that famous and most
renowned Orator and Patriot (Tully I mean) does most admirably express the
lineage and descent of Laws in this golden manner. Hanc video sapientissimorum
^uisse sontentiam, Legem nemque hominum ingeniis ex^ogitata^, neque scitum
aliquod esse Populorum, sed aet^rnum quidd^^ quod universum mundum regeret,
imperandi prohibendique sapientia. It a principem illam Legem and ultimam
ment^m dicebant omnia ratione out cogentis, aut vetanti^ Dei. Which I shall
thus render, Wise men did ever look upon a Law, not as on a spark struck from
humane intellectuals, not blown up or kindled with popular breath, but they
thought it an eternal light shining from God himself irradiating, guiding and
ruling the whole Universe; most sweetly and powerfully discovering what ways
were to be chosen, and what to be refused. And the mind of God himself is the
center of Laws, from which they were drawn, and into which they must return.

Thus also that florid Moralist Plutarch resolves all Law and Justice into that
Primitive and eternal Law, even God himself, for even thus he tells us. Justice
(says he) does not only sit like a Queen at the right hand of Jupiter when he
is upon his throne, but she is always in his bosom, and one with himself; and
he closes it up with this, that God himself is (...). As he is the most ancient
of days, so also is he the most ancient of laws; as he is the perfection of
beings, so is he also the rule of operations.

Nor must I let slip that passage of Plato, where he calls a law (...), the
golden Scepter by which God himself rules and commands; for as all true
Government has a bright stamp of divine Sovereignty, so every true Law has a
plain superscription of his Justice. Laws are anointed by God himself, and
most precious oil drops down upon them to the skirts of a Nation; and the Law
of Nature had the oil of gladness poured out upon it above its fellows.

So then, that there is such a prime and supreme Law is clear, and
unquestionable; but who is worthy to unseal and open this Law? and who can
sufficiently display the glory of it? we had need of a Moses that could ascend
up into the Mount, and converse with God himself, and yet when he came down he
would be feign to put a veil upon his face, and upon his expressions too, lest
otherwise he might too much dazzle inferior understandings; but if the
Schoolmen will satisfy you, (and you know some of them are styled Angelical,
and Seraphical) you shall hear, if you will, what they will say to it.

Now this Law according to them is Aeterna quaedam ratio practica totius
dispositionis, and gubernationis Vniversi. It Is an eternal Ordinance made in
the depth of Gods infinite wisdom and council for regulating and governing of
the whole world, which yet had not its binding virtue in respect of God
himself, who has alvvayes the full and unrestrained liberty of his own
essence, which is so infinite, as that it cannot bind it self, and which
needs no Law, all goodness and perfection being so intrinsecal and essential
to it: but it was a binding determination in reference to the creature, which
yet in respect of all irrational beings, did only fortiter inclinare, but in
respect of Rationals, it does formaliter obligare.

By this great and glorious Law every good action was commanded, and all
evil was discountenanced, and forbidden from everlasting. According to this
righteous Law all rewards and punishments were distributed in the eternal
thoughts of God. At the command of this Law all created beings took their
several ranks and stations, and put themselves in such operations as were best
agreeable and conformable to their beings. By this Law all essences were
ordained to their ends by most happy and convenient means, The life and vigor
of this Law sprang from the will of God himself; from the voluntary decree of
that eternal Lavv-giver, minding the public vvelfare of being; who when
there were heaps of varieties and possibilities in his own most glorious
thoughts, when he could have made such or such worlds in this or that manner,
in this or that time, with such and such species, that should have had more or
fewer individuals, as he pleased, with such operations as he would allow
unto them; he did then select and pitch upon this way and method in which we
see things now constituted; and did bind all things according to their
several capacities to an exact and accurate observation of it.

So that by this you see how those eternal idea's in the mind of God, and
this eternal Law do differ. I speak now of Idea's not in a Platonical sense,
but in a Scholastical, (unless they both agree, as some would have them.) For
Idea est possibilium, Lex tantum futurorum, God had before him the picture of
every possibility, yet he did not intend to bind a possibility, but only a
futurity. Besides, Idea's they were situated only in the understanding of God;
whereas a Law has force and efficacy from his will; according to that much
commended saying, In Coelesti and Angelica curia voluntas Dei Lex est. And then
an Idea does magis respicere artificem, it stays there where first it was; but
a Law does Potius respicere subditum, it calls for the obedience of another, as
Suarez does very well difference them.

Neither yet is this eternal Law the same with the providence of God, though
that be eternal also. But as Aquinas speaks, Lex se habet ad providentiam,
sicut principium generale ad particulares conclusiones; or, if you will, Sicut
principia primae practicae ad prudentiam; his meaning is this, that Providence
is a more punctual and particular application of this binding rule, and is not
the Law it self but the superintending power, which looks to the execution and
accomplishment of it; or as the most acute Suarez has it, Lex dicit jus in
communi constitutum, providentia dicit curam quae de singulis actibus haberi
debet.

Besides, a Law in its strict and peculiar notion, does only reach to rational
beings; whereas Providence does extend and spread it self over all. But that
which vexes the Schoolmen most, is this, that they having required promulgation
as a necessary condition to the existence of a Law, yet they cannot very easily
show how this eternal Law, should be published from everlasting. But the most
satisfactory account that can be given to that, is this, that other Lawgivers
being very voluble and mutable before their mind and will be fully and openly
declared, they may have a purpose indeed, but it cannot be esteemed a Law. But
in God there being no variablenes nor shadow of turning, this his Law has a
binding virtue as soon as it has a being, yet so as that it does not actually
and formally oblige a creature till it be made known unto it: either by some
revelation from God himself which is possible only, and extraordinary; or else
by the mediation of some other ^aw, of the Law of Nature, which is the usual
and constant way that God takes for the promulgation of this his eternal Law.
For that (...), that sacred Manuscript, which is writ by the finger of God
himself in the heart of man, is a plain transcript of this original Law, so far
as it concerns man's welfare. And this you see does most directly bring me to
search out the Law of Nature.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Law of Nature in general, its subject and nature.
THe Law of Nature is that Law which is intrinsecal and essential to a rational
creature; and such a Law is as necessary as such a creature, for such a
creature as a creature has a superior to whose Providence and disposing it
must be subject, and then as an intellectual creature it is capable of a moral
government, so that it is very suitable and connatural to it to be regulated by
a Law; to be guided and commanded by one that is infinitely more wife and
intelligent then it self is; and that minds its welfare more then it self can.
Insomuch that the most bright and eminent creatures, even angelical beings, and
glorified souls are subject to a Law, though with such an happy privilege, as
that they cannot violate and transgress it; whereas the very dregs of entity,
the most ignoble beings are most incapable of a ^aw; for you know inanimate
beings are carried on only with the vehemence and necessity of natural
inclinations; nay, sensitive beings cannot reach or aspire to so great a
perfection as to be wrought upon in such an illuminative way as a Law is; they
are not drawn with these cords of men, with these moral engagements, but in a
more impulsive manner driven and spurred on with such impetuous propensions as
are founded in matter; which yet are directed by the wise and vigilant eye, and
by the powerful hand of a Providence to a more beautiful and amiable end, then
they themselves were acquainted with. But yet the Lawyers, the Civilians would
feign enlarge the Law of Nature, and would willingly persuade us that all
sensitive creatures must be brought within the compass of it; for this they
tell us, Jus natural est quod natura omnia animalia docuit, nam jus illud non
solum Humani Generis est proprium, sed ^mnium animalium quae in terra marique
nascuntur, avium quoque commune est. Nay, they are so confident of it, as that
they instance in several particulars, Maris and foeminae conjunctio, Liberorum
procreatio, educatio, conservatio, Plurima in tutelam propriam facta, Apium
respub. Columbarum conjugia. But not only the Critics, but the Schoolmen also
do sufficiently correct the Lawyers for this their vanity; for certainly these
men mean to bring beasts, birds and fishes into their Courts, and to have some
fees out of them. Perhaps they expect also that the Doves should take Licenses
before they marry: it may be they require of the beasts some penitential, or
(which will suffice them) some pecuniary satisfaction for all their adulteries;
or it may be the Pope will be so favorable, as to give his fellow- Beasts some
dispensation for all their irregular and incongruous mixtures.

But yet notwithstanding, they prosecute this their notion, and go on to frame
this difference between (...), and (...). Jus Gentium, and Jus Natural. The
Law of Nature (say they) is that which is common with men to irrational
Creatures also; but the Law of Nations is only between men: but this
distinction is built upon a very sandy bottom; what the true difference is we
shall see hereafter. Now all that can be pleaded in the behalf of the Lawyers,
is this, that they err more in the word then in the reality. They cannot
sufficiently clear this Title of a Law; for that there are some clear and
visible stamps and impressions of Nature upon sensitive beings, will be easily
granted them by all, and those instances which they bring, are so many ocular
demonstrations of it; but that there should a formal obligation lie upon
Brutes; that they should be bound to the performance of natural commands in a
legal manner; that there should be a (...) upon them, (...), so as that they
should be left without excuse, and lie under palpable guilt, and be obnoxious
to punishment for the violation of it, this they cannot possibly find out,
unless they could set up this Candle of the Lord in sensitive creatures also;
whereas there are in them only some (...) as the Philosopher calls them, which
the Orator renders, virtutum simulacra, some apish imitations of reason, some
shadows of morality, some cunterfeit Ethics, some wild Oeconomicks, some
faint representations of Politics amongst some of them. Yet all this while
they are as far distant from the truth of a Law, as they are from the
strength of Reason. There you may see some sparks of the divine power and
goodness, but you cannot see the Candle of the Lord. Now these men might have
considered if they had pleased; that as for the prints and footsteps of
Nature, some of them may be seen in every being. For Nature has stamped all
entity with the same seal, some softer beings took the impression very kindly
and clearly; some harder ones took it more obscurely.

Nature played so harmoniously and melodiously upon her Harp, as that her music
proved not only like that of Orpheus, which set only the sensitive creatures on
dancing; but like that of Amphion, inanimate beings were elevated by it, even
the very stones did knit and unite themselves to the building of the Universe.

Show me any being, if you can, that does not love its own welfare, that does
not seek its own rest, its center, its happiness, that does not desire its own
good (...), as he speaks; pick out an entity, if you can tell where, that does
not long for the continuation and amplification, for the diffusion and
spreading of its own being. Yet surely the Lawyers themselves cannot imagine
that there is a Law given to all inanimate beings, or that they are accountable
for the violation.

Let them also demurre awhile upon that argument which Suarez urges against
them, that these sensitive creatures are totally defective in the most
principal branches of the Law of Nature; as in the acknowledging of a Deity, in
the adoring of a Deity, where is there the least adumbration of divine worship,
in sensitive beings? What do they more then the heavens, which declare the
glory of God; or the firmament, which shows his handy work? Unless perhaps
the Lawyers can find not only a Commonwealth, but a Church also among the
Bees; some Canonical obedience, some laudable ceremonies, some decency and
conformity amongst them. We'll only set some of the Poets to laugh the Lawyers
out of this opinion; Old Hesiod. tells them his mind very freely.

(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
What are those Laws that are observed by a rending and tearing ^ion, by a
devouring Leviathan? does the Wolf oppress the Lamb by a Law? Can birds of
prey show any Commission for their plundering and violence? thus also that
amorous Poet shows that these sensitive creatures, in respect of lust, are
absolute Antinomians. For thus he brings in a wanton pleading.

-- Coeunt animalia nullo
Caetera delicto, nec habetur turpe juvencae
Far patrem tergo; fit equo sua filia conjux*
Quasque creavit init pecudes caper; ipsaque cujus
Semine concepta est, ex illo concipit ales.
And what though you meet with some (...), some rare patterns of sensitive
temperance? a few scattered and uncertain stories will never evince that the
whole heap and generality of brutes act according to a Law. You have heard it
may be of a chaste Turtle, and did you never hear of a wanton Sparrow? It may
be you have read some story of a modest Elephant, but what say you in the mean
time to whole flocks of lascivious Goats? Yet grant that the several
multitudes, all the species of these irrational creatures were all without spot
and blemish in respect of their sensitive conversation, can any therefore fancy
that they dress themselves by the glass of a Law? Is it not rather a
faithfulness to their own natural inclinations? which yet may very justly
condemn some of the sons of men, who though they have the Candle of the Lord,
and the Lamp of his Law, yet they degenerate more then these inferior beings,
which have only some general dictates of Nature.

This is that motive with which the Satyrist quickened and awakened some of his
time;

Sensum e coelesti demissum traximus arce,
Cujus egent prona and terram spectantia; Mundi
Principio indulsit communis Conditor illis
Tant^m animas, nobis animum quoque. --
A Law it is founded in intellectuals, in (...) not in (...), it supposes a
Noble and freeborn creature, for where there is no Liberty, there is no Law, a
Law being nothing else but a Rational restraint and limitation of absolute
Liberty. Now all Liberty is Radicaliter in Intellectu; and such Creatures as
have no light, have no choice, no Moral variety.

The first and supreme being has so full and infinite a liberty as cannot be
bounded by a Law; and these low and slavish beings have not so much liberty as
to make them capable of being bound. Inter Bruta silent leges. There is no
Turpe nor Honestum amongst them: no duty nor obedience to be expected from
them, no praise or dispraise due to them, no punishment not reward to be
distributed amongst them.

But as the learned Grotius does very well observe; Quoniam in bestias propri^
delictum non cadit, ubi be^tia occiditur ut in lege Mosis ob concubitum cum
homine, non ea vere poena est, sed usus dominii humani in bestiam. For
punishment in its formal notion is (...) (as the Greek Lawyers speak) or as the
forementioned Author describes it; It Is malum Passionis quod infligitur ob
malum actionis. In all punishment there is to be some (...) and (...), so that
every Damnum or Incommodum is not to be esteemed a punishment, unless it be in
vindictam culpae. So as for those Laws given to the Jews, where sometimes the
Beast also was to be put to death: the most renowned Seldom gives a very full
and satisfactory account of it out of the Jewish writings, and does clearly
evidence that the meaning was not this; that the Beast was guilty of a crime,
and had violated a Law, and therefore was to be condemned and put to death; but
it was in order to the happiness and welfare of men; for Bestia cum homine
concumbens was to be stoned: partly because it was the occasion of so foul a
fact, and so fatal punishment unto man; and partly that the sight and presence
of the object might not repeat so prodigious a crime in the thoughts of men,
nor renew the memory of it, nor continue the disgrace of him that died for it.
But there was another different reason in Bove cornupeta, for there, as
Maimonides tells us, in his Morch Nebachim, 'twas ad poenam exigendam a Domino:
the putting of that to death was a punishment to the owner, for not looking to
it better; for I cannot at all consent to the fancy of the Jews, which
Josephus mentions; (...). Although the forenamed Critic give a better sense of
it, then it is likely the Author ever intended: non in alimentum sumi debuit
unde scilicet in Domini commodum cederet: but how such an interpretation can be
extracted out of (...) is not easily to be imagined; for those words of
Josephus plainly imply, that the Jews thought such an Ox could not yield
wholesome nourishment; or at the best, they looked upon it as an unclean Beast,
which was not to be eaten, which indeed was a fond and weak conceit of them,
but they had many such, which yet the learned Author loves to excuse, out of
his great favor and indulgence to them. Yet, which is very remarkable if the
Ox had killed a Gentile, they did not put it to death. It seems it would yield
wholesome nourishment for all that. But this we are sure of, that as God does
not take care for Oxen, (which the acute Suarez does very well understand of
Cura Legislativa, for otherwise God has a Providential care even of them) so
neither does he take care for the punishmeut of Oxen, but it is written for his
Isreal's sake, to whom he has subjected these creatures, and put them under
their feet.

Neither yet can the proper endof a punishment agree to sensitive creatures;
for all punishment is (...), as Plato speaks; (...). It Is not in the power of
punishment to recall what is past, but to prevent what is possible. And that wise
Moralist Seneca does almost translate Plato verbatim; Nemo prudens punit quia
peccatum est, sed ne peccetur: Revocari enim praeterita non possunt, futura
prohibentur.

So that the end of all punishment is either in compensationem, which is (...),
It Is in utilitatem ejus contra quem peccatum est; or else it is in emendationem,
and so in utilitatem peccantis; in respect of which that elegant Moralist
Plutarch styles punishment (...), and Hierocles calls it (...): or else it is
in exemplum, in utilitatem aliorum; (...), as the Greek Orator speaks; the
same which God speaks by Moses, that Israel may hear and fear: and thus
punishment does (...).

But now none of these ends are applyable to sensitive creatures, for there is
no more satisfaction to justice in inflicting an evil upon them, then there is
in the ruining of inanimate beings, in demolishing of Cities or Temples for
Idolatry; which is only for the good of them that can take notice of it; for
otherwise as that grave Moralist Seneca has it, Quam stultum est his irasci,
quae iram nostram nec meruerunt, nec sentiunt: No satisfaction to be had from
such things as are not apprehensive of punishment. And therefore Annihilation,
though a great evil, yet wants this sting and aggravation of a punishment, for
a creature is not sensible of it.

Much less can you think that a punishment has any power to mend or meliorate
sensitive beings, or to give example to others amongst them.

By all this you see that amongst all irrational beings there is no (...), and
therefore no (...), and therefore no (...): from whence it also flows that the
Law of Nature is built upon Reason.

There is some good so proportionable and nutrimental to the being of man, and
some evil so venomous and destructive to his nature, as that the God of Nature
does sufficiently antidote and fortify him against the one, and does maintain
and sweeten his essence with the other. There is so much harmony in some
actions, as that the soul must needs dance at them, and there is such an harsh
discord and jarring in others, as that the soul cannot endure them.

Therefore the learned Grotius does thus describe the Law of Nature; Jus
natural est dictatum Rectae Rationis, indicans, actui alicui, ex ejus
convenientia vel disconvenientia cum ipsa natura Rationali, inesse Moralem
turpitudinem, aut necessitatem Moralem; and consequenter ab Authore Naturae
ipso Deo, talem actum aut vetari aut praecipi. Which I shall thus render; The
Law of Nature is a streaming out of Light from the Candle of the Lord,
powerfully discovering such a deformity in some evil, as that an intellectual
eye must needs abhor it; and such a commanding beauty in some good, as that a
rational being must needs be enamoured withit; and so plainly showing that God
stamped and sealed the one with his command, and branded the other with his
disliking.

Chrysostom makes mention of this (...), and does very rhetorically enlarge
himself upon it in his 12 and 13 Orations (...); where he tells us, that it is
(...); a Radical and fundamental knowledge, planted in the being of man,
budding and blossoming in first principles flourishing and bringing forth
fruit, spreading it self into all the fair and goodly branches of Morality,
under the shadow of which the soul may sit with much complacency and delight.
And as he poures out himself very fluently; (...): There Is no need of Oratory
to allure men to it, you need not heap up arguments to convince them of it: No
need of an Interpreter to acquaint them with it: No need of the minds spinning,
or toyling, or sweating for the attaining of it; it grows spontaneously, it
bubbles up freely, it shines out cheerfully and pleasantly; it was so visible
as that the most infant-age of the world could spell it out, and read it
without a Teacher: (...); as he goes on, 'twas long extant before Moses was
born, long before Aaron rung his golden Bells, before there was a Prophet or a
Judge in Israel. Men knew it (...). They had a Bible of Gods own printing, they
had this Scripture of God within them. By this Candle of the Lord, Adam and Eve
discovered their own folly and nakedness; this Candle flamed in Gains
conscience, and this Law was proclaimed in his heart with as much terror as
'twas published from Mount Sinai, which filled him with those furious
reflections for his unnatural murder. Enoch when he walked with God, walked by
this light, by this rule. Noah the Preacher of righteousness took this Law for
his text. Nay, you may see some print of this Law upon the hard heart of a
Pharaoh, when he cries out, the Lord is righteous, but I and my people have
sinned. Hence it was that God when he gave his Law afresh, gave it in such a
compendious Brachygraphy; he wrote it as 'twere in Characters, (...) without
any explication, or amplification at all. He only enjoined it with an
Imperatorious brevity, he knows there was enough in the breasts of men to
convince them of it, and to comment upon it, only in the second Command there
is added an enforcement, because his people were excessively prone to the
violation of it; and in that of the Sabbath there is given an exposition of it,
because in all its circumstances it was not founded in Natural Light. So that
in Plutarchs language the Decalogue would be called (...), Gold in the lump,
whereas other Lawgivers use to beat it thinner. Of this Law as it is printed by
Nature, Philo speaks very excellently; (...). Right Reason (says he) is that
fixed and unshaken Law, not writ in perishing paper by the hand or pen of a
creature, nor graven like a dead letter upon livelesse and decaying Pillars,
but written with the point of a Diamond, nay with the finger of God himself in
the heart of man; a Deity gave it an Imprimatur; and an eternal Spirit engraved
it in an immortal mind. So as that I may borrow the expression of the Apostle,
the mind of man is (...). And I take it in the very same sense as it is to be
took of the Church; It Is a Pillar of this Truth not to support it, but to hold
it forth. Neither must I let slip a passage in Plutarch which is very near of
kin to this of Philo, (...). You may take it thus: This Royal Law of Nature was
never shut up in a paper-prison, was never confined or limited to any outward
surface; but it was bravely situated in the Center of a Rational Being, always
keeping the Soul company, guarding it, and guiding it; Ruling all its Subjects,
(every obedient Action) with a Scepter of Gold, and crushing in pieces all its
enemies (breaking every rebellious Action) with a Rod of Iron. You may hear the
Lyrick singing out the praises of this Law in a very lofty strain; (...); This
Law which is the Queen of Angelical and humane Beings does so rule and dispose
of them, as to bring about Justice, with a most high and powerful^, and yet
with a most soft and delicate hand.

You may hear Plato excellently discoursing of it, whilst he brings in a
Sophister disputing against Socrates, and such a one as would needs undertake
to maintain this Principle, (...). That there was an untunable antipathy
between Nature and Law; that Laws were nothing but hominum infirmiorum
commenta; that this was (...), the most bright and eminent Justice of Nature,
for men to rule according to Power, and according to no other Law: that (...)
was (...), and (...); that all other Laws were (...): Nay, he calls them
cheatings and bewitchings, (...), they come (says he) like pleasant songs,
when as they are mere charms and incantations. But Socrates after he had stung
this same Callicles with a few quick Interrogations, pours out presently a
great deal of honey and sweetness, and plentifully shows that most pleasant
and conspiring harmony that is between Nature and Law. That there is nothing
more (...) then a Law, that Law is founded in Nature, that it is for the
maintaining and ennobling and perfecting of Nature. Nay, as Plato tells us
elsewhere, There Is no way for men to happiness, unless they follow, (...);
these steps of Reason, these footsteps of Nature. This same Law Aristotle does
more then once acknowledge, when he tells us of (...) and (...); a Positive Law
with him is a more private Law, (...); but Natures Law is a more public and
Catholic Law, (...), which he proves to be a very Sovereign and commanding
Law, for thus he says, (...). The Law that is most filled with Reason must
needs be most victorious and triumphant.

The same Philosopher in his tenth Book De Rep. has another distinction of
Laws; one branch whereof does plainly reach to the Law of Nature.

There are, says he, (...), which are the same with those which he called
(...) before, and then there are (...), which are all one with that he styled
before (...). Now, as he speaks, these (...) are (...); Laws of the first
magnitude, of a Nobler Sphere, of a vaster and purer influence. Where you see
also that he calls the Law of Nature, the Moral Law; and the same which the
Apostle calls (...), he with the rest of the Heathen calls it (...), couching
the same sense in a seeming contradiction.

The Orator has it expressly; Non scripta, sed nata lex.

And amongst all the Heathen, I can meet with none that draws such a lively
pourtraiture of the law of Nature as that Noble Orator does.

You may hear him thus pleading for it: Nec si regnante Tarquinio nulla erat
scripta lex de stupris, etc. Grant, (says he) that Rome were not for the
present furnished with a Positive Law able to check the lust and violence of a
Tarquin; yet there was a Virgin-law of Nature, which he had also ravished and
deflour'd: there was the beaming out of an eternal Law, enough to revive a
modest Lucretia, and to strike terror into the heart of so licentious a Prince:
for as he goes on, Est quidem vera lex Recta Ratio, Naturae congruens, diffusa
in omnes, constans, sempiterna; quae vocet ad officium jubendo, vetando a
fraud deterreat; quae tamen Probos, neque frustra, jubet aut vetat, nec
improbos jubendo aut vetando movet. Hinc Legi nec Propagari fas est, neque
derogari ex hac aliquid licet. Neque tota abrogari potest. Nec vero aut per
Senatum, aut per Populum solvi hac Loge possumus. Neque est quaerendus
explanator, aut interpres ejus alius. Non erat alia Romae, alia Athenis: Alia
nunc, alia posthac: sed and omnes gentes, omnitempore, Vna Lex, and sempiterna
and immutabilis continebit, unusque erit quasi communis magister and Legislator
omnium Deus: Ille Legis hujus Inventor, Disceptator, Lator; Cui qui non parebit
ipse se fugiet, and Naturam hominis aspernabitur; Hoc ipso licet maximas
poenas, etiamsicaetera, quae putantur, effugerit.

His meaning is not much different from this:

Right Reason is a beautiful Law; a Law of a pure complexion, of a natural
color, of a vast extent and diffusion; its color never fades, never dies. It
encourages men in obedience with a smile, it chides them and frowns them out of
wickedness. Good men hear the least whispering of its pleasant voice, they
observe the least glance of its lovely eye; but wicked men sometimes will not
hear it though it come to them in thunder; nor take the least notice of it,
though it should flash out in lightning. None must enlarge the Phylacteries of
this law, nor must any dare to prune off the least branch of it. Nay the malice
of man cannot totally deface so indelible a beauty. No Pope, nor Prince, nor
Parliament, nor People, nor Angel, nor Creature can absolve you from it. This
Law never paints its face, it never changes its color, it does not put on one
Aspect at Athens and another face at Rome, but looks upon all Nations and
persons with an impartial eye, it shines upon all ages and times, and
conditions, with a perpetual light, it is yesterday and to day, the same for
ever. There is but one Lawgiver, one Lord and supreme Judge of this Law, God
blessed for evermore. He was the contriver of it, the commander of it, the
publisher of it, and none can be exempted from it, unless he will be banished
from his own essence, and be excommunicated from humane Nature.

This punishment would have sting enough, if he should avoid a thousand more
that are due to so foul a transgression.

Thus you see that the Heathen, not only had this (...) upon them; but also
they themselves took special notice of it, and the more refined sort amongst
them, could discourse very admirably about it, which must needs leave them the
more inexcusable, for the violation of it. We come now to see where the
strength of the Law of Nature lies, where its nerves are, where it has such an
efficacious influence, such a binding virtue.

And I find Vasquez somewhat singular, and withal erroneous in his opinion,
whilst he goes about to show that the formality of this Law consists only in
that harmony and proportion, or else that discord and disconvenience, which
such and such an object, and such and such an action has with a Rational
Nature; for, says he, every Essence is Mensura Boni and Mali in respect of it
self.

Which, as he thinks, is plainly manifested and discovered also in corporal
beings, which use to fly only from such things as are destructive to their own
forms, and to embrace all such neighbourly and friendly beings as will close
and comply with them. But he might easily have known that as these material
beings were never yet so honored, as to be judged capable of a Law; so neither
can any naked Essence, though never so pure and noble, lay a Moral engagement
upon it self, or bind its own being: for this would make the very same being
superior to it self, as it gives a Law, and inferior to it self, as it must
obey it.

So that the most high and Sovereigne being even God himself, does not subject
himself to any Law; though there be some Actions also most agreeable to his
Nature, and others plainly inconsistent with it, yet they cannot amount to such
a power, as to lay any obligation upon him, which should in the least Notion
differ from the liberty of his own essence.

Thus also in the Commonwealth of humane Nature, that proportion which Actions
bear to Reason, is indeed a sufficient foundation for a Law to build upon; but
it is not the Law it self, nor a formal obligation.

Yet some of the Schoolmen are extreme bold and vain in their suppositions;
so bold, as that I am ready to question whether it be best to repeat them; yet
thus they say,

Si Deus non esset, vel si non uteretur Ratione, vel si non recte judicaret de
Rebus, si tamen in homine idem esset dictamen Rectaerationis, quod nunc est,
haberet etiam eandem Rationem Legis quam nunc habet.

But what are the goodly spoils that these men expect, if they could break
through such a crowd of Repugnancies and impossibilities? the whole result and
product of it will prove but a mere Cipher, for Reason as it is now does not
bind in its own name, but in the name of its supreme Lord and Sovereigne, by
whom Reason lives, and moves, and has its being.

For if only a creature should bind it self to the observation of this Law, it
must also inflict upon it self such a punishment as is answerable to the
violation of it: but no such being would be willing or able to punish it self
in so high a measure as such a transgression would meritoriously require; so
that it must be accountable to some other Legislative power, which will
vindicate its own commands, and will by this means engage a Creature, to be
more mindeful of its own happiness, then otherwise it would be.

For though some of the Gallanter Heathen can brave it out sometimes in an
expression; that the very turpitude of such an action is punishment enough, and
the very beauty of goodness is an abundant reward and compensation; yet we see
that all this, and more then this, did not efficaciously prevail with them for
their due conformity and full obedience to Natures Law; such a single cord as
this, will be easily broken.

Yet there is some truth in what they say, for thus much is visible and
apparent, that there is such a Magnetical power in some good, as must needs
allure and attract a Rational Being; there is such a native fairness, such an
intrinsecal loveliness in some objects as does not depend upon an external
command, but by its own worth must needs win upon the Soul: and there is such
an inseparable deformity and malignity in some evil, as that Reason must needs
loath it and abominate it.

Insomuch as that if there were no Law or Command, yet a Rational being of its
own accord, out of mere love would espouse it self to such an amiable good,
'twould claspe and twine about such a precious object, and if there were not
the least check or prohibition, yet in order to its own welfare, 'twould abhor
and fly from some black evils, that spit out so much venom against its Nature.

This is that which the Schoolmen mean, when they tell us, Quaedam sunt mala,
quia prohibentur; sed alia prohibentur, quia sunt mala: that is, in Positive
Laws, whether Divine, or Humane; Acts are to be esteemed evil upon this
account, because they are forbidden; but in the Law of Nature such an evil was
intimately and inevitably an evil, though it should not be forbidden.

Now that there are such Bona per se, and Mala per se, (as the Schools speak) I
shall thus demonstrate: Quod non est Malum per se potuit non prohiberi, for
there is no reason imaginable why there should not be a possibility of not
prohibiting that which is not absolutely evil, which is in its own nature
indifferent.

But now there are some evils so excessively evil, so intollerably bad, as that
they cannot but be forbidden; I shall only name this one; Odium Dei, for a
Being to hate the Creator and cause of its being, if it were possible for this
not to be forbidden; it were possible for it to be lawful; for Vbi nulla Lex,
ibi nulla praevaricatio: Where there is no Law there is no (...); where there is
no Rule, there is no Anomaly; if there were no prohibition of this, 'twould not
be sin to do it. But that to hate God should not be sin, does involve a whole
heap of contradictions; so that this evil is so full of evil, as that it
cannot but be forbidden; and therefore is an evil in order of Nature before the
Prohibition of it. Besides, as the Philosophers love to speak, Essentiae rerum
sunt immutabiles, Essences neither ebb nor flow, but have in themselves a
perpetual Unity and Identity: and all such properties as flow and bubble up
from Beings, are constant and unvariable, but if they could be stopped in their
motion, yet that state would be violent, and not at all connatural to such a
subject.

So that grant only the being of man, and you cannot but grant this also; that
there is such a constant convenience and Analogy, which some objects have with
its Essence, as that it cannot but incline to them, and that there is such an
irreconcilable Disconvenience, such an Eternal Antipathy between it and other
objects, as that it must cease to be what it is before it can come near them.

This Suarez terms a Natural Obligation, and a just foundation for a Law; but
now before all this can rise up to the height and perfection of a Law: there
must come a Command from some Superior Powers, from whence will spring a Moral
obligation also, and make up the formality of a Law.

Therefore God himself, for the brightning of his own Glory, for the better
regulating and tuning of the world; for the maintaining of such a choice piece
of his workmanship as man is, has published this his Royal command, and
proclaimed it by that Principle of Reason, which he has planted in the being of
man: which does fully convince him of the righteousness, and goodness, and
necessity of this Law, for the materials of it; and of the validity and
authority of this Law, as it comes from the mind and will of his Creator.
Neither is it any eclipse or diminution of the Liberty of that first being; to
say that there is some evil so foul and ill-favored, as that it cannot but be
forbidden by him; and that there is some good so fair and eminent, as that he
cannot but command it.

For, as the Schoolmen observe, Divina voluntas, licet simpliciter libera sit
ad extra, ex suppositione tamen unius, Actus liberi, potest necessitari ad
alium.

Though the will of God be completely free in respect of all his looks and
glances toward the Creature, yet notwithstanding upon the voluntary and free
precedence of one Act, we may justly conceive him necessitated to another, by
virtue of that indissoluble connection and concatenation between these two Acts,
which does in a manner knit and unite them into one.

Thus God has an absolute liberty and choice, whether he will make a promise or
no, but if he has made it, he cannot but fulfill it. Thus he is perfectly free,
whether he will reveal his mind or no, but if he will reveal it, he cannot but
speak truth, and manifest it as it is.

God had the very same liberty whether he would create a world or no, but if he
will create it, and keep it in its comeliness and proportion, he must then
have a vigilant and providential eye over it; and if he will provide for it, he
cannot but have a perfect and indefective Providence agreeable to his own
wisdom, and goodness, and being, so that if he will create such a being as
Man; such a Rational Creature furnished with sufficient knowledge to discern
between some good and evil; and if he will supply it with a proportionable
concourse in its operations; he cannot then but prohibit such acts as are
intrinsecally prejudicial and detrimental to the being of it; neither can he
but command such acts as are necessary to its preservation and welfare.

God therefore when from all eternity in his own glorious Thoughts he contrived
the being of man, he did also with his piercing eye see into all conveniences
and disconveniences, which would be in reference to such a being; and by his
eternal Law did restrain and determine it to such acts as should be
advantageous to it, which in his wise Economy and dispensation, he published to
man by the voice of Reason, by the Mediation of this Natural Law.

Whence it is that every violation of this Law, is not only an injury to man's
being, but ultra nativam rei malitiam, (as the Schools speak) it is also a
vertual and interpretative contempt of that supreme Lawgiver, who out of so
much wisdom, love, and goodness did thus bind man to his own happiness.

So much then as man does start aside and Apostatize from this Law, to so much
misery and punishment does he expose himself.

Though it be not necessary that the Candle of nature should discover the full
extent and measure of that punishment which is due to the breakers of this Law,
for to the Nature of punishment, non requiritur ut praecognita sit poena, sed
ut fiat actus Dignus tali poena. The Lawyers and the Schoolmen both will
acknowledge this Principle.

For as Suarez has it, Sequitur reatus ex intrinseca condition culpae, Ita ut
licet poena per Legem non sit determinata, Arbitrio tamen competentis judicis
puniri possit. Yet the Light of Nature will reveal and disclose thus much: That
a being totally dependent upon another, essentially subordinate and subject to
it, must also be accountable to it for every provocation and rebellion: And for
the violation of so good a Law, which he has set it, and for the sinning
against such admirable Providence and justice as shines out upon it; must be
liable to such a punishment, as that glorious Lawgiver shall judge fit for
such an offense; who is so full of justice, as that he cannot, and so great in
goodness, as that he will not punish a Creature above its desert.

CHAP. VII.
The Extent of the Law of Nature.
THere are stamped and printed upon the being of man, some clear and undelible
Principles, some first and Alphabetical Notions; by putting together of which
it can spell out the Law of Nature.

There Is scattered in the Soul of Man some seeds of light, which fill it with a
vigorous pregnancy, with a multiplying fruitfulness, so that it brings forth a
numerous and sparkling posterity of secondary Notions, which make for the
crowning and encompassing of the Soul with happiness.

All the fresh springs of Common and Fountain-Notions are in the Soul of Man,
for the watering of his Essence, for the refreshing of this heavenly Plant,
this Arbor inversa, this enclosed being, this Garden of God.

And though the wickedness of man may stop the pleasant motion, the clearand
Crystalline progress of the Fountain, yet they cannot hinder the first
risings, the bubling endeavors of it. They may pull off Natures leaves, and
pluck off her fruit, and chop off her branches, but yet the root of it is
eternal, the foundation of it is inviolable.

Now these first and Radical Principles are wound up in some such short
bottomes as these: Bonum est appetendum, malum est fugiendum; Beatitudo est
quaerenda; Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. And Reason thus (...),
incubando super haec ova, by warming and brooding upon these first and oval
Principles of her own laying, it being it self quickened with an heavenly
vigor, does thus hatch the Law of Nature.

For you must not, nor cannot think that Natures Law is confined and contracted
within the compass of two or three common Notions, but Reason as with one foot
it fixes a Center, so with the other it measures and spreads out a
circumference, it draws several conclusions, which do all meet and crowd into
these first, and Central Principles. As in those Noble Mathematical Sciences
there are, not only some first (...), which are granted as soon as they are
asked, if not before; but there are also whole heaps of firm and immovable
Demonstrations, that are built upon them. In the very same manner, Nature has
some Postulata, some (...), which Seneca renders praesumptiones, which others
call Anticipationes Animi,) which she knows a Rational being will presently and
willingly yield unto; and therefore by virtue of these it does engage and
oblige it, to all such commands as shall by just result, by genuine production,
by kindly and evident derivation flow from these.

For men must not only look upon the capital letters of this (...), but they
must read the whole context, and coherence of it; they must look to every jot
and Apex of it, for heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, then one jot or
title of this Law shall vanish.

They must not only gaze upon two or three Principles of the first Magnitude,
but they must take notice of the lesser Celestial Sporades, for these also have
their light and influence.

They must not only skim off the Cream of first Principles, but whatsoever
sweetness comes streaming from the Dugge of Nature, they must feed upon it,
they may be nourisht with it.

Reason does not only crop off the tops of first Notions, but does so gather
all the flowers in Natures Garden, as that it can bind them together in a
pleasant posie, for the refreshment of it self and others.

Thus as a noble Author of our own does well observe, Tota fere Ethica est
Notitia communis: All Morality is nothing but a collection and bundling up of
natural Precepts. The Moralists did but (...), enlarge the fringes of Natures
garment; they are so many Commentators and Expositors upon Natures Law. This
was his meaning that styled Moral Philosophy, (...), that Philosophy which is
for the maintaining and edifying of humane nature. Thus Natures Law is
frequently called the Moral Law. But the Schoolmen in their rougher language
make these several ranks and distributions of natural Precepts. (...). First,
there come in the front Principia Generalia, (as some call them) per se Nota;
ut Honestum est faciendum; Pravum vitandum. Then follow next Principia
Particularia, and magis determinata; ut justitia est servanda; Deus est
colendus; vivendum est Temperate. At length come up in the rear, conclusiones
evidenter illatae, quae tamen cognosci nequeunt nisi per discursum; ut
Mendacium, furtum, and similia prava esse.

These, though they may seem somewhat more remote, yet being fetched from clear
and unquestionable premises, they have Natures Seal upon them; and are thus
far sacred, so as to have the usual privilege of a Conclusion, to be
untoucht and undeniable.

For though that learned Author, whom I mentioned not long before, do justly
take notice of this, that discourse is the usual inlet to Error, and too
often gives an open admission, and courteous entertainment to such falsities,
as come disguised in a Syllogistical form, which by their Sequacious windings
and Gradual insinuations, twine about some weak understandings: yet in the
nature of the thing it self, it is as impossible to collect an Error out of a
Truth, as it is to gather the blackest night out of the fairest Sunshine, or the
foulest wickedness out of the purest goodness. A Conclusion therefore that is
built upon the Sand, you may very well expect its fall, but that which is built
upon the Rock is impregnable and immovable; for if the Law of Nature should not
extend it self so far, as to oblige men to an accurate observation of that,
which is a remoov or two distant from first Principles, 'twould then prove
extremely defective in some such Precepts as do most intimately and intensely
conduce to the welfare and advantage of an Intellectual being.

And these first Notions would be most barren inefficacious speculations,
unless they did thus increase and multiply, and bring forth fruit with the
blessing of heaven upon them.

So that there is a necessary connection, and concatenation between first
Principles, and such Conclusions. For as Suarez has it, Veritas Principii
continetur in conclusione: so that he that questions the Conclusion, must needs
also strike at the Principle. Nay, if we look to the notion of a Law, there is
more of that to be seen in these more particular determinations, then in those
more Universal notions; for Lex est proxima Regula operationum. But now
particulars are nearer to existence and operation then universals: and in this
respect do more immediately steer and direct the motions of such a being. The
one is the bending of the bow, but the other is the shooting of the Arrow.

Suarez does fully determine this in such words as these, Haec omnia Praecepta
(he means both Principles and Conclusions) prodeunt a Deo Auctore Naturae, and
tendunt ad eundem finem, nimirum ad debitam conservationem, and Naturalem
perfectionem, seu foelicitatem Humanae Naturae.

This Law of Nature as it is thus brancht forth, does bind in foro
Conscientiae; for as that noble Author, (whom I more then once commended
before) speaks very well in this; Natural Conscience it is Centrum Notitiarum
Communium, and it is a kind of Sensus Communis in respect of the inward
faculties, as that other is in respect of the outward Senses. It Is a competent
Judge of this Law of Nature: it is the Natural Pulse of the Soul, by the beating
and motion of which the state and temper of men is discernable. The Apostle
Paul thus felt the Heathens pulse, and found their consciences sometimes
accusing them, sometimes making Apology for them. Yet there is a great deal of
difference between Natural Conscience, and the Law of Nature; for (as the
Schoolmen speak) Conscience, it is Dictamen Practicum in Particulari; it is a
prosecution and application of this Natural Law, as Providence is of that
Eternal Law.

Nay, Conscience sometimes does embrace only the shadow of a Law, and does
engage men though erroneously to the observation of that which was never
dictated by any just Legislative power. Nor is itcontent to glance only at
what is to come, but Janus-like it has a double aspect, and so looks back to
what is past, as to call men to a strict account for every violation of this Law.

Which Law is so accurate as to oblige men not only ad Actum, but ad modum
also: it looks as well to the inward form and manner, as to the materiality
and bulk of outward actions: for every being owes thus much kindness and
courtesy to it self, not only to put forth such acts as are essential and
intrinsecal to its own welfare; but also to delight in them, and to fulfill them
with all possible freeness and alacrity, with the greatest intensnesse and
complacency. Self-love alone might easily constrain men to this natural
obedience. Humane Laws indeed rest satisfied with a visible and external
obedience; but Natures Law darts it self into the most intimate Essentials, and
looks for entertainment there.

You know that amongst the Moralists only such acts are esteemed Actus Humani
that are Actus Voluntarii. When Nature has tuned a Rational Being, she expects
that every string, every faculty should spontaneously and cheerfully sound
forth his praise.

And the God of Nature that has not chained, nor fettered, nor enslaved such a
Creature, but has given it a competent liberty and enlargement; the free
diffusion and amplification of its own Essence; he looks withal that it should
willingly consent to its own happiness, and to all such means as are necessary
for the accomplishment of its choicest end: and that it should totally abhor
whatsoever is destructive and prejudicial to its own being; which if it do,
'twill presently embrace the Law of Nature, if it either love its God or it
self; the command of its God, or the welfare of it self.

Nay, the precepts of this natural Law are so potent and triumphant, as that
some acts which rebel against it, become not only Illiciti, but Irriti, as both
the Schoolmen and Lawyers observe: they are not only irregularities, but mere
nullities: and that either ob defectum Potestatis and Incapacitatem Materiae,
as if one should go about to give the same thing to two several Persons, the
second Donation is a Moral Nonentity: or else Propter Perpetuam rei
indecentiam, and Turpitudinem Durantem; as in some Anomalous and incestuous
marriages. And this Law of Nature is so exact, as that it is not capable of an
(...), which the Lawyers call Emendatio Legis: but there is no mending of
Essences, nor of Essential Laws, both which consist in Puncto, in
indivisibili, and so cannot Recipere magis and minus: nor is there any need of
it, for in this Law there is no rigor at all, it is pure equity, and so nothing
is to be abated of it. Neither does it depend only a mente Legis-latoris, which
is the usual Rise of Mitigation; but it is conversant about such acts as are Per
se tales, most intrinsecally and inseparably.

Yet notwithstanding this Law does not refuse an Interpretation, but Nature
herself does gloss upon her own Law, as in what circumstances such an Act is
to be esteemed murder, and when not; and so in many other branches of Natures
Law, if there be any appearance of Intricacy, any seeming knot and difficulty,
Nature has given edge enough to cut it asunder.

There is another Law bordering upon this Law of Nature, Jus Gentium, Juri
Naturali Propinquum and consanguineum; and it is Medium quoddam, inter Jus
Natural and Jus Civil. Now this Jus Gentium is either per similitudinem and
concomitantiam, when several Nations in their distinct conditions have yet some
of the same positive Laws: or else (which indeed is most properly (...)) Per
communicationem and Societatem, which, as the learned Grotius describes, Ab
omnium, vel multarum gentium voluntate vim obligandi accepit: that is, when all
or many of the most refined Nations bunching and clustering together, do bind
themselves by general compact, to the observation of such Laws, as they judge
to be for the good of them all. As the honorable entertainment of an
Ambassador, or such like.

So that it is Jus humanum, non scriptum. It Is (...). For as Justinian tells us,
Vsu exigente, and Humanis necessitatibus, Gentes humanae quaedam sibi jura
constituerunt. Whereas other humane Laws have a narrower sphere and compass,
and are limited to such a state, which the Orator styles, Leges populares, the
Hebrews call their positive Laws (...), sometimes (...), though the one do
more properly point at Ceremonials, the other at Judicials; The Septuagint
render them (...), some others call them (...), as they call natural Laws
(...), which the Hellenists render (...). But according to the Greek Idiom,
these are termed (...), and the others (...).

Now, though the formality of humane Laws do flow immediately from the power
of some particular men; yet the strength and sinew of these Laws is founded in
the Law of Nature; for Nature does permissively give them leave to make such
Laws as are for their greater convenience; and when they are made, and whilst
they are in their force and vigor, it does oblige and command them not to
break or violate them: for they are not to contradict their own Acts, nor to
oppose such commands, as ex Pacto were framed and constituted by themselves.

Thus much for the Law of Nature in general. We must look in the next place, to
that Lumen Naturae, that Candle of the Lord by which this Law of Nature is
manifested and discovered.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Law of Nature is discovered? not by Tradition, nor an Intellectus
agens.
GOD having contrived such an admirable and harmonious Law for the guiding and
governing of his Creature, you cannot doubt but that he will also provide
sufficient means for the discovery and publishing of it; Promulgation being
pre-requir'd as a necessary condition before a Law can be valid and vigorous.
To this end therefore he has set up an Intellectual Lamp in the soul, by the
light of which it can read this (...), and can follow the commands of its
Creator.

The Schoolmen with full and general consent understand that place of the
Psalmist of this Lumen Natural, and many other Authors follow them in this too
securely. Nay, some Critical writers quote them, and yet never chide them for
it. The words are these, (...) Eleva super nos lumen vultus tui: but yet they,
very ignorantly, though very confidently render them; Signatum est super nos
lumen vultus tui: and they do as erroneously interpret it of the light of
Reason, which (say they) is Signaculum quoddam, and impressio increatae lucis
in Anima. So much indeed is true, but it is far from being an Exposition of
this place. Yet perhaps the Septuagint misled them, who thus translate it;
(...); but Aquila, that had a quicker eye here, renders it (...), and Symmachus
(...).

The words are plainly put up in the form of a Petition to heaven, for some
smiles of love, for some propitious and favorable glances, for Gods gracious
presence and acceptance. And they amount to this sense; If one Sun do but shine
upon me, I shall have more joy, then worldlings have, when all their Stars
appear.

But to let these pass with the Errors of their vulgar Latin; I meet with one
more remarkable and of larger influence; I mean that of the Jews, who (as that
worthy Author of our own in his learned book De Jure Naturali secundum Hebraeos
makes the report) do imagine and suppose that the light of Nature shines only
upon themselves originally and principally, and upon the Gentiles only by way
of Participation and dependence upon them: They all must light their candles at
the Jewish Lamp. Thus they strive as much as they can to engrosse and
monopolize this natural light to themselves; only it may be sometimes out of
their great liberality they will distribute some broken beams of it to the
Gentiles. As if these (...) these Praecepta Noachidarum had been locked up and
cabinetted in Noah's Ark, and afterward kept from the profane touch of a
Gentile: as if they had been part of that bread, which our Savior said was not
to be cast unto dogs; and therefore they would make them be glad to eat of the
crumbs that fall from their masters table. As if they only enjoyed a Goshen of
Natural light, and all the rest of the world were benighted in most palpable
and unavoidable darkness; as if this Sun shined only upon Canaan; as if Canaan
only flowed with this milk and honey; as if no drops of heaven could fall upon
a Wilderness, unless an Israelite be there; As if they had the whole
impression of Natures Law; as if God had not dealt thus with every Nation; as
if the Heathen also had not the knowledge of this Law. It Is true, they had the
first beauty of the rising Sun, the first peepings out of the day, the first
dawnings of natural light; for there were no other that it could then shine
upon: but do they mean to check the Sun in its motion, to stop this Glant in
his race, to hinder him from scattering rays of light in the world? Do they
think that Natures Fountain is enclosed, that her Well is sealed up, that a Jew
must only (...) of it, and a Gentile must die for thirst? O but they tell you
they are (...), a Darling, and peculiar Nation.

We shall fully acknowledge with the Hebrew of Hebrews, (...), though not in
respect of natural light, which doubtless is planted by Nature in the heart
both of Jew and Gentile, and shines upon both with an equal and impartial beam.
And yet this must not be denied, that the Jews had even these Natural notions
much clarified and refined from those clouds and mists which (...) Original sin
had brought upon them, and this by means of that pure and powerful beam of
heavenly truth which shined more peculiarly upon them; those Laws which Nature
had engraven (...) upon the tables of their hearts, sin like a moth had eaten
and defaced (as in all other men it had done) but in them those fugitive
letters were called home again, and those many Lacunae were supplied and made
good again by comparing it with that other Copy (of Gods own writing too) which
Moses received in the Mount; and besides, they had a great number of revealed
truths discovered to them, which were engraffed indeed upon the stock of
Nature, but would never have grown out of it: so that this second Edition was
Auctior also, as well as Emendatior; but yet for all this they have no greater
a portion of the light of Nature then all men have. Thus Christians also are
(...), and yet in respect of their natural condition, have no more then others.

Now if the Jews have so many privileges, why are not they content, why do
not they rest satisfied with them? Why will they thus be claiming and
arrogating more then their due?

Are they the firstborn, and have they a double portion, and do ^^ey envy
their younger brethren, their birth and being? Have they a bright and eminent
Sunshine, and do they envy a Gentile the Candle of the Lord?

No (as that learned Author tells us) they will grant that the Gentiles had
their Candle, and their Torch, but it was lighted at the Jews Sun. They may
have some bottles of water to quench their thirst, but they must be filled at
their streams, (...), ex fluentis Hebraicis.

But truly, if they were at their disposing, there be some that will question,
whether they would let them sip at their fountain or no; whether they would let
them light a Candle with them or no. Yes (may some say) Pythagoras lighted his
Candle there, and Plato lighted his Candle at theirs.

But what did they borrow common Notions of them? did they borrow any Copies of
Natures Law from them? was this (...), only some Jewish Manu-script, which they
translated into Greek? Can Pythagoras know nothing, unless by a present (...)
a Jews soul come and inform him? That Pythagoras should be circumcised by the
persuasion of the Jews is not impossible; but that he could not know how to
^orbid Blasphemy, without the Jews teachings, deserves a good argument to prove
it.

If they will but attend to Pythagoras himself, they shall hear him resolving
these first Notions of his and others, into Natures bounty, and not into the
Jews courtesy; for thus he sings; -- (...). And Hierocles in his Comment
(which is as golden as Pythagoras his Verses) does thus paraphrase upon his
meaning, (...). And these Principles which he does call here (...), he does not
long after style (...).

Then as for Plato, to be sure he will tell them, that he has connate Species of
his own, for which he was never beholding to the Jews. He Will tell them, that he
has many Spermatical Notions, that were never of their sowing; Many vigilant
sparks that were never of their striking or kindling. He Will but set his
Reminiscence awork, and will visit his old acquaintance, recall many ancient
truths, that are now slipped out of his memory, and have been too long absent.

And surely Aristotle never thought that his Rasa Tabula, could have nothing
printed upon it, till a Jew gave it an Imprimatur, he little imagined that the
Motion of his Soul depended upon these Oriental Intelligences.

Therefore if they please they may spare that pretty story of theirs, which
that learned Author, whom I have so often commended, does acquaint us with, but
yet withal esteems it fabulous of Simeon the just, the High Priest reading of
Lectures to Aristotle a little before his death, of the immortality of the
soul, and the reward and punishment which are reserved for another life: and
that so powerfully, as that he convinced him, and converted him.

But certainly that brave Philosopher could easily spy out immortality stamped
upon his own soul, though such a Monitor had been absent, and did know long
before that time by the improvement of his own intellectuals, that he must give
an account of his being and operations to his (...).

What means then that voice of the Oracle;
(...)
(...), Truly the Oracle here is not so obscure, but that you may easily
perceive that by (...), it did not mean Intelligentia, which is (...), but only
Sapientia, which is (...). Now why they had more of this, the Apostle will give
you the best account of it; (...), because they had a better Oracle to consult
withal, then this was.

Yet surely neither Jew nor Gentile need go to an Oracle to enquire of common
Notions. But in respect of these that Anonymous Author of the life of
Pythagoras speaks an unquestionable truth; (...); that is the Athenians had not
an Adventitious and Precarious kind of knowledge; but that Nature which gave
them a Being, gave them Education also; As her womb bare them, so her breasts
gave them suck; As they were (...), so likewise (...).

But you shall hear a bragging and doting Egyptian telling you, (...). The
Greeks were always boys in knowledge. Grant that they were children; yet
cannot they suck at Natures dug? Cannot they read Natures Alphabet, unless a
Jew come with his fescue and teach them?

Howere, the Egyptian has little Reason to triumph, for to be sure, if there be
any light in Egypt more then this of Nature, they may thank Israelites for it:
if there be any corn in Egypt, they may thank a Joseph for providing of it.
These, if any, lighted their Candles at the Israelites, and received more
precious jewels from them, then ever they were robbed of by them.

This indeed must be granted that the whole generality of the Heathen went a
gleaning in the Jewish fields. They had some of their grapes, some ears of
corn that dropped from them. Pythagoras and Plato especially were such notable
gleaners, as that they stole out of the very sheaves, out of those truths that
are bound up in the sacred volume* Yet all this while they nere stole first
Principles, nor demonstrations; but they had them (...), and needed not to take
such a long journey for them.

Give then unto the Jew the things of the Jews, and to the Gentile, the things
that are the Gentiles, and that which God has made common, call not thou
peculiar. The Apostle Paul's question is here very seasonable, (...).

There was never any partition wall between the Essence of Jew and Gentile: Now
the Law of Nature it is founded in Essentials. And that which is disconvenient
to that Rational Nature which is in a Jew, is as opposite and disagreeable to
the same Nature in a Gentile; as that good which is suitable and proportionable
to a Jew in his Rational being, is every way as intrinsecal to the welfare of a
Gentile* that does not differ essentially from him. So likewise for the
Promulgation of this Law, being it does equally concern them both, and equally
oblige them both; it is also by Nature equally published and manifested to them
both. So that what the Apostle speaks in respect of the freeness of
Evangelistical light, we may say the very same in respect of the commonnesse of
natural light: (...), but all these are one in respect of Nature, and natures
Law, and natures Light.

CHAP. IX.
The Light of Reason.
THis law of Nature having a firm and unshaken foundation in the necessity and
convenience of its materials, becomes formally valid and vigorous by the mind
and command of the Suprem^ Lawgiver; So as that all the strength and nerves,
and binding virtue of this Law are ^ooted and fastened partly in the excellency
and equity of the commands themselves, but they principally depend upon the
Sovereignty and Authority of God himself: thus contriving and commanding the
welfare of his Creature, and advancing a Rational Nature to the just perfection
of its being. This is the rise and original of all that obligation which is in
the Law of Nature. But the publishing and manifestation of this Law which must
give notice of all this, does flow from that heavenly beam which God has
darted into the soul of man; from the Candle of the Lord, which God has lighted
up for the discovery of his own Laws; from that intellectual eye which God
has framed and made exactly proportionable to this Light.

Therefore we shall easily grant that the obligation of this Law does not come
from this Candle of the Lord; and others I suppose will not deny that the
Manifestation of this Law does come from this Candle of the Lord, that the
Promulgation of this Law is made by the voice of Reason.

In order of Nature, this Law, as all others, must be made, before it can be
made known, Entity being the just Root and bottom of Intelligibility. So that
Reason does not facere or far legem, but only invenire, as a Candle does not
produce an object, but only present it to the eye, and make it visible. All
verity it is but the gloss of Entity, there is a loving Union and Communion
between them, as soon as being is it may be known.

So that Reason is the Pen by which Nature writes this Law of her own
composing; This Law it is published by Authority from heaven, and Reason is the
Printer: This eye of the soul it is to spy out all dangers and all advantages,
all conveniences and disconveniences in reference to such a being, and to warn
the soul in the name of its Creator, to fly from such irregularities as have an
intrinsecal and implacable malice in them, and are prejudicial and destructive
to its Nature, but to comply with, and embrace all such acts and objects as
have a native comeliness and amiablenesse, and are for the heightning and
ennobling of its being.

Hierocles does most excellently set forth this, whilst he brings that golden
Verse of Pythagoras to the Touchstone; (...), and does thus brighten it, and
display it in its full glory, (...); his meaning's this: There is a kind of
Canon Law in the essences of men, and a Rational tuning all its faculties
according to those lessons which Nature has set; it does (...), with a most
grateful and harmonious life, pleases both it self and others. So whilst he
weighs that other golden verse in the Balance, he speaks very high. (...); he
gives us this learned account of it; (...); which I may thus render; To obey
right Reason, it is to be persuaded by God himself; who has furnished and adorned
a Rational Nature with this intrinsecal and essential Lamp, that shines upon
it, and guides it in the ways of God, so as that the soul and its Creator
become pefect Unisons, and being blessed with the light of his countenance, it
steeres all its motions and actions with much security and happiness. But if
this Lamp of Reason be darkened and obscured, the soul presently embraces a
Cloud, and courts a Shadow; the blackest and most palpable Atheism and
wickedness must needs cover the face of that soul, that starts back and
apostatizes from its God and its Reason. Where you cannot but take notice that
he calls the light of Reason (...), which is an expression very parallel to
this of Solomon, the Candle of the Lord.

That wise Heathen Socrates was of the very same mind, in whose mouth that
speech was so frequent and usual, (...); It Is in vain to trust any thing but
that which Reason tells you has the Seal of God upon it. Thus that Heathen
Orator very fully and emphatically; Nos Legem bonam a Mala nulla alia nisi
Naturali norm^ dividere possumus; Nec solum Jus and Injuria a Natura
dijudicantur, sed omnino omnia honesta and Turpia. Nam and communis
Intelligentia nobis Res not as efficit, ea quae in animis nostris inchoavit, ut
Honesta in virtute ponantur, in vitiis Turpia; That is, Nature has distinguished
good from evil, by these indelible stamps and impressions which she has graven
upon both; and has set Reason as a competent Judge to decide all Moral
controversies, which by her first seeds of light plainly discovers an
honorable beauty in goodness, and an inseparable Blot in wickedness: hence
these three (...) are esteemed equivalencies by that Emperor and Philosopher
Marcus Antonius. But yet the Jews will by no means yield that there is light
enough in the dictates of Reason to display common notions, for they look upon
it as a various and unsatisfactory light mixed with much shadow and darkness,
laboring with perpetual inconstancy and uncertainty. What are first Principles
become so mutable and treacherous? Are Demonstrations such fortuitous and
contingent things? had I met with this in a fluctuating Academick, in a Rolling
Sceptique, in a Sextus Empiricus, in some famous Professor of doubts, I should
then have looked upon it as a tolerable expression of their trembling and
shivering opinion. But how come I to find it among those Diverse into the
depths of knowledge, who grant a certainty, and yet will not grant it to
Reason? I would they would tell us then, where we might hope to find it;
Surely not in an Oriental Tradition, in a Rabinical dream, in a dusty
Manuscript, in a Remnant of Antiquity, in a Bundle of Testimonies; and yet this
is all you are like to get of them, for they tell you this story, that these
Natural precepts, tum in ipsis rerum initiis, tum in ea quae fuit post diluvium
instauratione, Humano generi, ipsa sanctissima Numinis voce fuisse imperata,
atque ad Posteros per Traditionem solum inde manasse; that is, that these
commands were proclaimed by the voice of God himself, first to Adam in the
first setting out of the world; and then they were repeated to Noah when there
was to be a reprinting, and new Edition of the world after the Deluge; and thus
were in way of Tradition to be propagated to all posterity. O rare and
admirable foundation of Plerophory! O incomparable method and contrivance to
find out certainty, to raze out first Principles, to pluck down
Demonstrations, to demolish the whole structure and fabric of Reason, and to
build upon the word of two or three Hebrew Doctors, that tell you of a voice,
and that as confidently, as if they had heard it, and they are entrusted with
this voice, they must report and spread it unto others, though they do it like
unfaithful Ecchos with false and imperfect rebounds.

This is to tell you that men have no Candle of the Lord within them, but only
there must be Traditio Lampadis, a General and Public light, that must go
from one hand to another.

This is to blot out the (...), to leave out Canonical Scripture, and to give
you Apochrypha in the room of it. It Is to set a Jew in the chair dictating the
Law of Nature, with the very same infallibility, that the Pope promises himself
in determining all points of Religion. Therefore some it may be will have
recourse to such an Intellectus Agens as must clear up all things. Now this is
another Oriental Invention, for those Arabian writers Averroes and Avicen, did
not look upon the spirit of a man as the Candle of the Lord, but must needs
have an Angel to hold the Candle to enlighten men in their choicest operations.
Nay, Averroes will allow but one Angel to superintend and prompt the whole
Species of mankind; yet Zabarel questions whether his bounty will not extend
to two, the one for an Intellectus Agens, the other for an Intellectus Patiens.
To be sure Averroes fancied man as the most imperfect and contemptible being
that could be, totally dependant upon an Angel in his most essential workings;
the whole sphere of his being was to be moved by an Intelligence.

He fancied him a Ship steered only by an Angel; he fancied him a Lute that
made no music but by the touch of an Angel. It had been well if his Genius
would have tuned him a little better. It had been well if his Pilot would have
kept him from making shipwreck of Reason. If his Intelligence would but have
moved his Head a little more harmoniously. But by this, if he had pleased he
might have perceived that there were pluralities and differences of
understandings, because there were so few of his mind. Yet Plotinus and
Themistius that were his Seniors, had more then a tincture of this Error; and
looked upon this (...), as if it had been Sol quidam incorporeus nulli oriens
aut occidens, sed semper and ubique omnibus praesens.

Which notion Cardan prosecutes so far, as that he falls into this most
Prodigious conceit, that this Intellectus Agens does offer its light and
assistance to sensitive beings also, but that the churlishness of the matter
will not welcome and entertain such pure irradiations, for thus he speaks;
Eundem Intellectum etiam belluis imminere, easque ambire: At ipsi non patere
Aditum, propter materiae ineptitudinem. Igitur hominem intus irradiare, circum
belluas extrinsecus collucere. Neque alia re Hominis Intellectum, ab Intellectu
differ belluarum. Idcirco belluas ea omnia habere inchoata, quae in homine
perfecta sunt. But Scaliger has sufficiently corrected him for this brutish
Tenent; so that I shall need only to add this; Cardans Intellectus Agens, was
so familiar, as that some question whether he were a good Angel or no. Nay,
some tell us that he was left him for an inheritance, shut up in a Ring,
enclosed in a golden circle, a goodly sphere for an Intelligence to move in.
But there were many others also enamored with this opinion, of an Intellectus
Agens; the Platonists were excessively enclinable to it, and were always so
much conversant with spirits, which made their Philosophy ever questioned for a
touch of Magic. Nay, Scaliger tells us of some others, that will have this
Intellectus Agens to be caput and Author consiliorum omnium, the contriver of
the rarest and wittiest inventions; the Author of Guns, of Clocks, of Printing,
of the Pyxis nautica: Materialem vero Intellectum esse quasi Vsufructuarium,
and beneficiarium illius.

The Jews especially admire and adore the Influence of an Intellectus Agens,
and not forgetful of their Primogeniture and privileges, but being always a
conceited and a bragging generation, they would fain persuade us that God
himself is their Intellectus Agens, but to the Gentiles he sends only an Angel
to illuminate them.

The Jews indeed sometimes call every faculty an Angel, as one of the best
amongst them, Maimonides tells us, but yet here they properly mean an Angelical
being, distinct and separate from the soul, and just according to Averroes
Determination, the lowest Intelligence, Vltimus Motor Coelestium. Their own
Intellectus Agens they call (...) and (...), the presence and power of God
dwelling in the understanding, the influence of it they term (...), as the
forementioned Maimonides observes, that is, a copious and abundant supply of
light shining upon the Mind. According to which they understand that place of
the Psalmist (...) in lumine tuo videbimus lumen; which the Schoolmen more
truly expound of the Lumen Gloriae in the Beatifical vision, though it may
reach also to that joy and delight which Saints have in communion with God here.

Amongst fresher and more modern writers, Zabarel is very intense and zealous
for this, that God himself is the Intellectus Agens of the soul: but being a
most humble and devoted servant of Aristotle, he can by no means quiet and
content himself unless he can show the world that his Master was of the same
judgment.

This makes him to suborne two or three Testimonies, or at least to tamper with
a place or two; and then bravely to conclude that without doubt 'twas the mind
of the Philosopher, which is not only against the whole stream of other
Interpreters, but against the known and Orthodox Principles of him that was
wiser then to countenance such a vanity.

It should seem by that eminent writer of our own, that Friar Bacon was of the
same mind too, for whose words these are quoted amongst many others, out of an
Oxford-Manuscript; Deus respectu animae est sicut Sol respectu Oculi
Temporalis, and Angeli sicut stellae. Now what angels they were that this Roger
Bacon fixed his eye upon, whether they were not fallen Stars, let others
examine. I should think that Cardans Intellectus Agens and his were both much
of the same color.

But this you may perceive in him and the rest of the great Pleaders for an
Intellectus Agens, that they found all their Arguments in a pretty similitude
of an eye, and light, and colors, as if this were some inconquerable
Demonstration. Whereas that great Master of subtleties, whom I have more then
once named before, has made it appear, that the whole Notion of an Intellectus
Agens is a mere fancy and superfluity.

Yet this may be granted to all the forementioned Authors, and this is the only
spark of Truth, that lies almost buried in that heap of Errors; That God
himself as he does supply every being, the Motion of every Creature with an
intimate and immediate concourse every way answerable to the measure and degree
of its Entity; so he does in the same manner constantly assist the
Understanding with a proportionable Cooperation. But then as for any such
Irradiations upon the soul in which that shall be merely patient: God indeed if
he be pleased to reveal himself in a special and extraordinary manner, he may
thus shine out upon it, either immediately by his own light, or else drop
Angelical influence upon it: but that this should be the natural and ordinary
way, necessarily required to Intellectual workings, is extermely prejudicial to
such a noble Being as the soul of Man is; to which God gave such bright
participations of himself, and stamped his Image upon it, and left it to its own
workings, as much as any other created being whatsoever. Nay, as Scaliger does
most confidently object it to Cardan, you will not have one Argument left, by
which you can evince the Immortality of the soul, if ye shall resoive all the
excellency of its being and operations into an Intellectus Agens really
distinct from it.

But then to make this (...), and (...), only the various aspects and different
relations of the same soul, is but a weak and needless device, and if 'twere
Aristotle's, to be sure 'twas none of his Masterpieces; for it is built upon I
know not what Phantasms and false Appearances.

Whereas those Species and colors, those pictures and representations of being
that are set before an Intellectual eye, carry such a light and beauty in
themselves as may justly engratiate them with the understanding. And though some
tell us that they have too much dross and impurity, that they are too muddy
and feculent, not proportionable to the purity of a reasonable soul, yet let
them but think of those many strainers they have gone through: those double
refinings and clarifyings, that they have had from so many percolations: and
withal they may know that the understanding can drink in the most pure and
flowring part of the Species, and can leave the dregs at the bottom. Have
you not thus often seen a seal stamping it self upon the wax, and yet not
communicating the least particle of matter, but only leaving a form and
impression upon it?

However, there is as much proportion between these Species and an Intellectus
Patiens, as between these and an Intellectus Agens. Nay, there is more
proportion between these Species and the understanding, then between the soul
and body, which yet are joined and married together in a most loving and
conjugal union.

CHAP. X.
Of the consent of Nations*
THough Natures law be principally proclaimed by the voice of Reason; though it
be sufficiently discovered by the Candle of the Lord; yet there is also a
secondary and additional way, which contributes no small light to the
manifestation of it: I mean the harmony and joint consent of Nations, who
though there be no (...) nor (...), no communion, nor commerce, nor compact
between them, yet they do tacitly and spontaneously conspire in a dutiful
observation of the most radical and fundamental Laws of Nature.

So that by this pleasant consort of theirs you may know that the same Nature
did tune them all. When you see the same prints and impressions upon so many
several Nations, you easily perceive that they were stamped eodem communi
Sigillo, with the same public Seal. When you see the very same seeds thrown
in such different soyles, yet all increasing and multiplying, budding and
blossoming, branching out and enlarging themselves into some fruitful
expressions; you know then that 'twas Natures hand, her bountiful and
successeful hand that scattered such Seminal Principles amongst them; you
presently know that it is no enclosed way, it is a Via Regia, in which you meet
with so many Travelers, such a concourse and confluence of People.

Amongst many others, the learned Grotius is full and express for searching out
the Law of Nature in this manner.

You shall hear his own words which he speaks in that excellent work of his, De
jure Belli and Pacis: Esse aliquid juris Naturalis probari solet tum ab eo quod
Prius est, tum ab eo quod Posterius; quarum probandi Rationum illa subtilior
est, haec popularior. A Priori, si ostendatur Rei alicujus convenientia aut
disconvenientia Necessaria cum Natura Rationali ac Sociali. A posteriori vero,
si non certissima side, certe probabiliter admodum juris Naturalis esse
colligitur id, quod apud gentes omnes, aut moraliores omnes tale esse creditur.
And ^he does annex this reason of it; Vniversalis effectus, Vniversalem
requirit causam. When you see such fresh springs and streams of Justice
watering several Kingdoms and Nations, you know that they are participations of
some rich Fountain, of a vast Ocean. When you see so many Rays of the same
light, shooting themselves into the several corners of the world, you presently
look up to the Sun; as the glorious original of them all.

Let me then a little vary that place in the Acts of the Apostles: you may hear
every man in his own Language, in his own Dialect, and Idiom speaking the same
works of Nature; Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in
Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and Cappadocia; in Pontus, in Asia, Phrygia, and
Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers of
Rome, Jews and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, you may hear them speak in
their Tongues the wonderful works of God and Nature.

For whatsoever is Natural and Essential is also universal in order to such a
Species. The Philosopher speaks to this very pertinently; (...); That is,
whatsoever is Natural is immovable, and in the same manner perpetually
energetical; as fire does not put on one color amongst the Grecians, and paint
its face otherwise amongst the Persians: but it has always the same ruddinesse
and purity, the same zeal and vehemence.

As Nature shows choice variety and Needle Work in this, in that she works
every Individuum with several flourishes, with some singular and distinguishing
notes: So likewise she plainly aspires to concord and unity, whilst she knits
altogether in a common and specifical identity. Not only in the faces of men,
but in their beings also, there is much of Identity, and yet much of variety.

You do not doubt, but that in all Nations there is an exact likeness and
agreement in the fabric and composure of men's bodies in respect of integrals,
excepting a few Monsters and Heteroclites in Nature; nor can you doubt but that
there is the very same frame and constitution of men's spirits in respect of
Intrinsecals, unless in some prodigious ones, that in the Philosophers languge
are (...). As face answers face, so does the heart of one man the heart of
another, even the heart of an Athenian, the heart of an Indian.

Wherefore the Votes and Suffrages of Nature are no contemptible things. (...);
as the Poet sings. This was the mind of that grave Moralist Seneca, as appears
by that speech of his; Apud nos veritatis argumentum est aliquid omnibus
videri. But the Orator is higher and fuller in his expression; Omni autem in
re, Consensio omnium Gentium, Lex Naturae putanda est. And that other Orator
Quintilian does not much differ from him in this; Pro certis habemus ea, in
quae communi opinione concessum est. Or if the judgment of a Philosopher be
more potent and prevalent with you, you may hear Aristotle telling you, (...).
You may hear Heraclitus determining that (...) is an excellent (...) of Truth;
and therefore he wss wont to lay down this for a Maxim, (...), which may be
rendered Vox Populi, Vox Dei; yet upon this condition, that it be took with its
due restraints and limitations: If you would have a sacred Author set his seal
to all this, Tertullian has done it; Quod apud multos unum invenitur, non est
erratum sed traditum.

Surely that must needs be a clear convincing light that can command respect
and adoration from all beholders; it must be an orient Pearl indeed, if none
will trample upon it. It must be a conquering and triumphant truth, that can
stop the mouths of gainsayers, and pass the world without contradiction.
Surely that is pure gold that has been examined by so many several Touch-stones,
and has had approbation from them all; certainly it is some transcendent beauty
that so many Nations are enamored withal. It Is some powerful music that sets
the whole world a dancing. It Is some pure and delicious relish, that can
content and satisfy every palate. It Is some accurate piece that passes so many
Critics without any Animadversions, without any Variae lectiones. It Is an
Elegant Picture, that neither the eye of an Artist, nor yet a Popular eye can
find fault withal. Think but upon the several tempers and dispositions of
men; how curious are some? how censorious are others? how envious and malicious
are some? how various and mutable are others? how do some love to be singular?
others to be contentious? how doubtful and wavering is one? how jealous and
suspicious is another? and then tell me whether it must not be some Authentical
and unquestionable Truth, that can at all times have a Certificate and
Commendamus from them all?

Then look upon the diversities of Nations and there you will see a rough and
barbarous Scythian, a wild American, an unpolisht Indian, a superstitious
Egyptian, a subtle Ethiopian, a cunning Arabian, a luxurious Persian, a
treacherous Carthaginian, alying Cretian, an elegant Athenian, a wanton
Corinthia^, a desperate Italian, a fighting German, and many other heaps of
Nations, whose titles I shall now spare, and tell me whether it must not be
some admirable and efficacious Truth, that shall so overpower them all, as to
pass current amongst them, and be owned and acknowledged by them.

Yet notwithstanding as we told you before, that the obligation of Natures Law
did not spring from Reason, so much less does it arise from the consent of
Nations. That Law indeed which is peculiarly termed (...), Jus Gentium, has its
vigor and validity from those mutual and reciprocal compacts, which they have
made amongst themselves: but the meeting of several Nations in the observation
of Natures Law, has no binding or engaging virtue in it any otherwise then in
an exemplary way; but yet it has a confirming and evidencing power, that shows
that they were all obliged to this by some supreme Authority, which had such an
ample influence upon them all. Thus you know the sweetness of Honey, both by
your own taste, and by the consent of Palates too: yet neither the one, nor the
other does drop any sweetness or lusciousnesse into the Honeycomb. Thus you
see the beauty and glory of light, and you may call most men in the world to be
eyewitnesses of it, yet those several eyes add no gloss or luster to it, but
only take notice of it.

Man being (...) and (...) as the Philosopher styles him, a sociable and
peaceable Creature; (...), as that sacred Orator terms him, a congregating
Creature that loves to keep company, he must needs take much delight and
complacency in that, in which he sees the whole Tribe and Species of mankind
agreeing with him.

Why then do the Jews look upon the (...) with such a disdaining and scornful
eye, as if all the Nations in comparison of them, were no more then what the
Prophet says, they are in respect of God, as the drop of a bucket, as the dust
of the Balance, that cannot incline them one way or other.

Do but hear a while how that learned and much honored Author of our own, does
represent their mind unto you. Gentium (says he) sive omnium, sive complurium
opiniones, mores, constitutiones, mensurae apud Hebraeos, in eo decernendo quod
jus esse velint Natural, seu universale, locum habent nullum. These are the
Contents of that Chapter which he begins thus; Quemadmodum ex aliorum
animantium actibus aut usu, jus aliquod natural disci, aut designari nolunt
Ebraei; it a neque ex aliarum, sive omnium sive plurimarum Gentium usu ac
moribus de Jure Naturali, seu hominum universali decerni volunt. It seems the
Jews look upon the Gentiles, as if they differed specifically from them: as
they do not search for the Law of Nature amongst Sensitive Beings, so neither
amongst other Nations.

But I had thought that the Jewish Writers had promised the Heathens an Angel,
an Intelligence, to irradiate and illuminate them, and does he shine upon them
no clearer? does he perform his office no better? The Jews told us that they
themselves were to inform them and instruct them, and have they taught them
their lessons no better? they mentioned a voice that came to Adam and to Noah,
and have they whispered it only in one another ear? Why have they not
proclaimed it to the rest of the world?

How sad were the condition of the Gentiles, if they were to live upon the Jews
courtesy and benevolence, that would strip them of Nature, plunder them of
their essences, rob them of their first Principles and Common Notions? But God
has not left them like Orphans to such unmerciful Guardians. He himself has
took care of them, and has made better provision for them.

Now these several Nations are to be considered either in the common bulk and
heap of them* or else in the major part of them, or in the noblest and most
refined sort amongst them, either (...) and (...), or (...) and (...).

If we take them in the fullest universality of them, then that worthy Author
of our own says truly, Nec olim, nec hactenus, aut qualesnam, aut quot sint,
fuer^ntve, est ab aliquo satis exploratum. Nor indeed is it at all material in
respect of this, whether we know them or no; but having the formal consent of
so many, and knowing that there is Par Ratio Reliquorum, being that they have
the same natural engagements and obligations upon them, we cannot justly
distrust, but that if there should new Nations, nay if there should new worlds
appear that every Rational Nature amongst them, would comply with and embrace
the several Branches of this Law: and as they would not differ in those things
that are so intrinsecal to Sense; so neither in those that are essential to the
Understanding. As their corporal eye would be able to distinguish between
beauty and deformity, so their Intellectual eye would as easily discern some
goodness from some kind of wickedness.

But are there not many Nations of them that live in the perpetual violation of
Natures Law? If you speak of the more capital letters of this (...), you find
no Nation so barbarous but that it can read them and observe him. I never heard
of a Nation apostatizing from common Notions, from these first Principles. But
if you mean the whole context and coherence of Natures Law, if you speak of
those Demonstrations that may be built upon these fundamental Principles, of
those kindly derivations and conclusions that flow from these fountain-Notions:
then this indeed must be granted, that it is the condemning sin of the Heathen;
That so many of them imprison this natural light, and extinguish this Candle of
the Lord.

There are many wild and Anomalous Individuum's amongst them (...), as
Aristotle calls them; (...), as others term them; but are there not such also
even amongst Jews? nay amongst such as call themselves Christians, that are
lapst and fallen below themselves? many natural precepts are violated even
amongst them; have you weeds, and briars, and thorns in a garden? no wonder
then that you meet with more in a wilderness. Are there some prodigies in
Europe? you may very well look for more Monsters in Africa. Do Christians blur
and blot the Law of Nature? no wonder then that an American seeks quite to raze
it out. Does an Israelite put Truth sometimes in Prison? no wonder then that an
Egyptian puts it in a Dungeon. Yet notwithstanding amongst all those that have
had so much Culture and Morality as to knit, and embody, and compact themselves
into a Commonwealth; to become (...), to be regulated by a legal government,
you will scarce find any Nation that did generally and expressly and for long
continuance, either violate or countenance the violation of any precept clearly
Natural.

This is that in which the learned Grotius satisfies himself, that Omnes Gentes
Moraliores and Illustriores, gave due obedience and conformity to Natures Law,
so that all Testimonies fetched from them, are to have an high price and esteem
put upon them.

But the famous Salmasius in his late Tractate De Coma goes a far different
way; and tells us that he had rather search for Natures Law in a naked Indian,
then in a spruce Athenian, in a rude American, rather then in a gallant Roman;
in a mere Pagan, rather then in a Jew or Christian. His words are these, Quanto
magis Barbari, tanto felicius, faciliusque Naturam Ducem sequi putantur: Eam
detorquent, aut ab ea magis recedunt politiores gentes.

Those Nations that have more of Art and emprovement amongst them, have so
painted Natures face, have hung so many Jewels in her ear; have put so many
Bracelets upon her hand; they have clothed her in such soft and silken raiment,
as that you cannot guess at her so well, as you might have done, if she had
nothing but her own simple and neglected beauty: you cannot taste the Wine so
well, because they have put Sugar into it, and have bribed your palate.

So that the learned Salmasius will scarce go about to fetch the Law of Nature
from the Jews principally; you see he chooses to fetch it rather from a
Scythian, from a Barbarian; there he shall see it without any glosses, without
any Superstructures, without any carving and gilding, a (...) plainly written,
without any flourishes and amplifications. Yet the Author, whom I but now
commended, (Salmasius I mean) neither could nor would go about to vindicate all
those Nations from some Notorious Rebellions against Natures Law, but he would
rather choose, (as much as he could) to abstract their Intellectuals from their
Practicals, and would look to their opinions and Laws, rather then to their
life and conversation.

Indeed Aristotle tells us, (...) (...). That same phrase (...), does only
speak a propensity and inclination in their vile affections to such
wickednesses as these were; which sometimes also they acted in a most violent
and impetuous manner. Though to be sure they could not be long a Nation if they
did thus kill and eat up and devour one another.

But let us suppose that they dealt thus with their enemies, yet can it be
shown us that they established Anthropophagy by a Law? that their Natural
Conscience did not check them for it? or if their reason did connive at them;
yet how comes it to pass that their Angel did not jog them all this while,
that their Intellectus Agens did not restrain them?

But out of what Antiquity does it appear that any Nation did favor Atheism
by a Law? that any Kingdom did license Blasphemy by a statute, or countenance
Murder by a Law? Out of what Author can they show us a Nation that ever did
allow the breaches of solemn compacts, the dishonouring of Parents, that ever
made a Law for this, that there should be no Law or Justice amongst them?

Till all this can appear, let the Testimonies of Gentiles be esteemed somewhat
more then the barking of dogs. Me thinks if they were mere Ciphers, yet the
Jews going before them, they might amount to somewhat. Let the prints of Nature
in them be accounted sacred: a Pearl in the head of a Heathen, some Jewels hid
in the rubbish of Nations, let them be esteemed precious. Whatsoever remains of
Gods image upon them, let it be loved and acknowledged. Their darkness and
misery is great enough, let not us aggravate it, and make it more. To mix the
light of their Candle, with that light which comes shining from the Candle of
an Heathen, is no disparagement to Jew nor Christian.

CHAP. XI.
The light of Reason is a derivative light.
NOw the Spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord.

First, as Lumen derivatum, (...). Surely there is none can think that light is
primitively and originally in the Candle; but they must look upon that only as
a weak participation of something that is more bright and glorious. All created
excellency shines with borrowed beams, so that reason is but Scintilla divinae
lucis, it is but Divinae particula aurae. This was the very end why God framed
intellectual creatures, that he might communicate more of himself to them, then
he could to other more drossie and inferior beings, and that they might in a
more complete and circular manner redire in principium suum (as the Schoolmen
speak) that they might return into the bosom of the first and supreme cause by
such operations as should in some measure imitate and represent the working of
God himself, who being a most free and intellectual Agent, would have some
creature also that should not only take notice of these his perfections, so as
to adore and admire them, but should also partake of them, and should follow
the Creator in his dispensations and workings, though still at an infinite
distance and disproportion.

This moved him to stamp upon some creatures understanding and will, which in
themselves make up one simple and entire print and signature of Reason, though
we break the seal for the better opening of them, and part them into two
several notions. To this end he filled the highest part of the world with those
Stars of the first magnitude, I mean those Orient and Angelical beings, that
dwell so near the fountain of light, and continually drink in the beams of
glory; that are exactly conformable to their Creator in all his motions, for
the same end he furnished and beautified this lower part of the world with
intellectual lamps, that should shine forth to the praise and honor of his
name, which totally have their dependence upon him, both for their being, and
for their perpetual continuation of them in their being. 'Twas he that lighted
up these lamps at first; it is he that drops (...) the golden oil into them.
Look then a while but upon the parentage and original of the soul and of
Reason, and you will presently perceive that it was the Candle of the Lord. And
if you have a mind to believe Plato, he will tell you such a feigned story as
this. That there were a goodly company of Lamps, a multitude of Candles, a set
number of souls lighted up altogether, and afterward sent into bodies, as into
so many dark Lanthorns. This stock and treasure of souls was reserved, and
cabinetted in I know not what Stars, perhaps that they might the better
calculate their own incarnation, the time when they were to descend into
bodies, and when they came there they presently sunk into (...); they slipped
into (...), which he terms (...), the putting off of knowledge for a while,
the clouding and burying of many sparkling and twinkling notions, till by a
waking reminiscence as by a joyful resurrection, they rise out of their graves
again. Plato it seems looked upon the body as the blot of nature, invented for
the defacing of this (...), or at the best as an impertinent tedious
parenthesis, that checked and interrupted the soul in her former notions; that
eclipsed and obscured her ancient glory, which sprung from his ignorance of the
resurrection, for had he but known what a glory the body was capable of, he
would have entertained more honorable thoughts of it.

Yet Origin was much taken with this Platonical notion, it being indeed a
pretty piece of Philosophy for him to pick allegories out of. And though he do
a little vary from Plato in a circumstance or two, yet in recompense of that he
gives you this addition, and enlargment, that according to the carriage and
behavior of these naked spirits before they were embodied, there were prepared
answerable mansions for them. That such a soul as had walked with God acceptably
was put into a fairer prison, was clothed with an amiable and elegant body; But
that soul which had displeased and provoked its Creator, was put into a darker
dungeon, into a more obscure and uncomely body. That Candle which had shined
clearly, was honored with a golden Candlestick; that which had soiled its
light, was condemned to a dark Lantern: one would think by this, that Origin
had scarce read Genesis, he does in this so contradict the Sacred History of
the Creation. Nor is this the just product of Plato's opinion, but it is
pregnant with much more folly, he returns him his own with usury, gives him
this as the just (...) and improvement of it.*

Aquinas does clash in pieces all these Platonical fictions in his two books
Contra Gentiles; yet upon this sinking and putrid foundation was built the
tottering superstructure of connate Species. For when Plato had laid down this
Error for a maxim. (...), that the souls of men were long extant before they
were born, then that other fancy did presently step in (...), that the soul
was very speculative and contemplative before it was immerst in the body, which
made way for the next conceit, that the soul brought many of its old notions
along with it into the body, many faithful attendants that would bear the soul
company in her most withering condition, when other more volatile and fugitive
notions took wing to themselves and flew away; many a precious pearl sunk to
the bottom of Lethe, but some relics of notions floated upon the top of the
waters, and in the general Deluge of notions there was an Ark prepared for some
select principles, some prec^pta Nouchidarum, which were to increase and
multiply and supply the wants of an intellectual world.

This makes the Platonists look upon the spirit of man as the Candle of the
Lord for illuminating and irradiating of objects, and darting more light upon
them then it receives from them. But Plato as he failed in corporeal vision
whilst he thought that it was per extramiss^onem radiorum; So he did not ab
errore suo recedere in his intellectual optio^^but in the very same manner
tells us that spiritual vision also is per emissionem radiorum. And truly he
might as well fancy such implanted Ideas, such seeds of light in his external
eye, as such seminal principles in the eye of the mind. Therefore Aristotle
(who did better clarify both these kinds of visions) plucked these motes out
of the sensitive eye, and those beams out of the intellectual. He did not
antedate his own knowledge, nor remember the several postures of his soul, and
the famous exploits of his mind before he was born; but plainly professed that
his understanding came naked into the world. He shows you an (...), an abrasa
tabula, a virgin-soul espousing it self to the body, in a most entire,
affectionate, and conjugal union, and by the blessing of heaven upon this
loving pair, he did not doubt of a Notional offspring and posterity; this
makes him set open the windows of sense to welcome and entertain the first
dawnings, the early glimmerings of morninglight. Clarum mane fenestras intrat
and Angustas extendit lumine rimas. Many sparks and appearances fly from
variety of objects to the understanding; The mind, that catches them all, and
cherishes them, and blows them; and thus the Candle of knowledge is lighted. As
he could perceive no connate colors, no pictures or portraictures in his
external eye: so neither could he find any signatures in his mind till some
outward objects had made some impression upon his (...), his soft and pliable
understanding impartially prepared for every seal. That this is the true method
of knowledge he does appeal to their own eyes, to their own understandings; do
but analyze your own thoughts, do but consult with your own breasts, tell us
whence it was that the light first sprang in upon you. Had you such notions as
these when you first peept into being? at the first opening of the souls eye?
in the first exordium of infancy? had you these connate Species in the cradle?
and were they rockt asleep with you? or did you then meditate upon these
principles? Totum est majus part, and Nihil potest esse and non esse simul.
Never tell us that you wanted origanical dispositio^s, for you plainly have
recourse to the sensitive powers, and must needs subscribe to this, that al
knowledge comes flourishing in at these lattices. Why else should not your
Candle enlighten you before? who was it that chained up; and fettered your
common notions* Who was it that restrained and imprisoned your connate Idea's?
Me thinks the working of a Platonists soul should not at all depend on (...);
and why had you no connate demonstrations, as well as connate principles? Let Us
but see a catalogue of all these truths you brought with you into the world. If
you speak of the principles of the Laws of Nature, you shall hear the Schoolmen
determining. Infans pro illo statu non obligatur lege naturali, quia non habet
usum Rationis and libertatis. And a more sacred Author says as much, Lex
Naturae est lex intelligentiae quam tamen ignorant pueritia, nescit infantia.
There Is some time to be allowed for the promulgation of Natures Law by the
voice of Reason. They must have some time to spell the (...)* that was of
Reasons writing. The mind having such gradual and climbing accomplishments,
does strongly evince that the true rise of knowledge is from the observing and
comparing of objects, and from thence exstracting the quintessence of some such
principles as are worthy of all acceptance; that have so much of certainty in
them, that they are near to a Tautology and Identity, for this first principles
are.

These are the true and genuine (...); these are the (...); these are the props
of Reasons contriving, upon which you may see her leaning, about which you may
see her turning and spreading and enlarging her self. That learned Knight, in
his discourse concerning the soul, does at large show the manner how the mind
thus goes a gathering of knowledge; How like a Be it goes from flower to
flower, from one entity to another, how it sucks the purest and sweetest of
all, how it refuses all that is distasteful to it, and makes a pleasant
composition of the rest, and thus prepares honey-combs for it self to feed on.

But if it were at all to be granted that the soul had many stamps and
characters upon it; that it had any implanted and ingraffed Species; 'twere
chiefly to be granted that it has the connate notion of a Deity, that pure and
infinitely refined entity, abstracted from all appearance of matter. But mark
how the great Doctor of the Gentiles convinces them of the (...), he does not
set them a searching their connate Species, but bids them look into the glass
of the creatures; O but (might some Platinist say) why, he is all spirit and an
invisible being, what shall we find of him amongst material objects? yes
(says the Apostle) (...), the invisible things of God are made known by the
things that do appear; for a being endowed with such a soul as man is, can
easily in a discoursive way, by such eminent steps of second causes ascend to
some knowledge of a prime and supreme being; which does fully explain that he
means by his (...), those clear dictates of Reason fetched from the several
workings of the understanding, that have sealed and printed such a truth upon
the soul; so that no other innate light, but only the power and principle of
knowing and reasoning is the Candle of the Lord.

Yet there is a noble Author of our own, that has both his truth and his
error, (as he has also writ about both) who pleads much for his instinctus
naturales, so as that at the first dash you would think him a Platonical
strain; but if you attend more to what he says, you will soon perceive that he
prosecutes a far different notion much to be preferred before the other
phansy.

For he does not make these instincts any connate Idea's and representations of
things, but tells us that they are powers and faculties of the soul, the
firstborn faculties and beginning of the souls strength, that are presently
espoused to their Virgin-objects closing and complying with them, long before
discourse can reach them; nay, with such objects as discourse cannot reach at
all in such a measure and perfection: these instincts he styles Naturae dotes,
and providentiae Divinae universalis idea, and typus optimus. Some of these are
to be found in the lowest inanimate beings, which yet have no connate Species
among them; though they have powers and propension to their own welfare, a
blind tendency and inclination to their own security; for thus he speaks --
Instinctus ille Naturalis in quovis inarticulato licet and incauto elemento,
sapiens est ad conservationem propriam; and such a noble being as man is, must
needs have it in a more sublime and eminent manner.

Therefore he terms these instincts in man facultates noeticae, and facultates
Deo analogae; whereas those other inferior faculties are esteemed facultates
analogae mundo; his words being somewhat cloudy, I shall thus paraphrase upon
them. The soul it is made with a through light, with a double window, at one
window it looks upon corporeals, at the other it has a fair prospect upon
spirituals. When it takes notice of the material world, it looks out at the
window of sense, and views the putamina and cortices rerum, theoutward husks
and shells of being, but not at all pleased or contented with them, those
higher powers, those purer faculties of the soul unclasp and disclose
themselves, and extend themselves for receiving some delight more precious and
satisfactory, being made in as harmonious proportion suitable to spiritual
objects, as the eye is to colors, o^ the care to sounds. And as you know, a
corporeal eye is so fashioned and organized, that though it have no connate
Species of the Sun, yet it is pleasant to behold it; so the eye of the soul
does willingly open it self to look upon God per modum objecti, and has all per
receptionem from him, fixing its eye upon so transcendent and beautiful an
object, and viewing all those streamings out of light, those beamings out of
eternal and universal notions, that flow from him as the fountain of lights,
where they have dwelt from everlasting, which now appear to it in time with a
most powerful and enamouring ray, to direct the soul to that happiness it
longed for, and to guide and conduct it in all its operations. If you ask when
these highest faculties did first open and display themselves, he tells you
it is then when they were stimulated and excited by outward objects, and it may
be upon this account, that when the soul can find nothing there worthy one
glance, one cast of its eye, impatient of such empty and shadowy sights, it
opens it self to the (...), and warmes it self in those everlasting Sunbeams*
but when it comes down from the mount, it puts on the veil of sense, and so
converses with material objects.

Yet I do not here positively lay down this for a truth in all the branches of
it, but only represent the mind of the forementioned Author, who himself does
acknowledge that the rise of these first principles is very Cryptical and
mysterious. His words are these. Vos interea non*morari debet qued quomodo
eliciantur istae notitiae communes nesciatis. Satis superque diximus vos
nescire quomodo fiat gustus, odoratus, tactus, etc. By which you cannot but
perceive that he makes the conformity of such a faculty with such an object,
the spring and original of common notions. Yet this then had deserved a little
clearing, whence the difficulty of understanding spirituals pro hoc statu does
arise, if there be such a present, and exact analogy between them; whereas the
intuitive knowledge of God, and viewing those goodly notions that are steept in
his essence uses to be reserved as a privilege of a glorified creature. Yet
this I suppose may be said that herein is the souls imperfection, that it
cannot sufficiently attend both to spirituals and corporeals; and therefore
sense being so busy and importunate for the prosecution of her objects; no
wonder that these noentical faculties do faint and languish. So that if there
be any whom the former discoursive way will not suffice, it seems better for
them to have recourse to an innate power of the soul that is fitted and
fashioned for the receiving of spirituals, quatenus spirituals, then to fly to
I know not what connate Species, of I know not how long duration before the
soul was acquainted with the body. Yet that other noble Author of our own, that
has the same title of truth not without a competent mixture of error too, does
choose to resolve all into a Platonical remembrance, which yet that acute
answerer of him does show to be a mere vanity; for as for matters of fact, to
be sure they have no implanted Idea's: And if historical knowledge may be
acquired without them, why then should discursive knowledge have such a
dependence upon them? And I wish that the Platonists would but once determine
whether a blind man be a competent judge of colors by virtue of his connate
Species, and whether by supply of these Idea's deaf man may have the true
notion of music and harmony? if not, then they must ingeniously confess, that
the soul for the present wants so much of light as it wants of the window of
sense. But if they tell us that some outward objects must jogge and waken these
drowsy and slumbring notions, they then lay the foundation in sensitives; and
withal let them show us, why the generality of men in their intellectuals are
not equally improved, whereas they have the same objects to quicken and inflame
them? in the mean time we will look upon the understanding as speculum non
coloratum, a glass not prejudiced nor prepossest with any connate tinctures,
but nakedly receiving, and faithfully returning all such colors as fall upon
it. Yet the Platonists in this were commendable, that they looked upon the
spirit of a man as the Candle of the Lord, though they were deceived in the
time when 'twas lighted.

Nor is this Candle lighted out of the Essence of God himself, 'twere a far
more tolerable error to make the light of a Candle a piece of the Sun's
essence then to think that this intellectual lamp is a particle of the divine
nature: There is but one (...), I mean the wonderful (...), not a Candle, but a
Sun that shined from everlasting. But I find the Stoics challenged for this
error, that they thought there was a real emanation, and traduction of the
soul out of God. Ex ipsa Dei substantia, and the Gnostics, the Maniche's and
Priscillianists are looked upon as their successors in this folly.

Now as for the Stoics you will scarce find evidence enough to prove them
guilty of this opinion. They have indeed some doting and venturing expressions,
when they amplify and dignifie the nobility of the soul; and will needs have
some of the royal blood to run in every vein and faculty of it, nor are the
Platonists defective in this, but lift up the soul to as high a pitch of
perfection as the Stoics ever did; yet surely both of them but as a limited
and dependant being infinitely remote from the fullness of a Deity. Yet
Simplicius in his Comment upon the grand Stoic Epictetus tells us that that
Sect of Philosophers were wont to call the soul (...), pars vel membrum Dei,
which is a gross and corporeal conceit, not at all agreeable to the
indivisibility of spirituals, nor suitable with the souls immateriality, much
less consistent with the transcendent purity of God himself. But the learned
Salmasius in his Animadversions on both the forementioned Authors, though he
spend paper enough in clearing some passages of the Academicks, Peripateticks,
and Stoics, concerning the nature of the soul; yet does not in the least
measure take notice of any such heterodox tenent among the Stoics, yet if
there had been any such, they had very well deserved Animadversions; but he
does thus represent their Philosophy to you; That whereas the soul is usually
looked upon as (...), being brancht out into the Vegetative, Sensitive and
Rational* the Stoics they chose to make it (...), and would have septem parts
ancillantes, Imperatricem unicam; which they reckoned thus: (...) they were
five; then (...), which was all one with (...), or (...), or (...). Yet as
Plato and Aristotle disposing the soul into three several ranks and
distributions, would by no means allow of (...), a triplicity of souls in one
compositum: So neither would the Stoics admit any plurality of souls, but
esteemed these (...) only as (...), non membra sed ingenia, as Tertullian terms
them very significantly, stiling the powers and faculties of the soul, the
several wits of the soul, so that it was but (...), enlarging it self to the
capacity and exigency of the body, but in such a manner, as that 'twas
dispensata potius quam concisa. The principal and Hegemonical power of the soul
the Stoics situated in the heart, as Aristotle did, though very erroneously,
and yet Plato had taught him better, for he placed it in the brain as the
proper tabernacle for reason to dwell in. But amongst the Stoics there are
some expressions that seem to depresse and degrade the soul, as much as others
seem to advance and exalt it, for though some call it (...), yet others, and
among the rest Zeno (the great founder of that Sect,) terms it (...), and
(...), which that stupid Author of the souls mortality finding somewhere
translated into English, catches at, and tells us that the Stoics hold the
soul to be a certain blast hot and fiery, or the vital spirit of the blood;
whereas at the most, they did only choose that corporeal spirit as Vehiculum
animae, a Chariot for a more triumphant spirit to ride in, the principal seat
of the soul, which they did so much extol and deifie. It Is abundantly clear
that their Stoical Philosophy was more refined and clarified, more sublime and
extracted from matter, then to resolve the quintessence of a rational nature
into I know not what muddy and feculent spirit; this they could not do, if they
would be faithful and constant to their own principles. Nay, they were so far
from thus vilifying the soul and detracting from it, as that they were rather
excessive and hyperbolical in praising it above the sphere of a creature. Thus
that known Stoic Epictetus calls the soul of man (...), which Seneca renders,
liber animus est Diis cognatus; and Arrian in his Comment upon the
forementioned Author does thus diffuse and amplify it, (...). i. e. There is
connection and coherence of souls with a Deity, there are mutual touches and
embraces between them, they are some delibations, and participations of
himself; thus that famous Emperor M. Antoninus that had tasted of the Stoical
Philosophy, styles the soul (...). Where, at the first one would think he had
meant it in an Averroistical sense, but that he himself does prevent the
interpretation, by telling you that he intends nothing else but (...), which
therefore he calls (...), because that he knew the soul was separable from the
body, and Pythagoras long before him had called it by the same name in his
golden verses.

But amongst all the rest, Seneca is the most high and lofty in magnifying, and
very near deifying of the soul; for thus you may hear him speak; Quid aliud
vocas animum, quam Deum in humano corpore hospitantem? That is, What less
title can you give the soul, then that of a God condescending to dwell in an
house of clay? which is too near that of the Apostle (...), God manifestested
in the flesh. Nor yet was this any unwary passage that slipped from Seneca's pen
on the sudden, but he will stand to it, and repeat it, for thus he says again.
Ratio nil aliud est quam in corpus humanum pars Divini spiritus mersa, Reason
it is somewhat of a Deity steept in a body. From this last speech that learned
and eminent writer of our own does endeavor to evince, that Seneca made God
the Intellectus Agens of the soul, whereas it is very evident that this
Philosopher only prosecuted that Stoical notion, of the soul being (...), a
branch of a Deity (...). Yet notwithstanding all these strains of Stoical
Philosophy do not sufficiently declare that they thought the soul to be of the
very same essence with God himself, but only that they perceived much
similitude between the soul and a Deity; many bright resemblances of God stamped
upon it, which is not only sound Philosophy, but good Divinity too; that the
soul was made according to the image of its Creator. Thus they made it not
only (...), but (...) too, even the breath of a Deity (...), stamped with the
Seal of God himself, as Philo speaks. 'Twas (...), as Damascen calls it, very
agreeable to this of Solomon, the Candle of the Lord. It Is (...), as Greg.
Nyss. has it, the Poem of God himself. That whereas other creatures were as it
were writ in Prose, the souls of men were composed more harmoniously, in more
exact number and measure. No wonder then that the Stoics spying out such
spiritual workmanship, and embroydery in the soul of man, did esteem it as an
inferior kind of Deity, a Bud, and Blossom of Divinity; as they meant by
their (...), nothing but (...), so likewise when they call the soul To* (...),
they need intend no more then the Pythagoreans do by their (...), that divine
virtue and efficacy which the soul has, that makes it look so like its
Creator. Thus the Pythagoreans were wont to call the higher region of the
soul, (...), and the lower (...), not understanding by the first any particle
of a Deity, though it may be by the last they might understand the soul of a
beast, by virtue of their supposed (...). But I meet with none that does so
punctually and accuratly determine this, as Trismegistus does, who speaks so
exactly as if he had spyed out this difficulty and objection, his words are
these. (...), The soul, says he, was not framed and carved out of the essence
of a Deity, but it rather sprung from the dilatation, and diffusion of his
power and goodness, as beams do from the Sun, when it spreads forth its
quickening and cherishing wings. Yet when you hear the creatures often styled
beams of a Deity, and drops of a Deity, you must neither imagine that there is
the least division, or diminution, or variation in the most immutable essence
of God; nor that the creature does partake the very essence of the Creator,
but that it has somewhat of his workmanship, obvious and visible in it, and
according to the degree of its being, does give fainter or brighter
resemblances of its Creator. As suppose an accurate Painter should bestow much
of his skill in drawing a lively portraicture of himself, you would not think
such a picture a piece of his essence, but you would look upon it only as the
fruit and product of his skill, and as a witty imitation of himself. Now there
is a far greater disproportion between God and any created being, then between
the face and the picture of it: So that if you see any heavenly beauty, any
divine lineaments sparkling in the soul, you may presently conclude that it was
digitus Dei, nay the hand of God that drew them there, as the shadowy
representations of his own most glorious being. It Is the greatest honor that a
creature is capable of, to be the picture of its Creator. You know the very
formality of creation does speak a being raised ex nihilo; creation being the
production of something out of the barren womb of nothing; and if the creature
must be ex nullo praeexistente, then to be sure it is not extracted out of the
essence of God himself. But the whole generality of the ancient Heathen
Philosophers had a veil upon their face, here they had not a clear and open
sight of the creation, but only some obscure and imperfect notions about it,
which made them think that all corporeals were made ex aliqua praejacente
materia, coexistent with the prime and supreme efficient; and because they
could not fetch spirituals out of materials, nor yet conceive that they should
be fetched out of nothing, this made them determine that they sprung out of the
essence of God himself, who as a voluntary fountain could bubble them forth
when he pleased, who as a father of lights could sparkle and kindle them when
he thought best. But that fiction of materia ab aeterno will do them no service
at all; for either 'twas produced by God himself, and then it was created ex
nihilo, for God himself was a pure immaterial Spirit, and therefore must make
matter where none was before; or else it was an Independent eternal being,
which makes it another Deity, and that involves a flat repugnancy. Therefore as
corporeal and material beings were raised out of nothing by the infinite vigor
and power of God himself, so he can with the very same facility produce
spiritual beings out of nothing too. Can he not as well light this Lamp out of
nothing, as build the goodly fabric of the world out of nothing? Cannot a
creating breath make a soul as well as a creating word make a world? He that
can create the shell of corporeals, cannot he as well create the kernel of
spirituals? He that created a visible Sun, cannot he as well create an
invisible, an intellectual spark? You may hear Aquinas disputing against the
Gentiles, and most fully and strongly demonstrating, that God could not be
either the materia or forma of any created being, for its not imaginable how
the Creator himself should ingredi essentiam creaturae. But his causality is by
way of efficiency producing and maintaining beings; the best of creatures are
but vasa figuli. Now a vessel, though a vessel of honor, yet it is no piece of
the Potters essence, but only the subject of his power and will. One and the
same Seal may print all the Wax that is possible, yet there will not be the
least mutation in the Seal, but only in the Wax; nor yet does the Wax at all
participate of the seals essence, but only receives a stamp and signature made
upon it. So that the Seal was as entire and complete before it had imprinted
the Wax, as it was afterward; and though all the signatures of the Wax were
defaced and obliterated, yet the Seal would be as perfect as before.

Thus God, though he leaves prints of himself upon all the souls in the world,
nay upon all the beings in the world, yet these impressions are not particles
of himself; nor do they make the least mutation in him, only in the creature;
for he was as full and perfect before he had printed any one creature, and if
the whole impression of creatures were annihilated, yet his essence were the
same, and he could print more when he pleased, and as many as he pleased. Yet
all the entity, goodness, and reality, that is to be found in the creature,
was totally derived from him, and is transcendently treasured up in him, as the
print of the wax, though it be really different from the print of the Seal, yet
that very stamp and signature had its being from the Seal, 'twas vertually and
originally in the Seal; and now gives some resemblance of it. All created
goodness was a Deo producta, and a Deo exemplata, (as the Schools speak)
though not very elegantly. It Is a Deo conservata, and in Deum ordinata, yet all
this while 'twas nothing of the essence of a Deity; and indeed it cannot have
any of his essence, unless it have all of it. He that calls the creature a
drop in such a sense, may as well call it a fountain; he that thus terms it a
ray of Divinity, may as well call it a Sun, for there are no particles in
essentials. All essence it is indivisible, how much more the essence of God
himself. How fond is the fancy of a semi-Deity, away with the Stoics (...)
here, if this be the meaning of them, who ever heard of fragments in
spirituals! Dares therefore any absolutely deifie the soul? or make it
coessential or coequal with God himself? Is not the soul a limited and
restrained being? short and imperfect in its operations, a dependent and
precarious being; and are these things agreeable to a Deity? Is not the soul
naturally united to the body for the quickening and enforming of it? and is
that a condition fit for a Deity? nay, are not many souls guilty, defiled,
miserable beings? and are they all this while spangles of a Deity? They must
have very low and dishonorable thoughts of God that make any creature partner
or sharer with him in his essence, and they must have high and swelling
thoughts of the creature. How proud is that soul that aspires to be a God? Is
it not enough for a soul to approach unto his God, to see his face, to enjoy
his presence, to be like unto him, to be knit unto him, in love and affection?
Happiness does advance a creature to his just perfection, but it does not lift
it above the sphere of its being. A glorified being, is still a subservient and
finite being. A soul when in its full brightness, yet still is but the Candle
of the Lord, let it come as near as it can, yet it will be infinitely distant
from him. Heaven it does not mix and blend essences together, but keeps them
all in their just beauty and proportions; so that take a creature in what
condition you will, and it is not the least particle of a Deity. There Is another
Error, but it is scarce worth mentioning, of some that would have the Candle of
the Lord lighted up by Angels, as if they had created the soul; Nay, the
Carpocratians thought that all the rest of the world was created by them. But
as no secondary being could create it self, so neither can it create any other
being. 'Twas no Angelical breath, but the breath of a Deity that gave life to
the soul, and 'twas not made after the image of an Angel, but of God himself.
Angels and souls both came from the same Almighty Father of spirits, from the
same glorious Father of lights, who showed the greatness of his power in
raising such goodly beings, not out of himself, but out of nothing.

Whether ever since the first Creation the souls of men be lighted on the same
manner immediately by God himself, by that commanding and efficacious word.
(...), let there be light, let there be an intellectual Lamp set up in such a
creature; or whether it be lighted by the parents? whether one soul can light
another? whether one and the same soul may be lighted by two, as a candle is
lighted by two? These are the several branches of that great question, which
has been frequently vexed and discussed, but scarce ever quieted and
determined. The Divines favor the way of creation, the Physicians that of
traduction; Nay, Galen tells in plain terms, that the soul is but (...) a
mere temper or complexion, the right tuning of the body, which is not far
distant from the Fiddlers opinion, that Tully speaks of, that would needs have
the soul to be an harmony. His soul that played him some lessons, and his body
danced to them. And indeed some of the Physicians are as loath as he was ab
art sua discedere, and therefore they do embody the soul as much as they can,
that their skill may extend to the happiness and welfare of it, as if they
could feel the pulse of the soul, and try experiments upon the spirits; as if
they could soften and compose the Paroxysme of the mind, and cure all the
Languors and distempers of the soul; as if their drugs would work upon
immaterial beings; as if they could kill souls as fast as they can kill bodies:
as if the Candle of the Lord did depend upon these Prolongers; as though the
Lamp would go out, unless they pour in some of their oil into it. No doubt
but there is a mutual communion and intercourse between this friendly and
espowsed pair, the soul and body; no doubt but there is a loving sympathy and
fellow-feeling of one another conditions; but it is not so strong and powerful,
as that they must both live and die together. Yet I speak not this as though
the maintaining of the souls traduction did necessarily prejudice the
immortality of it; for I know there are many learned Doctors amongst them (and
Seneca amongst the rest) that are for the souls beginning in a way of
generation, and yet do detest and abominate the least thoughts of its
corruption. Nay, some sacred writers contend for the souls traduction, who yet
never questioned the perpetuity of it: not only the African father Tertullian,
but most of the Western Churches also; and the opinion of Apollinaris and
Nemesius that one spiritual being might propagate another; I have not yet found
sufficiently disproved, though it be generally reprehended. The truth is, the
original of all forms, it is in profundo, it is very latent and mysterious; yet
the Naturalists must needs acknowledge thus much, that the matter and form of
every thing must have at least an incomplete being before generation; for by
that they do not receive any new absolute entity, for then it would be a
creation, but the parts are only collected, and disposed, and united by a
strict and Gordian knot, by an inward continuity. So that in all such
production the materia oritur ex materia, and forma ex forma generantis, and
thus forms are continued according to that degree of being, which they had in
the first Creation. Now why there should not be such a traditio Lampadis in the
souls of men, will not easily be shown; the nobility and purity of the soul
does not at all hinder this, for there is a proportionable eminency in the
soul, that does produce it* One soul prints another with the same stamp of
immortality, that it self had engraven upon it. But if any question how an
immaterial being can be conveyed in such a seminal way, let him but show us
the manner by which it is united to the body, and we will as easily tell him how
it entered into it. Yet Hierome was so zealous against this, that he
pronounces a present Anathema, to all such as shall hold the soul to be ex
traduce. But Austin was a great deal more calm and pacate; Nay, indeed he was
in this point (...), in a kind of equipoise and neutrality; and therefore with
a gentle breath he did labor to fan and cool the heat of Hieromes opinion,
and putting on all mildness and moderation, plainly confesses, Se neque
legendo, neque or ando, neque ratiocinando invenire potuisse quomodo cum
Creatione animarum peccatum originale defendatur. It seems he could not solve
all those difficulties which the Pelagians raised against original sin, unless
he held the traduction of the soul. He could not perceive how the Candle should
be so soyld, if it were lighted only by a pure Sun-beame fetched from heaven.
Yet that knot (which so skilful and laborious a hand could not unty) some
others have easily cut asunder; and indeed there is no such cogency, and
prevalency in that argument as can justly promise it self the victory. For the
Schoolmen that are strong assertors of the souls creation, do satisfy all such
doubts as these. And the major part of modern writers do incline to this, that
these Lamps are lighted by God himself, though some indeed do (...), and will
determine nothing, as the acute Pemble does among the rest, in his little
Tractate De Origin Formarum, and so does that learned Knight in his late
discourse of the soul, where he does only drop one brief passage that
countenances the souls traduction, upon which he that pretends to answer him,
takes occasion to huddle up no less then twenty Arguments against it, which
sure he should by number and not by weight. But that Oxford answerer of that
Brutish Pamphlet of The Souls Mortality, does more solidly and deliberately
handle the question, yet being very vehement and intense for the souls
Creation, he slips into this error, that the traduction of the soul, is
inconsistent with the immortality of it. But it may be you had rather hear the
votes and suffrages of those ancient heathen writers, that had nothing to see
by but the Candle of the Lord; perhaps you would willingly know what their
souls thought of themselves. You Will believe nature, the universal mother, if
she tell you who is the father of spirits. We Will begin with Pythagoras, and he
tells you his mind freely and fully, whilst he gives you that piece of
leafe-gold in one of his Verses; (...). Aratus is in the very same streine, and
was honored so far as to be quoted by an Apostle for it, (...). But if these
seem somewhat more generally, not exactly pointing out at the soul, the Caldy
Oracle will speak more punctually, (...), the Father of spirits by his thought
and word, by his commanding breath did kindle this Lamp of the soul, for the
quickening and illuminating of such a noble creature. Zoroaster pouers it out
more at large, and does thus dilate and amplify it. (...). O soul (says he)
why do thou not aspire, and mount up to the center and light of glory, to
that fountain of beams and brightness, from whence thou were derived, and sent
down into the world, clothed and apparelled with such rich and sparkling
indowments? The consideration of this made the Divine Trismegist break into
that pang of admiration, (...); what womb (says he) is fit to bear a soul? who
is fit to be the father of the soul? what breast is able to nourish a soul? who
can make sufficient provision fot a soul, but only that pure and invisible
Spirit that shoots them, and darts them into bodies by his own Almighty power?
And as the forementioned Author goes on, (...), that is, God the Father of
being, the Father of life and nature, did frame and fashion man much like
himself, and love him as his proper offspring; for those words of his, (...)
must be taken in an allayed, and tempered sense, (for they must by no means be
understood of an equality, but only of a similitude). In the very same sense he
calls God (...), the Painter and trimmer of the soul; thus representing himself
to the life; As for the mind of the Platonists and the Stoics we have before
acquainted you with it, one looks so high, as if a Creation would scarce
content them, unless they may have it ab aeterno; and the other seem to plead
for a traduction and generation of the soul, not from the parents, but from God
himself, which makes Epictetus so often mention the affinity and consanguinity
of the soul with the Deity; And to use such words as these, (...); If the
Philosophers (says he) speak truth, when they tell us how near a kin the soul
is to God; why then does such a soul streighten and confine it self? why does
it contract and imprison so vast an essence? why does it look upon some spot of
ground, with such a partial and peculiar affection? why does it love the smoke
of its earthly coun^rey, (...); why does it not rather warm it self in the
flame of its heavenly original? why does such an one style himself an Athenian,
a Corinthian, a Lacedemonian? why does he not rather think that he has a whole
world within him? why does he not sum up all his happiness in this great and
honorable title, that he is the Son of God? and thus you see (...) will be the
same with Socrates his (...); and the words you see will pass currantly in
this sense; But yet (if we may take the liberty of a conjecture) I am ready to
think that the first negative particle does intrude it self too unseasonably,
against the drift and meaning of the place, and therefore is to be refused and
rejected; so that whereas the words were printed thus, (...); read (...), and
then they will run thus, Quid se mundanum vocat, cur non potius filium Dei? why
does he think himself a worldling, why does he measure himself by earth, if he
were born of heaven? where yet you may perceive that the Philosopher ascribes
that to the first (...) which is due only to the (...) to be called a Son of
God. Nay, which indeed is due only to the (...), to the only begotten Son of
God. Thus Philo the Jew (too Stoical in this) calls souls (...), which is the
very same title, that the Apostle applies to God himself; and Plotinus gives as
much to the soul as the Arrians did to Christ, for he calls it (...), which
Plato styled (...); but Epictetus he goes on to keep (...), much in the
Language of the Oracle, (...): by (...) it can mean nothing else but God
himself, the Father of spirits, and these (...) are such love tokens as he has
left with the sons of men to engage their affections to him. These Symbols
are the very same which Moses calls the image of God; those representations of
himself which he has scattered and sown in the being of man; as this word (...)
does imply, which made the wise Grecian Thales conclude (...), that all men
were brethren born of the same supreme being, that did educate and instruct
them; this teaching is the same which the Persian Magi called a divine
inebriation, (...), it was replete (...), you see then, that the joint consent
of the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Persians, Grecians; was for the creation of the
soul; and if you desire more testimonies from them, you may consult with
Eugubin in his learned work de perenni Philosophia, where you shall meet with
whole heaps of them. But as for Aristotle's opinion, you know that his custom
was, when he could not beat out a notion into a rational account fairly to
pass it by, and not to piece it out with such fabulous inventions, as Plato
did abound withal; and though it is like he did often dispute this question in
his thoughts, yet he makes no solemn entrance upon it in his works, but only
touches it occasionally, and scatters a passage or two; that seem very
clearly to acknowledge the creation of it: for (not to speak of the place in
his morals, where he calls the soul (...), I shall only commend unto you those
full and pregnant words in his two books de generatione animalium, the words are
these (...), he had but a little before evinced that the sensitive, and
vegetative souls were conveyed in a seminal way, like a couple of sparks,
they were struck ex potentia materiae; but (says he) the rational, that came
(...) ex altiori sede, as Seneca speaks, the window of heaven was opened, and
present light sprung in, for the completing of those former rudiments and
preparations; the misunderstanding of this (...), did it may be occasion, but
it did at least corroborate the fancy of an Angels being an Intellectus Agens;
yet Simplicius that known Interpreter of Aristotle does expound it of the souls
creation, (...), as he speaks; and this which Aristotle here calls (...),
Psellus the Philosopher styles (...), Plato termed it (...), the Sybils called
it (...), some others (...), still conspiring with this of Solomon's, the Candle
of the Lord; and Seneca, (setting aside his Stoicisme) has very gallant and
brave apprehensions of the souls nobility, and tells us that it was haustus ex
divina origin, which Tully, thus varies, ex mente divina decerptus, souls,
like so many flowers, were cropped and gathered out of the garden of God; and
were bound up in fasciculo viventium, in the bundle of the living: and if you
will but attend to the noble Orator and Philosopher; you shall hear him thus
pleading for the souls divinity. Animorum nulla in terris origo inveniri
po^est; nihil enim est in animo mixtum atque concretum, aut quod e terra natum;
atque fixum esse videatur: nihilque aut humidum quidem, aut flabile, aut
igneum, his enim in Naturis nihil inest, quod memoriae vim, mentis,
cogitationis habeat; quod and preterita teneat, and futura praevideat, and
complecti possit praesentia, quae sola divina sunt, nec evincetur unquam unde
ad hominem venire possunt nisi a Deo; singular is igitur quaedam est nature a
atque vis animi, sejuncta ab his usitatis notisque naturis; it a quicquid est
illud quod sentit, quod serpit, quod vult, quod viget, coeleste and divinum
est; ob eam rem aeternum sit necesse est; which I shall thus render. It Is in
vain to look for the souls parentage upon earth, for there is no mixing and
blending of spirituals with corporeals, the earth does not contribute, for the
fixing and consolidating of them; it is no aerie puff will suffice for the
swiftness and nimblenesse of their motion; no drops of water will quench their
thirst and longings; they have a purer light and heat, then could ever be
fetched from an elementary spark, in those humble and sordid beings, there is
nothing fit to represent, much less to produce the clasping and retentive
power of memory; the masculine and vigorous working of the mind; the refined
and comprehensive virtue of those thoughts, that can recall and look back to
things past, that can interpret, and comment upon all present objects, and with
a Prophetical glance can spy out futurities and possibilities, which are works
not unworthy of a Deity, nor can it e're be shown that such rare privileges
should be communicated to humane nature any other way then by the immediate
bounty and indulgence of heaven; there being such singular and inimitable
idioms in the mind of man as could neverbe extracted from those ordinary and
vulgar entities. Though a sensitive soul may creep upon the ground, though it
may roll and tumble it self in the dust, yet an intellectual being scorns to
look lower then heaven it self; and though it be dated in time, yet it means to
live as long as eternity. The Poets had veiled and mufled up the same opinion
in their mythology, whiles they tell us that Prometheus, (which is all one with
providence) did work and fashion the bodies of men out of clay, but he was fain
to steal fire from heaven for the quickening and enlivening them with souls,
which made the Prince of Poets sing Igneus est ollis vigor and Coelestis origo,
and Ovid supplies him with a short verse, Sedibus aetheris Spiritus ille venit.
How often do you meet with this in Homer, that God is the Father of spirits,
(...), the Father of Angelical beings and of the souls of men; which Virgil
renders hominum Sator atque deorum. Yet all this while I know not whether you
can, I am sure I cannot, sufficiently perceive that the generality of the
Heathen did think that every soul was immediately created by God himself, but
only that at the first there was bestowed more then ordinary workmanship upon
them, which they knew principally by those generous motions which they found
working in their own souls; and partly by some relics of Mosaical History,
that was scattered amongst them. Thus then I have represented unto you, as
indifferently as I can, the state of this great controversy; and though I
could easily tell you which part I do most easily incline to; yet I shall
rather refer it to your own thoughts, with this intimation, that a modest
hesitancy may be very lawful here; for if you will believe Gregory the Great,
he tells you it is a question which cannot be determined in this life. However
it is enough for us that the spirit of a man either by virtue of its constant
creation, or by virtue of its first creation is the candle of the Lord.

As the soul is the shadow of a Deity, so reason also is a weak and faint
resemblance of God himself, whom therefore that learned Emperor M. Antoninus
calls (...), it is God that plants reason, it is he that waters it, it is he that
gives it an increase, (...), the title of (...) belongs to Christ himself, in
whom are hid the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Reason first danced and
triumphed in those eternal Sunbeams, in the thoughts of God himself, who is the
fountain and original of Reason. And as his will is the rule of goodness, so
his understanding is the rule of Reason. For God himself is a most knowing and
intellectual being, he is the first mover of entity, and does determinate
tendere in aliquem ^inem, which speaks an intelligent agent; he does propound
most choice designs, and blessed ends to himself, and is not that a work of
Reason? he does contrive, and dispose, and order means for accomplishing of
them, and does not that require understanding? He makes all beings instrumental
and subordinate to him, he moves all inferior wheels in a regular manner; he
moves all the spheres of second causes in a harmonical way; such blind
entities as want intellectual eyes, he himself does lead them, and conduct
them* and to others he gives an eye for their guidance and direction. Now, he
that has framed an intellectual eye, shall not he see? he that has clothed
the soul with light as with a garment, shall not he much more be clothed
himself with a fuller and purer brightness? In that which we esteem reason
amongst men, there are many clouds and blemishes, many dark spots and wrinkles,
that are scattered and conquered by this more glorious light. The soul it is
fain to climb up and ascend to knowledge by several steps and gradations, but
his understanding is all at the same height and eminency; Man's reason is fain
to spend time in knitting a proposition, in spinning out a Syllogism, in
weaving a demonstration; but he is infinitely beyond, and above these first
draughts and rudiments of knowledge; he sees all (...), at the first opening of
his eye from everlasting, with one intellectual glance, he pierces into the
whole depth of Entity, into all the dimensions of being. Man's understanding is
fain to borrow a Species from the object which presents to the mind the
picture and portraicture of it self, and strikes the intellectual eye with a
color suitable and proportionable to it: But the divine understanding never
receives the least tincture from an object, no species ab extra, but views all
things in the pure Crystal of his own essence, he does not at all see himself
in the glass of the creatures, as we see him, but he sees creatures in the
glass of his own being, how else should he see them from everlasting, before
they were extant, before they were visible by any Species of their own? God
therefore does primarily and principally look upon himself, for he is
nobilissimum intelligibile, he cannot have a more beautiful and satisfying
object to look upon, then his own face, (...) is an object fit to enamour all
understanding: for the more any being is abstracted from materiality, the more
it is refined from material conditions, the more graceful and welcome it is to
the understanding; for matter does cloud and darken the gloss of being; it
does eclipse an object, and is no friend to intelligibility. So that God being
a pure and immaterial spirit must needs be praestantissimum intelligibile, and
a most adequate object for his own eye to look upon. And this understanding is
himself, it being actio immanens, always dwelling with him, Dei scientia est
Dei essentia, (as the Schoolmen speak) God is (...), he is both all eye, and
all light; as suppose the bright body of the Sun had a visive faculty, so as it
could view and surveigh its own light and beams, and could by virtue of them
look upon all other things, which its own light does unveil, and discover,
'twould then give some languishing adumbration of a Deity, who is always
looking upon his own perfections, and seeing creatures by his own light, by his
own uncreated beams. For Species and similitudo omnium est in Dei essentia.
Thus God looking upon his own omnipotency, knows all possibilities; viewing his
own determinations, he sees all futurities; looking upon his own wisdom he
beholds all varieties, all degrees and differencies of being, which yet put not
the least shadow of difference in him, because the excellencies of all beings
are treasured up in him only by way of transcendency, not per modum
compositionis, sed per modum perfectionis (as the Schools have it.) So that
when God beholds all created beings by virtue of his own essence, yet you must
not imagine that the formality of a creature is contained in an uncreated
being, but only that there is enough of being there to give a representation of
all being whatsoever. As when a glass reflects a face, there is not the least
mutation in the glass, much less is the face any part of the glasses essence;
though the glass give a sufficient resemblance of it. Yet herein there is this
disparity, that the glass of Gods essence did represent a creature, before any
created face could look into it; for God looking upon himself from eternity,
did then know quot moais aliquid assimilari potuit ipsius essentiae, and did
know how far such a being would imitate his essence, and how far it would
fall short of it. He saw that this being would come nearer, that that being
would be more distant and remote from him; this picture would be liker him,
that would show very little of him. Now the actuality and existence of such an
object is not requisite to the understanding of it, for how then could we
conceive of the privation of a not Entity? How can we otherwise apprehend them,
then by framing the notion of something positive in our minds, and supposing a
total deficiency from it? Thus as they use to speak, Rectum est index sui and
obliqui; and nobilissimum in unoquoque genere est mensura, and exemplar
reliquorum, that first and supreme being by the great example and pattern of
himself, can judge of all inferior and imperfect beings. Nor could he see them
ab aeterno any otherwise then in himself, there being nothing else eternal, but
himself, and in himself he could clearly see them as we see effects in their
cause. All created beings were eminently contained in the Center of one
indivisible essence, who by his infinite virtue was to produce them all, who
being an intelligent Center did see those several lines that might be drawn
from him, and withal, being a free and a voluntary Center, did know how many
lines he meant to draw from himself. Now you know amongst men, a demonstration
a priori, is esteemed most certain and scientifical, Scire est per causas
cognoscere. God thus knew creatures, perfectly knowing himself, who was the
first cause of them all; This does much speak the immutability of the eternal
reason and wisdom in the mind of God, and does remove all imperfections from
it: For you see, he did not move in an axiomatical way, per compositionem and
divisionem; for he saw things by his own uncompounded and indivisible essence;
much less did his knowledge improve it self in a syllogistical way, deducing
and collecting one thing out of another: This is the Schoolmens meaning* when
they tell us cognitio Dei non est ratiocinativa, that is, non est discursiva.
They that will light a candle may strike such sparks, but the Sun and Stars
want no such light. Angels are above Syllogismes, how much more is God himself?
Nay, even amongst men, first principles are above disputings, above
demonstrations; now all things are more naked in respect of God himself, then
common notions are to the sight of men. It Is a motus testudineus, a tardy* and
tedious work, a fetching a compass, to gather one thing out of another; It Is
the slow pace of a limited understanding. But there is no succession in God, not
in the knowledge of God. There Is no prius and posterius, no premises or
conclusions; no transitus ab uno ad aliud, no externum medium, for he does not
cognoscere per aliud medium a seipso distinctum, there is a complete
simultaneity in all his knowledge, his essence is altogether, and so is his
knowledge; plurality of objects will confound a finite understanding, for they
must be presented by different Species, and a created eye cannot exactly view
such different faces at once, such several pictures at once. The understanding
sometimes loses it self in a crowd of objects; and when such a multitude comes
thronging upon it, it can scarce attend to any of them. But God seeing them all
per unicam speciem, per unicam operationem, takes notice of them all with an
infinite delight and facility. For he loves to attend to his own essence, which
does so admirably represent them all; hence his knowledge is always in act,
because his essence is a pure act; Humane understandings have much of their
knowledge stored up in habits, but there are no habits in a Deity, for
knowledge is dormant in a habit, but his understanding never slumbers nor
sleeps: There Is no potentiality in him, but he is always in ultima perfectione,
he is semper in actu intelligendi, as Sol is semper in actu lucendi. Humane
understandings are feign to unbend themselves sometimes, as if they were faint
and weary, but Divinity is always vigorous, and Eternity can never languish.
The understanding of God thus being filled with light, his Will also must needs
be rational, non caeca, sed oculata notitia. This makes the Schoolmen very well
determine, that though there cannot be causa divinae voluntatis; yet there may
be assigned ratio divinae voluntatis. There can be no cause of his Will, for
then there would be a cause of his Essence, his Will being all one with his
Essence; but there cannot be causa prior prima. Yet this account may be given
of his Will, that bonum intellectum est fundamentum voliti, so that as God does
primarily intelligere seipsum, so he does understand other things, only per
seipsum, so likewise he does principally and necessarily velle seipsum, and
does will other things secondarily, and out of choice, propter seipsum. And as
God has set all other beings a longing after the perfections and conservations
of their own beings, and has in a special manner stamped upon a rational nature
an intellectual appetite of its own welfare and happiness, so as that it
cannot but propound an ultimate scope and end to it self, and bend and direct
all its desires for the hitting and attaining of it; so he himself also sets up
himself, as the most adequate and amiable end of all his workings and motions,
and does bend the whole creation, does shoot every being, and order it to his
own glory. Now how rational is that Will of his that does chiefly fix it self
upon the fairest good, and wills other things only as they are subservient to
it, Deus vult bonitatem suam tanquam finem, and vult omnia alia tanquam media
ad finem. Out of the intense and vehement willing of himself, he wills also
some prints and resemblances of himself. The beauty of his own face, of his own
goodness is so great* as that he loves the very picture of it; And because one
picture cannot sufficiently express it, therefore he gives such various and
numerous representations of it. As when men cannot express their mind in one
word, they are willing to rhetoricate and enlarge themselves into more. God
does give many similitudes of himself, for the greater explication of his own
essence. His essence in it self not being capable of augmentation or
multiplications, he loves to see some imitations and manifestations of it, to
make known his own power and perfection in a way of causality. Now the
understanding of God being so vast and infinite, and his will being so
commensurate and proportioned to it, nay all one with it; all those Decrees of
his that are the Eternal product and results of his mind and will, must needs
be rational also; For in them his understanding and will met together, his
truth and goodness kissed each other. And though these Decrees of God must be
resolved into his absolute supremacy and dominion, yet that very sovereignty of
his is founded upon so much reason, and does act so wisely and intelligently,
as that no created understanding can justly question it, but is bound
obediently to adore it. The prosecution and application of these Decrees, it is
accompanied with the very same wisdom and reason; for what is Providence but
oculus in sceptro, a rational guiding and ruling all affairs in the world, it is
ipsa ratio divina in summo principe constituta; it is ratio ordinandorum in
finem, that which in man is called prudence, in God is called Providence; the
right tuning and regulating of all circumstances, and making them to conspire
and contribute to his own end and glory. And if man could but rightly interpret
and comment upon Providence, what fresh discoveries, what bright displayings of
divine reason would they all continually meet withal? what shinings and
sparklings of divine wisdom are there in some remarkable providential
passages? You that are most acquainted with the ways of God; tell us if you
did ever find any thing unreasonable in them. Enquire still more into his
dealings, and you will see more of reason in them. Could you search deeper into
the rich mine of his counsel, you would still meet with more precious veins of
wisdom. The depths of his counsels, what are they but the very profoundnesse
of his reason? (...) they are (...). And whenever this secret counsel of his
issues out and bubles forth, it is in most rational manifestations. His
commands are all rational, his word is the very pith and marrow of reason. His
Law is the quickening and wakening of men's reason; his Gospel, it is the flowing
out of his own reason; it is the quintessence of wisdom from above; His spirit
is a rational agent; the motions of the holy Ghost are rational breath; the
revelations of the holy Ghost, a rational light, as rational as a
demonstration: the Apostle calls them so. As when the Spirit of God overpowers
the will, it makes a willingness there, where there was an absolute nolency,
an obstinate refusal before. So when it over-powers the mind, it makes it
understand that which it did not, which it could not understand before.
Spiritual irradiations stamp new light, create new reason in the soul; Nothing
comes to man with the superscription of a Deity, but that which has upon it
some signature of wisdom. God himself is an intelligent worker in his dealing
with all beings, how much rather in his dealing with rational beings? By all
this you see that God himself is the Eternal spring and head of reason. And
that humane wisdom is but a created and an imperfect copy of his most perfect
and original wisdom.

Now Philosophy could dictate thus much, (...). God loves to see such a noble
creature as man is, to follow and imitate him in his reason. Omnia intendunt
assimilari Deo, as the Schoolmen have it. Now men cannot be more assimilated
unto God, then by moving as intelligent agents. Does God himself work according
to reason from eternity to eternity? And has he made a creature in time, whose
very essence is reason? Why then does it not open its eyes? why does it not use
its lamp? and though it cannot discover all, yet let it discern as much as it
can. Let it not act in the choicest points of religion, out of blind and
implicit principles, and huddle up its chiefest operations in I know not what
confused and obscure and undigested manner. This neither becomes sons of light,
nor works of light. The more men exercise reason, the more they resemble God
himself, who has but few creatures that can represent him in so bright an
excellency as this; only Angels and men; and therefore he expects it the more
from them. And the more they exercise their own reason, the more they will
admire and adore his; For none can admire reason but they that use some reason
themselves. And this may suffice for the first particular, that The Candle of
the Lord it is lumen derivatum, it was first lighted at a Sunbeam.

CHAP. XII.
The light of Reason is a Diminutive light.
THis Candle of the Lord, it is Lumen tenue and diminutum. A Lamp is no such
dazzling object. A Candle has no such goodly light, as that it should pride and
glory in it. It Is but a brief and compendious flame, shut up, and imprisoned in
a narrow compass. How far distant is it from the beauty of a Star? How
far from the brightness of a Sun? This Candle of the Lord when it was first
lighted up, before there was any thief in it, even then it had but a limited
and restrained light. God said unto it, Thus far shall thy Light go. Hither
shall thou shine, and no farther. Adam in innocence was not to crown himself
with his own sparks. God never intended that a creature should rest satisfied
with its own candlelight, but that it should run to the fountain of light, and
sun it self in the presence of its God. What a poor happiness had it been
for a man, only to have enjoyed his own Lamp? Could this ever have been a
beatifical vision? Could this light ever have made a heaven fit for a soul to
dwell in? The sparkling Seraphims and glittering Cherubims (if it were possible
that the face of God should be eclipsed from them, that they should have no
light, but that which shines from their own essences) Blackness, and
darkness, and gloominesse, a total and fatal Eclipse, a present and perpetual
night would rush in upon them, if the heaven were fuller of Stars then it is,
and if this lower part of the world were adorned and illuminated with as many
Lamps as it is capable of, yet would they never be able to supply the absence of
one Sun. Their united light would not amount to so much as to make up one day,
or one moment of a day. Let Angels and men contribute as much light as they
can, let them knit and concentricate their beams; yet neither Angelical
Starlight, nor the sons of men with their Lamps and Torches could ever make up
the least shadow of glory, the least appearance of heaven: the least fringe of
happiness. Lucifer that needs would be an Independent light that would shine
with his own beams, you know that he presently sunk and fell into perpetual
darkness. And Adams Candle aspiring to be a Sun, has burnt the dimmer ever
since. God taking notice of it, and spying him in the dust; Lo (says he) here
lies the spark, that would needs become a God. There lies the glowworm that
would needs become a Sun. Man is become like one of us, yet notwithstanding
Adams light at first was a pure light, till he had soild it, 'twas a
Virgin-light till he had deflower'd it. The breath that God breathed into him
was very precious and fragrant, till he had corrupted it. (...) the spirit of
Adam (if we should render the words so) 'twas in a special manner (...) Lucerna
Domini, when God raised this goodly structure of man out of nothing, he built
it most completely and proportionably; he left it in statu integro and
perfecto, for you cannot imagine that any obliquity, or irregularity should
come from so accurate an hand as his was; when God printed the whole creation,
there were no errata to be found, no blots at all. Every letter was fair and
lovely, though some first and capital letters were flourisht more artificially
then others; Other inferior creatures would serve like so many consonants, but
men were the vowels, or rather the diphthongs to praise him both in soul and
body. When God first tuned the whole creation, every string, every creature
praised him; but man was the sweetest and loudest of the rest, so that when
that string apostatized, and fell from its first tuning, it set the whole
creation a jarring. When God first planted the soul of man, it was the garden
of God himself, his spiritual Eden, he loved to walk in it; 'twas full of the
fairest and choicest flowers, of the most precious and delicious fruits; 'twas
watered with all the fresh springs of heavenly influence: No weeds, nor briers,
nor thorns to be found there. The understanding, that tree of knowledge was
very tall and stately, and reaching up to heaven. There was in man a cognitio
plena and lucida, as the Schoolmen speak; clara and fixa contemplatio
intelligibilium. The eye of the soul 'twas quick and clear, 'twas strong and
fixed, God tried it by himself, by a Sunbeam, and found it genuine. How
presently did Adam by this spy out the stamps and signatures that were upon the
several creatures? when by an extemporary facility, he gave them such names as
should interpret and comment upon their essences (nay according to the
Schoolmens determinations) man in this his primitive condition, habuit
scientiam omnium nature aliter scibilium. As God framed him an elegant body, at
its full height and stature, (though not with his head reaching up to heaven,
as some did ridiculously fancy) so he gave him also a comely and amiable soul
at its just (...) endowed with all natural accomplishments and perfections; his
Dove-like spirit dwelt in a spotless and beautiful temple. This makes the
Protestant Divines very well determine, that pronitas ad malum non fluit ex
principiis naturae integrae; for it would be a thought too injurious to the God
of Nature, to imagine he should frame evil. Yet some of the Papists and some
others do constantly affirm, that such a rational being as man is, considered
in pur is nature alibus, will have an unavoydable propensity unto evil, ex
necessaria materiae condition, and they bring forth such bold words as these.
Deum non posse creare hominem ex anima rationali, and materiali sensibili
compositum, quin praeter divinam intentionem, homo it a constitutus habeat
praecipitem inclinationem ad sensibilia, their meaning is this, by reason of
that intimate and essential conjunction of the sensitive powers with the
intellectual, there must needs arise some ataxy and confusion in the being of
man, and too great a favoring of sensitive objects, unless that inferior
part of the soul be restrained supernaturali quodam fraeno (as they speak;) and
say they, it was thus chained up in a state of innocence, but now being let
loose, it is extremely wild and unruly. How derogatory is this from the
goodness and power of Gods creation, and from that accurate harmony and
immaculate beauty that were to be found in such a noble being as man was in his
native and original condition? nec fraenum nec calcar desiderabatur, for there
was a just and regular tendency without the least swerving or deviation. There
was no such tardity in the sensitive part as should need a spur; nor yet any
such impetuousnesse and violence as should require a bridle. This indeed must
be granted, that upon the knitting and uniting of such a soul to such a body,
of sensitives to intellectuals, there will naturally follow, respectus and
inclinatio ad sensibilia; and this is not praeter, sed secundum intentionem
divinam; but that this should be praeceps, rebellis, and inordinata inclinatio,
is so far from being necessary, as that it is plainly contra-natural. For this
sensitive appetite of man, is born sub regno rationis, and so is to be governed
sceptro rationis. By this golden Scepter, it was peaceably ruled in a state of
innocence. Anima non aggravata erat a corpore, (as the Schoolmen say) the body
though it was not beautified and clarified in the same measure that a glorified
body is; yet it was dutiful and obedient, and every way serviceable to the
soul. The sensitive powers were not factious, but were willingly subject to the
higher powers, to the intellectuals. The first bublings of the soul were pure
and crystaline, and streamed out very freely and fluently without any
murmuring, without any wavering, without any foaming. There were no violent
motions, no violent perturbations which since have made such insurrections in
the soul, and with their importunate breath endeavor as much as they can, to
blow out this intellectual Lamp, this light of reason. There were nullae
passiones, quae recipient malum, (as the School tells us.) There was no
slavish fear to bespeak and antedate grief. There was no palenesse to be seen,
no tremblings nor shiverings, no tears nor sighs, no blushes nor the least
tincture of shame. Paradise it had so much of the Lily, as 't had nothing of
the Rose, yet there were isti^smodi passiones quae ordinantur ad bonum. Joy
would dance and leap sometimes, love would embrace and twine about its dearest
good; such pure and noble affections as live and dwell in the breasts of
glorified beings were not banished and excluded from this state of integrity.
The Poets shadowed out this happy time in their golden age, though they mix
some dross in the description of it. Now man being constituted in this state
of natural rectitude, his Candle shining clearly, his will following
cheerfully, his affections complying most suitably, a sudden cloud presently
rusht upon him, and blotted all his glory. And as the Orator styled that Roman
Magistrate, that was suddenly turned out of his place, Consul vigilantissimus,
because he did not sleep all the time of his Consulship (for he continued but a
day in it) In the very same sense, and only in this sense, man also was
vigilantissimus in honor, in the Psalmists language (...) non per noctabit, he
would not abide in honor, he did not lodge one night in honor. Though I am
far from laying such stresse upon those words, as they do, that will needs
from thence measure the time so exactly, as that they will tell you to a minute
how long Adam enjoyed his first glory: This only we are sure of, it was a very
brief and transient happiness, a fading and withering glory; he had wasted his
Oil presently, and the Lamp was going out, but that God dropped fresh oil into
it, by the promise of a Messiah. The Schoolmen are very solicitous and desirous
to know how Adams understanding being in vigore viridi could be entangled in
such a snare, and deluded with such a miserable fallacy. Aquinas for his part
determines hominem in primo statu decipi non potuisse, which yet is altogether
unconcelvable, for how could he fall unless his head declined? It Is not very
easily perceptible at any time; how there can be defectus in voluntate, and yet
not Error in Intellectu, much less can we tell how this should come to pass,
when the will was so obediently disposed ad nutum intellectus, when it gave
such observance to all the commands and dictates of the understanding, as that
did in a state of innocence. And to resolve the whole anomaly and irregularity
of that first prevarication, only into the wills untowardnesse; what is it else
then to say that Adam sinned ex mera malitia, contra claritatem judicii; which
is to entertain a thought very groundless, uncharitable, and dishonorable to
the first root of mankind, and to make his transgression of the same dye with
those damned Angelical spirits that were thrown into irrecoverable misery.
Therefore Zanchy, that was one of the most scholastical amongst the
Protestants, does most judiciously conclude, that the understanding of Adam was
defective in its office, by a negligent non-attendency. The eye was clear
enough, the bow was strong enough, but it was not vigilant enough, it was not
bent enough; the balance was not deceitful, but he forgot to weigh things in
it. Now man by this fall of his was not only spoliatus supranatur alibus, but
also vulneratus in ipsis naturalibus. How soon is this beautiful creature
withered! his spring is gone, his May is gone, his gloss and greenness gone;
the flower droops, the tree is neither so flourishing nor so fruitful, an
untimely and disconsolate Autumn comes upon him. Thus the purest complexions
are always most frail and brittle. Thus the highest conditions are most
tottering and precipitious, and the noblest perfections, if built only upon
natures bottom, are but voluble and uncertain. There arises a sudden (...), a
present (...), in the being of man. The Philosophers were very sensible of it,
and groaned under it. You may hear them complaining of the (...), of the
languishings and faintings of the soul, of a (...), a spurious and adulterate
kind of reason. You may hear them complaining of an (...) and (...), a
defluvium pennarum. The wings of the soul flag, many of the feathers are sick
and drop away. And that soul which was wont to build its nest in the Stars,
is now feign to build it in the dust. You may hear one Philosopher complaining
of the (...), his head, his understanding aches; another of the (...), his eye,
his reason is dimmed; a third of the (...), the palpitatio cordis, his soul
trembles with doubts and uncertainties. You may see one grasping a cloud of
Errors, another spending much of his time in untying some one knot, in solving
some one difficulty; you may see some one pleasing himself, and sitting down in
the shadow of his own opinion, another bending all his nerves and endeavors,
and they presently snap asunder. You may see Socrates in the twilight, and
lamenting his obscure and benighted condition, and telling you that his Lamp
will show him nothing but his own darkness. You may see Plato sitting down by
the waters of Lethe, and weeping because he could not remember his foormer
notions. You may hear Aristotle bewailing himself thus, that this (...) will so
seldom come into act, that his abrasa tabula has so few, and such imperfect
impressions upon it, that his intellectuals are at so low an ebb, as that the
motions of Euri^us will pose them. You hear Zeno complaining that his (...) is
dark, and Epictetus confessing that he had not the right ansa, the true
apprehension of things; look upon the Naturalists head and you will see it
nonplust with an occult quality, feel the Moralists pulse, (his conscience I
mean) and you will find it beating very slowly, very remissely; look upon the
most speculative Eagles that stare the Sun in the face, that fly highest in
contemplation, those that love to sport and play in the light; yet at length
you may see the Sun striking them through with one of his glorious darts, and
chastizing their inquisitive eyes with one of his brightest beams. The Sun it is
ready to put out this Candle of the Lord, if it make too near approaches to it.
Humane understandings are glad to wink at some dazzling objects, as vehemens
sensibile does destruere sensum: so vehemens intelligibile does perstringere
intellectum. For in all knowledge there is required a due proportion between the
objectum cognoscibile, and the virtus cognoscitiva, but when the several powers
and faculties of the soul lost that comely proportion which they had amongst
themselves, they lost also much of that correspondency and conformity which
they had to their several objects. And the soul besides its own loss, had a
share in the bodies loss also: for the body wanting much of that accurate and
elegant composure which once it had, knowledge it self must needs be prejudiced
by it; that being amongst men founded in sense, and in some measure depending
upon organical dispositions. So that the streitning and stopping of these
windows, must needs prohibit light. Sin entered in first at a corporeal, then at
an intellectual window, and stole away the heart; and the windows have been
broken ever since. I know the generality of Philosophers do partly excuse the
understanding, and do blame the objects for their exility and poverty, for
their little diminutive Entity, for their want of intelligibility. But the
subtle Scotus does endeavor to invalidate, that by telling them, that omnia
eadem facilitate intelliguntur a Deo. Thus much is evident and undeniable, that
the spying out of a little lurking object, does argue the strength, and
quickness, and clearness of the eye. The Sun discovers atoms, though they be
invisible by candlelight, yet that makes them dance naked in his beams. Created
understandings want spectacles to augment and majorate some objects. But the
soul never meets with more difficulty then in the understanding of spiritual
beings, although they have most of Entity, and so most of intelligibility. Yet
the soul being imprisoned in a body not sufficiently clarified and refined,
cannot so fully close and comply with incorporeal beings. This Candle of the
Lord will discover more of spirituals when it is took out of the Lantern in
statu separato, or when it is put into a clearer in statu consummato. But for
the present how little does it know of it self? How little of Angels? How
little of God? And yet how much might be known of them? Look but a while, (if
you can endure to look) upon so unlovely and unpleasant an object, I mean upon
those black and prodigious Errors, that cover and bespot the face of these
times. And they will soon convince you of the weakness and dimnesse of this
Lamp-light of the spirit of a man. The Candle of the Lord, though it be amongst
them, yet it is not so powerful as to scatter and conquer their thick and
palpable darkness. It Is not an easy, nor a sudden, nor a delightful work to
number so many errors, yet if I could reckon them up all, from the blundering
Antinomian, to the vagabond Seeker, or the wild Seraphick, set on fire of hell,
they would all serve for so many fatal examples of the miserable weakness of
men's understanding. It Is true, they do not follow the Candle of the Lord, for
then reason would have guided them better. But this very consideration shows
the weakness of their candlelight, for if it had been a brighter 'twould not
have been so soon put out. It Is easy to blow out a candle, but who can put out
a Star? or who can extinguish the Sun? And men can shut up natural light, but
who can imprison a Star? or who can shut up the Sun? This faint and languishing
candlelight does not always prevail upon the will, it does not sufficiently
warm and inflame the affections. Men do not use to warm their hands at a
candle, it is not so victorious and over-powerings as to scatter all the works
of darkness. It will be night for all the candle; the Moralists were not only
frigid in their devotions, but some of them were very dissolute in their
practices. When you think upon these things, sure you will willingly subscribe to
the forementioned particular, which you may do very safely, that the spirit of
a man it is but a Candle. Lumen exile and diminutum.

CHAP. XIII.
The light of Reason discovers present, not future things.
It Is lumen explicans praesentia, non aperiens futura, for did you ever hear of
such a Lamp as would discover an object, not yet born nor yet in being? Would
you not smile at him that should light up a Candle to search for a futurity?
It Is the glorious prerogative of the Divine understanding, to have such a fair,
and open, and unlimited prospect, as that in one glorious twinkling of an
intellectual eye, he can see the whole compass and extent, and latitude of
being; and the whole duration of being* for Eternity at one draught does
swallow up the whole fluency of time, and is infinitely above those temporal
conditions of past, present, and to come; Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, (say the
Lawyers) Nullum tempus occurrit Deo, say the Philosophers. An intellectual Sun,
does not occidere, and redire, but makes one bright and perpetual day, and by
its pure and uninterrupted irradiations, does paraphrase, and comment upon all
objects, so as to uncloud and reveal the most obscure contingency, and to make
it present, and naked, and visible. For as the Schoolmen tell us, Scientia Dei
ad omnia presentialiter se habet, His knowledge being all one with his essence,
without the least shadow of change. Insomuch as that which with men is a
futurity and contingency, with him is always present and extant; which speaks
for the certainty and infallibility of his prescience, though it be conversant
about such things, as seem to us most casual and fortuitous. For even we our
selves know these things certainly, when they are in act, and in being, because
that then they lose their volubility and contingency, and put on reality and
necessity: according to that unquestionable rule, Omne quod est quando est
necesse est esse, a contingency when it is extra suas causas, when it is actualy
produced having a determinatum esse, it may then also have a determinate
cognoscibility. Now God always thus sees a contingency in termino, in eventu,
in periodo; whereas created understandings look upon it, in medio, in motu, in
itinere. Nay such is the poverty and imperfection of man's knowledge, that many
things which are in their own nature necessary and demonstrable; yet perhaps
they know them, per modum probabilitatis and per modum ncecessitatis. But such
is the height and transcendency of the Divine understanding, as that such
things as are in their own natures most dubious and hovering between esse and
non esse; yet God knows even these per modum infallibilem, and plainly
perceives which way they will incline, when men see only an equipoise and
neutrality. So that the whole rise of contingency flows from the wavering of
second causes. And though scientia Dei be causa rerum; yet being but causa
remota, it does not take away contingency; But God himself sees that some
things will evenire contingenter: For he does not only cognoscere res, but
ordinem and modum rerum. And knows that there are some causae intermediae,
mediae, which are impedibiles and defectibiles (as the Schoolmen speak somewhat
rudely) and by virtue of these, there arises a contingency. Thus in a
Syllogism, though the major be necessary, yet if the minor be contingent, the
conclusion will be so also, and will sequi deteriorem partem; though the first
cause be certain, yet if there be obstructions in the second, you cannot
promise your self what the effect will be. Though the spring of motion cannot
fail, yet if the wheels may possibly break, the progress will be very
uncertain to all but to God himself. For other understandings only know that
the wheels may break, but God he sees whether they will break or no, so that
which in respect of creatures is periculosae plenum opus aleae, in respect of
God is fixum and (...), determined and immovable in his everlasting thoughts.
Angelical beings cannot reach to so high a perfection of knowledge as this is.
For futurum quatenus futurum, is objectum improportionatum intellectui
Angelico, as acute Suarez does abundantly evince. The Philosophers find
difficulty enough in explaining the manner how God has a certain and
infallible prescience of these future uncertainties. And they find it a plain
impossibility for the Angels to have any such knowledge, for they neither have
aeternitatem intuitus, which should ambire in objecto suo omnes differentias
temporis, which should remove all succession, all prius and posterius, and make
a complete simultaneity, nor yet have they plenitudinem rationis
representativae, they have no such boundless and infinite species as the
Divine essence is, by which God beholds all things. Angels have neither light
enough of their own to manifest a future object, nor an eye strong enough to
pierce into it. They cannot infallibly foretell their own motions, because God
can alter them and overpower them, much less can they know the determinations
of God himself, or any operations that depend upon a free agent, till they bud
and blossom in some actual discoveries and appearances. Nor are they so well
acquainted with the whole context and coherence of natural agents, with all
those secret twinings and complications as to spy out beforehand those events
which are brought forth in a casual and unusual and very unlikely manner.
Whenever then they have any prescience of future contingencies, it is only by
revelation from God himself. They may see the face of a future object in
speculo divino, but yet that is speculum voluntarium, and shows only what it
pleases, and when, and to whom it pleases. The wicked Angels know this well
enough, that they for their parts have no knowledge of future uncertainties,
though they desire to have it as much as any, and they pretend to it as much as
any; yet you know how cautelous they were in their Oracular responsals, as that
elegant Moralist Plutarch does most excellently show in several places. They
always drew a curtain before their predictions, and wrapped them up in
obscurity, which plainly argued a consciousnesse of their own ignorance in
respect of future events. The good Angels are so filled with their present
happiness, they are so quieted with the enjoyment of God himself, as that they
are not at all solicitous, or inquisitive about future events, but they
cheerfully entertain and drink in all those beams that come flowing from the
face of their God, and they desire no more then he is pleased to communicate to
them, nay indeed they can desire no more, for he gives them as much as they are
capable of. Now if Angelical understandings are not so wide and comprehensive
as to graspe and take in such objects, what mean then the sons of men to aspire
and reach after the knowledge of them? if those tall and eminent beings,
standing upon the mount of God cannot see them, how shall the sons of men that
are of a lower stature hid in a valley, how shall they behold them? Yet there
was always in the generality of mankind, a prurient desire, and hankering
afterthe knowledge of future events. Men still stretch out the hand to the
forbidden tree, they long for the fruit of it, and would fain be plucking some
apples from it. Nay, men long for the greenest apples, for the precocious
knowledge of events before they come to their just ripeness and maturity. The
desire of this sets the Astrologer a lighting his candle at the Stars. O how
does he flatter himself in his own imaginary twincklings, and how does he
persuade the more simple and credulous part of the world that he can discover
every future atome, that he can put those capital Stars, those golden letters
together, and spell out all the fates of Kingdoms and persons? It makes the
Augur (the (...) as the Greeks call him) chatter with the birds in their own
dialect, and as if he were their Scholiast, he writes Comments and Expositions
upon their language; O how devoutly will he listen to a prophetical Crow? how
will he criticize upon the harsh accents of the screech-Owle? upon the dismal
and melancholy notes of the night-Raven? It makes the Auspex watch the birds in
their several postures, and to be as diligent and judicious a spectator of
them, as the other was an Auditor. He can interpret every fluttering, he can
tell you all their journeys, where they lodged, where they baited last, what
tree they visited, what bough they stayed longest upon; and at length he will
pluck some pens out of their sacred wings, for the writing of all his learned
predictions. It moved the Exspex to consult with the inwards, to search into
the bowels of things; he will but look upon a Liver, and will presently tell you
the color and complexion of all affairs. It caused the Aruspex to behold the
behavior of the dying sacrifice, and from the quietness or struggling of those
sensitive creatures, to foretell the reluctancles or facilities in higher
matters. It set the Chiromancer a studying to read those lines that seem to be
scribled upon his hand, and to explain them with his own interlineary glosses;
and to look upon them as natures M S S* as an Enchiridion of natures penning,
in which she gave him a brief Synopsis of all such passages of his life, as
should come into being afterward. It moved the Interpreter of dreams to set up
his seat of Judicature in those gates of fancy, the Porta Cornea I mean, and
the Porta Eburnea, and as if the night were to enlighten the day, he will
regulate all his waking motions by those slumbring intimations, yet usually the
interpretation of the dream is the more non-sensical dream of the two. Some
others will needs cast lots for their fortunes, and think that the judgment of
a Dye is infallible, will undertake no matters of moment til they be
predetermined by it; Jacta est alea, and per praesentem sortem judicant de
futura. A rare device to find out one contingency by another, to lose one
arrow, and to shoot another after it. These are some of those many methods and
contrivances, which the sons of men have contrived to themselves, for the
finding out of future events. What should I tell you of the rest of the (...),
and the (...), of the (...), and the (...), and (...), of the (...), of the
(...), which are all but the various expressions of the same madness? What
should I tell you of those several Nations that have been enamored with these
follies? the Assyrians, the Caldeans, the Persians, the Grecians, the Romans,
have had always amongst them several professors of these vanities. You see how
fain the sons of men would have some key or other to unlock and open these
secret and reserved passages, which Providence has wisely shut up, and hid
from the eyes of men. But Aquinas passes this censure upon them all, Hujusmodi
arts non utuntur patrocinio intellectus been dispositi secundum virtutem. And
that sacred Author is much of the same mind* Frustra illud quaeris* in terris
quod solus Deus novit in Coelis. Yet this tree of knowledge is fair to the eye,
and pleasant to the taste, the soul does relish all notional dainties with
delight, and these prenotions and anticipations of things are the more sweet
and delicious to the palates and tastes of men, because most of their being is
treasured up in their future condition. They have no satisfaction, no Sabbath,
nor quiet in their present state, and therefore they would fain know what the
next day, and what the next year, and what the next age will bring forth. The
desires, the prayers, the hopes, the endeavors, the councels of men, they all
look toward the future. For (as Mirandula the younger does well observe) the
soul of man, it is trium temporum particeps. Tempus praeteritum memoriae,
praesens intellectui, futurum voluntati congruit and respondit. God therefore
that he may keep such a creature as man is in a waiting and obedient posture,
in a posture of dependence and expectation, he does choose gradually and
leisurely to discover to him, (...) these thoughts which he has concerning
him. God will have man in this sense in Diem vivere. to entertain fortune by
the day, (as the noble Verulam says that Prince did whose life he writes and
commemorates) (...); it is a speech that may be took in a better sense, then
Anacreon e're meant it. And so may that of the Latin Lyrick, Quid sit futurum
cras fuge quaerere. And the Heroical Poet shows them the necessity of this
sobriety and temperance in knowledge; for says he, Nescia men's hominum fati
sortisque futurae; for men's knowledge naturally enters in at the gate of sense,
but a future object can have no admission there. And as the mind cannot recall
objectum totaliter praeteritum, when there is no remaining Species, neither the
least print or vestigium of it; so neither can it present an object that is
altogether future, and has no such color as can move and strike the
intellectual eye; such effects indeed as are stored up in pregnant and eminent
and necessary causes, may be easily and certainly foreknown by visible and
unquestionable demonstrations. The foretelling of an Eclipse may be done
without an Oracle, and may be believed though there be no miracle to seal and
confirm it. Such effects as lurk in probable causes, that seem to promise very
fairly, may be known also in an answerable, and proportionable manner, by
strong and shrewd conjectures; hence spring all the praenotiones Medicorum,
Nautarum, Pastorum, as the forementioned Mirandula tells us. yet the great
pretenders of the Antedating knowledge, do very frequently and pro more,
deceive both themselves and others in these more ordinary and easy scrutinies.
This might cloth your Almanacks in more red, and put them to the blush for
guessing at the weather no better, you may write upon them nulla dies sine
errato, did they never threaten you with thunder and lightning enough to make a
Caligula prepare new Laurels; when yet the heavens proved very pacate and
propitious? Did they never tell you of a sad discontented day which would weep
its eyes out? which yet when 'twas born proved a Democritus, and did nothing
but laugh at their ignorance and folly. Did they never flatter you with fine
pleasant temperate weather, (...), the rain descended, the winds arose, the
hail beat, the Prediction fell, because 'twas built upon so weak a foundation.
So that Aquinas for his part thinks, that the sensitive creatures, the Crows,
and the Craines, and the Swallows, those flying Almanacks, that know their
appointed tims, are more happy and successeful in their predictions, and are
better directed by their feeling the impression of some heavenly bodies then
men are by their seeing of them. Now if these Anni specula be cracked and
broken, and give such unequal representations of things most obvious, how then
will they be ever able to show you objects far more imperceptible and
immaterial, that depend upon the will and decrees of God himself? and upon the
motions of most free and indifferent agents? This makes the great
Astrologo-mastix, I mean the most noble and eminent Mirandula with indignation
to conclude, that this blasing Art of theirs (that is Astrology abused, for so
either he means, or ought to mean) it is at the best but Domina and Regina
Superstitionum, and he breaks out into such words as these, Vanitas vanitatum
Astrologia, and omnis superstitio vanitas; yet notwithstanding God has
provided some that shall give some faint resemblances of himself, in the
knowledge of future things, by a participation of light from him. (...). That I
may borrow these words of the Apostle, This Lumen propheticum, it is Lumen super
natural, Prophetical springings come not from the will of man, but from the
breathings of the holy Ghost, they are impressiones and signaturae divinae
scientiae. As God himself is (...), so he will have a Prophet to be a shadow of
himself, (...), which Virgil well translates, Novit namque omnia vates, Quae
sint, quae fuerant, quae mox ventura trahantur. God thus revealing and
communicating his mind to his Prophets does clearly manifest, that he himself
has an exact knowledge of future events, he does expressly show that he does
curare res humanas, that he is actor and ordinator futurorum; That his
providence does overruled the greatest contingencies. He does therefore upbraid
the Idols of the Heathens with their ignorance of these things (...) Jsaiah 41.
23. Prophetical language is divini sermonis character, and does necessarily
require, super humanam cognitionem, which makes me wonder at the great Doctor
Maimon, that resolves the power of prophesying into nothing else then a
healthful temper, a lively complexion of body, and a vigorous mind advanced
with study and industry. An opinion which smells too strongly of the Garlic
and Onions of that Country, the Egyptian superstition I mean, with which he
was sufficiently acquainted; yet he tells us that it is the public tenent of
the Jews, sententia legis nostrae, for so he entitles it, and withal adds
that the Art of prophesying (for though he does not style it so, yet he makes
it so) it is supremus gradus hominis, and summa perfectio speciei; the
qualifications which he requires are these, men must be idonei ad prophetiam ab
ipsa conceptione and nativitate, there must be dispositio and dexteritas
naturalis, there must be optimus humor cerebri, he must be optimus vir in
intellectualibus, and moribus suis perfectus. But his principal condition is,
that there must be summa facultatis imaginatricis perfectio; for says he, if
the influence of an intellectus agens, (such a one as he, falsely and vainly
supposes) be poured out only upon the rational part of the soul, and does not
drop upon the fancy, either by reason of the scarcity of oil, or the
incapacity of the fancy, there will be only secta sapientum speculatorum. Such
men may be eminent for deep Contemplation, but they will never be famous for
prophesying. If the fancy be only quickened or heightened, then there will be
secta Politicorum, Jurispositorum, Praestigiatorum, Incantatorum, But if the
understanding, and fancy be both heightened to their due apex repent ^iunt
prophetae: only this I had almost forgot which yet he thinks very convenient,
that they should have good diet for the time of their prophesying; for, as he
tells you, according to the mind of the Jews, Prophetia neque habitat inter
tristitiam neque pigritiam; So that the terrae filii the (...), the vulgar sort
of people are no more fit to prophesy, quam vel Asinus vel Rana. They are his
own words turned into Latin. But surely this Doctor himself did not prophesy
but dream all this while; How else did he think that such a noble and spiritual
employment, such a rare and glorious privilege as this is, could be raised by
the power of man out of the strength of nature, that nature that is so fallen
and degenerated? And what means he to limit the Holy one of Israel, and to
restrain the Spirit of the Almighty? Grant that Esaias was a Courtier, yet was
not Amos an herdsman? and was not he also among the Prophets? Did he never hear
of the weaker sex sometimes prophesying? which yet was near famous for
intellectuals. Does not this prophetical spirit breath when it pleases, and
where it pleases, and how it pleases? Me thinks this second Moses should not
be offended, though some of the ordinary people be Prophets. Or if natural
endowments, or artificial preparations must be had, and if they of themselves
be so potent, and energetical, how then comes Vision to fail, and how does
Prophecy cease? Are there none that have their imagination strong enough, that
have their understandings raised enough? that are of unquestionable integrity,
and are not wanting in study and industry, and yet are no Prophets nor Prophets
sons? Let then this Candle of the Lord content it self with its proper object.
It finds work enough and difficulty enough in the discovery of present things,
and has not such a copious light as can search out future events.

CHAP. XIV.
The light of Reason is a certain light.
It Is Lumen certum. Lamp-light as it is not glorious, so it is not deceitful,
though it be but a faint and languishing light. Though it be but a limited and
restrained light, yet it will discover such objects as are within its own
sphere with a sufficient certainty. The letters of Natures law, are so fairly
printed, they are so visible and capital, as that you may read them by this
Candlelight; yet some weak and perverse beings not fit to be honored with the
name of men, slight all the workings and motions of Reason, upon this account,
that they are Rolling and fluctuating, that they are treacherous and
unconstant. And they look upon Logic which is nothing else but the just
advancement of reason, an Art of Ripening and mellowing reason, an art of
Clarifying and refining of the mind, yet they look upon it as an intelectual
kind of juggling, an artificial kind of cheating and cozening their
understanding: Nor were it a wonder if only the dregs of people, the rude lump
of the multitude, if they only were sunk and degenerated into this folly, But
I meet with a famous and ancient sect of Philosophers that delight in the name
of Scepticks, who by a strange kind of Hypocrisy, and in an unusual way of
affectation pretend to more ignorance then they have, nay then they are capable
of. They quarrel with all Arts and Sciences, and do as much as they can to
annihilate all knowledge and certeinty; and profess nothing but a
Philosophical kind of neutrality, and Lukewarmnesse. Socrates did not please
them; for he showed himself but a Semisceptick, one that was too confident in
saying that he did hoc tantum scire, se nihil scire; for they will not allow so
much knowledge as that comes to, this they tell you, that they don't know this,
whether they know any thing or no. There was one sort of Academicks, that came
very near them, their motto was, (...), their meaning was that they could not
graspe or comprehend any object. Lucian (that unhappy wit) makes himself very
merry with them, and laughs at one of them, that had a servant that proved a
fugitive and ran away from him, his Master (says he) is very unfit to run
after him (...); for he will always cry, (...), I cannot reach him, I cannot
come near him; yet if these Academicks by their (...) meant no more then this,
that the whole Intelligibility of any entity, could not be exhausted by them,
that they could not perfectly and powerfully pierce into any object as to
discover all that was knowable in it, their opinion then was not only
tolerable, but very commendable, and undeniable; for only God himself, does
thus (...). There is not enough in any created lamp to give such a bright
displaying of an object. Nor is there vigor enough in any created eye, so to
pierce into the pith and marrow of being, into the depth and secrecy of being.
But if their mind was this (as it is generally thought to be) that there was
nothing in being so visible as that their understanding could pierce it with
certainty and satisfaction, such an Error as this was very derogatory to the
plenitude and exuberancy of beings that streams out in a clear cognoscibility,
and 'twas very injurious to their own rational capacities, which were not made
so strait and narrow-mouthed as not to receive those notions that continually
drop from being: But they were contrived and proportioned for the well-coming
and entertaining of truths, that love to spin and thread themselves into a fine
continuity, as if they meant to pour themselves into the soul without spilling.
But the Scepticks will bid you (...), and will desire you not to believe one
word of this. They have no less then ten several bridles, ad compescendum and
cohibendum assensum; Sextus Empiricus, that grand Sceptick will give you a
sight of them all, from whence they were styled (...) men that did check and
constrain knowledge, that whereas the (...) their adversaries ex Diametro, did
lay down their determinations in a more positive and decretorious manner, these
(...) would take time to consider, and no less then all their lifetime. They
chose to be so many perpetual Questionists that would pose themselves, and rub
themselves, and stay themselves finally, and would by no means be persuaded to
commence or take any degree in knowledge. (...), that was the sum of all
their Philosophy. Their most radical and fundamental principle, if they may be
said to have any such, was this, (...), that all propositions were in
aequilibrio, that there was nothing could incline the Balance this way or that,
that there was an (...), there was an exact equality of reason, for the
affirmation or negation of any Proposition. Lucian brings in one of them with a
parie of Balances in his hand, crowding three or four Arguments for the
affirmative into one scale, and just as many for the negative into the other,
and then telling them his meaning in these words, (...). I have took (says he)
a great deal of pains in weighing of controversies, and yet find in them such
an undistinguishable equipoise as that there is not in me the least inclination
to one side more then the other. This they term an (...), an (...), a
speculative kind of (...), an impartiality in respect of al things. In morals
they call it (...); for as they would not acknowledge any verum or falsum, so
neither would they trouble themselves about any turpe or honestum, (...). They
had no better Ethics then that speech would amount to; yet they had some laws
amongst them, some customs and rules of life, but they did not observe them,
some customs and rules of life, but they did not observe them as (...), things
that were fixed and fit to be established, they were far from being
irreversible, like those of the Medes and Persians, but they put them under the
head of (...), laws pro tempore, such shadows and appearances as they would
for the present please themselves in. And after all debates, after all their
siftings and discussing of affairs, they would conclude no otherwise then
this. (...), which were all but so many frigid expressions of their hesitancy
and stammering opinion. Yet this they called (...), a judicious pawsing and
deliberation which they did far prefer, or rather seem to prefer, before
the daring rashness of others, that were more dogmatical and magisterial,
(...) (as they called them) swelling bladders, empty bottles, that were stopped,
and sealed up as if they had some precious liquor in them, when as they were
filled with nothing but air and wind. There was more modesty and less
ostentation, as they thought, in their (...), which they esteem no small
temperanc^ and sobriety in knowledge. An intellectual kind of continence and
virginity to keep their mind pure and untoucht, when as other understandings
were ravished and deflower'd with the violence of every wanton opinion. Whereas
demonstrations did not move these men at all, for as they tell you, they
always run, either (...) or (...), they either rest in a medium equally
obscure, which must needs be invalid and inefficacious, or else there will be
no period at all, but a processus in infinitum, if you expect that they should
acquiesce and rest contented with first principles, they know no such things,
they tell you they are only some artificial pillars, which some faint and tired
understandings have set up for themselves to lean upon, they will not be fettered
with an Axiom, nor chained to a first principle, nor captivated by a common
notion. As they break the most binding cords of demonstrations asunder, so they
threaten to make these pillars of truth to tremble; to prove by a first
principle (say they) it is but petitio principii, it is (...), it is to beg a
truth, not to evince it. If you tell them that these common notions shine with
their native light, with their own proper beams; all that they return will be
this, that perhaps you think so, but they do not. Yet that they might the
better communicate their minds, they allowed their scholars to take some
things for granted, for a while upon this condition, that they would distrust
them afterward. But these doubters, these Scepticks were never so much
convinced, as when they were quickened and awaked by sensitive impressions.
This made some laugh at Pyrrhon, though not the Author, (as is falsely supposed
by some) yet a principal amplifier and maintainer of this Sect, (whence they
had their name of (...),) who when a dog was ready to bite him, he beat him
away, and ran as fast as he could from him; Some that took notice of it, gave
him a smiling reproof, for his apostatizing from Scepticisme, but he returns
him this grave answer, (...); Where he spoke truth before he was aware, for his
words are (...), (as I may so phrase them) a brief description of the whole
drift and intention of that Sect, which was (...), for they had sufficiently
put off Reason, and they did endeavor indeed to put off Sense as much as they
could: Yet the Skeptical writer Sextus Emricus confeffes, that the (...), the
vehemence and importunity of sensitive, (...), they are (says he) so urgent
and cogent, as that they do extort some kind of assent from us, (...), when we
seem to be hungry (says he) perhaps we go to our meat, and when we have made a
show of eating, at length we seem to be satisfied, all such matters of sense
they resolve into their (...), into some kind of appearances that do for the
present affect them. (...), honey seems to be pretty sweet and pleasant to
them, but whether it do not dissemble, whether it be as it seems to be, that
they question. I find that Pyrrhon the great promoter and propagator of this
Sect was at first a Painter by his trade, and it seems he was very loath ab
art sua recedere, for he looks upon every being as a picture and color, a
shadow, a rude draught and portraicture, a mere representation, that has
nothing of solidity or reality. These pictures of his drawing enamored many
others, for this Sect was patronized by men of acuteness and subtilty, the
wits of the age, magna ingenia, sed non sine mixtura dementiae, mala punica,
sed non sine grano putrido, I could name you Authors of good worth and credit,
who tell you that Homer and Archilochus and Euripides, and the Wise men of
Greece were all Scepticks, yet those proofs which they bring to evidence and
evince it, are not so pregnant and satisfying, but that you may very lawfully
doubt of it, and yet be no Scepticks neither. But Francis Mirandula reckons
many very learned men that were deeply engaged in this Sect, and some others
that did very near border upon it. Protagoras among the rest whom Plato
frequently mentions, and whom Aristotle confutes, who was of this mind that
all opinions were true, Sextus Empericus passes this censure upon him, that he
was too positive and dogmatical in asserting theirs; but if he had only
questioned and deliberated upon it, whether all opinions were not true, he had
then been a rare and complete Sceptick. The ground that Protagoras went upon,
was this, (...). By (...) he meant nothing else but (...), and Aristotle thus
explains the words, (...), for he made appearance of the whole essence and
formality of truth. So that according to him several opinions were but the
various discoveries and manifestations of truth. There was one verum quod ad te
pertinet, and another verum quod ad illum pertinet. Honey was as truly bitter
to a feverish palate, as it was sweet and dellcious to an ordinary taste. Snow
was as truly black, in respect of Anaxagoras, as it was white in the eye and
esteem of another. Thus says he, mad men, wise men, children, old men, men in
a dream, and men awake, they are all competent Judges of these things that
belong to their several conditions; for (as he tells us) truth varies according
to several circumstances, that is true to day, which is not true to morrow, and
that is true at Rome, that is not true at Athens; that is true in this age, that is
not true in the next: That Is true to one man, that is not true to another.
There Is none of you but can spy out such a weak fallacy as this is; and if he
meant to have spoken truth, he would have said no more then this, that every
man thinks his own opinion true. For as the will cannot embrace an object
unless it be presented sub umbra boni, so neither can the understanding close
and comply with any opinion, unless it be disguised, sub apparentia very; But
to make appearance the very essence of truth, is to make a shadow the essence
of the Sun, it is to make a picture the essence of a man. I shall say no more to
Protagoras then this, that if any opinion be false, his cannot be true, but
must needs be the falsest of all the rest. Yet the end that these Scepticks
propound to themselves, was (if you will believe him,) (...), a freedom from
jarres and discords, from Heresy and Obstinacy, to have a mind, unprejudiced*
unprepossest, the avoiding of perturbations a milky whiteness and serenity of
soul; a fair mark indeed, but how a roving Sceptick should ever hit it, is not
easily imaginable, for what Philosophy more wavering and voluble? was there
ever a more reeling and staggering company? was there ever a more tumbling and
tossing generation? What shall I say to these old Seekers, to this wanton and
lascivious Sect, that will espouse themselves to no one opinion, that they may
the more securely go a whoring after all? If they be resolved to deny all
things (as they can do it very easily, and have seemed to do it very
compendiously) truly then they have took a very sure way to prevent all such
arguments as can be brought against them; yet because they seem to grant
appearances, we will at least present them with a few (...), and we will see
how they will move them and affect them. 'Twere well then if Pyrrhon, the
forementioned Painter, would but tell us, whether a picture would be all one
with a face, whether an appearance be all one with a reality, whether he can
paint a nonentity or no, whether there can be an appearance where there is no
foundation for it, whether all pictures do equally represent the face, whether
none can paint a little better then he used to do, whether all appearances do
equally represent being? whether there are not some false and counterfeit
appearances of things? If so, then his (...), must needs be took away, or if
there be always true and certain appearances of things, then his doubting and
(...) must needs vanish. When he is thirsty, and chooses rather to drink then
abstain, what then becomes of his (...)? if he be sure that he is athirst, and
if he be sure that he seems to be athirst, what then becomes of his (...)? When
the dog was ready to bite him, if he was indifferent, why did he run away? if
it were an appearance, why did he flee from a shadow? why was the Painter
afraid of colors? If his sense was only affected, not his understanding, how
then did he differ from the sensitive creature? from the creature that was
ready to bite him? if he tells us that he was the hansomerpicture of the two who
was it then that drew him so fairly, was it an appearance also? Does one
picture use to draw another? when he persuades men to incline to his
Scepticisme, what then becomes of his (...)? when he makes no doubt nor scruple
of denying certainty, what then becomes of his (...)? but not to disquiet this
same Pyrrhon any longer, I shall choose more really to scatter those empty
fancies by discovering the true original and foundation, the right progress
and method of all certainty.

Now God himself, that eternal and immutable being, that fixed, and unshaken
Entity, that (...), must needs be the fountain of certainty, as of all other
perfections; and if other things be compared to him, they may in this sense,
without any injury to them, be styled (...), in respect of the infinite reality
and weighty and massy solidity, that is in his most glorious being, by virtue
of which, as himself has everlastingly the same invariable knowledge of all
things, so he is also the most knowable and intelligible object, a sun that
sees all things, and is in it self most visible. An Atheist must needs be a
Sceptick; for God himself is the only immovable verity upon which the soul
must fix and anchor. Created beings, show their face a while, then hide it
again, their color goes and comes, they are in motu and fluxu, God is the
only durable object of the soul. Now that the soul may have a satisfactory
enjoyment of its (...) and that it may be accurately made according to his
image, God stamps and prints as resemblances of his other perfections, so this
also of certainty upon it; How else should it know the mind of its God? how
should it know to please him, to believe him, to obey him? with what confidence
could it approach unto him, if it had only weak and wavering conjectures? Now
God, lets the soul have some certain acquaintance with other beings for his
own sake, and in order to his own glory. Nor is it a small expression of his
wisdom and power, to lay the beginnings of man's certainty so low, even as low
as sense; for by means of such an humble foundation the structure proves the
surer and the taller. It Is true there is a purer and nobler Certainty in such
beings as are above sense, as appears by the Certainty of Angelical knowledge,
and the knowledge of God himself; yet so much certainty as is requisite for
such a rational nature as man is, may well have its rising and springings out
of sense, though it have more refinings and purifyings from the understanding.
This is the right proportioning of his certainty to his being; for as his being
results out of the mysterious union of matter, to immateriality: so likewise
his knowledge and the certainty of his knowledge (I speak of natural
knowledge) first peeps out in sense, and shines more brightly in the
understanding. The first dawnings of certainty are in the sense, the
noon-day-glory of it is in the Intellectuals. There are indeed frequent errors
in this first Edition of knowledge set out by sense; but it is then only when
the due conditions are wanting, and the understanding (as some printers use to
do) Corrects the old Errata of the first Edition, and makes some new Errors in
its own. And I need not tell you, that it is the same soul that moves both in
the sense and in the understanding, for (...), and as it is not privileged
from failings in the motions of the sense, so neither is it in all its
intellectual operations, though it have an unquestionable certainty of some, in
both. The certainty of sense is so great as that an Oath, that high expression
of certainty, is usually and may very safely be built upon it. Mathematical
demonstrations choose to present themselves to the sense, and thus become Ocular
and visible. The Scepticks that were the known enemies of certainty, yet would
grant more shadow and appearance of it in sense, then any where else, though
erroneously. But sense that rackt them sometimes, and extorted some confessions
from them, which speculative principles could never do. Away then with that
humor of Heraclitus that tells us (...), men's eyes (says he) are but weak and
deceitful witnesses. Surely he speaks only of his own watery and weeping
eyes, that were so dulled and blur'd, as that they could not clearly discern
an object. But he might have given others leave to have seen more then he did.
Nor can I tell how to excuse Plato for too much scorning and sleighting these
outward senses, when that he trusted too much inwardly to his own fancy.
Sextus Empiricus propounds the question, whether he were not a Sceptick, but he
only showed himself a Sceptick by this, for which he moved such a question.
It Is sure that Plato was sufficiently dogmatical in all his assertions, though
this indeed must be granted, that some of his principles strike at certainty,
and much endanger it; for being too fantastical and Poetical in his Phisosophy,
he placed all his security in some uncertain airy and imaginary Castles of his
own contriving and building and fortifyng. His connate Ideas (I mean) which
Artistotle could not at all confide in, but blowed them away presently; and
perceiving the proud emptiness, the swelling frothinesse of such Platonical
bubles, he was feign to search for certainty some where else, and casting his
eye upon the ground he spyed the bottom of it, lying in sense, and laid there
by the wise dispensation of God himself, from thence he looked up to the highest
top and Apex, to the (...) and pinnacle of certainty placed in the
understanding. The first rudiments of certainty were drawn by sense, the
completing and consummating of it was in the understanding. The certainty of
sense is more gross and palpable, the certainty of intellectuals, it is more
clear and Crystalline, more pure and spiritual. To put all certainty or the
chiefest certainty in sense, would be excessively injurious to reason, and
would advance some sensitive creatures above men, for they have some quicker
senses then men have; sense it is but the gate of certainty, (I speak all this
while but of humane certainty) the understanding it is the throne of it.
Descartes the French Philosopher resolves all his assurance, into thinking
that he thinks, why not into thinking that he sees? and why may he not be
deceived in that as in any other operations? And if there be such a virtue in
reflecting and reduplicating of it, then there will be more certainty in a
super-reflection, in thinking that he thinks that he thinks, and so if he run
in infinitum, according to his conceit he will still have more certainty,
though in reality he will have none at all, but will be fain to stop and stay
in Sceptisme, so that these refuges of lies being scattered, first pinciples
and common notions with those demonstrations that stream from them, they only
remain, as the nerves of this assurance, as the souls of natural Plerophory;
and he that will not cast Anchor upon these, condemns himself to perpetual
Sceptisme; which makes me wonder at a passage of a Right honorable of our own;
Though whether he be the Author of the passage, you may take time to consider
it: But this it is, (the sense of it I mean) That absolute contradictions may
meet together, in the same respect Esse and non esse it seems are espoused in
a most near and conjugal union, and live together very affectionately and
imbracingly; O rare and compendious Synopsis of all Sceptism! O the
quintessence of Sextus Empiricus and the Pyrrhonian (...) of all their (...)
and (...) of their (...) and (...), that which is the most paradoxical of all;
you have all this in a book that calls it self by the name of truth: yet let
none be so vain as to imagine that this is in the least measure spoken to the
disesteem of that noble Lord, who was well known to be of bright and sparkling
intellectuals, and of such singular and incomparable ingenuity, as that if he
had lived till this time, we cannot doubt but he would have retracted it, or at
least better explained it before this time. However I could not but take notice
of so black an Error that did crush and break all these first principles, and
had an irreconcilable Antipathy against reason and certainty, though it hid it
self under the protection of so good and so great a name. Certainly it is so
precious and desirable, as where God has given it, it is to be kept sacred and
untoucht; and men are to be thankful for these Candles of of the Lord, for this
Lumen certum, set up, not to mock and delude them, but to deal truly and
faithfully with them.

CHAP. XV.
The light of Reason is directive.
It Is Lumen dirigens, this (...), it is a light for the feet, and a Lanthorn for
the paths. For the understanding, it is the (...), the leading and guiding power
of the soul. The will looks upon that as L^eander in Musaeus looked up to the
Tower for Hero's Candle, and calls it as he does there (...). Reason does facem
praeferre, it carries a Torch before the will, nay more then so, it is an eye to
the blind; for otherwise 'twere in vain to light up a Candle for a Caeca
potentia, to see withal. Intellectuals are first in motion (...), these gates
of light must first be set open before any glorious and beautiful object can
enter in for the will to court and embrace. The will does but echo to the
understanding, and does practically repeat the last syllable of the ultimum
dictamen, which makes the Moralist well determine virtutes morales non possunt
esse sine intellectualibus; for to the presence of moral virtues there are
necessarily pre-required Intelligentia and prudentia, the one being the
knowledge of principia speculativa, as the other of principia operativa. That
action must needs be hopeful and promising when the understanding aims before
the will shoots; but he that in an implicit way rushes upon any performance,
though the action it self should prove materially good, yet such a one deserves
no more commendation for it, then he would do that first put out his eyes, and
then contingently hit the mark. Other creatures indeed are shot more violently
into their ends, but man has the skill and faculty of directing himself, and
is (as you may so imagine) a rational kind of arrow, that moves knowingly and
voluntarily to the mark of its own accord. For this very end God has set up a
distinct lamp in every soul, that men might make use of their own light: all
the works of men they should olere lucernam, smell of this Lamp of the Lord,
that is to illuminate them all. Men are not to depend wholly upon the courtesy
of any fellow creature; not upon the dictates of men; nay not upon the votes
and determinations of Angels; for if an Angel from heaven should contradict
first principles, though I will not say in the language of the Apostle, let him
be accursed, yet this we may safely say, that all the sons of men are bound to
dis-believe him. All arguments drawn from testimony and authority, (created
authority I mean) were always looked upon as more faint and languishing, then
those that were fetched from reason. Matters of fact indeed do necessarily
depend upon testimony, but in speculations and opinions none is bound so far
to adore the lamp of another, as to put out his own for it. For when any such
controversy is moved, when any Author is quoted and commended, all the credit
and esteem that is to be given him, is founded either in the Reason, which he
does annex to his assertion, or else in this more remote and general reason,
that such a one had a very clear and bright lamp, that the Candle of the Lord
did shine very eminently in him; therefore what he says is much to be attended
to, for in his words, though there should not be ratio explicata, yet it is to
be supposed that there is ratio subintellecta. So that the assent here is
ultimately resolved into the reason of him that speaks, and the other that
receives it; for he that complies with a naked testimony, makes a tacit
acknowledgement of thus much, that he is willing to resign up himself to
another reason, as being surer and fuller then his own; which temper and frame
of spirit is very commendable in a state of inchoation: for (...), knowledge in
the cradle cannot feed it self; knowledge in its infancy must suck at the
breasts of another: And babes in intellectuals must take in the (...), those
spoonfuls of knowledge that are put in their mouths, by such as are to nurse
and to educate them. Paul when he sits at the feet of Gamaliel, must observe
the prints and footsteps of the Hebrew Doctor, and must roll himself in pulvere
sapientum. Knowledge in its nonage, in its pupil-age and minority must hide it
self under the wing and protection of a guardian. Men use at first to borrow
light, and to light their candle at the light of another; yet here I find
some license and encouragement given to these first beginners, to these setters
up in learning to be (...), modestly inquisitive into the grounds and reasons
of that which is delivered to them.

Thus that sacred writer Hierom commends Marcell^ though one of the weaker sex,
upon this account, that she was wont to search and to examine his doctrine, it
a ut me sentirem (says he) non tam discipulum habere quam judicem. Nay, a
far greater then Hierome honors the Bereans, with the title of (...), a more
noble and generous sort of Christians that would bring even Apostolical words
to the touchstone. Why is it not then lawful for them that are in statu
adulto, that are come to some pregnancy and maturity in knowledge, to look upon
the stamp and superscription of any opinion, to look any opinion in the face?
The great and noble Verulam much complains (and not without too much cause) of
those sad obstructions in learning, which arose upon the extreme doting upon
some Authors, which were indeed men of rare accomplishments, of singular worth
and excellency, and yet but men, though by a strange kind of (...), a great
part of the world would have worshipped as gods. The Canonizing of some profane
Authors, and esteeming all other as Apocryphal, has blasted many buds of
knowledge, it has quenched many sparks and beams of light, which otherwise would
have gilded the world, with an Orient and unspotted luster. Far be it from
me to drop one word that should tend to the staining and eclipsing of that just
glory that is due to the immortal name of Aristotle. There are those that are
envious and ungrateful enough, let them do it if they please; yet this I shall
say, and it shall be without any injury to him, that to set him up as a Pope in
Philosophy, as a visible head of the truth militant, to give him a negative
voice, to give him an arbitrary power, to quote his texts as Scripture, to look
upon his works as the irreversible decrees of Learning, as if he had sealed up
the Canon, so that whoever adds to him, or takes one word from him, must be
struck with a present Anathema to condemn all for Heretics that oppose him,
for Schismatics that depart from him, for Apostates that deny him; what is all
this but to forget that he was but the Candle of the Lord, and to adore him as
a Sun in the firmament that was set to rule the day of knowledge? it is to make
him an (...) the causa prima, the first mover of Learning, or at least 'tvvas
to make him such an Intellectus agens, as Averroes would have, that must
inform and quicken all that come after him. Could that modest Philosopher have
foreseen and prophesied, that the world would thus flatter him, it is to be
feared, that he would have thrown his works also, his legible self into
Euripus rather then they should have occasioned such excessive Idolatry and
partiality; yet it is no fault of his, if the world would over-admire him; for
that which first inhanc't the price and esteem of Aristotle, was that rich
vein of reason that ran along and interlin'd most of his works. Let this
therefore, and this only commend him still; for this is of indelible and
perpetual duration; yet if these blind admirers of him, could have follovved
him fully and entirely, they might have learnt of him a braver liberty and
independency of spirit; for he scorned to enslave and captivate his thoughts to
the judgment of any whatsoever; for though he did not deal violently and
dis-ingenuously with the works of his predecessors, (as some affirm) yet he
dealt freely with them, and was not over-indulgent to them. He came like a
Refiner amongst them, he purged away their dross, he boiled away their froth
and scum, he gathered a quintessence out of their rude and elementary
principles. How impartially did he deal with his Master Plato? and not favor
him in any of his Errors, and his words are answerable to his practices, you
may hear him what he says, and professes, (...), to have a reverent esteem
of Antiquity is but fitting and equal, but to stand in awe of it, is base and
unworthy. Potestas senatoria is very honorable and beneficial, but dictatoria
potestas, is not to be allowed in the Commonwealth of Learning; yet such has
been the intolerable tyranny and oppression of the Roman faction, as that they
have enjoined and engaged as many as they could to serve and torture their
wits, for the maintaining of whatever such a one as pleases them, shall please
to say: for they care not how prejudicial or detrimental they prove to
Learning, so that they may but train up their scholars in an implicit faith,
in a blind obedience, in a slavish acknowledgement of some infallible judge of
controversies, and may shut up and imprison the generality of people in a dark
and benighted condition, not so much as allowing them the light of their own
Candle, this Lamp of the Lord that ought to shine in them. That great advancer
of Learning whom I commended before, takes notice, that by such unhappy means
as these, the more noble and liberal sciences, have made no progress
proportionable, to that which more inferior and mechanical Arts have done; for
in these latter ingenia multorum in unum coeunt, whereas in the former, ingenia
multorum sub uno succubuerunt. What brave improvements have been made in
architecture, in manufactures, in printing, in the Pyxis nautica? For here is no
limiting and restraining men to Antiquity, no chaining them to old Authors, no
regulating them to I know not what prescribed forms and Canons, no such
strange voices as these. You must not build better then your predecessors have
done, you must not print fairer then the first Tullies Offices, that ere was
printed; It Is not looked upon as a transgression and a piaculum, if they should
chance to be a little more accurate then they were that went before them. But
in speculatives, in mere Mathematics (which one would think were far enough
from any breach of faith or manners) yet here if a Galilaeus should but present
the world with a handful of new demonstrations, though never so warily and
submissively, if he shall but frame and contrive a glass for the discovery of
some more lights; all the reward he must expect from Rome, is, to rot in an
Inquisition, for such unlicenced inventions, for such venturous undertakings.
The same strain of cruelty has marched more vehemently and impetuously in
sacred and religious matters, for here Babylon has heated her furnace seven
times hotter, whilst under the pompous name of a Catholic Church, under the
glittering pretenses of Antiquity and Authority, they have as much as they
could put out all the Lamps of the Lord. And that Bestian Empire has
transformed all its Subjects into sensitive and irrational creatures. A noble
Author of our own tells us in his book De Veritate, that he for his part takes
them for the Catholic Church, that are constant and faithful to first
principles; that common notions are the bottom and foundation upon which the
Church is built. Excuse our diffidence here great Sir, the Church it is built
upon a surer and higher Rock, upon a more Adamantine and precious foundation;
yet thus much is acceptable and undeniable, that whoever they are that by any
practices or customs, or traditions, or tenants, shall stop the passage of
first principles, and the sound reason that flows from them, they are in this
farther from a Church then the Indians or the Americans, whilst they are not
only Antichristian, but unnatural. And of the two the Church has more security
in resting upon genuine Reason, then in relying upon some spurious traditions;
for think but a while upon those infinite deceits and uncertainties that such
Historical conveyances are liable and exposed to, I always except those sacred
and heavenly volumes of Scripture, that are strung together as so many pearls,
and make a bracelet for the Spouse to wear upon her hands continually: These
writings the providence of God has deeply engaged it self to keep as the
apples of his own eye. And they do not borrow their certainty or validity from
any Ecclesiastical or universal Tradition (which is at the most but previous
and preparatory) but from those prints of Divinity in them, and specially from
the seal of the same Spirit that endited them, and now assures the soul, that
they were Oracles breathed from God himself. As for all other sacred Antiquity,
though I shall ever honor it as much as any either did or can do justly, and
with sobriety; and shall always reverence a gray headed truth; yet if
Antiquity shall stand in competition with this Lamp of the Lord (though genuine
Antiquity would never offer to do it) yet if it should, it must not think much
if we prefer Reason, a daughter of Eternity, before Antiquity, which is the
offspring of time. But had not the spirit of Antichristianisme by its early
twinings and insinuations wound and wrought it self into most flourishing and
primitive times, into the bosom of a Virgin-Church, and had it not offered
violence to the works of some sacred writers, by detracting and augmenting
according to its several exigencies, by feigning and adulterating, by hiding
and annihilating some of them, as much as they could, (the ordinary tricks of
Antichrist, which he used always more subtly, though of late more palpably)
had it not been for such devices as these, Antiquity had come flowing to us, in
purer and fuller streams, in more fair and kindly derivations, and so might
have run down more powerfully and victoriously then now it will. But Antichrist
has endeavored to be the Abaddon and the Apollyon of all sacred antiquities,
though the very relics of those shining and burning lights that adorned the
Church of God, have splendour enough to scatter the darkness of Popery, that
empty shadow of Religion, that arises ob defectum Luminis; yet Antiquity
(setting aside those that were peculiarly (...)) was but the first dawning of
light which was to shine out brighter and brighter, till perfect day. Let none
therefore so superstitiously look back to former ages, as to be angry with new
opinions and displayings of light, either in Reason or Religion. Who dares
oppose the goodness and wisdom of God? if he shall enamour the world with the
beauty of some pearls and jewels, which in former times have been hid, or
trampled upon? if he shall discover some more light upon earth, as he has let
some new Stars be found in the heavens; This you may be sure and confident of,
that it is against the mind and meaning of Antiquity to stop the progress of
Religion and Reason. But I know there are some will tell us of a visible
tribunal, of an infallible head of the Church borne to determine all
controversies, to regulate all men, it is a wonder they do not say Angels too.
Others more prudently and equally resolve the final judgment of Controversies
into a general and ecumenical Council, but I shall speak to them all, in the
language of the Philosopher, (...), and I shall explain it according to the
mind of the learned Davenant in his discourse de indice ac norma fidei and
Cultus Christiani: God only is to rule his own Church (...), judicio
autoritativo, by a determining and Legislative power. Men that are fitted by
God himself, are to guide and direct it (...), judicio ministeriali, in way of
subserviency to him, by an explication of his mind, yet so as that every one
may judge of this (...), judicio privato and practicae discretionis, by acts of
their own understanding illuminated by the Spirit of God; for there are no
representatives in intellectuals and spirituals. Men may represent the bodies
of others, in Civil and Temporal affairs in the acts of a Kingdom, and thus a
bodily obedience is always due to just authority; but there is none can
always represent the mind and judgment of another in the vitals and inwards
of Religion; for I speak not of representations in outward order and
discipline. A general council does and may produce judicium forense, but still
there is reserved, to every single individuum, judicium rationale; for can you
think that God will excuse any one from Error upon such an account as this,
such a Doctor told me thus; such a piece of Antiquity enform'd me so, such a
general Council determined me to this; where was thine own Lamp all this while?
where was thy ratio illuminata and guhernata, secundum normas bonae and
necessariae consequentiae rationali creaturae impressas? Yet this must be
gratefully acknowledged that these general Councels have been of public
influence, of most admirable use and advantage to the Church of God; though
they are not of the very Essence of it; for it is well known that there were
none of them till the days of Constantines: But herein is the benefit of
Councels, that they are (or ought to be) a comparing and collecting of many
Lights, an uniting and concentricating of the judgments of many holy, learned,
wise Christians with the Holy Ghost breathing amongst them, though not always
so fully and powerfully as that they shall be sure to be priviledg'd from every
Error, but being all of them subject to frailty and fallibility, and sometime
the major part of them proving the pejor part, there is none bound to give an
extemporary assent to their votes and suffrages, unless his mind also
concur with theirs. That worthy Divine of our own, whom I mentioned before,
speaks very fully and clearly to this, Ad nudam praescriptionem, aut
determinationem alterius sine lumine privati judicii nemo est qui credere
potest etiamsi cupiat maxim. The most eminent Mirandula will give you the
reason of it; for (says he) Nemo credit aliquid verum praecise quia vult
credere illud esse verum, non est enim in potentia hominis facere aliquid
apparere intellectui suo verum, quando ipse voluerit. But before there can be
faith in any soul, there must be cognitio propositionis credendae, and there
must be inclinatio intellectus ad assentiendum huic propositioni revelatae, and
cognitae; Before you understand the terms of any proposition, you can no more
believe it, then if it came to you in an unknown tongue. A Parrat may repeat
the Creed thus, Corvos poetas poetridasque picas cantare credas Pegaseium
melos. Though such at length may very safely conclude, as that talkative bird
is reported to have done by a happy and extemporary contingency, Operam and
oleum perdidi. This is the misery of those implicit believers amongst the
Papists (and it is well if not among some Protestants too) that do in aliorum
sententias pedibus potius quam cordibus ire, dancing in a circular kind of
faith, they believing as the Church believes, and the Church believing as they
believe, etc. and this is with them, (...) the whole perfection of a Roman
Catholic. Yet let none be so foolish or wicked as to think that this strikes
at any thing, that is truly or really a matter of faith, when as it does only
detect the wretched vanity and deceit of a Popish and implicit credulity, which
commands men to put out their Lamps, to pluck out their eyes, and yet to follow
thelr leadets, though they rush upon the mouth of hell and destruction, whereas
it is better to be an Argus in obedience, then a Cyclops a monstrum horrendum,
etc. An eye open is more acceptable to God then an eye shut. Why do they not as
well command men to renounce their sense, as to disclaim their understandings?
Were it not as easy a tyranny to make you to believe that to be white which
you see to be black, as to command you to believe that to be true, which you
know to be false? Neither are they at all wanting in experiments of both; for
Transubstantiation, that heap and crowd of contradictions does very
compendiously put out the eyes of sense and reason both at once: yet that
prodigious Error was established in the Lateran Council under Innocent the
third, which (as some contend) was a general and Ecumenical Council. And if
the Pope whom they make equivalent to all Councels, nay transcendent, if he in
Cathedra shall think fit to determine, that the right hand is the left, they
must all immediately believe him, under pain of damnation. So that first
principles, common notions with the products and improvement of them, must
needs be looked upon as of bad consequence, of pernicious influence at Rome;
what, to say that two and two makes four, the totum's majus part (especially
if the Church shall determine against it) O dangerous point of Socinianisme! O
unpardonable Heresy of the first magnitude! Rebellion against the Catholic
Church! a proud justling against the Chair of infallibility! Away with them to
the Inquisition presently, deliver them up to the Secular powers, bring fire
and faggot immediately; Bonners learned demonstrations, and the bloody
discipline of the scarlet and purple Whore. No wonder that she puts out the
Candle, and loves darkness rather then light, seeing her deeds are evil. She
holds a Cup in her hand, and will not let the world sip and taste, and see how
they like it, but they must swallow down the whole Philtrum and potion without
any delay at all. Thus you may see the weak reeds that Babylon leans upon,
which now are breaking and piercing her through. But Religion framed according
to the Gospel, did always scorn and refuse such carnal supports as these are.
That truth that must look the Sun in the face for ever, can you think that it
will fear a Candle? must it stand in the presence of God, and will it not
endure the trial of men? Or can you imagine that the Spouse of Christ can be so
unmerciful as to pull out her childrens eyes? though she may very well restrain
their tongues sometimes, and their pens if they be too immodest and unruly; I
shall need to say no more then this, that true Religion never was, nor will be,
nor need be shy of sound Reason which is thus far Lumen dirigens, as that
it is obliged by the will and command of God himself, not to entertain any false
religion, nor any thing under pretense of Religion that is formally and
irreconciliably against Reason. Reason being above humane testimony and
tradition, and being only subordinate to God himself, and those Revelations
that come from God; now it is express blasphemy to say that either God, or the
Word of God did ever, or ever will oppose Right Reason.

CHAP. XVI.
The light of Reason is calm and peaceable.
It Is Lumen tranquillnm and amicum, it is a Candle, not a Comet, it is a quiet
and peaceable light. And though this Candle of the Lord may be too hot for
some, yet the Lamp it is only maintained with soft and peaceable Oil. There is
no jarring in pure intellectuals; if men were tuned and regulated by Reason
more, there would be more Concord and Harmony in the world. As man himself is a
sociable creature, so his Reason also is a sociable Light. This Candle would
shine more clearly and equally if the winds of passions were not injurious to
it. 'Twere a commendable piece of Stoicisme, if men could always hush and
still those waves that dash and beat against Reason, if they could scatter all
those clouds that soil and discolor the face and brightness of it, would
there be such fractions and commotions in the State, such Schisms and Ruptures
in the Church, such hot and fiery persecutions of some trifling opinions? If
the soft and sober voice of Reason were more attended to, Reason would make
some differencies kiss and be friends, 'twould sheath up many a sword, 'twould
quench many a flame, 'twould bind up many a wound. This Candle of the Lord
'twould scatter many a dark suspicion, many a sullen jealousy. Men may fall
out in the dark sometimes, they cannot tell for what, if the Candle of the Lord
were but amongst them, they wonld chide one another for nothing then but their
former breaches, (...) it calmes and composes a soul, whereas passion, as the
grand Stoic Zeno paints it, is (...). An abounding and over-boyling impetus, a
preternatural agitation of soul, animi commotio aversa a recta ratione, and
contra naturam, as the Orator styles it. The soul it is tossed with passion, but
it anchors upon Reason. This gentleness and quietness of Reason does never
commend it self more then in its agreeing and complying with faith, in not
opposing those high and transcendent mysteries that are above its own reach and
capacity; nay it had always so much humility and modesty, waiting and
attending upon it, that it would always submit and subordinate it self to all
such divine revelations as were above its own sphere. Though it could not grasp
them, though it could not pierce into them; yet it ever resolved with all
gratitude to admire them, to bow its head, and to adore them. One light does
not oppose another; Lumen fidei and Lumen rationis, may shine both together
though with far different brightness; the Candle of the Lord, it is not
impatient of a superior light, 'twould both far parem and priorem. The light
of the Sun that indeed is Lumen Monarchicum, a supreme and sovereign light,
that with its golden Scepter rules all created sparkles, and makes them subject
and obedient to the Lord and rule of light. Created intellectuals depend upon
the brightness of Gods beams, and are subordinate to them, Angelical
Starlight is but Lumen Aristocraticum, it borrows and derives its glory from a
more vast and majestical light. As they differ from one another in glory, so al
of them infinitely differ from the Sun in glory. Yet it is far above the Lumen
Democraticum, that light which appears unto the sons of men, it is above their
lamps and Torches, poor and contemptible lights, if left to themselves; for do
but imagine such a thing as this, that this external and corporeal world should
be adjudg'd never to see the Sun more, never to see one Star more. If God
should shut all the windows of heaven, and spread out nothing but clouds and
curtains, and allow it nothing but the light of a Candle, how would the world
look like a Cyclops with its eye put out? It Is now but an obscure prison with a
few grates to look out at; but what would it be then, but a capacious grave,
but a nethermost dungeon? yet this were a more grateful shade, a pleasanter and
more comely darkness, then for a soul to be condemned to the solitary light of
its own Lamp, so as not to have any supernatural irradiations from its God.
Reason does not refuse any auxiliary beams, it joys in the company of its
fellow-Lamp, it delights in the presence of an intellectual Sun, which will so
far favor it, as that 'twill advance it, and nourish it, and educate it;
'twill increase it,, and inflame it, and will by no means put it out. A Candle
neither can nor will put out the Sun, and an intellectual Sun, can, but will
not put out the Lamp. The light of Reason does no more prejudice the light of
faith, then the light of a Candle does extinguish the light of a Star. The same
eye of a soul may look sometimes upon a Lamp, and sometimes upon a Star; one
while upon a first principle, another while upon a revealed truth, as hereafter
it shall always look upon the Sun and see God face to face; Grace does not
come to pluck up nature as a weed, to root out the essences of men; but it
comes to graft spirituals upon morals, that so by their mutual supplies and
intercourse they may produce most noble and generous fruit. Can you tell me why
the shell and the kernel may not dwell together? why the bodies of nature may
not be quickened by the soul of grace? Did you never observe an eye using a
prospective-glasse, for the discovering and amplifying and approximating of
some remote and yet desirable object? and did you perceive any opposition
between the eye and the glass? was there not rather a loving correspondency
and communion between them? why should there be any greater strife between
Faith and Reason, seeing they are brethren? do they not both spring from the
same Father of Lights, and can the Fountain of love and unity, send forth any
irreconcilable streams? do you think that God did ever intend to divide a
rational being, to tear and rend a soul in pieces, to scatter principles of
discord and confusion in it? If God be pleased to open some other passage in
the soul, and to give it another eye, does that prejudice the former? Man you
know is ordained to a choicer end, to a nobler happiness, then for the present
he can attain unto, and therefore he cannot expect that God should now
communicate himself in such bright and open discoveries, in such glorious
manifestations of himself, as he means to give hereafter. But he must be
content for the present, to behold those infinite treasures of reserved love,
in a darker and more shadowy way of faith, and not of vision: Nature and Reason
are not sufficiently proportioned to such blessed objects, for there are such
weights of glory in them, as do opprimere ingenium humanum, there are such
depths, such pleonasmes, such oceans of all perfections in a Deity as do
infinitely exceed all intellectual capacity but its own. The most that man's
Reason can do, is to fill the understanding to the brim, but faith that throws
the soul into the Ocean, and lets it roll and bathe it self in the vastness
and fullness of a Deity. Could the sons of men have extracted all the spirits
of Reason, and made them meet and jump in one head; nay, could Angels and men
have united and concentricated all their Reason, yet they would never have been
able to spy out such profound and mysterious excellencies, as faith beholds in
one twinkling of her eye. Evangelical beauties shine through a veil that is
upon their face; you may see the precious objects of faith like so many pearls
and diamonds sparkling and glittering in the dark. Revealed truths shine with
their own beams, they do not borrow*their Primitive and original luster from
this Candle of the Lord, but from the purer light, wherewith God has clothed
and attired them as with a garment; God crowns his own Revelations with his own
beams. The Candle of the Lord it does not discover, it does not oppose them, it
cannot eclipse them. They are no sparks of Reasons striking, but they are
flaming darts of heavens shooting, that both open and enamour the soul. They
are Stars of Heavens lighting, men behold them at a great distance twinkling
in the dark. Whatsoever comes in Gods name does aut invenire viam, aut facere.
Whatever God reveals in his Word, it is supra providentiam rerum communem
constitutum. It Is not in the road of nature, and therefore for the welcoming
and entertaining of it (as a noble Author of our own does very well observe,)
explicatur sensus quidam supernaturalis, and (...), there is an opening of a new
window in the soul, an intellectual eye looks out at the window, and is much
pleased and affected with the oriency of that light that comes springing and
rushing in upon it; as there is a (...), so there is an (...) too; the one it is
written by the pen of nature; the other by the finger of the Spirit, for ubi
desinit natura, ibi incipit gratia; and this second Edition set out by Grace,
it is auctior and emendatior, yet so as it does not at all contradict the first
Edition, that was set out by Nature; for this is the voice of Nature it self,
that whatsoever God reveals must needs be true; and this common Principle is
the bottom and foundation of all Faith to build upon. The soul desires no
greater satisfaction then an (...), for if God himself say it, who can question
it? who dare contradict i^? Reason will not, Reason cannot; for it does most
immovably acknowledge a Deity, and the unquestionable truth of a Deity: in all
believing there is an assent, a yielding to him that speaks by virtue of his
own Authority; though he don't prove it, though he don't evince it. Now men
themselves look upon it as a contempt and injury not to have their words taken,
and Reason it self dictates thus much, that we are to believe such a one whom
we have no reason to distrust; for without some Faith there would be no
commerce nor traffiking in the world, there is no trading wit hout some
trusting. A general and total incredulity would threaten a present and fatal
dissolution to humane society. Matters of fact are as certain in being and
reality, as demonstrations; yet in appearance most of them can never be proved
or evinced any other way then by mere testimony much historical knowledge, many
a truth has been lost and buried in unbelief, when as many a falsity in the
mean time has proved more fortunate and triumphant, and has past currantly
through the world under the specious disguise of probability; yet because no
created being is infallible or authentical, because the sons of men are so
easily deceived themselves, and are so apt and propense to deceive and impose
upon others, 'twill be very lawful to move slowly and timerously, warily and
vigilantly in our assents to them; for a sudden and precocious faith here, is
neither commendable nor durable: But God being truth it self, an Eternal,
Immutable truth, his word being vehiculum veritatis; and all Revelations
flowing from him, shining with the prints and signatures of certainty, hence it
is that his naked word is a demonstration; and he that will not believe a God, is
worse then a Devil, he is the blackest Infidel that was e're yet extant. This
sin is so unnatural, as that none but an Atheist can be guilty of it; for he
that acknowledges a Deity, and knows what he acknowledges, sure he will not offer
to make his God a liar. That which might otherwise seem to some to be against
Reason, yet if it bring the seal of God in its forehead, by this you may know
that it is not against Reason. Abraham's slaying of his son may seem a most
horrid and unnatural act, against the (...), against the Candle of the Lord,
yet being commanded and authorized by God himself, the Candle durst not oppose
the Sun. That pattern of faith the father of the faithful does not dispute and
make Syllogismes against it; he does not plead that it is against common
Notions, that it is against Demonstrations (for he had said if he had said so,)
but he does dutifully obey the God of Nature, that high and supreme Lawgiver,
who by this call and voice of his did plainly and audibly proclaim, that for
Abraham to kill his son in these circumstances, was not against the Law of
Nature. So that all the stresse and difficulty will be to know whether God
reveals such a thing or no; for here Reason (corrupt reason I mean,) is wont to
slip and evade, and when it cannot frame a conceit adequate and commensurate to
some transcendent and superlative mysteries, it would then fain cloud them and
eclipse them, that it may quench and avoid the dazzling brightness of them. It
would feign make them stoop and condescend to its own capacity, and therefore
it puts some inferior notion upon them. When it cannot grasp what God says,
it then presently questions whether God say so or no, whether that be the mind
of his Word. Hence many may err very deeply and dangerously, yet will
acknowledge the Scriptures, they will own and honor them as the Word of God;
for they are not yet arrived to that full perfection of Error, as those lumps
and dunghills of all Sects, I mean that young and upstart generation of gross
Anti-Scripturists, that have a Powder Plot against the Gospel, that would very
compendiously behead all Christian Religion at one blow, a device which old and
ordinary Heretics were never acquainted withal. Though they be not come to
such an height as this, yet eitheir by their flat and frigid explicating, they
do endeavor to dispirit and evervate the Word of God; or else in a more
violent and injurious manner, they do even ravish it, and deflower the
virginity of it, or else in a more subtle and serpentine manner, they seek to
bend the rule, and expound it to their purposes and advantages. The letter of
the word, the vagina verbi that does not wound them, that does not strike them,
and as for the edge they think they can draw that as they please, they can
blunt it as they list, they can order it as they will. But the Law of sound
Reason and Nature does oppose such unworthy dealings as these are; for men look
upon it very heinously to have their words misinterpreted, to have their meaning
wrested and violenc'd. Can you think that the majesty of Heaven will allow or
endure that a creature should study or busy it self in perverting his words,
in corrupting his meaning, in blending it and mixing it with the crude
imaginations of their own brain? That Spirit which breathed out the word at
first, and which convinces and satisfies the soul, that it is the word of God;
the very same Spirit is the Interpreter of it, he is the Commentator upon it.
The text is his, and the gloss is his, and whosoever shall call this a private
spirit, must needs be a bold blasphemer, a Jesuit, an Atheist. But they that
know what the Spirit of God is, will easily grant that the Spirit of God
unsheaths his own sword, that he polishes Evangelical Pearls, that he anoints
and consecrates the eye of the soul, for the welcoming and entertaining of such
precious objects. It Is true indeed, that some explications are so impertinent
and distorted, as that a profane and carnal eye may presently discern that
there was either some violence or deceit used in them, as who cannot tell when
any Author is extremely vexed and wronged? but if there be any such obscurity as
may give just occasion of doubting and dissidence, who then can be fitter to
clear and unfold it, then the Author himself? nay, who can explain his mind
certainly but he himself? is it not thus in spirituals much rather? When God
scatters any twilight, any darkness there, is it not by a more plentiful
shedding abroad of his own beams? such a knot as created understanding cannot
unty, the edge of the Spirit presently cuts asunder; Nor yet is providence
wanting in external means, which by the goodness and power of God, were
annexed as sigilla verbi, miracles I mean, which are upon this account very
suitably and proportionably subservient to Faith, they being above natural
power, as revealed truths are above natural understanding. The one's above the
hand of nature, as the other's above the head of nature; But Miracles, though
they be very potent, yet they are not always prevalent, for there were many
spectators of Christ's Miracles, which yet like so many Pharaohs were hardened
by them, and some of them that beheld them were no more moved by them, then
some of them who only hear of them; will not at all attend to them. So that
only the seal of the Spirit can make a firm impression upon the soul, who
writes his own word upon the soul with a conquering and triumphant Sunbeam,
that is impatient either of cloud or shadow. Be open therefore ye everlasting
doors, and stand wide open ye intellectual gates, that the spirit of grace and
glory, with the goodly train of his revealed truths may enter in. There Is
foundation for all this in a principle of nature; for we must still put you in
mind of the concord that is betwixt Faith and Reason. Now this is the voice of
Reason, that God can, and that none but God can assure you of his own mind; for
if he should reveal his mind by a creature, there will still be some
tremblings and waverings in the soul, unless he does withal satisfy a soul,
that such a creature does communicate his mind truly and really as it is, so
that ultimately the certainty is resolved into the voice of God, and not into
the courtesy of a creature. This holy Spirit of God creates in the soul a
grace answerable to these transcendent objects, you cannot but know the name of
it, it is called Faith, Super-naturalis forma fidet, as Mirandula the younger
styles it, which closes and complies with every word that drops from the voice
or pen of a Deity, and which facilitates the soul to assent to revealed truths;
So as* that with a heavenly inclination, with a delightful propension it moves
to them as to a center. Reason cannot more delight in a common notion or a
demonstration, then Faith does in revealed truth. As the Unity of a Godhead is
demonstrable and clear to the eye of Reason, so the Trinity of persons, that
is, three glorious relations in one God is as certain to an eye of Faith. It Is
as certain to this eye of Faith that Christ is truly God, as it was visible to
an eye both of Sense and Reason that he is truly man. Faith spies out the
resurrection of the body; as Reason sees the immortality of the soul. I know
there are some Authors of great worth and learning, that endeavor to maintain
this Opinion, that revealed truths, though they could not be found by reason,
yet when they are once revealed, that Reason can then evince them and
demonstrate them: But I much rather ^ncline to the determinations of Aquinas,
and multitudes of others that are of the same judgment, that humane Reason
when it has stretched it self to the uttermost, is not at all proportioned to
them, but at the best can give only some faint illustrations, some weak
adumbrations of them. They were never against Reason, they were always above
Reason. 'Twill be employment enough, and 'twill be a noble employment too, for
Reason to redeem and vindicate them from those thorns and difficulties, with
which some subtle ones have vexed them and encompast them. 'Twill be honor
enough for Reason to show that Faith does not oppose Reason; and this it may
show, it must show this; for else (...), those that are within the enclosure of
the Church will never rest satisfied, nor (...), Pagans, Mahumetans, Jews,
will ever be convinced. God indeed may work upon them by immediate revelation;
but man can only prevail upon them by Reason; yet it is not to be expected, nor
is it required, that every weak and newborn Christian, that gives real
assent, and cordial entertainment to these mysterial truths, should be able to
deliver them from those seeming contradictions which some cunning adversaries
may cast upon them. There are some things demonstrable, which to many seem
impossible, how much more easily may there be some matters of faith which every
one cannot free from all difficulties. It Is sufficient therefore for such, that
they so far forth understand them as to be sure that they are not against
Reason, and that principally upon this account, because they are sure God has
revealed them. And others that are of more advanced and elevated intellectuals,
may give such explications of them, as may disentangle them from all
repugnancy, though they cannot display them in their full glory. Nor must the
multitude or strength and wit of opposers fright men out of their Faith and
Religion. Though the major part of the world do disesteeme and look upon them
as mere contradictions; yet this being the censure of mo^^ unequal and
incompetent judges, is not at all prejudicial to their worth and excellency;
for to most of the world they were never revealed so much as in an external
manner, and to all others that refuse and reject them, they were never
powerfully revealed by the irradiations of the Holy Ghost. So that one
affirmative here is to be preferred before a whole heap of negatives; the
judgment of one wise, enlightened, experienced, spiritualized Christian is
more to be attended to, then the votes and suffrages of a thousand gainsayers;
because this is undeniable, that God may give to one that Eye, that Light, that
discerning power, which he does deny to many others. It Is therefore a piece of
excessive vanity and arrogance in Socinus, to limit and measure all Reason by
his own. Nor does this put any uncertainty in Reason, but only a diversity in
the improvings of it, one Lamp differs from another in glory; and withal it
lays down an higher and nobler principle then Reason is: for in things merely
natural, every rational being is there a competent Judge in those things that
are within the Sphere and compass of Reason, the Reason of all men does agree
and conspire, so as that which implies an express and palpable contradiction,
cannot be owned by any; but in things above Nature and Reason, a paucity here
is a better argument then a plurality; because Providence uses to open his
Cabinets only for his Jewels. God manifests these mysterious secrets only to a
few friends, his Spirit whispers to a few, shines upon a few, so that if any
tell us that Evangelical mysteries imply a contradiction, because they cannot
apprehend them, it is no more then for a blind man confidently to determine,
that it involves a contradiction to say there is a Sun, because he cannot see
it. Why should you not as well think that a greater part of the world lies in
Error, as that it lies in wickedness? is it not defective in the choicest
intellectuals, as well as in the noblest practicals? Or can any persuade
himself, that a most eminent and refined part of mankind, and (that which is
very considerable) a Virgincompany which kept it self untoucht from the
pollutions of Antichrist upon mature deliberation, for long continuance upon
many debatings, examinings, discussings, constantprayers unto God for the
discovery of his mind, should all this while embrace mere contradictions, for
the highest points of their Religion? or can any conceive that these
Evangelical Mysteries were invented, and contrived, and maintained by men?
Could the Head of a creature invent them? could the arm of a creature uphold
them? have they not a Divine super-scription upon them? have they not an
heavenly original? or can you imagine that Providence would have so blessed and
prosper'd a contradiction? as always to pluck it out of the paws of devouring
adversaries? when the whole Christian world was ready to be swallowed up with
Arrianisme, dare any to say that God then prepared an Arc only for the
preserving of a contradiction? Providence does not use to countenance
contradictions, so as to let them ride in triumph over Truth. The most that any
opposer can say, if he will speak truth, is no more then this, that they seem
to him to imply a contradiction? which may very easily be so, if he want an
higher principle of faith, suitable and answerable to these matters of faith,
both of them (the principle and object I mean) being supernatural, neither of
them contranatural; for there is a double modesty in Reason very remarkable; As
it does not multa asserere, so it does not multa negare; as it takes very few
things for certain, so it concludes very few for impossible; Nay, Reason though
she will not put out her eye, for that is unnatural, yet she will close her eye
sometimes, that faith may aim the better, and that is commendable: And Faith
makes Reason abundant compensation for this; for as a learned Author of our
own, and a great Patron both of Faith and Reason, does notably express it,
Faith is a supply of Reason in things intelligible, as the imagination is of
light in things visible. The imagination with her witty and laborious pensil
draws and represents the shapes, proportions and distances of persons and
places, taking them only by the help of some imperfect description, and it is
feign to stay here, till it be better satisfied with the very sight of the
things themselves. Thus Faith takes things upon an heavenly representation and
description, upon a word, upon a promise, it sees a heavenly Canaan in the Map
before an intellectual eye can behold it in a way of clear and open vision;
for men are not here capable of a present Heaven, and happiness of a complete
and beatifical vision; and therefore they are not capable of such mysteries in
their full splendour and brightness; for they would make it, if they were thus
unfolded, but they now flourish only in the latices, as Christ himself the Head
of these Mysteries; they do (...), they put a veil upon their face, out of
pure favor and indulgence to an intellectual eye, lest it should be too much
overcome with their glory; the veiles of the Law were veiles of obscurity, but
the veiles of the Gospel are only to allay the brightness of it. It Is honor
enough for a Christian, if he can but touch the hem of Evangelical Mysteries,
for he will never see a full Commentary upon the Gospel, till he can behold the
naked face of his God. Yet the knowledge which he has of him here, imperfecta
cognitio rerum nobilissimarum, it is most pleasant and delicious. It Is better to
know a little of God and Christ, then to see all the creatures in their full
beauty and perfection. The gleanings of spirituals is better then the vintage
of naturals and morals. The least spangle of happiness is better then a globe
of temporals. This sets a gloss and luster upon Christian Religion, and highly
commends the purity and perfection of it, above all other whatsoever, in that
it has (...). Christ tries all his followers by his own Sunbeams. Whereas the
dull and creeping religion of Mahomet has nothing at all above Nature and
Reason, though it may have many things against both; no need of Faith there,
there are no Mysteries in his Alcoran, unless of deceit and iniquity. Nothing
at all nisi quod de facili, a quolibet mediocriter sapiente naturali ingenio
cognosci potest, as that solid Author very well observes. And therefore that
stupid imposter did not seal his words with any miracles, for there was not
one supernatural truth to be sealed, nor could he have sealed it if it had been
there, but only he prosecutes it with a sword. Mahomets Loadstone does not draw
men, but his sword that conquers them, he draws his sword, he bids them deliver
up their souls, and tells them, that upon this condition he will spare their
lives. Signa illa quae tyrannis and latronibus non desunt, as he speaks
notably. But the very principles of Christian Religion are attractive and
magnetical, they enamour and command, they overpower the understanding, and
make it glad to look upon such mysterious truths as are reflected in a glass,
because it is unable to behold them (...). This speaks the great preeminence of
Mount Sion above Mount Sina. In the Law you have the Candle of the Lord
shining; in the Gospel you have the dayspring from on high, the Sun arising.
Nature and Reason triumph in the Law, Grace and Faith flower out in the Gospel.
By virtue of this wise and free dispensation, weak ones chiefly receive the
Gospel, for they are as well able to believe as any other, nay they are apter
to believe then others. If it had gone only by the advancement of
intellectuals, by the heightenings and clarifyings of Reason, who then would
have been saved but the grandees of the world? the Scribes, the Pharisees, the
Philosophers, the Disputers? but God has framed a way that confounds those
heads of the world, and drops happiness into the mouths of babes. There are
some understandings that neither spin nor toil, and yet Solomon in all his
wisdom and glory was not clothed like one of these: for this way of Faith it is
a more brief and compendious way Longum iter per Rationem, breve per Fidem.
Very few understandings much less all can demonstrate all that is
demonstrable, but if men have a power of believing, they may presently assent
to all that is true and certain. That which Reason would have been sweating for
this many a year, Faith sups up the quintessence of in a moment. All men in the
world have not equal abilities, opportunities, advantages of improving their
Reason, even in things natural and moral, so that Reason it self tells us, that
these are in some measure necessitated to believ others. How many are there
that cannot measure the just magnitude of a Star, yet if they will believe an
Astronomer, they may know it presently, and if they be sure that this
Mathematician has skill enough, and will speak nothing but truth, they cannot
then have the least shadow of Reason to dis-believe him. It Is thus in
spirituals, such is the weakness of humane understanding pro hoc statu, as
that they are necessitated to believing here; yet such is its happiness, that
it has one to instruct it who can neither deceive nor be deceived. God has
chosen this way of Faith, that he may stain the pride and glory of man, that
he may pose his intellectuals, that God may maintain in man great
apprehensions of himself, of his own incomprehensiblenesse, of his own truth,
of his own revelations, as that he may keep a creature in a posture of
dependency, so as to give up his understanding, so as to be disposed and
regulated by him. And if a Cherubim be ambitious of stooping, if Angelical
understanding do so earnestly (...), me thinks then the sons of men might fall
down at the beautiful feet of Evangelical mysteries, with that humble
acknowledgment, Non sum dignus solvere corrigiam ^ujus mysterii. Only let thy
Faith triumph here, for it shall not triumph hereafter; let it shine in time,
for it must vanish in eternity. You see then that Reason is no enemy to Faith,
for all that has been said of Faith, it has been fetched out of Reason. You see
there are mutual embraces twixt the Law and the Gospel, Nature and Grace may
meet together, Reason and Faith have kissed each other.

CHAP. XVII.
The light of Reason is a pleasant light.
It Is Lumen jucundum; All light is pleasant, it is the very smile of Nature, the
gloss of the world, the varnish of the Creation, a bright paraphrase upon
bodies. Whether it discover it self in the modesty of a morning blush, and open
its fair and Virgin eyelids in the dawning of the day, or whether it dart out
more vigorous and sprightful beams, shining out in its noonday glory; whether
it sport and twinckle in a Star, or blaze and glare out in a Comet, or frisk
and dance in a Jewel, or dissemble and play the Hypocrite in a gloworm, or
Epitomize and abbreviate it self in a spark, or show its zeal and the
ruddinesse of its complexion, in the yolk of the fire, or grow more pale,
pining and consuming away in a Candle; however it is pleased to manifest it
self, it carries a commanding luster in its face, though sometimes indeed it be
veiled and shadowed, sometimes it is clouded and imprisoned, sometimes it is
soyl'd and discolored. Who will not salute so lovely a beauty with a (...);
welcome thou firstborn of corporeal beings, thou Lady and Queen of Sensitive
beauties, thou clarifier and refiner of the Chaos, thou unspotted beauty of the
Universe. Let him be condemned to a perpetual night, to a fatal disconsolate
grave, that is not enamored with thy brightness. Is it not a pleasant thing
to behold a Sun? nay, to behold but a Candle, a deputed light? a vicarious
light? the ape of a Sun-beame? Yet there are some superstitious ones that are
ready to adore it, how devoutly do they complement with a Candle, at the first
approach? how do they put off the hat to it, as if with the Satyr they meant to
kiss it. You see how pleasant the light is to them; Nay that learned Knight in
his discourse of Bodies, tells us of one totally blind, who yet knew when a
candle came into the room, only by the quickening and reviving of his Spirits.
Yet this Corporeal light, it is but ashadow, it is but a black spot to set off
the fairnes of intellectual brightness. How pleasant is it to behold an
intellectual Sun? Nay, to behold but the Candle of the Lord? How pleasant is
this Lamp of Reason, (...). All the Motions and Operations of Nature are mixed
and seasoned with sweetness; Every Entity it is sugared with some delight;
Every being it is rolled up in some pleasure. How does the inanimate Being clasp
and embrace its Center, and rest there as in the bosom of delight? how
flourishing is the pleasure of vegetatives? Look but upon the beauty and
pleasure of a flower. Behold the Lilies of the Valleys, (and the Roses of
Sharon,) Solomon in all his Pleasure was not clothed like one of these. Go
then to sensitive Creatures, and there you meet with pleasures in a greater
height and exaltation. How are all the Individua amongst them maintained by
acts of pleasure? How are they all propagated by acts of pleasure? Some of them
are more merry and cheerful then the rest. How pleasant and jocund is the Bird?
How musical is it? How does it sing for joy? did you never see the fish playing
in its element? did you never see it caught with a bait of pleasure? does not
Leviathan sport in the sea, and dally with the waves? If you look up higher to
rational Beings, to the sons of men, you will find there a more singular and
pecular kind of pleasure, whilst they have both a taste of sensitive delight,
and a Participation of Intellectual. The soul and body enjoying a chaste and
conjugal love, the pleasure of the soul is more vigorous and masculine, that of
the body more soft and effeminate. The Nobler any Being is, the purer pleasure
it has proportioned to it. Sensitive pleasure it has more of dregs;
Intellectual pleasure it has more of Quintessence. If pleasure were to be
measured by Corporeal senses, the Brutes that are more exquisite in sense then
men are, would by virtue of that, have a choicer portion of happiness then men
can arrive to, and would make a better sect of Epicureans then men are ever
like to do. But therefore Nature has very wisely provided, that the pleasure
of Reason should be above any pleasure of Sense; as much, and far more then the
pleasure of a Be is above the pleasure of the Swine. Have you not seen a Be
make a trade of pleasure, and like a little Epicure faring deliciously every
day, whilst it lies at the breast of a flower, drawing and sucking out the
purest sweetness? and because 'twill have variety of dishes and dainties, it
goes from flower to flower, and feasts upon them all with a pure and spotless
pleasure, when as the Swine in the mean time tumbles and wallowes in the mire,
rolling it self in dirt and filthiness. An Intellectual Be that deflowers
most elegant Authors, a learned Epicure that sups up more Orient pearls then
ever Cleopatra did, one that delights in the embraces of truth and goodness,
has he not a more refined and clarified pleasure, then a wanton Corinthian
that courts Lais, then a soft Sardanapalus spinning amongst his Courtizans,
then a plump Anacreon, in singing and dancing and quaffing and lascivious
playing? (...) as the elegant Moralist has it: and it is as if he had said, the
delights of a studious and contemplative Athenian, or of a courageous and
active Lacedemonian, is infinitely to be preferred before the pleasure of a
delicate Sybarite, or a a dissolved Persian. The delight of a Philosopher does
infinitely surpass the pleasure of a Courtier. The choicest pleasure is
nothing but the Efflorescentia very and boni, there can be no greater pleasure,
then of an understanding embracing a most clear truth, and of a will complying
with its fairest good, this is (...), as the Greeks calls it; or as the Latins
in sinu gaudere; all pleasure consisting in that Harmonious Conformity and
Correspondency, that a faculty has with its object, 'twill necessarily flow
from this, that the better and nobler any object is, the purer and stronger any
faculty is, the nearer and sweeter the union is between them; the choicest must
be the pleasure that arises from thence. Now Intellectual Beings have the
bravest object, the highest and most generous faculties; the strictest
Love-knot and Union, and so cannot want a pleasure answerable to all this.
Epicurus himself (as that known writer of the Philosophers lives, who himself
also was a favourer and follower of the Epicurean Sect, does represent him)
that grand master of pleasure, though sometimes he seem to steep all pleasure
in sense, yet upon more digested thoughts he is pleased to tell us, that the
supreme delight is stored and treasured up in intellectuals. Sometimes indeed
he breaks out into such dissolute words as these, (...). I know no pleasure,
says he, if you take away the bribes and flatteries of lust, the enticings and
blandishings of sense, the graces and elegancies of Music, the kisses and
embraces of Venus. But afterward he is in a far different and mote sober
strain, and seems to drop a pearl, though his auditors proved swine, his words
were these, (...). I mean not (says he) the pleasures of a Prodigal, or those
that are situated in a carnal fruition, (...). I intend a rational pleasure, a
prudential kind of pleasure, which makes him lay down this for an axiom,
(...), that is, there can be no pleasure unless it be dipped in goodness, it
must come bubbling from a fountain of Reason, and must stream out virtuous
expressions and manifestations, and whereas other in their salutations were
wont to write (...), he always writ (...). But that ingenuous Moralist whom I
mentioned before, who could easily spy out the mind of Epicurus, and who was
of greater candor and fairness then to wrong his opinion, does yet so far
lay it open and naked to the world, as that he notably detects the follies and
vanities of that voluptuous Philosopher in that golden tractate of his, which
he entitles (...). Non potest suaviter vivere secundum Epicuri decreta, where
he shows that this jolly Philosopher makes the body only the proper center of
pleasure, and when he tells you that the mind has a more rarefied delight, he
means no more then this, that the mind perceives the pleasure of sense better
then the sense does, which makes the forementioned Author pass this witty
censure upon them, (...), they pour no pleasure upon the soul, but that which
comes out of the impure and musty vessel of the body. The whole sum of
Epicurus his Ethics, which he styles his Canonical Philosophy, is this, (...),
that pleasure was the ((...)) and ((...)) of all happiness. To this purpose he
wrote a multitude of books, and scattered them like so many of his Atoms, and
the greedy appetite of his licencious followers was easily caught with these
baits of pleasure, which made his opinions to be styled meretricia dogmata that
curled their locks, that painted their faces, that opened their naked breasts,
that clothed themselves in soft and silken apparel, to see if they could thus
entice the world; they were (...) that with a melting and delicate voice, did
endeavor to soften and win upon the hearts of men as much as they could; the
quintessence of all his doctrine was this, Dux vitae dia voluptas, as Lucretius
the Epicurean Poet sings. The practice of that frolic professor of pleasure,
did sufficiently explain and comment upon his mind. His dwelling was in a
garden, a fit place to crown with Rose-buds, (...) to crop the tops of
pleasure, to let no flower of the spring pass untoucht of him; here he was
furnished with all his voluptuous accommodations, and he might spread like a
green and flourishing Bay Tree; But amongst all his pleasure me thinks none
should envy that (which yet the writer of his life is pleased to observe) that
he was wont (...), to vomit twice a day constantly after meals, by virtue of
his excessive luxury. O rare Philosopher! that Head of a vomiting Sect, that
lickt up his and their own filthiness. Is this the work of an Athenian? is
this his mixing of virtue with pleasure? will he call this (...); sure he will
not call this (...); yet his death was very conformable to his life, for he
expired with a cup of wine at his mouth, which puts me in mind of the end of
the other carousing Epicure, that merry Greek Anacreon; who by a most
emphatical Tautopathy was chok'd with the husk and kernel of a Grape. So soon
does the pleasure of an Epicure wither, so soon are his resolves blasted, he
eats, and drinks, and dies before to morrow, (...), etc. they seem to refresh
and fan the soul with a gentle breath, but they are not certain, nor durable.
Those corporeal delights (as that florid Moralist Plutarch tells us) (...),
like so many sparks, they make a crack and vanish; like some extemporary
meteors, they give a bright and sudden coruscation, and disappear immediately.
The pleasures of taste are but in fine palati, as that famous Epicure Lucretius
tells us. Whereas intellectual joy shines with a fixed and undecaying
brightness, and though these (...) (as Plato calls them elegantly) these
outward pictures of pleasure, though they lose their gloss and color, yet the
inward face of delight maintains its original and primitive beauty. Sensitive
pleasure is limited and contracted to the narrow point of a (...), for sense
has no delight but by the enjoyment of a present object, when as intellectual
pleasure is not at all restrained by any temporal conditions, but can suck
sweetness out of time past, present, and to come; the mind does not only
drink pleasure out of present fountains; but it can taste those streams of
delight that are run away long ago, and can quench its thirst with those
streams, which as yet run under ground. For does not memory (which therefore
Plato calls (...) does it not reprint and repeat former pleasure? and what is
hope but pleasure in the bud? does it not antedate and prepossesse future
delight? Nay, by virtue of an intellectual percolation, the waters of Marah and
Meribah will become sweet and delicious. The mind can extract honey out of the
bitterest object when it is past, how else can you construe it, haec olim
meminisse jutabit? Corporeal pleasure it is but drossie and impure, the wine
it is dashed with water, there is a (...) (as Plato in his Philebus that book of
pleasure does very plainly and fully explain it,) and the instance that there
Socrates gives, is a quenching of thirst, where there is a very intimate
connection betwixt vexation and satisfaction. Tell me, you that crown your
selves with Rose-buds, do you not at the same time crown your selves with
thorns? for they are the companions of Rose-buds. But intellectual pleasure
it is (...), clear and crystaline joy, there is no mud in it, no feculency at
all. Men are ashamed of some corporeal pleasures, the crown of Roses it is but a
blushing crown, but who are blushed at intellectual delights? Epicurus his
Philosophy was very well termed (...), 'twas afraid to come to the light,
whereas intellectual pleasure need not fear the light, or the Sunshine. Men
faint and languish with sensitive pleasures, Membra voluptatis dum vi labefacta
liquescunt (as Lucretius himself upon much experience acknowledges.) Lassata
viris nondum satiata, as the Satyrist speaks of the eminent wanton. Nay, such
is the state and temper of the body (...), as that it will better endure
extreme grief, then excessive pleasure. Did you never hear of the soft
Sybariste, who complained in the morning of his weariness, and of his pimples,
when he had lien all night only upon a bed of Roses; but who ever was tired
with intellectual pleasure? who ever was weary of an inward complacency? or who
er'e surfetted of rational joy? Other pleasures ingratiate themselves by
intermission, Voluptates commendat rarior usus, whereas all intellectuals
heighten and advance themselves by frequent and constant operations. Other
pleasures do but emasculate and dispirit the soul, they do not at all fill it
and satisfy it. Epicurus may fill his with one of his atoms, as well as with
one of his pleasures. Whereas rational pleasure fills the soul to the brim; it
oiles the very members of the body, making them more free and cheerful; Nay,
speculative delight will make abundant compensation for the want of sensitive;
'twill turn a wilderness into a Paradise. It Is like you have read of the
Philosopher that put out his eyes, that he might be the more intent upon his
study; he shuts his windows that the candle might shine more clearly within;
and though he be rather to be wondered at, then to be followed or commended,
yet he did proclaim thus much by this act of his, that he preferred one beam
of intellectual light before the whole glory of this corporeal world; How have
some been enamoured with the pleasure of Mathematics? when says Plutarch, did
any Epicure cry out (...) with so much joy as Archimides did (...)? How have
some Astronomers built their nests in the Stars? and have scorned to let any
sublunary pleasures rend their thoughts from such goodly speculations? the
worst of men in the mean time glut themselves with sensitive pleasure, (...)
(as he in Plato speaks.) Apollo laughs but once in a year, when as a fool
laughs all the year long. And it is a great deal more consonant to sound
Philosophy that rationality should be the spring of inward pleasure, then of
outward risibility. Amongst all mental operations reflex acts taste pleasure
best, for without some selfreflexion men cannot tell whether they rejoice or
no; now these acts are the most distant and remote from sense, and are the
highest advancements of Reason: true pleasure, it is res severa (as the grave
Moralist Seneca speaks) and it is in profundo, where truth and goodness those
twin-fountains of pleasure are. Sensitive pleasure makes more noise and
crackling, when as mental and noetical delight, like the touches of the Lute,
make the sweetest and yet the stillest and softest music of all. Intellectual
vexations have most sting in them, why then should not intellectual delights
have most honey in them? Sensitive pleasure it is very costly, there must be
(...), much preparation and attendance, much plenty and variety, Parcentes ego
dexteras odi, sparge Rosas, it is too dear for every one to be an Epicure, it is
a very chargeable Philosophy to put in practice, whereas rational delight
freely and equally diffuses it self, you need not pay any thing for
fountain-pleasure, the mind it self proves a Canaan that flows with milk and
honey, other pleasure a sick man cannot relish, an old man cannot embrace it.
Barsillai says he is too old to taste the pleasures of the Court. A Crown of
Rose-buds does not at all become the gray head. But this noetical pleasure it is
a delight fit for a Senator, for a Cato, it is an undecaying, a growing
pleasure, it is the only pleasure upon the bed of sickness; the mind of him
that has the gowt may dance, it is the staff for old age to lean upon; these
are the rosae in hyeme, the delights of old age, how much is the pleasure of a
wise Nestor above the pleasure of a wanton Menelaus? The more rational and
spiritual any being is, the larger capacity it has of pleasure. (...) (says
Plato) and in a commendable sense it does Terram coelo miscere, and extract
what sweetness it can out of both. The purer Arts, the nobler Sciences have
most pleasure annexed to them, when as Mechanical Arts are more sordid and
contemptible, being conversant about sensitive and corporeal objects. Seeing
and hearing are the most pleasurable senses, because they receive their objects
in a more spiritual and intentional manner, and are deservedly styled by the
Naturalist sensus jucunditatis. Other senses are more practical, but these are
more contemplative. (...), as Aristotle tells us, for these are the sensus
disciplinae, they are the (...) mentis, they contribute most to Reason. The
more any object is spirituali^ed, the more delightful it is, there is much
delight in the tragical representation of those things which in reality would
be sights full of amazement and horror. The ticklings of fancy are more
delightful then the touches of sense. How does Poetry insinuate and turn about
the minds of men? A^acreon might take more delight in one of his Odes, then in
one of his Cups; Catullus might easily find more sweetness in one of his
Epigrams, then in the lips of a Lesbia* Sappho might take more complacency in
one of her Verses, then in her practices. The nearer any thing comes to mental
joy, the purer and choycer it is. It Is the observation not only of Aristotle,
but of every one almost, (...). Some things delight merely because of their
novelty, and that surely upon this account, because the mind which is the
spring of joy, is more fixed and intense upon such things. The Rose-bud thus
pleases more then the blown Rose. This noetical pleasure does quietly possess
and satiate the soul, and gives a composed and Sabbatical rest. So that as the
forementioned Philosopher has it, (...). Men that are took up with intellectual
joy, trample upon all other inferior objects. See this in Angelical pleasure;
those Courtiers of heaven much different from those on earth, neither eat nor
drink, nor come near, nor desire to come near any carnal pleasures. The
painted and feigned heaven of a Mahomet, would prove a real hell to an Angel or
glorified Saint. He plants a fools paradise of his own, there are trees of his
own setting and watering, the fat and juicey Olive, the wanton and sequacious
Ivy, and though he would not allow them Vines on earth (such was his great love
of sobriety) yet he reserves them for heaven; what means that sensual and
sottish impostor, to give notice of heaven by an Ivy-bush? Does he think that
Goats and Swine, that Mahomets must enter into the new Jerusalem? This is just
such a pleasure and happiness as the Poets, that loose and licentious
generation fancied and carved out as most agreeable to their Deities. They
pour them out Nectar, they spread them a table, they dish out Ambrosia for
them, they allow them an Hebe, or a Ganymede to wait upon them, and do plainly
transform them to worse then sensitive beings, such is the froth of some vain
imaginations; such is the scum of some obscene fancies, that dare go about to
create an Epicurean Deity, conformable to their own lust and vile affections.
Judge in your selves, are these pleasures fit for a supreme being? is there not
a softer joy, is there not a more downy happiness for a spiritual being to lay
its head upon? That conqueror of the world had far wiser and more sober
thoughts, when he distinguished himself from a Deity by his sleep and lust. And
I begin to admire the just indignation of Plato, who (though neither he
himself, (unless he be mis-reported) could content himself with intellectual
pleasure, no nor yet with natural, yet he) would banish from the Idea of his
Commonwealth all such scandalous and abominable Poetry, as durst cast such
unworthy and dishonorable aspersions upon a Deity, and make their god as bad
as themselves, as if they were to draw a picture of him by their own faces and
complexions. Yet as all other perfections, so the perfection of all true and
real pleasure, is enjoyed by God himself in a most spiritual and transcendent
manner. That which is honor with men, is glory with him; that which we call
riches, is in him his own excellency. His creatures which are very properly (as
the Philosopher styled riches) (...), all serviceable and instrumental to him,
and so that which amongst men is accounted pleasure, is with him that infinite
satisfaction, which he takes in his own Essence, and in his own operations. His
glorious decrees and contrivances, they are all richly pregnant with joy and
sweetness. Every providential dispensation is an act of choicest pleasure; the
making of all beings, nay of all irregularities contribute to his own glory,
must needs be an act of supreme and sovereigne delight. The laughing his
enemies to scorn, it is a pleasure fit for infinte justice, the smiling upon
his Church, the favoring and countenancing of his people, it is a pleasure fit
for mercy and goodness; Miracles are the pleasure of his omnipotency,
varieties are the delight of his wisdom; Creation was an act of pleasure, and
it must needs delight him to behold so much of his own workmanship, so many
pictures of his own drawing; Redemption was an expression of that singular
delight and pleasure which he took in the sons of men. Such heaps of pleasures
as these are never entered into the mind of an Epicurus, nor any of his
grunting Sect, who very near border upon Atheism, and will upon no other
terms and condition grant a Deity, unless they may have one of their own
modelling and contriving, that is, such a being as is wholly immerst in
pleasure, and that such a pleasure as they must be judges of; a being that did
neither make the world, nor takes any care of it, for that they think would be
too much trouble to him, too great a burden for a Deity, 'twould hinder his
pleasure too much. May they not a great deal better tell the Sun, that it is
too much trouble for it to enlighten the world; may they not better tell a
Fountain that it is too much pains for it to spend it self in such liberal
eruptions, in such fluent communications? Or shall natural agents act with
delight ad extremum virium, and shall not an infinite, and a free, and a
rational agent choose such operations as are most delightful to him? would not
Epicurus himself choose his own pleasure? and will he not allow a Deity the
same privilege? will he offer to set limits to a being which he himself
acknowledges to be above him? must he stint and prescribe the pleasures of a
God? and measure out the delights of the first being? who should think that an
Athenian, that a Philosopher could thus far dim the Candle of the Lord? and
could entertain such a prodigious thought as this, that the Sun it self is
maintained with the same Oil, as his decayed and corrupted Lampis? That
gallant Moralist Plutarch does most notably lay the axe to the root of this
abominable Error, for, says he, If Epicurus should grant a God in his full
perfections, he must change his life presently, he must be a swine no longer,
he must uncrown his rosy head, and must give that practical obedience to the
dictates of a God which other Philosophers are wont to do; whereas he looks
upon this as his fairest Rose-bud, as the most beautiful flower in his garden
of pleasure, that there is no providence to check him, or bridle him; that he is
not so subject or subordinate as to stand in awe of a Deity. But that brave
Author (whom I commended before) shows the inconsistency of this tenent, with
true and solid pleasure; For grant, O Epicure, that thou do not care for a
Deity in a calm, yet what will thou do in a storm? when the North-winde blows
upon thy garden, and when the frost nips thy tender Grapes. Thou do not care
for him in the spring, but would thou be glad of him in the winter? will it
be a pleasure then that thou have none to help thee? none to guide thee, none
to protect thee? Suppose a Ship ready to be split upon a rock, or to be soop't
up of a wave, would this then be a comfort and encouragement to it, or would it
take pleasure in this, (...), that it has no Pilot to direct it, it has no
tutelar Deities to mind the welfare of it? but it must rush on as well as it
can; thou blind and fond Epicure, thou know not the sweetness of pleasure,
that might be extracted out of providence, which is not (...), it is not a
supercilious and frowning authority, but it is the indulgent and vigilant eye of
a father, it is the tender and affectionate care of a Creator. One blossom of
Providence has more joy and pleasure in it, then all thy Rose-buds. Where is
there more delight then in the serving of a God? Look upon the Sacrifices, what
mirth and feastings are there? (...), It Is not the abundance of wine, nor the
abundance of provision that makes the joy and pleasure there, (...), it is the
presence of a propitious Deity, accepting and blessing his worshippers, that
fills the heart with greater joy then an Epicure is capable of. Never was there
a Sect found out that did more oppose true pleasure, then the Epicureans did;
they tell us that they take pleasure in honor, (...), they look upon it as a
lovely and delightful thing; yet by these tenants and practices of theirs, they
quite stain and blot their honor, and so lose that piece of their pleasure
which they pretend to. They say (if you will believe them) that they take pleasure
in friends, when as yet they constitute friendship, only (...), they must be
boon companions, that must drink and be merry together, and run into the same
excess of riot. Have not sensitive creatures as much friendship as this
amounts to? They tell us they love the continuation of pleasure, why then do
they deny the immortality of the soul? (...), it is the voice of Epicurus and
his swinish Sect, There must be no eternity. What, are they afraid their
pleasure should last too long? or are they conscious (as they may very well be)
that such impure pleasure is not at all durable? (...), it is the voice of the
same impure mouth, There is no repetition of life: what is he afraid of having
his pleasures reiterated? does he not expect a crown of Rose-buds the next
spring? or is he so weary (as well he may be) of his pleasure, as that he will
prefer a nonentity before it? This sure was the mind and desire of that
Epicurean Poet Lucretius, though a Roman of very eminent parts, which yet were
much abated by a Philtrum that was given him; a just punishment for him, who
put so much of his pleasure in a cup; and this desperate slighter of
Providence, at length laid violent hands upon himself. Are any of you enamored
with such pleasure as this? you see what is at the bottom of an Epicures cup:
you see how impatient a rational being is of such unworthy delights, and how
soon it is cloyed with them. You see the misery of an Epicure, whose pleasure
was only in this life, and yet would not last out this life neither. But all
rational pleasure, it is not of a span long, but reaches to perpetuity. That
Moralist whom I have so often mentioned, reckons up whole heaps of pleasure,
which spring from the continuation of the soul. (...). There (says he) shall I
have the pleasure of seeing all my friends again, there I shall have the
pleasure of more ennobled acts of Reason; (...), there shall I taste the so much
longed for sweetness of another world. (...), etc. The fear of future misery
cannot more terrify a guilty soul (the fear of which it is like made Epicurus
put off all thoughts of another life as much as he could, for else the fear of
that would have been a worm in his Rose-bud of pleasure; but the fear of that
has not more horror and amazement in it,) then the hope of future happiness
has joy and delight annexed to it.

Hoc habet animus Argumentum divi^itatis, qu^d eum divina delectant, as that
serious Moralist Seneca speaks most excellently. The soul by the enjoyment of
God comes near the pleasure of God himself.

The Platonists tell us that Voluptatis Generatio fit ex infiniti and finiti
copulatione, because the object of real pleasure must be (...). An intellectual
eye married to the Sun, a naked will swimming, and bathing it self in its
fairest good, the noblest affections leaping and dancing in the purest light,
this speaks the highest apex and eminency of noetical pleasure; yet this
pleasure of heaven it self, though by a most sacred and intimate connection; it
be unseparably conjoined with happiness, yet it is not the very essence and
formality of it, but does rather flow from it by way of concomitancy and
resultancy.

That which most opposes this pleasure, is that prodigious and anomalous
delight (not worthy the name of delight or pleasure) which damned spirits and
souls degenerate far below the pleasure of Epicurus, that delight which these
take in wickedness, in malice, in pride, in lies, in hypocrisy; all which
speaks them the very excrements of Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils. But you
that are genuine Athenians, fill your selves with noetical delights, and envy
not others their more vulgar Beotick pleasures; envy not the rankness of
their Garlic and Onions, whilst you can feed and feast upon more Spiritual
and Angelical dainties. Envy not the wanton Sparrows, nor the laseivious Goats,
as long as you can meet with a purer and chaster delight in the virginity of
intellectual embraces.

Do you devour with a golden Epicurisme, the Arts and Sciences, the spirits
and extractions of Authors; let not an Epicure take more pleasure in his garden
then you can do in your studies; you may gather flowers there, you may gather
fruit there. Convince the world that the very pith and marrow of pleasure does
not dwell in the surface of the body, but in a deep and rational center. Let
your triumphant reason trample upon sense, and let no corporeal pleasures move
you or tempt you, but such as are justly and exactly subordinate to Reason; you
come to Athens as to a fountain of learned pleasure; you come hither to snuff
the Candle of the Lord that is within you, that it may burn the clearer and the
brighter. You come to trim your Lamps, and to pour fresh Oil into them;
yourvery work and employment is pleasure. Happy Athenians (if you knew your own
happiness.) Let him be condemned to perpetual folly and ignorance, that does
not prefer the pleasant light of the Candle of the Lord before all the
Pageantry of sensitive objects, before all the flaunting and Comical joy of the
world.

Yet could I show you a more excellent way, for the pleasures of natural reason
are but husks in comparison of those Gospel-delights, those mysterious
pleasures that lie hidin the bosom of a Christ; those Rose-buds that were died
in the blood of a Savior, who took himself the Thorns, and left you the roses.
We have only looked upon the pleasure of a candle, but there you have the
Sunshine of pleasure in its full glory.

CHAP. XVIII.
The light of Reason is an ascendent light.
It Is Lumen ascendens -- (...), as Musaeus sings in the praise of Hero's
Candle. Yet I mean no more by this, then what that known saying of Saint Austin
imports, Fecisti nos (Domine) ad te, irrequietum erit cor nostrum donec redit
ad te. The Candle of the Lord it came from him, and 'twould feign return to
him. For an intellectual lamp to aspire to be a Sun, it is a lofty strain of
that intolerable pride which was in Lucifer and Adam: but for the Candle of the
Lord, to desire the favor, and presence, and enjoyment of a beatifical Sun,
this is but a just and noble desire of that end which God himself created it
for. It must needs be a proud and swelling drop that desires to become an
Ocean; but if it seeks only to be united to an Ocean, such a desire tends to
its own safety and honor. The face of the soul naturally looks up to God,
coelumque tueri Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus, it is as true of
the soul as of the body. All light loves to dwell at home with the Father of
lights. Heaven it is Patria luminum, God has there fixed a tabernacle for the
Sun, for it is good to be there, it is a condescension in a Sunne-beam that
'twill stoop so low as earth, and that 'twill gild this inferior part of the
world; it is the humility of light that 'twill incarnate and incorporate it self
into sublunary bodies; yet even there it is not forgetful of its noble birth and
original, but 'twill still look upwards to the Father of lights. Though the Sun
cover the earth with its healing and spreading wings, yet even those wings love
to fly aloft, and not to rest upon the ground in a sluggish posture. Nay,
light when it courteously salutes some earthy bodies, it usually meets with
such churlish entertainment, as that by an angry reverberation, it is sent back
again, yet in respect of it self it is many times an happy reflection and
rebound, for it is thus necessitated to come nearer heaven. If you look but upon
a Candle, what an aspiring and ambitious light is it? though the proper figure
of flame be Globular and not Pyramidal, (as the noble Verulam tells us in his
History of Nature) which appears by those celestial bodies, those fine and
rarefied flames, (if we may so call them with the Peripateticks leave) that
roll and move themselves in a globular and determinate manner: yet that flame
which we usually see puts on the form of a Pyramide, occasionally and
accidentally, by reason that the air is injurious to it, and by quenching the
sides of the flame crushes it, and extenuates it into that form, for otherwise
'twould ascend upwards in one greatness, in a rounder and compleater manner.
It Is just thus in the Candle of the Lord; Reason would move more fully
according to the sphere of its activity, 'twould flame up toward heaven in a
more vigorous and uniforme way, but that it is much quenched by that (...), and
the unrulinesse of the sensitive powers will not allow it its full scope and
liberty, therefore it is fain to spire up, and climb up as well as it can in a
Pyramidal form, the bottom and basis of it borders upon the body, and is
therefore more impure and feculent; but the apex and cusp is of it catches at
heaven, and longs to touch happiness, thus to unite it self to the fountain of
light and perfection. Every spark of Reason flies upwards, this divine flame
fell down from heaven, and halted with its fall, (as the Poets in their
Mythology tell us of the limping of Vulcane) but it would feign ascend thither
again by some steps and gradations of its own framing.

Reason it is soon weary with its fluttering up and down among the creatures,
the Candle of the Lord does but waste it self in vain in searching for happiness
here below. Some of the choicest Heathens did thus spend their Lamps, and
exhaust their Oil, and then at length were feign to lie down in darkness and
sorrow; their Lamps did show them some glimmering appearances of a Summum bonum
at a great distance, but it did not sufficiently direct them in the way to it,
no more then a Candle can guide a traveller that is ignorant of his way. You
may see some of the more sordid Heathen toyling and searching with their Candle
in the mines and treasuries of riches, to see if they could spy any vein of
happiness there, but the earth says, It Is not in me. You may see others among
them feeding and maintaining their Candle with the air of popular applause,
sucking in the breath and esteem of men, till at the length they perceived that
it came with such uncertain blasts, as that they chose rather to cloister
themselves up in a Lanthorn, to put themselves into some more reserved and
retired condition, rather then to be exposed to those transient and arbitrary
blasts, which some are pleased to entitle and style by the name of honors. You
might see some of them pouring the Oil of gladness into their Lamps, till
they soon perceived that voluptuous excess, did but melt and dissolve the
Candle, and that pleasures like so many thieves, did set it a blazing, and did
not keep it in an equal shining. You might behold others, and those the most
eminent amongst them, snuffing their Candles very exactly and accurately, by
improving their intellectuals and refining their morals, till they sadly
perceived that when they were at the brightest, their Candles burnt but dimly
and blewly, and that for all their snuffing they would relapse into their
former dullness. The snuffings of Nature and Reason will never make up a day,
nor a Sunshine of happiness; all the light that did shine upon these
Ethiopians did only discover their own blackness, yet they were so enamored
with this natural complexion, as that they looked upon it as a piece of the
purest beauty.

Nature Narcissus-like loves to look upon its own face, and is much taken with
the reflections of it self. What should I tell you of the excessive and
hyperbolical vapourings of the Stoics in their adoring and idolizing of
Nature, whilst they fix their happiness in the (...) in their own compass
and sphere; these were (as I may so term them) a kind of Pharisees among the
Heathen, that scorned precarious happiness, like so many arbitrary and
independent beings; they resolved to be happy how they pleased, and when they
list. Thus do sond creatures boast of their decayed Lamps, as if they were so
many Suns, or at least Stars of the first magnitude. The Stoics spoke this
more loudly, yet the rest of the Heathen whispered out the same, for they were
all of the Poets mind. -- Natura beatis Omnibus esse dedit, si quis cognoverit
uti. And they would all willingly subscribe to those words of Salust. Fal^o de
natura queritur humanum genus, which indeed is understood of the God of Nature,
they were words of truth and loyalty; but if they meant them (as certainly they
did) of that strength which was for the present communicated to them, they were
but the interpreters of their own weakness and vanity. Yet it is no wonder to
hear any of the Heathen Rhetoricating in the praise of Nature; it may seem a
more tolerable piece of gratitude in them to amplify and extol this gift of
their Creator; it is no wonder if such a one admire a Candle, that never saw a
nobler light. But for such as are surrounded and crowned with Evangelical
beams, for men that live under Gospel-Sun-shine, for them to promise themselves
and others that they may be saved by the light of a candle* a Stoic, an
Academick, a Peripatetick shall enter into heaven before these. Yet I find
that in the very beginning of the fifth Century, Pelagius an high Traitor
against the Majesty of Heaven, scattered this dangerous and venomovs Error,
endeavoring to set the Crown upon Natures head, and to place the creature in
the throne of God and grace. The learned Vossius in his Historia Pelagiana (a
book full fraught with sacred Antiquity) gives us this brief representation of
him, that he was, humani arbitrii decomptor, and Divinae Gratiae contemptor, a
trimmer of Nature, and an affronter of grace. His body was the very type of his
soul, for he wanted an eye, he was but (...)* to be sure he wanted a spiritual
eye to discern the things of God. He was a Scot by Nation, a Monk by
profession, a man exemplary in Morals, and not contemptible for learning, for
though Hierom vilify him in respect of both, yet Chrysostom gives him a
sufficient Commendamus, and Augustine himself will set his hand to it, that
learned adversary of his full of grace and truth, and the very hammer that
broke his flinty and rebellious Error in pieces. If you would see the rise,
and progress, and variations of this Error, how it began to blush and put on
more modesty in Semipelagianisme; how afterward it covered its nakedness with
some Popish fig leaves; how at length it refined it self and dressed it self more
handsomely in Arminianisme, you may consult with the forementioned Author, who
kept a relic of his Pelagian History in his own breast, whilst it left upon
him an Arminian tincture. This spreading Error leavened the great lump and
generality of the world, as the profound Bradwardin sighs, and complains; Totus
pene mundus post Pelagium abiit in errorem: for all men are born Pelagians;
Nature is predominant in them: it has took possession of them, and will not
easily subordinate it self to a superior principle. Yet Nature has not such a
fountain of perfection in it self, but that it may very well draw from another;
this Heathenish principle after all its advancements and improvements, after
all its whitenings and purifyings, it must stand but afar off in Atrio Gentium,
it cannot enter into the Temple off God, much less into the Sanctum Sanctorum,
it cannot pierce within the veil.

The ennoblement of intellectuals, the spotless integrity of Morals,
sweetness of dispositions, and the candor of Nature, they are all deservedly
amiable in the eye of the world. The Candle of Socrates, and the candle of
Plato, the Lamp of Epictetus, they did all shine before men, and shine more
then some that would fain be called Christians. Nature makes a very fine show,
and a goodly glittering in the eye of the world, but this Candle cannot appear
in the presence of a Sun* all the paintings and varnishings of Nature, they
please and enamour the eyes of men, but they melt away at the presence of God.
The Lamp of a Moralist may waste it self in doing good to others, and yet at
length may go out in a snuff, and be cast into utter darkness. The harmonious
composing of natural faculties, the tuning of those spheres, will never make up
an heaven fit for a soul to dwell in. Yet notwithstanding whatsoever is lovely
in narure is acceptable even to God himself, for it is a print of himself, and
he does proportion some temporal rewards unto it; the justice of an Aristides,
the good laws of a Solon or a Lycurgus, the formal devotion of a Numa
Pompilius, the prudence of a Cato, the courage of a Scipio, the moderation of a
Fabius, the publitk spirit of a Cicero, they had all some rewards scattered
among them. Nor is there any doubt but that some of the Heathen pleased God
better then others. Surely Socrates was more lovely in his eyes then
Aristophanes, Augustus pleased him better then Tiberius, Cicero was more
acceptable to him then Catiline, for there were more remainders of his image in
the one then in the other, the one was of purer and nobler influence then the
other. Minus malus respectu pejoris est bonus, the one shall have more
mitigations of punishment then the other; Socrates shall taste a milder cup of
wrath, when as Aristophanes shall drink up the dregs of fury; if divine justice
whip Cicero with rods, 'twill whip Catiline with Scorpions. An easier and more
gentle worm shall feed upon Augustus, a more fierce and cruel one shall prey
upon Tiberius; if justice put Cato into a prison, 'twill put Cethegus into a
dungeon. Nor is this a small advantage that comes by the excellencies and
improvements of Nature, that if God shall please to beautify and adorn such
an one with supernatural principles, and if he think good to drop grace into
such a soul, 'twill be more serviceable and instrumental to God then others.
Religion cannot desire to shine with a greater gloss and luster, it cannot
desire to ride among men in greater pomp and solemnity, in a more triumphant
Chariot, then in a soul of vast intellectuals, of Virgin and undeflowered
morals, of calm and composed affections, of pleasant and ingenuous
dispositions. When the strength of Nature, and the power of godliness unite,
and concentricate their forces, they make up the finest and purest complexion;
the soundest and bravest constitution, like a sparkling and vigorous soul,
quickening and informing a beautiful body. Yet this must be thought upon, that
the different improvement even of Naturals, springs only from grace. For
Essentials and Specificals (which are mere Nature they are equal in all, but
whatsoever singular or additional perfection is annexed to such a one, flows
only from the distingushing goodness of an higher cause; that Socrates was any
better then Aristophanes, was not nature, but a kind of common gift and grace
of the Spirit of God, for there are the same seminal principles in all.
Augustus and Tiberius were hew'n out of the same rock; there are in Cicero the
seeds of a Catiline: and when the one brings forth more kindly and generous,
the other more wild and corrupted fruit, it is accordingly as the countenance
and favorable aspect of heaven is pleased to give the increase; for as the
Philosophers tell us, Motio moventis praecedit motum mobilis, was there any
propension or inclination to goodness in the heart of a Cicero more then of a
Catiline? 'twas only from the first mover, from the finger of God himself that
tuned the one more harmoniously then the other. As take two several Lutes, let
them be made both alike for essentials, for matter and form; if now the one be
strung better then the othet, the thanks is not due to the Lute, but to the
arbitrary pleasure of him that strung it; let them be both made alike and
strung alike, yet if the one be quickened with a more delicate and graceful
touch, the prevailing excellency of the music was not to be ascribed to the
nature of the Lute, but to the skill and dexterity of him that did move it and
prompted it into such elegant sounds. The several degrees of worth in men that
are above radicals and fundamentals of nature, they are all the skill and
workmanship, the fruits and productions of common grace. For Omnis actio
particularis habet originem ab agente universali. Now if the universal agent
did only dispense an equal concourse in an equal subject, all the operations
and effects that flow from thence must needs be equal also; if then there be
any eminency in the workings of the one more then of the other* i^ can have no
other original then from that noble influence, which a free and supreme agent
is pleased to communicate in various measures; so that naked Nature of it self
is a most invalid and inefficacious principle, that does crumble away its own
strength, and does wear and waste by its motions, and for every act of
improvement it depends only upon the kindness of the first being. They that
tell you Nature may merit Grace and Glory, may as well tell you (if they
please) that a Candle by its shining may merit to be a Star, to be a Sun. Nor
yet is Nature always constant to its own light; it does not deal faithfully
with its intimate and essential principles. Some darlings of Nature have
abundantly witnessed this, whilst they have run into some unnatural practices,
that were the very blushes of Nature; if then Nature cannot tell how to live
upon earth, will it ever be able to climb up to heaven? Sinesciat servire,
nescit imperare, if it be not faithful in a little, do you think that it shall
be made Ruler over much? no certainly, moral endowments when they are at the
proudest top and apex, can do no more, then what that great Antipelagian
Prosper tells us, Mortalem vitam honestare possunt, aeternam confer non
possunt. God has ordained men to a choycer end, then these natural faculties
can either deserve, or obtain, or enjoy. Natures hand cannot earn it; Natures
hand cannot reach it, Natures eye cannot see it. That glorious and ultimate
end, which must fill and satiate the being of man, is the beatifical vision of
God himself. Now there is no natural power nor operation proportioned to such a
transcendent object as the face of God, as the naked essence of a Deity.
Inferior creatures may, and do move within the compass of their natures, and
yet they reach that end which was propounded and assigned to their being: but
such was the special and peculiar love of God, which he manifested to a
rational nature, as that it must be advanced above it self by a supernaturale
auxilium, before it can be blessed with so great a perfection, as to arrive to
the full end of its being. Yet God has touched nature with himself, and draws
it by the attractive and magnetical virtue of so commanding an object as his
own essence is, which makes Nature affect and desire somewhat supernatural,
that it may make nearer approaches unto happiness; for this end God did assume
humane nature to the divine, that he might make it more capable of this
perfection, and by a strict love-knot and union might make it partaker of the
divine nature; not that it is changed into it, but that it has the very
subsistence of its happiness by it. Every being does naturally long for its
own perfection, and therefore a rational nature must needs thus breath and pant
after God, and the nearer it comes to him, the more intensely and vehemently it
does desire him, for as they tell us, Motus naturalis velocior est in sine, the
nearer a body approaches to its center, the more cheerful and vigorous is its
motion. The Understanding that sees most of God, desires to see more of him;
its eye will never leave rolling till it fix it self in the very center of the
Divine essence. Nature that has but some weak glimpses of him, and so it has
but faint and languishing velleities after him. (...), as he speaks of the
Heathens, they seem to nod after a summum bonum. What the states and conditions
of those Heathens was and is in order to eternal happiness, we cannot easily
nor certainly determine; yet thus much may be safely granted, though we say not
with the Pelagians, that the emprovements of nature can make men happy; nor yet
with the Semi-Pelagians that natural preparations and predispositions do
bespeak and procure Grace; nor yet with the Papists and Arminians, that works
flowing from Grace do contribute to more Grace and Glory, yet this we say, that
upon the improvement of any present strength, God out of his free goodness,
may if he please give more. As God freely gave them nature (which makes
Pelagius sometimes call Nature Grace) and as he freely, and out of his Grace
gave them some emprovement of Nature, so he might as freely give them
supernatural strength if it so please him. Yet a creature cannot come to heaven
by all those improvements which are built upon Natures foundation; for if it
should accurately and punctually observe every jot and tittle of Natures Law,
yet this natural obedience would not be at all correspondent or commensurate to
a supernatural happiness, which makes Saint Augustine break out into such an
expression as this; Qui dicit hominem servari posse sine Christo, dubito an
ipse per Christum servari possit; for this is the only way, the new and living
way, by which God will assume humane nature to himself, and make it happy. Yet
notwithstanding their censure is too harsh and rigid, who as if they were
Judges of eternal life and death, damn Plato and Aristotle without any
question, without any delay at all; and do as confidently pronounce that they
are in hell, as if they saw them flaming there. Whereas the infinite goodness
and wisdom of God might for ought we know find out several ways of saving
such by the Pleonasmes of his love in Jesus Christ; he might make a Socrates a
branch of the true Vine, and might graffe Plato and Aristotle into the fruitful
Olive; for it was in his power, if he pleased, to reveal Christ unto them, and
to infuse faith into them after an extraordinary manner; Though indeed the
Scripture does not afford our charity any sufficient ground to believe that he
did; nor dorh it warrant us peremtorily to conclude the contrary. Secreta Deo,
it does not much concern us to know what became of them; let us then forbear
our censure, and leave them to their competent Judge. But when we mention
Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, and the more eminent and refined ones among the
Heathens, you must be sure not to entertain such a thought as this, that the
excellency of their intellectuals and morals did move and prevail with the
goodness of God to save them more then others of the Heathen, as if these were
dispositiones de congruo merentes salutem aeternam, this indeed were nothing
but Pelagianisme a little disguised; whereas you must resolve it only into the
free grace of God, that did thus distinguish them here in time, and might more
distinguish them eternally, if it pleased him to bestow a Savior upon them.
Which grace of God is so free, as that it might save the worst of the Heathens,
and let go the rest; it might save an Aristophanes as well as a Socrates, nay
before a Socrates, as well as a Publican before a Pharisee: not only all
Heathen, but all men are of themselves in equal circumstances in order to
eternal happiness; it is God only that makes the difference, according to his
own determinations, that were eternal and unconditional. Yet I am far from
the mind of those Patrons of Universal Grace, that make all men in an equal
propinquity to salvation, whether Jews, or Pagans, or Christians; which is
nothing but dight and gilded Pelagianisme, whilst it makes grace as extensive
and Catholic, a principle of as full latitude as nature is, and resolves all
the difference into created powers and faculties. This makes the barren places
of the world in as good a condition as the Garden of God, as the enclosure of
the Church: It puts a Philosopher in as good an estate as an Apostle; For if
the remedium salutiferum be equally applied to all by God himself, and
happiness depends only upon men's regulating and composing of their faculties;
how then comes a Christian to be nearer to the Kingdom of Heaven then an
Indian? is there no advantage by the light of the Gospel shining among men with
healing under its wings? Surely, though the free grace of God may possibly pick
and choose an Heathen sometimes, yet certainly he does there more frequently
pour his goodness into the soul where he lets it stream out more clearly and
conspicuously in external manifestations. It Is an evident sign that God
intends more salvation there, where he affords more means of salvation; if then
God do choose and call an Heathen, it is not by universal, but by distinguishing
grace. They make Grace Nature, that make it as common as Nature. Whereas Nature
when 'twas most triumphant, shining in its Primitive beauty and glory, yet even
then it could not be happy without Grace. Adam himself besides his integritas
naturae, had also adjutorium gratiae, for as the Schoolmen explain it, though
he had viros idoneas ad praestanda omnia naturalia; reipsa tamen nihil
praestitit sine auxilio gratiae. As, if you expect any goodly and delicious
clusters from a Vine, besides its own internal form which we'll style Nature,
there must be also auxilium gratiae, the Sun must favor it and shine upon it,
the rain must nourish it, and drop upon it, or else Nature will never be
pregnant and fruitful. Adams Candle did not shine so clearly, but that Grace
was fain to snuff it. Nature, though 'twere complete and entire, yet 'twas
feign to strengthen and support it self by its twinings about Grace, and for
want of the powerful support and maintenency of Grace, Nature fell down
presently; it startled from it self, and apostatized like a broken bow. What
mean the Pelagians to tell us of a Naturalis Beatitudo, when as Nature now is
surrounded with so many frailties and miseries, so many disorders and
imperfections? Yet were it as green and flourishing as ever it was when 'twas
first planted in Paradise, yet even then 'twould be too remote from happiness,
for perfect happiness excludes and banishes all futurity and possibility of
misery, which Nature never yet did, nor could do. And happiness never flows
out till the Sun look upon it, till it see the face of God himself, whom
Natures eye will never be able to behold. Yet Oh! how desirous is Nature of
this? how inquisitive is humane Nature into the causes of things, and esteems
it no small piece of its beatitude if it can find them out? Foelix qui potuit
rerum cognoscere causas. What a goodly sight is it then to behold the first
cause of all being, and its own being? how feign would an intellectual eye
behold him that made it! Nature longs to see who 'twas that first contrived it,
and framed it, and fashioned it; the soul would fain see its Father of Spirits.
The Candle would feign shine in the presence of him that lighted it up.

Yet Nature cannot see the face of God and live. Ante obitum nemo supremaque
funera foelix. The Moralists happiness is dormant in the nightime, for
there is no operatio secundum virtutem then, nor can the soul while it is clogged
with a frail body, climb to the (...) of goodness or happiness; the soul
here has not a perfect enjoyment of inferior objects, much less of God
himself; it has but a shadowy sight of Angels propter connaturalitatem
intellectus nostri ad phantasmata; and if natures eye cannot look upon the face
of a twinkling Star, how will it behold the brightness of a dazzling Sun?
that general knowledge which it has of God here is mixed with much error and
deceit.

Nor can Faith look upon the divine essence; it is a lovely grace indeed, yet it
must die in the Mount like Moses; it cannot enter into the Land of promise;
it is auditui magis similis quam visioni, it hears the voice of its God, it does
not see his face, it enflames the desire of the soul, it does not quench it,
for men would feign see what they believe; the object of Faith is obscure and
at a distance, but the face of God is all presence and brightness. Happiness
it consists in the noblest operation of an intellectual being, whereas in
believing there is imperfectissima operatio ex part intellectus, licet sit
perfectio ex part objecti.

Nor yet is the divine essence seen in a way of demonstration, for then only a
Philosopher should see his face, such only as had skill in Metaphysics, who yet
may be in misery for all that, for demonstrations are no beatifical visions.
The damned spirits can demonstrate a Deity, and yet they are perpetually
banished from his face: there can be no demonstration of him a priore, for he is
the first cause, and all demonstrations fetched from such effects as flow from
him, they do only show you that he is, they do not open and display the divine
essence, for they are not effectus adaequantes virtutem causae. To see God in
the creatures, it is to see him veiled, it is to see him clouded. The soul will
not rest contented with such an imperfect knowledge of its God, it sees him
thus here, and yet that does not hush and quiet rational desires, but does
increase and enlarge them. Such things as last long, are perfected slowly, and
such is happiness; the knowledge of men here it is too green and crude, 'twon't
ripen into happiness, till the Sun shine upon it with its blessed and
immediate beams. God therefore creates and prepares a Lumen Gloriae for the
soul, that is, such a supernatural disposition in an intellectual eye, by which
it is clarified and fortified, and rightly prepared for the beholding the divine
essence, which makes Dionysius the falsely supposed Areopagite, very fitly
describe happiness by this, it is (...), the souls sunning of it self in the
Lumen Gloriae. Some will have that of the Psalmist to be sung in the praise of
this light, In lumine tuo videbimus lumen. That Seraphical Prophet does thus
most excellently represent it: The Sun shall be no more thy light by day;
neither for brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord
shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory, Isai. 60. v.
19. You have it thus rendered in the Apocalypse: (...). This lumen gloriae,
which is similitudo quaedam intellectus divini (as the Schoolmen speak,) this
light it is not so much for the discovering of the object, (for that is an
intellectual Sun clothed with all perfection and brightness,) as it is for the
helping and advancing of a created understanding, which else would be too much
oppressed with the weight of glory; but yet this augmentation of the visive
faculty of the soul, by the Lumen Gloriae, it is not per intentionem virtutis
naturalis, but it is per appositionem novae formae: it is not the raising and
screwing of nature higher, but it is the adding of a new supernatural
disposition that may close with the divine essence; for as Aquinas has it, Ipsa
divina essentia copulatur intellectui, ut forma intelligibilis, humane
understanding is as the matter accurately predisposed by the Lumen Gloriae, for
the receiving of the divine essence, as an intelligible form stamps an
impression of it self upon it; it prints the soul with that summum bonum which
it has so much longed for.

So that though there be still an infinite disproportion between God and the
creature in esse naturali, yet there is a fit and just proportion between them
in esse intelligibili. Though an eye be enabled to behold the Sun, yet this
does not make it all one with the Sun, but it keeps its own nature still as
much as it did before.

Nor is this vision a comprehensive vision, for a finite being will never be
able fully to graspe an infinite essence; it is true indeed, it sees the whole
essence of God, not a piece of his face only, for all essence is indivisible,
especially that most simple and pure essence of God himself, but the soul does
not see it so clearly, and so strongly as God himself sees it; hence degrees of
happiness spring, for the Lumen Gloriae being variously shed amongst blessed
souls, the larger measure they have of that, the brighter sight have they of
the divine essence. Several men may look upon the same face, and yet some that
have more sparkling eyes, or some that stand nearer may discern it better; if
a multltude of spectators were enabled to behold the Sun, yet some of them
that have a more strong and piercing eye might see it more clearly then the
rest. In this glass of the divine essence glorified souls see all things else
that conduce to their happiness; as God by seeing himself the cause and
fountain of beings, sees also all effects that come streaming from him; so
these also looking upon the Sun, must needs see his beams; they see the
Sun, and see other things by the Sun: they see there omnium rerum genera and
species, they there behold virtutes, and ordinem universi. Yet because they do
not see the essence of God clearly and perfectly, (that is, comprehensively) so
neither can they see all those treasures of mysterious wisdom, of unsearchable
goodness, of unlimited power, that lie hid in the very depth of the divine
essence. Non vident possibilia, nec rations rerum, nec ea quae dependent ex
pura Dei voluntate, as the Schoolmen do well determine; yet all that a
glorified understanding sees, it is in one twinkling of its eye, for it sees all
by one single species, by the divine essence. It forgets its wrangling
Syllogismes, it leaves its tardy demonstrations when it once comes to an
intuitive knowledge. Non movetur de uno intelligibili in aliud, sed quiescit in
actu unico, for the state of happiness is a Sabbatical state. The soul rests
and fixes it self in one act of perpetual enjoyment, and by this participation
of simultaneity it partakes of eternity, for that is tota simul.

Whether this glorious happiness be more principally situated in an act of the
understanding, or of the will, I leave the Thomists and Scotists to discuss
it; only this I will say in the behalf of Aquinas, that the will cannot enjoy
this happiness any other ways, then as it is a rational appetite. For there is
a blind appetite of good in every being, which yet neither has nor can have
such happiness. As therefore the operations of the will, so the happiness of
the will also seems to be subordinate to that of the understanding. But it is
enough for us that an entire soul, an whole rational being is united to its
dearest, fairest, and supreme object in a way of pure intuitive speculation, in
a way of sweetest love and fruition. Nor could nature of it self reach this,
for an inferior nature cannot thus unite it self to a superior, but only by
his indulgence raising it above it self.

This Candle of the Lord may shine here below, it may and does aspire, and long
for happiness; but yet it will not come near it, till he that lighted it up,
be pleased to lift it up to himself, and there transform it into a Star,
that may drink in everlasting light and influence from its original and
fountain-light.

THE Schism.
1 COR. 3. 4. For while one says I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo,
are ye not carnal?


THE Corinthians were Paul's Epistle, as he himself styles them; writ in a very
legible character, to be seen, and read of all men; and to be set as a copy,
for others to write after. No doubt but the Apostle had penned it very fairly;
it was not writ with Ink (as he himself tells us), and yet I know not how, he
meets with some blots and dashes in it; nay, the Epistle's ready to be torn
asunder, and rent in pieces by strifes and divisions; While one says, I am of
Paul, and another, I am of Apollos. Corinth the famous (...) of Achaia, (...),
or as Tully, Lumen Graciae: a mart-towne of great resort, whence as Eustathius
tells us; Thucidides termed it (...), ^enc't with a Castle, which they called
Acro-Corinthus, as the Poet loftily; Qua summus casus Acro-corinthus in auras
Tollit, and alterna geminum mare protegit umbra. So that 'twas for strength
impregnable; for command, very powerful; being able to cut off all passage by
land, from one half of Greece to the other; and hence as Casaubon well
observes out of the nineth book of Strabo', Geography; this was one of those
Cities which were termed Compedes Graciae. It mastered the Ionian and Aegean
Seas, on both which it had very commodious havens; the Sea on each side washing
it, whence he calls it, bimaris Corinthus, and the Greeks (...), and (...). The
people (as in such places they use to be) were rich, and luxurious, proud, and
contentious, (...), and so on, as Strabo in the eighth of his Geography. And I
find in Hesychius that (...) is no better then (...); and here lived Lais,
that famous Courtizan, that asked Demosthenes so dear for repentance. The City
was full of Philosophers, and Rhetoricians, full of Artificers, famous for new
inventions; whence the Lyrick applies that chiefly to them: (...). But God
tells Paul in a vision in the 8th of the Acts; that he had much people in this
city. The Apostle he spends a year and six months amongst them, preaching the
Gospel, and planting of a Church: and when from thence he ^ailed into Syria, he
left Apollos his successor for the watering of his plantation. Now in the
Church which Paul had planted, and which Apollos had watered, and which God had
blessed and given an increase unto; in the flourishing Church at Corinth, where
there were so many Christians eminent for grace, and religion, Non cuivis
contingit adire a^ire Corinthum, every one could not reach to so high a degree
of piety; yet even here there are strifes, and divisions, and tumults, (...),
one stands for Paul, and another for Apollos. Weeds they will spring up though
Paul never planted them, and though Apollos never watered them, to be sure God
he never blessed them; and yet they will find an increase. No Church so fair in
this world as to be without spot and wrinkle, none so happy as to be wholly
privileged from jarres and dissensions: even in Parradise there was (...);
only in heaven there is, (...), and Jerusalem which is above, that is a city
compacted, united within her self: Peace is within her walls; and happiness
within her palaces. Heaven's full of perfect harmony, there is music without
the least discord, but we cannot look for a Church triumphant here below. And
yet we meet with none so much blamed for strifes, and divisions as this of
Corinth: indeed the very Genius of the people strongly inclined them this way;
and though it be true that grace does not only polish and gild over nature;
(Mortality knows how to do that) but even subdue it, and change the very frame
and constitution of it: yet being that it is not wholly conquered here; it is
like 'twill show it self most in some domineering corruptions, which generally
reigned amongst them; even the Christians at Corinth are contentious; Animi
inflammati ebulliunt ad certamen: they were wholly disjoynted in affection, and
therefore the Apostle desires that they might be (...); and this is the very
time, as Hierome tells us when Episcopacy was first established in the Church;
when one said I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollos 'twas thought fit to
set some prime ruler over the rest for the better calming, and composing of
these strifes, and tum lts. And the Scholiast tells us that this Apollos
mentioned in the text was (...), the first Bishop of Corinth. Now as for the
words. I am of Paul, and I am of Apollo, even amongst expositours as well as
amongst the Corinthians there are (...); for the better clearing of them it
will not be amiss to compare them with that twin-place. 1 Cor 1. 12. Every one of
you says; you see how quickly schism had spread it self, how soon a little
leaven had leavened the whole lump. Every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I
am of Apollo, and I am of Cephas, (that is of Peter) and I am of Christ. The
Major part of interpreters will by no means yield that the Apostle blames any
such as said they were of Christ; but only complains of this, that whereas the
greatest part of them had with full voice cried up Paul and Apollo, and Peter,
only some few at length they stand for Christ; whereas all should have
challenged this honorable and glorious title of Christian to themselves* Pauci
dixerunt quod omnes dicere debuerunt, as he speaks: and one would have thought
the very name Christian should have been better able to still these stirrings
in the Church, then that of Quirites was presently to hush, and lay the
commotions in Caesar's army. Chrysostom he thinks the Apostle brings it (...),
and puts in his own voice; You indeed are for Paul, and Apollo, and Peter,
(...), I am for none but Christ: but others, and they of a very strong, and
piercing insight in the scripture, think even such may justly be blamed by the
Apostle that said they were of Christ* if they did this in a violent and
contentious way either (first) so as to exclud^ (...) others from Christ that
were not every way of their mind, or else (secondly) so as to vilify the
Ministers of Christ. For perhaps it might be spoken by some that had heard
Christ himself preach with authority and power; and for them hence to slight
Paul, and disesteem Apollos, surely this deserved a sharp, and cutting
reprehension. A fond conceit rooted in the minds of many now adays: that if
they had heard but Christ himself preach, they doubt not but they should have
believed. Blessed indeed were the eyes that saw their Savior, and the ears
that heard the gracious words that flowed out of his mouth; but yet such as
believe not Moses and the Prophets, the Apostles and Ministers sent in the name
of Christ; neither would they believe if they should hear Christ himself
preaching unto them, discovering his sweetest love, and dearest affection,
unbosoming and unboweling himself, woing and beseeching them to be reconciled
unto God. It has been well observed that we read of far more converted by the
ministry of the Apostles then by Christ himself, because he provided to
magnify the excellency of his spiritual presence above his personal. Even such
may be blamed as say they are of Christ. Now as for the other branch, I am of
Cephas, we never read of Peter's being at Corinth, it is like therefore 'twas
spoke by some Jews, that crept in amongst them, and extolled him as their
Apostle; Peter being a Minister of the circumcision, as Paul was of the
uncircumcision. And therefore the Apostle uses the name Cephas rather then
Peter; it being nomen Hebraeo-Syrum; with which the Jews were much better
acquainted. The Popish expositours they are of Cephas. Baronius, and his
troops would feign persuade us that the Apostle does not blame any such as
said they were of Cephas, no more then he does them that said they were of
Christ. Such indeed as followed Paul, and Apollos must needs be schismatics,
but such as kept themselves to the prime Bishop, and chief head of the Church
next under Christ, to Peter, these are Catholics like themselves. Others that
cannot wink so much but that they must needs see even Cephas followers come
under the Apostles reprehension: they sweat and take great pains to very
little purpose, whilst they go about to prove, that by Cephas here is not
meant Peter, but some of that name, that preached at Corinth, but who it should
be they cannot very well tell. You see how Cephas, who like his Savior was,
(...), becomes to them (...). Was Peter any better then a (...)? and does not
the argument hold as strongly? Was Cephas crucified for you? or were you
baptized into the name of Cephas? This indeed we'll easily grant, and it is by
the joint consent of all Interpreters, that under these names of Paul, and
Apollos, and Peter; there is a reprehension wisely and warily couched of such
false Apostles as were amongst them, whom Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 6. styles (...);
Words so big with Emphasis, as they hardly admit of a Translation, yet thus
that place is rendered. I was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles:
Where Paul does not speak (as it is usually taken) in respect of such as were
true Apostles, but only in reference to such as had nothing to set them out,
but lofty words of their own, (...). One would have thought (...) had been a
swelling title, and somewhat with the highest; but they in their own conceits
are (...). Paul acknowledges himself less then the least of the Apostles, and
unworthy to be called an Apostle; and yet he did (...), he might well have the
pre-eminence of them. These were they that thought to ingratiate themselves
with the Corinthians, by an outward pomp of words, and splendor of humane
wisdom* they made (...). For the Scholiasts they did (...), as Phocius, they
did monopolize the people, when as they should (...); setting out truths, in a
painted and meretricious bravery; nay, blending them with errors and humane
devices, with the crude imaginations of their own brain: And thus the Apostle
tacitly insinuates an argument, a minore admajus; If it a were a gross and
carnal thing, as no doubt but 'twas, to side with Paul that planted the Church,
and to glory in Apollos that watered it: Then much more to side with such a
false Apostle, that went about to overthrow it, and such another that meant to
extirpate it. And that the Apostle thus aims at them, it is clear out of the
4th Chapter of this Epistle, and the 6th Verse. ((...), Chrysostom:) These
things says he, have I transferred in a figure to my self, and to Apollo:
(...). Haec transtuli in faciem meam, according to the Syriack* (...); if we
would render't Hellenistically, as Heinsius tells us. These things have I
hiddenly spoke, and yet not so secretly, but that they might very well take
notice of it. But yet thus he did, that his reproof might be (...), as the
Scholiast speaks: (...) Chrysostom, a word well entertained; that he might
soften, and supple his reprehension, so as it might become a precious Oil:
that he might by no means exasperate these false Apostles; lest thus, while he
spoke against Schisms, and tumults in the Church; he might increase them which
were already, and occasion greater. And therefore, as a learned Interpreter
has well observed; it is like that they did not yet strike at the essentials,
or fundamentals of Religion; for then Paul would have more openly, and
piercingly reproved them. His words now were smoother then Oil; but then they
should have been very swords. You see the wisdom of our Apostle, and you see
the pregnancy of Scripture-sense, which in the same speech has several aims,
all full of excellent use. Paul here takes off the Corinthians from their
siding with false Apostles, and from their over-esteeming conceit which they
had of true ones. And though some take the former to be the maine drift, and
scope of the place: Yet I shall rather incline to them that rest in the latter,
as the more proper and genuine meaning of it; having more vicinity with the
letter of the Text, and being clearer out of the whole Series of the Chapter:
For what is Paul? and what is Apollo? Paul did but plant, and Apollo did but
water: 'Twas God only that gave the increase; so that he that plants is
nothing, nor he that waters; but God that gives the increase. You see how the
Apostle makes it his (...), to beat down those over-high thoughts which they
had of such as indeed deserved esteem, and double honor; of such as were
nuncii pulchri pedis, as the Hebrews love to speak. Oh, how beautiful were
their feet, that brought the glad tidings of salvation; and yet such must not
be adored, and deify'd; as if the gods had been come down amongst them, as so
many Saviors that had been crucified for them, and into whose Name they had
been baptized. Now that the Corinthians did thus glory in them, it is sure, and
that in a double respect. 1. As being baptized by them; and thus, I am of Paul,
and I am of Apollo; is as much as I am baptized by Paul, and I by Apollo; and
this was strengthened by an erroneous conceit amongst them, that the efficacy
of the Ordinance depended upon the worthiness of the Minister; Therefore Paul
in the following words tells us for his part, that he baptized very few of
them; lest they should say, that he baptized into his own name. And I find in
very good Authors, that from this time, the form of Baptism in the Greek
Church was altered: For whereas before, 'twas (...), ever since this 'twas
(...), lest they should seem to baptize into their own name. It is not for me
to question the wisdom of the Church, in altering their form: But this I am
sure, that that which we still keep, is very warrantable; while the Minister
says, I baptize thee. It Is clear, not in his own name, while he adds, as they
also did; In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
But secondly, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos; They are words of such as
gloried in the several gifts, and diversity of excellencies which they had in
preaching the Gospel, and publishing the welcome news of salvation by Christ;
and thus it is, I am Paul's disciple, and I am Apollos his. One likes the
powerful plainness of Paul, another the ample plenty, and variety of Apollos:
A third, the solidity, and perspecuity of Cephas. And here we will see as well
as we can, by those obscure vestigia which we meet withal, wherein their
several excellencies lay. And as for Paul, we find him himself yielding by way
of concession, 2 Cor. 11. 6. that he was (...), rude in speech. Although
indeed, I know not where to meet with more strong, and masculine eloquence,
then in this our Apostle; that eloquence that had (...), as Eunapius speaks;
Eloquence more fitted, and suited to the persons to whom he spoke, and the
places where he was: Yet this was that so much objected to him by those false
Apostles; that prided themselves so much in a flaunting gaudy eloquence of
their own, and esteemed Paul's preaching mere simplicity; and their followers,
even the wiser sort of the Corinthians thought it no better then foolishness,
as he himself tells us. But some of the more Christian sort amongst them, they
ran into the other extreme; and were so far in love with that as they liked
none else. He preached in a plain and a familiar way, sharply convincing the
judgment. We have these characters of Apollo in the 18th of the Acts: That he
was, 1. (...), an eloquent man. 2. (...), well skilled in the Scriptures, so
the Idiom carries it; we render't powerful in the Scriptures. 3. (...), he was
earnest in his preaching, fervent in spitit. 4. (...), he taught us accurately,
exactly; we have it diligently. 5. He did (...). As the Heathens painted their
Apollo, their god of eloquence; he had his harp, and his arrows, his sweet and
piercing expressions; there was the voice of the charmer, charming most
sweetly: and there were arrows in the hand of the mighty; happy he, for he had
his quiver full of them. I suppose he wrought chiefly upon the affections, in a
more Rhetorical manner. --

Cephas, he laid down the principles of Religion in a more Catechetical way; he
opened the Scriptures, and discovered a treasure of heavenly wisdom in every
iota of holy writ. Such places, as he in his Epistle calls (...), he laid them
(...), that I may borrow the expression in the Hebrews, and so he was more for
the enlightening, and information of the mind. Peter, he unsheathed the sword
of the Spirit; Apollos* he flourish't, and brandish't the glittering sword;
Paul, he strikes with it, and pierces to the dividing asunder of the joints,
and marrow; and to the discerning of the very thoughts and intentions of the
heart: And though these here say no more, then I am of Paul, and I am of
Apollos: Abrupt language will serve their turn; it is enough they can express
their minds; Yet no doubt, but some of the Corinthians could spin out their
thoughts into a fairer thread, and thus one might speak for Paul. --

What, did you never hear Paul preach? Did you never see him weeld those
weapons of his warfare, which are not carnal; but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of the strong holds of Satan, and to the beating down every high,
and towering imagination; which advances it self against the knowledge of
Christ, and captivating it into the obedience of Jesus Christ? Oh how he
speaks, as if he were within a man; as if he supplied the place of conscience!
He has a window into the breast; he opens the window, and darts in a beam of
irresistible light; Which though vain man may seek to imprison in
unrighteousness, and thus become the jaylour of Truth: Yet as the light for a
while, shut up in a cloud; easily breaks prison, and shows his glorious face
to all beholders: So the Truth discovers it self, will set it self at liberty;
and he, when he sees his prisoner loose, like that other jaylour in the Acts;
falls down, and amazed, cries out, Sirs, What shall I do to be saved? It Is hard
to imprison so strong a light. Cephas indeed preaches very well, and soundly:
And Apollos perhaps with more elegancy of expression, and greater discovery of
affection; but give me the convincing strength of Paul, who though he be rude
in speech, yet he comes in the very evidence, and demonstration of the Spirit;
as for me, I am of Paul.

Another he is for Apollos. It Is true Paul preaches very powerfully, and so does
Cephas very profitably; but yet me thinks none so movingly as Apollo. Oh did
you see with what a sweet facility he slides into his hearers? O how with a
happy fluence he insinuates himself into them? Oh did you see how (...) and
(...) met together, how sweetness and violence kissed each other? Did you
mind with what a holy variety he refresh't his hearers, and how he led
affection by the hand, which way he pleased? One while he dippes each word in a
tear; another while he steeps every phrase in honey now he breaths out flames,
that he may thaw a frozen generation; by and by he speaks in a silken Dialect;
and clothes his speech with the soft raiments of a more pleasant eloquence. If
he flames in terrors you would think the Pulpit a mount Sina, nothing but
thundering, and lightening, and the voice of the Trumpet; so that the people
exceedingly quake and tremble. If he breath out peace, and open the bowels of
mercy, if he display the riches of reconciliation in Christ, why now it becomes
a mount of Olives, nothing but peace and sweetness, and a gentle air. Christ
is seen in the mount, now his doctrine drops as the rain, and his speech
distilleth as the dew: as the soft rain upon the tender herbs* and as the
showers upon the grass, Heavenly Apollo! How is my soul taken with thy
powerful eloquence? O that I might for ever live under so happy a Ministry.
Let whose will be for Paul, I am for Apollo. A third he is for Cephas.

For my part, I like Paul well enough: neither can there be much fault found
with Apollo: but yet none pleases me so well as Cephas. O how does he explain
the Oracles of God, and unriddle the mysteries of salvation? O how does he
stoop to the lowest capacity, and feed us with the sincere milk of the word
that we may grow thereby? how does he come with line upon line, drop upon drop,
precept upon precept, here a little, and there a little? O how does he unvaile,
and ^nmaske heavenly truths; so as each eye may see their beauty, and every
soul become enamoured with them? What a luster does he set upon the pearl of
price,; so as one would willingly part with all they have for the purchasing of
it? Let others follow Paul, and admire Apollo: I am sure I profit by none so
much as by Peter; I am of Cephas.

You see here the Corinthians vanity, and in it our propensity to glory in men,
and that because we are carnal, which brings us to the Apostles censure painted
with a stinging interrogation, Are ye not carnal? (...), nonne homines estis?
So the vulgar Latin, it seems that makes it equivalent to be men, and to be
carnal; indeed there is but little difference, Paul himself calls it in the
former verse (...). Nonne corporejestis? So the Syriack has it, as it is
usually translated, Don't you seem to be all body, to have nothing of a soul in
you, nothing of a more refined part, whilst you thus judge only according to
outward appearance? and so I suppose (...) is a degree below (...), and yet he
savours not the things of God* But the force of the Original there reaches
further; even to this Nonne cadaverosi estis? as the word (...), from whence it
springs, plainly shows. Carnal men they are dead in trespasses, and sins
((...), as Lucian calls old men) though they esteem it their only life, as he
sings Vivamus m^a Lesbia.

But here it is to be took in a more candid sense; for the Apostle speaks to
such as were regenerate, and in the state of grace; to such as were (...), he
himself calls them babes in Christ, so that here it is meant either (first) have
not you such gross apprehensions as carnal men use to have? or else (secondly)
are not ye carnal in this? and thus the most refined, and spiritualized
Christian is gross, and carnal in part. In the best soul there are schisms
and divisions, even here and there are (...), as the Moralist: Every one has a
double self, an Antagonist within himself We use to call a friend Alter ego;
but here the (...) is the greatest enemy. This Plato means when he tells us of
his (...). It Is like they reached no further then the rebellion of the
sensitive soul against the rational, the struggling of reason with appetite: But
we know of a nearer, and so a sharper conflict between the flesh, and the
Spirit in the regenerate, the fight's described at large by our Apostle in the
seventh to the Romans; and this is that which a Christian so much groans
under; as Porphyr^ says of Plotinus, that he so lived, (...)* we find it true
in St. Paul, when he cries out, O who will deliver me from this body of death!
(...). But I shall let this pass as not being formally in the text, but only
virtually there, and by just consequence might be deduc't from it* as many the
like observations also might: and we will look upon the several aggravations in
these words: Are ye not carnal? (first) You, that for time, and means might
have been spiritual; (...), as he in the Greek Epigram calls out to Lycurgus,
that cut down so many vines because they brought forth too much fruit, the
blood of the grapes which he thought too generous; he speaks to him that he
would be pleased to cut down his, because it brought forth none at all. What
could they have done more to yours then they have done? and when they looked
for grapes, do you bring forth wild grapes, full of sowrenesse and
bitterness, nothing but strife, and contention? is this the fruit of Paul's
planting, and Apollo's watering? Nay how can they gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles! You that have drunk in the rain, which so often fell upon
you; do you now bring forth nothing but briers and thorns* (...), or else you
may look for the terrible curse upon the fig tree, Never fruit grow on thee
more. Is this your best improvement of your so many precious, and golden
opportunities? have you thus learned Christ? has the bright Sunshine of the
Gospel beamed out so strongly, and gloriously upon you, and cannot it so much as
warm your affections? while you thus neglect and abuse the means of grace,
aro you not carnal?

2. You that would seem to be spiritual, are ye not carnal? What Is become of
your fair shows, and promising out*sides, and specious professions! are they
vanished into this nothing, or worse then nothing! are our budding hopes so
soon blasted, and do your forward resolutions so quickly languish? You that
would have counted it an injury not to be thought Christians, and members of
the Church, what do you mean to tear and rend the body in pieces? You that
would have been looked upon as living stones, fit to build God an house, an
habitation for the God of Jacob, do you now go about to demolish so fair a
structure, and to bring into the temple the noise of axes, and hammers? You
that would have been thought sharers in the communion of Saints, and to have
had a chief part in that Spiritual consort, do you now put all out of tune by
your strifes, and dissensions? while you show no better fruits then these, what
ever you seem to be, are ye not carnal?

3. Some of you that are truly spiritual, yet here in this, are ye not carnal?
(...); who has bewitched you, O Corinthians! that having begun in the Spirit,
you should end in the flesh? You that are reconciled to a God of peace, and
redeemed by a Savior that breathed out nothing but love: You that are
sanctified and sealed by a Spirit of unity, and have embraced a Gospel of peace
in all meekness and subjection of mind, laying down your weapons of defiance:
why do yo now resist the goodness of so gracious a God, and kick against the
bowels of so sweet a Savior? why do you grieve the holy Spirit, and disgrace
the Gospel, as if that taught you to be contentious? nay you that know that
'twas the hand of omnipotency that plucked you out of the jaws of hell, and
destruction; and how 'twas not in the power of man or angel to unfetter you of
the least corruption; you that know how jealo^s God is of his honor, and how
he takes it more hainously to be robbed of it by his own people; whilst you
now attribute all to men, as if they were the authors, and finishers of your
faith, are ye not carnal?

4 Even in that which you think your selves spiritual, are ye not carnal?
Perhaps you think you honor Paul, and reverence Apollo, and give due respect
to the Ministers; but know that they are the friends of the bridegroom, and
would have presented virgin-souls unto Christ and whilst you dote upon other
loves, and fix your thoughts on inferior objects, you break Paul's heart, and
discourage Apollo in his labor. Paul took you for his crown, and joy; but you
prove no better then a crown of thorns, and pierce him through with many
sorrows. Paul called you his epistle, but you prove his blot, and now me thinks
you should correct your own thoughts, and even acknowledge your selves carnal.

5. In all this I appeal to your selves; Are ye not carnal? Be your own judges;
collect your thoughts together; consider it but with a serious, and composed
spirit: carry your selves to the rule, to the law, and to the testimony; see
whether this be to be carnal or no, if you deny it, why thus you will prove your
selves carnal, and more carnal then we hope you are: No question but you are
carnal. And thus much may serve for clearing of the text. We Will now sum up
the words together, and then they will amount to this proposition.

That it is a gross and carnal thing to glory in the worthiuesse, and
excellencies of them that dispense the Mysteries of salvation. And (first) as
it seeks to eclipse and obscure the glory of God. Nam ea est conditio
imperandi, ut non aliter ratio constet, quam si uni reddatur. God has taken
all means for the brightning of his own Crown* and he that dares set it upon a
creatures head; he that goes about to rest the golden Scepter out of Gods own
hand, and to place a creature in his Throne, must needs be reus laesae
Majestatis in a high degree. Nobis obsequii gloria relicta est. As he in the
forenamed Historian told his Emperor, though a cruel Tyrant; this is all the
honor left to us, and it is enough to be wholly subject to so great and good a
God, and to give all the glory unto him. Let not then the Wiseman glory in his
wisdom; no neither let others glory in his wisdom, for it is gross Idolatry
to attribute that to man which is due to God, to make them (...) which at the
best are but (...), even these idols are nothing. Now God that made us, and
knows our mold and fashion, the weakness and frailty of our nature; how we use
to pore upon the immediate agent, as present to our senses, and obvious to our
apprehensions; though far inferior, and of a more ignoble being, as wholly
dependant upon a higher cause: he therefore chose to himself so weak an
instrument, as we could not possibly imagine, that that should have sufficient
influence, for the producing of so great an effect; as that by the few words of
a weak frail man, a precious, and an immortal soul should be eternally saved,
which most make a greater work then that of the creation; that so we might be
necessitated to look higher to the powerful hand of God that brings so great
things to pass. And this is his usual method, and manner of dealing. Thus has
he chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise: and it is plain
as they tell us in Optics that (...) non sunt acuti visus, they give the
reason, propter radios in illis dispersos magis et dissipatos: Men of vast
intellectuals, of very fair eyes (...) they do but (...) in spirituals; they
have some broken and scattered notions, which cannot represent heavenly truths
in their proper s^ecies: when as some of a less eye, oh how quick and piercing
are they into these holy mysteries, and such as are dimme-sighted in Philosophy
become eagle-eyed in Divinity. Chrysostom tells us of two in his time, a
Greek, and a Christian, that were very hot in dispute, whether Paul, or Plato,
were the better scholar. The Christian he amplifies St. Paul's wisdom, and
excellency, the Greek scorns him, as rude and simple, and his writings not
comparable to Platoes Philosophical, and lofty style. The father he comes as
'twere to moderate; and when he had magnified St. Paul's learning, he seems to
chide the Christian, that he did not yield the other what he would have. Grant
indeed that Paul came in a more plain, and unlearned way, (...).

Nothing tended more to the advancement of the Gospel, to the stopping of their
mouths, then the consideration of this, that a few weak men by the
foolishness of preaching; the preaching of a crucified Savior confounded the
grand (...) of the world, and more prevailed upon the hearts of men, though
prepossest with contrary principles, then ever they could do with all their
wisdom: For an handful of naked impotent men, to conquen an whole host of
armed champions. These are (...), as he there speaks. Alas Moses Atticissant
had a veil upon his face, and (...) could not see into so divine a mystery;
nay, God has chosen the (...), the mere* Non-entia of the world, to bring to
naught the things that are. A strange Paradox, and enough to amaze an
Aristotle, to hear of a Non Ens annihilating an Ens; and yet no principle
surer, or clearer in all his Metaphysics, if it be took in this spiritual
meaning: and that because, God has chosen the things which are not at all in
men's apprehensions; and of a very thin, and weak being in themselves, He has
chosen these to bring to naught the things that are: That thus his power may be
the more eminent in their weakness, and his Majesty shine more gloriously in
their contemptiblenesse. God could have clothed some bright Seraphim with light
as with agarment, and sent him to have sparkled out Divinity amongst us. He
could have made his Angels (...), even in this sense ministering Spirits, for
the good of them that should have been heirs of salvation; But then, we should
have been took up too much with the glittering of the creatures, and our eyes
dazeled with their brightness. God therefore has made these Stars, even of
the first magnitude to disappear, that the Son may be all in all. He has hid
the Pearl in a shell, and shut up his treasure (...): by an infinite
condescension he speaks to us by Moses; and thus delivers the Gospel too by the
hand of a Mediator. He has sent us men (...) Paul, and Apollo, and these
fishers of men they came not with their silken line, and their golden hook;
with the enticing words of man's wisdom, as they do that go about (...); no,
they lay down the naked simplicity of the Gospel. Paul does but plant, and
Apollos does but water; and God is pleased by so weak means, in so plain a way,
to bring about his own glorious ends. Ipsum coelum stultitia p^timus, in a
better sense then e're the Poet meant it; even by this foolishness of
Preaching. Why then do you gaze on Paul, and glory in Apollos; as if 'twere
Paul's great parts that raised the Gospel, and Apollos eloquence that set it
off? What Is this, but to oppose the Almighty, and to counterplot wisdom it
self? God took this as a main way for the advancing of his glory, and you
make it (as much as in you lies) wholly derogatory from it; and judge you,
whether this be to be carnal or no. (...). Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us;
but unto thy Name be given the glory.

2. It is carnal, as it takes from the word of God, from its innate strength,
and excellency; from its divine Majesty, and Royalty.

1. From its strength, and excellency. The Gospel shines with its own beams,
and need not borrow light from Paul, nor luster from Apollo: When God has once
writ with his own finger upon the Tables of stone, they need then no humane
polishing; and the Gospel is very gloriously clothed with such ornaments as
Christ has put upon it. The Image of God stamped upon the word, and this
superscription is that which has made it so current, and all other writings to
be but (...) in comparison of it. And in the plain preaching of the word, what
a force and energy goes along with it: This is the voice of the Lord so
powerful. that brings down the loftiest Cedars in Lebanon, and crusheth the
strongest Oaks in Bashan. Man's eloquence does but weaken, and soften the
voice; and whilst 'twould make it more pleasant, makes it less powerful. That
which Plutarch tells us of the Spartans, who for brevity were wont to speak as
'twere in characters, and sentences in puncto; and for the weightinesse of
speech, they spoke in the lump, and massy sentences; he says of them, (...);
it is true here, Verbum Dei est sine cortice; it is all pith and strength, (...),
as he there goes on, it is edged into efficacy. God himself has been pleased
to whet his sword; and as the Lacedemonian, when he was asked whether his sword
was sharp* or no; replied that 'twas (...), sharper then a calumny. It Is like
his sword was not so sharp as his expression; but to be sure this two-edged
sword, as it is (...), so it is (...), it can pierce through all oppositions, cut
asunder the contradictions of men, the most Gordian knots, the most nodosum
ingenium, as he calls Tiberius: but then the quickening power of the Spirit
must go along with it, as that famous Captain when he had lost his sword; he
told his enemies, 'twas not so much the sword, as the arm; unless the arm of
the Lord be revealed, there is none will believe our report, unless this
formative virtue go along with it; instead of (...), it becomes but (...). Our
Apostle in the second Chapter of this Epistle, tells us of a demonstration of
the Spirit; Now (...) (as he has it) is (...), the native gloss of truth,
which clearly shows it, and presently convinces a man; there is no disputing
against a domonstration. The word that evidences it self, and the Ministers
they may strongly persuade; but unless the Spirit demonstrate, the soul has
never complete satisfaction; and the Spirit that may save extraordinarily
without the Word, but the Word cannot possibly save without the Spirit: But if
this accompany it; O then, there is a glorious Twinlight springing from them
both; and irradiating the soul with powerful, and enlivening beams arising
with healing under its wings. O then, the sword of the Lord, and of Gideon
conquer most victoriously, and then there is none able to withstand it; though
like Mars himself, he be tunica tectus adamantina, and though this be in the
hand of the weakest messenger; he that will resist it, must (...), and such a
one has no great hope of victory, but he must fall down with Saint Paul's
Idiot; and cry out, Surely God is in you of a truth. Why then do ye attribute
all to Paul, and ascribe the glory to Apollo; as if the word were a dead
letter, till quickened by Paul; and an empty breath, unless animated by
Apollo: as if Paul did not only plant, but bless; and Apollo, not only (...),
but (...); Et Deus interim nihil faceret. He stood as a spectator all the
while; when as indeed, Paul is but at the best, Echo Domini; he reflects the
sound of the Gospel, the Echo that never speaks till it be spoken to: What I
have received from the Lord, that deliver I unto you, and not as that does
dimidiata verba; no, he acquaints you with the whole will and counsel of God.
And Apollo is but as Aristole calls a servant. (...); he is Cythara Dei, strung
and tuned by him, touched by his Spirit, and then making a most sweet and
graceful melody. Paul may spend his strength in vain; and Apollo may stretch
out his hand all the day long to a gainsaying, and disobedient people. Peter
himself may toil all night, and catch nothing: Men of most rare
accomplishments, and of indefatigable industry may spend all their days, and
not save a soul; and others of far weaker abilities, may add daily to the
Church such as shall be saved. God by his secret judgment may blast the
labors of the one, because men glory too much in them; and by his goodness he
may give increase to the other, because he has more glory by them. This we are
sure, it is the same word preached by Paul, and by other his fellow laborers;
and the Spirit breaths when it pleases, and blows where it lists. And though
these here had some more plausible excuse for their siding with Paul, and
glorying in Apollo, as men furnished with extraordinary gifts, and the blessing
of the Spirit in those primitive times, accompanying their labors in a more
thankful manner; yet you hear the Apostles sharp reproof of them, even for
this; are ye not carnal? But then

2. As it takes from the Majesty of the Word. Is it fit that the word of God
should stoop to man's fancy? Why, here is Paul and Apollo, men of admirable
endowments, and of most exact holiness preaching the same Gospel; and yet it is
embraced by some, when coming from one; and neglected, when published by
another. It is the same truth, but not in the same dress: It is a sign, they
never received the love of the truth; plain truth will not please them, it must be
set out in such attire, as may best satisfy their eye; though sometimes not
becoming the purity of Fox.
so chaste a Virgin. This Lumen siccum (as he speaks) does parch and offend many
men's soft natures. And though no doubt but Paul, and Apollo deny their own
excellencies, and become wholly subservient to the Gospel; yet even in them
they find somewhat to prefer one before the other. And unless the word of
God were, as the Jews tell us of the Manna, though very fabulously, (yet we
have the same in the Apocrypha in the 16th of Wisdom; that whatsoever
Character, or Idea of taste a man shaped to himself in his fancy when he was
eating the Manna, as most pleasant and delightful to him; it served to the
appetite of the eater, and was tempered to every ones liking:) unless the word
of God had so many several relishes, agreeable to every ones liking: Even
this, though Angels food shall be loathed, and nauseated, and surely this
argues a carnal Spirit. Must the (...) bow to you? and the Gospel of the
Kingdom become so basely serviceable, as to do homage to your lusts? Must that
word which should search the Conscience tickle the fancy, and feed a worm of
curiosity that never dies? What are these but as Plutarch calls inquisitive
delatours (...), or in the Apostles phrase, men of itching cares, that catch
more after an elegancy then after a promise, and are better pleased with a
criticisme then with a practical truth. You know whose speech 'twas, Pruritus
disputandi est Ecclesiae scabies. We Will mould it a little to our purpuse,
pruritus aurium est animae scabies. It Is carnal, as it takes from the word of
God, from the strength of it, from the majesty of it.

3. (Which is the maine Argument urged by our Apostle) as it breeds ruptures in
the Church, schisms, and divisions, which

First, Hinder the communion of Saints: For all communion flows from union,
and division takes that away. Some go about to make unity the very form of
being; to be sure, it tends much to the well-being of the Church. Oh how happy,
and pleasant a thing it is to see the Churches children spreading themselves
like Olive-branches round about her table in a peaceable, and flourishing
manner! But when they shall (...), (as he speaks) think that the brightness of
their Brethrens condition, does but obscure, and shadow theirs; and thus (...),
(as he most elegantly,) if there be the least ansa or occasion of strife,
Passion presently hooks it in, and is too apprehensive. When one shall say, I
am of Calvin, and another, I am of Luther; when as they might both meet in the
Name of Christian; nay, when by most ridiculous dissension (for we have heard
of such a (...)) when one shall say, I am of Martin, and another, I am of
Luther; whereas they did but divide Martin Luther, for they were both of his
Religion; what must this needs bring, but a deformity, and confusion upon the
face of the Church, a (...) enough to make up a Chaos.

Secondly, These Schisms, and Divisions, they stop the progress of the
Gospel. If Christians would but take the Moralists counsel (...), to spend,
and derive their malice some other way; as civil wars are often quenched by
setting upon some common enemy: this was always the Cretians custom, and from
thence 'twas called Syncretismus; If we could hear of some happy
Synchristianismus, when the hearts, and tongues, and pens of all them that
profess the same faith in sincerity, would agree amongst themselves, and
wholly oppose the main adversary: If we had not such narrow, and contracted
souls; if God would be pleased to give us a larger heart, so as every one would
become a (...), wholly let go his private aims, and study the public good;
what might not united forces do? How quickly would all difficulties vanish;
every mountain become a plain, the seven hills amongst the rest? And the goodly
fabric of the Church would go up with the shoutings, and acclamations of
Grace, Grace, and quickly be at the top of its spiritual glory. O how should
every one with the consideration of so happy a time have (...), as Eunapius
speaks most elegantly; a sweet Chorus of well tuned affections, and a spirit
tripudiating for joy, as Abraham did (...), when he foresaw Christ's day, though
that were afar off, and this near at hand.

Thirdly, Schisms, and Divisions give great advantage to the enemies, and set
up the kingdom of Satan, the Prince of the Air. The Church thus becomes
militant against her self, and the enemy becomes triumphant. The devil danceth
at discord; and as St Chrysostom observes, when he heard that so goodly, and
populous a City as this of Corinth, (...) was like to entertain the Gospel; he
knew no better way to hinder the success of it, then by presently planting a
spirit of discord amongst them; as well knowing, that a Kingdom divided
against it self, could not long stand. And all his agents that are subordinate
to him, nihil spei nisi per discordias ^abent, as Tacitus says notably of some
in his time; and as he of others, they do per abrupta inclarescere, sed in
nullum Reipublicae commodum. We might learn more wisdom of them that are wiser
in their generation, then the children of light; what a strict union and
confederacy have they among themselves, as that in Job is usually allegorized:
These seals of the Leviathan are shut together, as with a close seal, in
respect of their secrecy, and combinings; and if they chance to be at variance,
and jarre amongst themselves, they have a sure way of meeting, and
reconciliation by a joint opposing of the Church. But then as it gives this
general advantage, so more specially, as it is the Original of all errors, and
the inlet of all heresies. When men by a strange (...) shall set up some one as
an oracle, and perpetual Dictatour in Divinity; If such a one broach an error,
O how greedily do they drink it as if 'twere pure Nectar, some saving truth!
when at the best it is but the poison of aspes, a deadly, and desperate error.
The devil thus serves them as Agrippina did Claudius; he mingles poison in
their delicate meat, and they fall to 't with an appetite. As that great
Scholar has well observed; they were always learned men, which have been
haereticorum Coryphaei: So withal they have been such, as by some deceitful
carriages have won the hearts, and esteem of men, and thus could spread their
infection farther. And though it is true, that Paul, and Apollo here mentioned
in the Text, were in a manner priviledg'd persons, acted by an extraordinary
spirit; no fear of this in them: yet some that are admired as much, or more
then ever they were; we cannot tell how to secure them from it. And this is the
third respect why it is carnal to glory in men, because it breeds Schisms and
Divisions in the Church, which hinder the communion of Saints; stop the
progress of the Gospel; give great advantage to the enemies, they being bolder
to oppose, and that being weaker to resist* and then in a more special way,
it is laid open to all errors, and heresies.

Fourthly, As it draws evil out of good; and surely this if any thing else
argues a carnal Spirit. Gods attributes shine very gloriously, his wisdom and
power more especially and eminently in extracting good out of evil; the least
touch of providence turns all to gold, even sins that seems to be all
dross, a mere obliquity, a transgression of the law; yet even this by the
overruling hand of an infinitely wise God, becomes a clear illustration of his
glory, and the crucifying of the LORD of Life, shall tend to the salvation of
the Church: And a Christian thus far participates of the divine Nature, as that
he can draw good out evil too, sweetness out of the worst condition, and gain
strength by his corruptions. What then, must it needs show but a divelish, and
envenomed spirit, that assimilates to it self, to t^rne every thing to poison,
and this is the nature of corruption. Every thing that a carnal man touches,
is defiled; he soyles every Ordinance, and discolours every blessing* turns
the grace of God into wantonness, he fights against God with his own weapons,
with his most precious favors, (...), by a most strange Chemistry; he extracts
dross out of the purest refined gold; ^^legme out of quintessence; dregs out
of the purest spirits; a savor of death from that which breaths out nothing
but life, and happiness. It Is clear in the Text. What a choice and
magnificent gift was this a (...), to adorn the Church with all variety of
excellencies? These made up the (...), they are the Needle-worke in the Spouses
Garment, the opus ocellatum, Gods (...), I and his (...) abundantly displayed
themselves in them: These were the Donaria which Christ gave at his Triumph;
when he led captivity captive, he have gave gifts unto men. And see what use,
and improvement they make of them. O how quickly do they become (...). Strifes
and Divisions, Bitterness and Contention, these are the best fruits they
gather from so great a mercy. They that glory in some excellencies, vili^ie
meaner; nay, they vilify choice ones too: For such as glory in Paul, slight
Apollo; and such as admire Apollo, disesteem Paul, and both rend the Church in
pieces. Do you thus requite the LORD, O ungrateful People, and unwise? (...).
Lucian though an Atheist, could say so much. No gift coming from above is so
mean, as to be despised, none so great, as to be gloried in. Me thinks the
diversity of gifts in several men, has some resemblance with the diversity of
colors in several bodies. Some bodies you see are clothed (...), in bright,
and orient colors. Nature took a Sunbeam for her Pensil, and flowrish't them
most gloriously; they have (...), as the Philosopher speaks, a greater
collection, and condensation of light, and are varnish't over: other sullen,
and discontented bodies in sad, and dusky colors, drawn with a coal (...).
Now the brightest colors they have aliquid umbrae; and the darkest they have
aliquid lucis. And some bodies they are content with one color; others have a
pleasant variety, and are set out with a rich Embroidery. See the same in the
excellencies of the mind: These (...), these interni colores, as I may so call
them; which are divine light, severally distributed unto souls, where some
have a fairer gloss set upon them, a twinkling, and glittering soul, all
bespangled with light: others have more sad, and darke-coloured spirits. Now
the brightest they have somewhat of a cloud; darkness and imperfection enough
to take them off from boasting; and the darkest they have somewhat of a beam,
some light, and excellency; enough to keep them from discouragement. Some are
apparently eminent in one gift, others have variety of colors, (...), animam
variegatam. They that glory in some one excellency; what do they but as if a
man should refuse to look only upon some one color most pleasant to him; when
as all are suitable to the eye, though some more delightful. All those tend to
the beauty of Nature, and all these to the beauty of Holiness. Every one that
is serviceable to the Temple, is not a Bezaleel and Aholiab, cunning to work in
gold; and many that can build up the Temple, yet know not how to carve it. That
which Philostratus has in the life of Apollonius, may be moraliz'd into very
good counsel, (...). Etiam Analecta deorum sunt colligenda; the least gift to
be received with a most thankful acknowledgement, a (...) (as Eunapius calls a
mean Scholar) a drop of Helicon, even that is precious; It is a notable speech
of one of our Prelates, I think it honor enough to be vouchsafed to bring but
one pin to the decking up of Christ's Spouse, whilst others adorn her with her
costly Robes, and rich Medals. And thus it is carnal to glory in men, as it
draws evil out of good.

We should now spend a word or two in reference to Paul, and Apollo, that they
would disclaim all glory, and ascribe it unto God. I know they did so; but I
speak of such as have the like gifts, and excellencies: as Paul here in the
Text, he chides the Corinthians for siding with him, and glorying in him;
whilst one says, I am of Paul, etc. and this is the most likely way to take
them off from their vanity, when they shall see such a one as they glory in;
not lightly, but sharply reproving them for it: and then in a real way men
should so aim at the glory of God, as that wholly denying their own aims, and
excellencies; all the world may see, that they only seek the advancement of the
Gospel. And this should be done in a suitable way, chiefly improving that
excellency which God has entrusted them withal, and in a proportionable way;
for to whom much is given, of them much is required. As God does (...),
dispense his gifts in proportion; so he looks for an improvement of them
according to a geometrical proportion. Two men may give up their account, the
one that has done less good with greater joy, because he did answerable to his
Talent; when as the other entrusted with some golden, and precious excellency,
may have done more good; but yet nothing so proportionable to his ability. But
if men would thus lay out themselves, and unite their several gifts* and
excellencies in one general aim, and faithfully improve them for the advantage
of their Master, and good of their fellow servants (which is a thing sull of
reason, and equity, as might be showed at large;) what glorious times should we
then see? How would knowledge begin to cover the face of the Earth, as Waters
do the Sea? How would the Tree of Knowledge be so laden with fruit, as that
'twould stoop down, and children might pick off the Apples that were ready to
drop into their mouths? How would the world become (as he speaks) terebratus,
and patens; full of fair windows, and goodly prospects, and all gilded over
with light? And we should walk from strength to strength, till we appeared
before GOD in Glory.

THE ACT OF Oblivion.
ISAIAH 43. 25 I, even I am he that blot out thy transgressions for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy sins.


EVery Promise is a breast full of Consolation, that would feign be drawn: and
as Job speaking of the breasts, calls them very elegantly, the milk-pales of
the breast, they are as it were Carnea Mulctralia; So there are the Evangelica
Mulctralia, receptacles of that (...) which is stored up for Babes in Christ,
where the thirsty soul may come and fill it self with most precious sweetness.
In the whole Word of God there is most sincere milk; but the Promises they are
the cream, the flos lactis, the purest and sweetest of all.

Here Is one of the Vtres coelestes, a bottle filled with heavenly dew, which
will never fail like that of Hagars; but cherish the soul, till it come to a
well of life. Here Is a pure emanation of Gods sweetest love, which would fain
communicate it self to a sinful creature; and therefore puts on the most
amiable expressions that the wisdom of God himself can cloth it withal, while
he breathes out free grace by the mouth of his Prophet to a disobedient and
rebellious Israel, and beseeches them to be reconciled unto him.

And if you look but upon the foregoing words, you will wonder how this Verse
should come in; it is somewhat a strange context, an unusual kind of coherence.
For God there complains by his Prophet, how that his people of Israel had done
nothing at all for him; He took them indeed for his pleasant plant, but they
were a very barren and ungrateful plant; He had made them a choice and a
spreading plant, but not one delicious cluster to be found upon them. In the
verse immediately before, Thou have bought me no sweet Cane with money; it is
meant of that Cane which was to be a chief ingredient into the precious
ointment, as you may see in Exodus 30. The Septuagint they render it (...);
Neither have thou made me to drink the fat of thy sacrifices; or as the words
flow in the fountain, (...) Thou have not moystened me abundantly with thy
sacrifices: Not that the Jews did neglect these duties of Gods worship, which
were so strictly enjoined them in the Law; no, they were very punctual and
accurate in observing that; but the force of the complaint lies in this, thou
did them not unto me; For

1. Thou did them not with that alacrity and cheerfulness of spirit which I
required of thee, and might well expect from thee. Love should have dropped oil
into the wheels, and thy ^oul should have moved like the chariots of Amminadab,
with a nimble spontaneity; but thou went on heavily, and lookedst upon my
service as an hard task and yoke, more intolerable then that of Egypt.

2. Thou trustedst in thy legal performances, and thought to be justified by
thine own righteousness; thou did them not for those ends which I aimed at,
for I intended only to raise thy thoughts higher to that great salvation which
I had stored up for thee in the Messiah.

3. Thou did them not to me, for many of thy sacrifices were offered up to
idol-gods; thou did not make me taste of them; I but thou did make them
drunk with them; thou did even cloy and ^urfet them with the fat of thy
sacrifices.

4. Thou did them not to me, while thou restedst in a fair flourish of
outward formality, and thou thought to put me off with a mock-worship, with
a mere outside and surface of devotion; in giving me a shell, and nothing of
the kernel: Thou could sin against me when thou list, and then thought to
appease me with a sacrifice. They were white as milk, and ruddier then rubies,
in their glorious profession, but within they were blacker then a coal; When
you fasted, did you fast unto me? I hate your burned offerings, my soul
nauseates your solemn assemblies; (...), Bring me no more vain oblations; Odi
Danaos and dona ferentes. He that will be my servant, let him seal up every
spiritual service with integrity of heart. A pure soul that is the only present
fit for a God, (...), a gift that may be united to God himself, as Hierocles
speaks; Sacrifices and burnt-offerings he would not have, then thou should
have said; Lo, I come, to do thy will, O my God. Thou should have presented
thy self a living and a reasonable sacrifice; for without this, all others were
no better then (...) ignis pabulum, as the Pythagorean has it; A sincere
spirit that should have been (...), Thou did not make me to drink the fat
of thy sacrifices. Well, but they stay not here; Thou have made me to serve
with thy sins, and thou have wearied me with thine iniquities; thou have made
me to serve with thy sins; that is either

1. Thou have so abused my patience, and long sufferance; and has heap't sin
upon sin, as if I had been a very servant, that was bound to endure all these
thine iniquities; Or else

2. It is a more prophetical passage looking upon Christ, who took upon him the
form of a servant, and bore our sins in his body upon the tree; And thus the
Septuagint.

3. Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, whilst thou do these things
under a show of strict holiness, and care of pleasing me, by virtue of my law
in reference to my command; as a peculiar people that served an holy God, and
had righteous laws; and yet while thou neglectedst the more weighty things
that I require of thee, thou do dishonor my Name, and wrong my Law, and
degenerate from those noble Principles that I had planted in thee. For what
will the Heathen say; that I am a God that delight in the blood of bulls and
goats, and give thee liberty in other things to do what thou list? Thou have
made me to serve with thy sins. And consider what a strong indignity this is
offered to the great God of Heaven and Earth to make him a servant, and then to
serve sin which he so much hates and abhorres, that he cannot endure to look
upon it, as that which strikes at his very being; Thou have made me to serve
with thy sins. And thou have wearied me with thine iniquities; All outward
performances though never so pompous, they do but weary Almighty God, unless
they flow from a sincere spirit: They thought they had pleased him with
sacrifices; but he tells them, they weary him with iniquities. And see here how
the mighty God of Jacob, the Rock of ages; Omnipotency it self is weary; he is
press't with sins, and wearied with iniquities. Well, what follows upon all
this? I, even I am he that blot out thine iniquities for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy sins. Surely Israel could not look for this in the next
verse. It must needs come in, (...). One would have thought it should have been,
I, even I am he, that will revenge these thine iniquities: Thou have made me to
serve with thy sins, and I Will make thee to serve with my plagues; Thou have
wearied me with thine iniquities, and I Will weary thee with my judgments: Mine
indignation shall flame out against thee, and I Will pour out the dregs of my
wrath upon thee; it is I, even I am he, that will set thy sins in order
before thee. One would have thought it should have run thus; but God, he comes
in the still voice, I, even I am he, that blot out thine iniquities. Thou have
made me to serve with thy sins, and I Will make thee a servant to my self: Thou
have wearied me with thine iniquities, and I Will load thee with my mercies: Thou
have blotted out my Testimonies, and I Will blot out thine iniquities: Thou have
not remembered my Covenant, and I Will not remember thy sins. Thus does Gods
goodness contend with a sinful Nation, thus does he conquer rebellion, and
triumph over sin. Indeed his very drift is to make a glorious illustratiou of
freegrace; and therefore he first discovers his peoples sin, and then displayes
his own mercy. He first shows you Isreal's stiff neck and iron sinew, and then
opens his own tender bowels, and dearest compassions; He bids you take notice
of the blackness of the Etheopian, and then tells you how white he will make
him. He would have you consider well the deep die, the bloody die of the Scarlet,
and then see it become as white as snow. Look upon the vastness of the
Egyptian^ Army, and see them all drowned in a Red Sea. Cast a sad eye upon a
large volume of iniquity, and behold them all blotted out in a moment. The
sinfulness of sin sets a glorious luster upon freegrace; when sin becomes
exceeding sinful, then grace becomes exceeding glorious. I, even I am he, that
blot out thine iniquities. There Is much Emphasis in redoubling the words, and
it stills many objections that might rise up in a wavering soul. And

1. I, even I, whom thou have offended: For what might the distrusting soul
object and say; Is it thou O God, that wilt blot out mine iniquities? It is thy
sacred Majesty, which I have provoked; and it is thy glorious Name which I have
profain'd; it is thy righteous Law which I have violated; and it is thy Covenant
which I have broken; and is it thou, G God, that wilt blot out mine iniquities?
(...), it is I, even I am he that blot them out for mine own sake. Gods
goodness runs over to a sinful creature; and where sin has abounded, there
grace does superabound. Consider

(1.) There is not so much evil in sin, as good in God. Sin indeed is thus
infinite, as it is against an infinite being; I, but there is an absolute
infiniteness in God. And this is no extenuation of sin to advance grace above
it.

(2.) There is not so much sin in man, as there is goodness in God. There is a
vaster disproportion between sin and grace, then between a spark and an Ocean.
Now who would doubt whether a spark could be quenched in an Ocean? Thy
thoughts of disobedience toward God have been within the compass of time; but
his goodness has been bubbling up toward thee from all eternity. He has had
sweet plots of freegrace, and gracious contrivances of love toward thee from
everlasting. The devils themselves though irreversibly sealed up to
destruction; yet they are not so bad as God is good. There cannot be a Summum
malum, as there is a Summum bonum. I, even I am he that blot out thine
iniquities; even I whom thou have thus offended.

2. I, even I, whose royal Prerogative it is to pardon transgression; and to
blot out sin; for otherwise the soul would still be left rolling and
fluctuating. I, this were welcome news indeed to hear of iniquity blotted out,
and they were Messengers of beautiful feet, that could bring me such
Gospel-tidings; but O it is not so easy a matter to have sin remitted, and
pardoning mercy is not so soon obtained: Who is it that can wash off guilt from
the soul, and set at liberty a captivated Spirit? Why, it is God himself that
undertakes so great a work; it is I, even I am he that blot out thine
iniquities, and it includes these two particulars.

(1.) God, he can blot out iniquities. For (first,) the offense is wholly
against him, and therefore he can freely pass it by: Sin is so far an
evil, as it opposes his will, the rule of Goodness, and as it prevaricates
from his Law, the expression of his Will, and that the Supreme Lawgiver can
pardon.

(2.) Christ he has made full satisfaction to his justice, so that now it is
but dipping the pen in the blood of Christ, and dashing out of iniquity: Nay,
Christ himself has blotted out, even this handwriting that was against us,
and nailed it to his Cross. Christ on the Cross had a sponge given him dipped
in Vinegar, and a Christians sins do incumbere in s^ongiam, that I may speak in
Augustus his phrase. And hence there are such wooings and beseechings of souls
to come in and be subject to the Scepter of Christ; for God has more
satisfaction to his justice by every Believer, then by the damned thar lie
roaring in hell to all eternity, for they are never able to discharge the debt;
but every Believer by his surety has paid the utmost farthing.

2. Only God can blot out iniquities. I, even I am he, and none else. A poor
creature may soon involve it self in sin and misery, there is none but has
power enough to damn himself; Thy destruction is of thy self, O Ephraim. But
it is beyond the sphere of men or Angels activity to blot out the least sin, or
to disentangle the soul of the least corruption; they can neither take off the
guilt of sin, nor yet subdue the power of sin. There Is none but knows how to
wound himself; I, but he must have skill that knows how to cure him; it is
easy enough to run into debt, and many find it hard enough to discharge it:
There Is none but can heap up sin, and treasure up wrath, and wound conscience:
I, but who is there that can appease wrath, and calm conscience, and screen a
soul from a consuming fire? Sin is an offense against an infinite justice, so
that infinite being can either dispense with it, or satisfy for it. It is not
the blessed Virgins milk can wash out so deep a stain, it is not this can
whiten the soul; no, if the Saints Robes be washed white, it must be in the
blood of the Lamb. And the power of the Keys cannot reach thus far; A
Minister can no more by any way of efficiency remit a sin, then he can create a
world. And I know not what a Popes indulgence should do, unless it be to send
some ignorant people to hell with more cheerfulness and alacrity, that they
may in Coelum descendere, as the Satyrist said Nero did; when they look for
heaven, drop into hell irrecoverably. The mighty hand of God himself must be
put to the blotting out of iniquities; it is I, even I that blot out thy
transgression, even I whose royal prerogative it is to pardon transgression,
and to blot out sin.

3. I, even I that have manifested mine anger against thee, in punishing thee
for thine iniquities; even I am he that will blot them out, for the soul will
still be doubting and mi^giving; why, it is thou, O God, that have shot off so
many threatenings against us, and spent all thine arrows upon us: Thou have
hewn us by thy Prophets, and slain us by the Words of thy mouth: Thou have
dipped thy Pen in gall, and writ bitter things against us: Thou have followed us
with an whole Army of judgments, and every way shown thy self an angry God
against us; and will thou now blot out our iniquities? The Text has the same
answer ready for this too, It Is I, even I am he, that will blot them out; and
it speaks these two things.

(1.) God, he is not long angry. (...) as it is in the 54. of Isaiah, verse. 8.
In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. God as he is
not (...), quickly provoked, so neither is he (...), long displeased. God is
Love, says the Apostle; now Love is hardly provoked, and it is quickly
reconciled; God is Love. He writes not injuries in Marble, his Law indeed he
writes in stone; I, but the breach of the Law, he writes that in the dust. All
the wrong has been done to him, and yet he beseeches us to be reconciled;
He Is far more ready to offer mercy, then the creature is to embrace it; and
more willing to speak peace then man is to hear it. Where will you meet with a
man so propense to put up a wrong, and so ambitious to forgive an injury? But
as far as the heavens are above the earth; so far are his thoughts above our
thoughts; He writes not our sins in so deep a character, but that they may be
easily blotted out.

(2.) God requires no more humiliation, then to bring a soul unto himself, and
make it capable of mercy. Many a weak Christian questions his condition,
because he has not filled Gods bottles so full of tears as others; he has
not had such rendings of heart, such breakings and piercings of spirit, such
scorching pre-apprehensions of hell, and wrath as others have had: I, but let
such a one consider, that God is very gracious in his dealings, and we must not
look for the like degrees of humiliation in all; some have a quicker delivery,
and are sooner freed from the pangs of the new birth; some hearts are more
wrought upon in a more winning and melting way; others are beat in pieces by a
stroke of Omnipotency. But this we are sure, that soul's humbled enough that is
brought to a sight and sense of his sin, so as to see the necessity of a
Savior; and to prize him, and love him as the fairest of ten thousand. When
God has made a soul to see his sins, he is ready then to blot them out; It Is
I, even I am he that blot out thine iniquities; even I that have punished thee
for them, and shown mine anger against them.

I might add, that it is a note of Gods complacency in his own goodness, he
does even glory in the riches of his free grace; and therefore it is so often
repeated, I, even I am he, that will do it for mine own sake; but I hasten to
the next words.

Blot out thine iniquities,] There are many things wrapped up in this expression,
I Will be more brief in them then to promise brevity. And

(1.) Blotting out of iniquities, implies that they were all written, and took
notice of.

1. They were written in Gods book* God, he is not only (...), and knows all
things; every idle word, every vain extravagant thought, every glance of the
soul; the least tendency to sin, the first bublings up of Original corruption,
they are all took notice of; In his Book are all thine iniquities written.

2. Thou have a book within thine own breast, and Conscience has the pen of a
ready writer; it can write as fast as the soul can dictate. Calamum in cord
tingit, and with an accurate pencill, it can give thee a full pourtraicture of
thy most closetted behavior, of thy most reserved actions, of thy most retired
motions; and though there be a curtain drawn over them here, yet then they
shall be made very apparent. God shall give conscience an Imprimatur, and such
works as thou would have suppressed, shall be published to the eyes of men and
Angels, and the (...) shall pass censure upon them; Sins of the smallest
print, of the most indiscernable character, shall be made clearly legible, and
become as Atoms in the presence of a Sun beam. With what a furious reflection
will thou then read over thine own sinful life; when all thine iniquity shall
stare thy soul in the face to all eternity? When as a Christians life shall be
set out in a new Edition, Multo auctior and emendatior; for all Errata shall be
corrected, and with an happy Index expurgatorius. Every iniquity shall have a
Deleatur, and all Desiderata shall be supplied; the Book shall become perfect,
and be looked on as a fair object to all eternity. This is the first thing
impli'd in blotting out of iniquity, that they were all written and took notice
of.

(2.) Every transgression leaves a blot. For even remission of sins is expressed
by blotting out of iniquity. Although the blot was here greater, before 'twas
blotted out; for blotting out of iniquities, is the wiping out of a blot.
Besides the guilt of sin, and the power of sin, there is the Macula peccati
too; the stain of sin.

(3.) You see here the nature of Justification, and how in it Remissio est
imputativa; it does not take away the being of sin, but takes it away from
being imputed, and laid to the charge of the soul. Sins in Scripture- idiome
are (...): Now in justification there is a crossing of the Book, a blotting out
of the debt, so as it cannot be required of the soul. And the justified person
in the 32. Psalm, is styled (...), one whose sin is covered, which supposes
the being of it; and though our adversaries urge the force of the other phrase
(...), one whose sin is took away; yet it is sufficiently cleared by the
following words, (...), God will not impute iniquity unto him; and it is
rendered in the New Testament by (...), which cannot be possibly meant of
taking away the being of sin; for it is attributed to men, when they are bid to
forgive one another their trespasses; now they cannot forgive sin so. And they
do merely wrangle, when they tell us that (...) and (...) signify putare and
not imputare; for we deny not but (...), signifies putare; but (...), must
needs be imputare; and so (...). as might appear by many instances, as the
learned Chamier has observed.

4. Look upon the fullness of the discharge. The soul may rest satisfied, and
roll it self upon the free grace of a God in Christ, and lay all the stresse
of its salvation upon it; the debt is blotted out, and 'twere injustice to ask
it twice: And shall not the Judge of all the world do right?

5. Consider the easiness of it. The hand was longer a writing, then it is a
blotting out; the hand was wearier with writing, then it is with blotting out: I
have blotted out thy transgressions as a thick* cloud, Isa. 44. 22. Now, how is
a cloud blotted out? Nay indeed, what is a cloud but a blot upon Natures
fairest and well-flourish't letter? A Sunbeam comes, rushes in upon it, wipes
away the cloud. The Sun fights against it; (...), it raises a glorious army of
beams* which quickly puts the enemy to flight, they scatter the cloud. And I Will
blot out thy transgressions like a cloud. An act of grace, a beam of mercy
shall blot out a whole cloud of transgressions; which otherwise would have
proved a cloud of witnesses against the soul. (...)*

6. Here Is the extent of Remission, a great debt may be blotted out as well as
a less; a great sum may be blotted out as well as a small one, though not so
easily, though not so suddenly.

7. This explaines that, how God sees not iniquity in Jacob, nor sin in Israel:
He looks upon his people as in state of grace, and reconciliation; now as the
Arabic proverb pithily, Favoris oculus velut nox est ad omnem labem. He sees
not iniquity in Jacob, for he sees it blotted out, he sees it covered; that he
sees it not at all, makes Omniscience blind.

Thine iniquities,] (1.) Thine, very heinous in their own nature, as the
Prophets continually complain; it turns every Prophecy to a (...), Onerosa
prophetia.

(2.) More heinous, because thine. The sins of Israel pierce deeper, grieve
God most: (...); It was a notable speech of Cosmus Duke of Florence, I have
read (says he) that I must forgive mine enemies, but never that I must forgive
my friends; The sins of Gods friends, of his people provoke him most. Every
sin is took notice of; I, but the sin of Judah is writ with a pen of iron,
and the point of a Diamond, (...) with the claw of an Adamant. They are against
beams of stronger light; against bowels of tenderer mercy, against nearer and
sweeter relations, against greater expectation; God looked for grapes, and they
bring forth wild grapes. Yet, I will blot out thine iniquities. Not only some
of the less, and call thee to account for the greater; no, such as are the
most deeply aggravated, the most frequently reiterated, thine iniquities
indefinitely. God never blots out one iniquity, but he blots out all;
Justificatio est simul and semel, and it does extendere ad futura peccata. For

1. It puts a man into a state of grace and reconciliation, and within the
Covenant of Grace, so that his person and services are accepted.

2. Suppose a man had all his sins remitted, and only one, the least
retained; yet such a one were still (...), a vessel fitted, and framed, and
fashioned for destruction, seeing the guilt of the least sin binds over to
eternal punishment.

For mine own sake,] (1.) Exclusively, for nothing at all in you; as in that
Twin-place, Ezekiel. 36. 22. There you have a clear comment upon the words; Thus
says the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, faith the Lord God; but for
mine holy Names sake, which ye have profain'd amongst the Heathen. Mark under
what notion it runs, for that holy Names sake which you have profain'd. And
in this Chapter we have in hand, in those Verses that are preparatory to the
Text, we showed you how strangely Israel behaved themselves, verse. 22. Thou
have not called upon me O Jacob. Why, one would have thought that they might
have opened the mouth for mercy, that they might at least have petitioned for
grace; surely, 'twas worth the asking: No, but I was found of them that sought
me not. The learned Chamier goes on, and shows how there is an exact removal
of all such works as the Papists make satisfactory.

(2.) For mine own sake, it includes for my Christ his sake, and that eternal
Covenant of love and peace which I have founded in him. For God in himself is
an holy, and a just God; and now by reason of sin, an offended and provoked
God; and would quickly prove a punishing, and revenging God; did not a Jupiter
(...) step in and assuage an angry Deity.

(3.) For mine own sake, for my Names sake, and for mine Honors sake; lest the
Heathen triumph, and say, Where is now your God? O the infinite goodness of
God, that by a most gracious and free act of his own will, has knit and united
his own glory, and the salvation of his people together! He has wrought
Isreal's name in the frame of his own glory, so that now it is for his Honors
sake to save Israel; he blots out iniquities for his own sake. God will not
suffer the luster of his Crown to be dimmed and eclipsed; he will be sure that
none of his Jewels shall fall off from it, It Is as impossible for Israel to
perish, as for God to lose his glory.

And will not remember thy sins,] The sinful soul is full of doubts and
suspicions; Certainly says he, if God should let me alone now, he will call me
to acount for them hereafter; If he seem to blot them out now, he will write
them again sometime or other. No says God, I Will blot out thy transgressions,
and will not remember thy sins. It Is an ordinary speech in the mouth of some
silly ones, they will forgive, but never forget, it had need have a very candid
construction, a grain of salt is scarce enough to make it savory; but God never
forgives, but he does forget too; when he blots out iniquities, he remembers
them no more. When the sins are laid upon the head of the scapegoat, they are
then carried into a land of forgetfulness.

I suppose you recall the usual rule; Verba Memoriae denotant affectum, and
effectum: He will not remember them so as to call thee to account for them, so
as to upbraid thee with them, so as any way to punish thee for them.

Guilt and punishmeat are correlates, such Twins as live and dye together,
when the one's remitted, the other's never retained. For

1. 'Twere injustice to punish where there is no fault. God indeed may out of
his absolute dominion and sovereignty, inflict an evil upon an innocent
creature, but then it falls not under the formal notion of a punishment; and
does inflict evils upon his own people, which flow from a fatherly castigation,
and not from a judicial proceeding.

2. It Is against the very nature of remission. Do you call that forgiving of a
debt, to cast a man into prison for not discharging it? or is that pardoning of
a Traitor, to behead him for his treason?

3. It Is injurious to the full satisfaction of Christ; who drunk up the whole
cup, all the dregs of wrath, not a drop of that bitter cup left for a
Christian; no (...) there; they do indeed pledge him, but it is in a sweeter
draught, and not at all in satisfaction to divine justice. It Is an impious
speech, and fit for the mouth that spoke it; worthy of a Jesuit, that calls
Christians sufferings, Fimbrias meritorum Christi; but he may touch this hemme
of the Garment, and find no virtue coming out from it. Christ's Resurrection
was a full and plain aquittance, a clear and apparent sign that iniquities
were all blotted out.

Quest. But does not God revive former sins, and reprint such iniquities as
he has once blotted out?

Answ. He does indeed, but in abundance of love and bowels of free grace: not
as an angry and revenging God; but it is to make thy tepentance for them, more
deep and serious. And though God remember them no more; yet there is good reason
that the soul should still remember them, (First) to make it more thankful to
him that he blotted them out. (Secondly) to walk more humbly. (Thirdly) more
watchfully and accurately, (...).

Observe.
And thus we have took a brief survey of the Text; we will now strain the
quintessence of all into one observation. Justifying grace, is free grace; He
blots out iniquities for his own sake: Every justified person is a monument of
free grace, or in the Psalmists language; he is crowned with loving kindness
and tender mercies.

The grace of God is free grace; and that

First, If you look to the Spring from whence it flows: That Original
goodness, that fountain-mercy in Election, when he singl'd out a peculiar
people to himself; there were beamings out of his love, and blossomings of his
grace toward thee from everlasting; He was plotting and studying thy
happiness, long before thou had any being. Thou were Gods Jewel from all
eternity, his (...); he casts a propitious glance upon thee, And thy time was
the time of love; He took thee as the Jewel out of the rubbish of ruinated
mankind, out of the Massa corrupta, and in his due time he means to polish
thee, and to set a glorious luster upon thee. Now what was there that God
should smile on Jacob, and frown on Esau from all eternity? What was there in
thee to persuade him to all this? What were the motives? Where were the
arguments? What was the Rhetoric?

1. It was long before thou had any being, thou were hid in the barren womb
of nothing; thou had no desire, no thought of happiness, and I cannot well
understand the merit of a nonentity.

2. God might have had great revenues of glory out of thy eternal ruin; now
that he should choose to glorify the riches of his mercy in thy happiness and
salvation, was most free grace. Two books were before him, he might have writ
thy name in his black book, with fatal and bloody characters, and made his
justice glorious in thy misery and damnation; I, but he took the book of life,
and with the point of a Diamond writ thy name there, thus to make his love
wonderful in thy salvation.

3. Consider how few God then chose unto himself. Out of those many worlds
which he might have made, out of that which he did make; he picked out a few
here and there, they all make up but (...), a little diminutive flock, a
little, little flock, (...). The major part of the world (...), it lies
drench't and drowned in wickedness. How comes it now that thou do not go
with the generality; but art one of the little number, is not this free grace?
God has riches of grace for many more, and yet he would spend it all upon a
few; he would contract and concentricate his love in them, Et quanto pauciores
filios habet, tanto cariores. It Is St Paul's reason, that he might make known
the riches of glory upon the vessels of honor; this was the very end, that
they might admire his goodness the more, and tell stories of free grace to all
eternity.

4. Don't think that this was out of any prevision of worth and excellency in
thee more then in another. For

1. This makes the prime wheeling cause wholly dependent upon inferior movers.
The great Creator of Heaven and Earth, must wait upon man's liberum arbitrium;
if the creature please to determine thus or thus, then he must copy out his
decree accordingly.

2. They speak as if they had never seen the nineth to the Romans. What was it
that prevailed with the Potter, to make one vessel to honor, and the other to
dishonor? Was it because this was the more refined Earth, and so fitter for a
vessel of Honor? No says St. Paul, of the very same lump, he made one a
vessel to honor, and the other to dishonor. And God loved Jacob, and hated
Esau, before they had done either good or evil; Now if Jacob would certainly
have done good of his own accord, 'twas all one as if 'twere done already in
respect of Eternity, all things being equally present to that.

3. This takes away all method, and order of prosecution, for the end is
always in intention before the means. God first resolves to save Jacob, and
then provides means accordingly.

4. It quite demolisheth the goodly and fair structure of grace; no
discriminating grace, it is no longer for his own sake, but for your sakes now.
A man now makes himself to differ, free will must be set on the throne, it is a
Roman and must not be bound; and free grace must lie at the footstool* and be
trampled on as they please. But all they that know what grace is, and have had
any gracious impressions upon their own spirits, will easily tell you who 'twas
that made them differ, even he who chose them; not because they were any better
then others, but he chose them, and so would be sure to make them better; and
if they be lovely, it is with the comeliness which he has put upon them. Grace
is free if you look to the fountain of it, the primitive goodness of God in
election, bubling out from all Eternity.

Secondly, If you look to the several streamings out of the fountain, you
must admire the riches of free grace: For

1. Gods giving of his only Son, and founding and eternal Covenant of love
and peace in him; the richest and preciousest stream that ever flowed to the
sons of men. Now if there were an assembly of those bright and intelligent
creatures gathered together, the most glorious Cherubims and glittering
Seraphims, and if this mystery which they now pry into, were fully unsealed,
and explained unto them; O how would they stand gazing upon the riches of free
grace, how would they think eternity it self too short for the admiring of it;
and what could they resolve it into but mere love. God so loved the world, so
freely, so fully, so unconceiveably, that he gave his only Son, etc. What was
there in thee to draw a Savior down from heaven? was there such an attractive
and magnetical virtue in an undone and bankrupted creature? How did thou
persuade him to disrobe himself of light, as of a garment, to cloud and eclipse
the luster of his Divinity, by the interposition of a pale mortal body! What
was it that moved him to take upon him the seed of Abraham, and not the nature
of Angels, to let pass those fair and eminent beings, and to advance a poor
crauling worm! Out of what Topics did thou fetch an argument that prevailed
with him, to espouse thee to himself in mercy and truth, and so to love thee as
to dye for thee? I know they thoughts are swallowed up with the consideration
of so boundless and bottomless a love, and desire some time for astonishment.

2. What should I tell you of those free expressions and manifestations of this
his love; those fresh eruptions and ebullitions of it in the Gospel? I mean
those precious promises, that are so many several sproutings and branchings out
of the Covenant. The Gospel's like a sweet and precious honey-combe, these are
the several droppings of it, that flow freely from it. Indeed the whole Gospel
like the midst of Solomon's bed in the Canticles, is paved with love.

3. Think upon those free offers of grace, and tenders of reconciliation; how
he woes you to receive mercy, how he beseeches you to be happy, how he entreats
you to be saved, to accept of him and of heaven, of grace and of glory. So that
if you look to the streamings out of the fountain; you see they all carry
with them the riches of grace.

Thirdly, Consider the several conveighances of it; how God diffuses this his
goodness to thy soul; and thou shall see how thou have lived upon the expenses
of free grace all thy days. And for this, observe how he tuned all
circumstances in a sweet and harmonious way, so as they did all sweetly agree
and consort in thy happiness; and how all providentiall passages did join for
thee, and (...), work together for thy good: As

1. 'Twas out of the riches of free grace, that he planted thee in a place of
light, when he shut up and imprisoned the rest of the world in palpable
darkness. The Gospel shines out but upon a little spot of ground which God
has enclosed for himself, and styles it his Garden. Paul plants it* and
Apollos waters it, and he himself gives it an increase: The rest of the world
lies like a barren and desolate wilderness, the word of the Gospel never dropped
upon it; nothing but briers and thorns fit for the fire. Now, how fell thy lot
in so fair a ground; and who is it that gives thee so goodly an heritage? Who
is it that shines thus upon thy Tabernacle, and fixes it in a land that flows
with milk and honey? Give a reason if thou can, why thou were not placed in
some obscure corner of America, and left only to the weak and glimmering light
of nature? Prithee, tell me who that was that opened for thee so many wells of
salvation, and feasted thee with all those spiritual dainties and delicacies
that are disht out in variety of Ordinances? I would fain know who that was
that crush't the honey-combe on purpose, that it might drop upon thy soul?
Prithee, tell me, if thou can, who that was that bespoke a place for thee in
the Church, among the assembly of the Saints? Has God dealt so with every
Nation, or have the Heathen knowledge of this Law? Ascribe this then to free
grace.

2. That salvation should wait upon thee so long, and when thou had repuls't
so many rich offers of grace and mercy; that still it should be importunate
with thee: If mercy had knocked once or twice, nay according to the rule, Si
ter pulsanti, etc.; if it had then bid thy soul farewell, thou had dropped into
hell irrecoverably. How many years has free grace stood at the door, and
begged for some admission, and thou have not so much as bid it welcome? Free
grace follows thee and pursues thee, and will not let thee go till thou have a
blessing. Would any friend have given thee so many invitations after thou have
rejected them? Are there not many of the damned that must lie roaring there to
all eternity, that never tasted of so much goodness, and longsufferance as
thou have done? O, why were not thou sent thither amongst the rest? that that
Spirit which thou have so much grieved, and so often vexed, should still breath
upon thee, and follow thee with secret whisperings, and gentle solicitations to
entice and allure thee to goodness; what can thou call this but free grace?

3. Consider in what state thou were all the while; and Enemy, a Rebel,
studying how to be damned; galloping to hell and destruction with full careere,
a scholars pace: who was it now that stopped thee in thy course? who bridled in
the proud waves and said, Hither ye shall go, and no further? Saul when he is
breathing out of slaughters, and making havoc of the Church, even then he
becomes a Paul. When the soul is even ripe for judgment, then mercy shines out
upon it. And that which would seem the most reasonable time for vengeance, is
made a blessed opportunity of showing mercy.

4. Consider the efficacious and overpowering work of grace; he must force thee
to be happy, and necessitate thee to salvation, and compel thee to come in. It
is not enough to provide the means, but he must strongly apply them; unless
the arm of the Lord be revealed, there is none will believe our report. It may
be thou came occasionally to hear a Sermon; well, God has the two-edged
sword in his own hand; he brandish't the glittering sword, he fought against
thee, he wounded thee, and frighted thee out of thy sins. Well, thou wentest
away with groans, and sighs, and tears; like a Heart stuck with an arrow,
panting and breathing, and feign would have some refreshment; Ere long, he
met with a faithful Messenger, and sent thee some balm from Gilead; he began
to let in some of his love to thy soul, and to cheer thee with
Gospel-cordials; and were not they all bought with the riches of free grace? Or
it may be, thou came into a Church with a mind, to smile at Religion, to
laugh at Goodness, to mock at Piety; or else to guess the best, thou came
for flowers and not for fruit, to crop an Elegancy, to take acquaintance of a
Notion, or a fine expression; as he once to hear an eloquent Ambrose. Thou
came for a bait, but met'st with an hook, and 'twas happy for thee that thou
were so caught; Thou thought only to see the flourishing of the sword, but
thou felt'st the edge of it, and 'twas well for thee that thou were so wounded.

5. Remember the manner how he thus wrought upon thee; it may be 'twas with
softer and gentler impressions, in a winning, in a melting way; he drew thee
with the cords of a man, and sweetly dissolved thy stony heart. It Is true, the
Law had its work, and struck thee with the flaming edge of a curse, but the
Gospel presently brought oil and powered it into the wounded spirit. The love
of Christ was the powerful Suada; Heavens Rhetoric; there was Demosthenes his
double Deity in it, (...), it constrained thee to obedience: And was it not
mercy to be dealt withal in so mild a way? Well, but what if thou were a more
knotty and obdurate piece, and 'twas not a little matter would tame thy unruly
spirit? God came in a more victorious and triumphant manner, and led captivity
captive, when he gave gifts unto thy soul: He was fain to batter down strong
holds, and bring to the ground towering imaginations. Thou had a rocky and
flinty spirit, and was not his word an hammer? did not he take it into his own
hand? he smote the stony rock indeed, so as the waters gushed out: Well, and
had he no bowels all the while? was it not abundance of mercy to take pains
with such an obstinate sinner? Refer it you to what you will, we will put it
under the head of free grace.

6. Think upon those mountains of opposition that were beaten down, when this
goodly fabric of the Temple went up with the shoutings and acclamations of
free grace. The strong man was dispossessed, all the plots and stratagems of
Satan were frustrated. God crush't his designs, and blasted his enterprises,
and broke his snares, and rescued thee out of the paw of the Lion. 'Twas much
love and grace to set a silly bird out of the snare, to ransom a poor captive,
to break the chain, and beat off the irons, to disentangle a soul, and set it
at liberty. And then he armed thee against the disgraces and frowns of the
world, and fortified thee against the smiles and blandishments of the world,
and carried thee against the potent stream of examples, which all ran another
way; free grace hid thy soul under the shadow of its wings.

7. Have thou not fresh supplies of free grace flowing in continually upon thy
soul, and maintaining it to all eternity? If God in this new creation had given
thee, as he did at the first, a stock of grace, and left it to thine own
improvement, thou would have spent it immediately; Thou have somewhat of
free grace, every moment of thy spiritual being. God feeds and preserves the
humidum radicale of the soul, or else 'twould quickly waste away. He sends thee
in rich influences and Auxiliary forces, and keeps thee by his mighty power
through faith unto salvation. And this is no small work of grace; Conservatio,
you know, it is continuata creatio.

8. Compare thy self with those that have had none of all this kindness shown
unto them, such as God has left to themselves in the severity of his justice,
and this will set a goodly gloss upon free grace.

1. Many of them are such as have improved their present strength far better.
Many Heathens have lived more accurately and exactly then some Christians in
their unregenerate condition, and yet one out of all ordinary possibility of
salvation, and the others efficaciously called. He may do with his own what he
will, and he has mercy on whom he will have mercy. Thus Publicans are before
Pharisees and swelling Justitiaries; that free grace may be more apparent and
conspicuous.

2. Some have desired more strength, and in their way prayed for it too, and it
may be have had the prayers of others too, and yet have gone without it; but
thou have not called upon me, O Jacob; I was found of thee, when thou sought'st
me not.

3. He past by men of most admirable endowments, most rare accomplishments;
that in all probability would have done him a great deal more honorable
service, then thou art like to do. Would not an Aristotle have made a glorious
convert, and filled the world as full of Divinity as he did of Philosophy? but
God passes by these stately Cedars of Lebanon, and chooses a few contemptible
Shrubs, and this is the good will of him that dwelt in the bush; he has chosen
the (...), the mere non-entia of the world, to bring to naught the things that
are.

So, that if thou look to the fountain, or the streams, or the conveiances,
you meet with nothing but free grace.

Fourthly, I might draw an head of arguments, a Minori ad Majus, common and
restraining grace is free grace, how much more justifying and saving grace,
that one is not so bad as another is mere grace, etc.

This truth is full of Use: Richly laden with fruit, if we had time to gather
it; I Will but point at it.

Use.
Use. Let none dare to abuse the grace of God; to still malignant and venomous
consequences out of so sweet and flowery a truth. C^m gratia Dei sit mellea, ne
comedas eam totam. There Is none but love to hear of free grace; O this is a
soft and downy Doctrine, a silken Truth: O it is a gentle breath that fans the
soul, and gives it sweet refreshment. O it is a pleasant thing to sit under the
shadow of free grace, and see Gods goodness streaming out before thee! But
take heed who e're thou art, of turning this grace of God into wantonness; and
know, that it is free grace in another sense too, God may take it away when he
pleases, thou know not which is the last offer: Believe it, he that
neglects this very present offer, venters eternity. And know withal, that as
there are more liberal aspersions of grace in time of the Gospel, so there are
larger viols of wrath too. Vinegar you know it is (...) filius vini, and the
sweetest wine degenerates into the sharpest vinegar. Grace abused, turns to
fury. What, to sin against God; because he is good? therefore to offend him,
because he is merciful? to multiply iniquities, because he blots them out for
his own sake? To kick against bowels of mercy, and to rebel against the golden
Scepter, when it is stretched out, and motions of reconciliation propounded?
truly this will be the very sting of hell, the Emphasis of damnation, this
will heat the furnace seven times hotter; 'twill teach the worm that never
dies to gnaw more cruelly, and put new stings into the eternal scorpions;
'twill prepare flaming ingredients for the cup of wrath, and fill it up to the
very brim. O how fain would thou then change places in hell with a Turk or
an Infidel, and be ambitious of ordinary damnation. But truly there is no
stronger argument against sin to an ingenuous spirit, then free grace. Because
God is so prone to pardon, therefore the soul is so loath to displease.

THE Child's Return.
PROVE. 23. 26. My Son, give me thine heart.


THere have been such noble, and generous spirits in some of the people of God,
as that they have been frequent in such enquiries as these: What shall we
render the Lord for all his mercies? And, what shall we return him for all his
goodness? And he in the Prophet Micah (though he be of a different temper from
these) yet he seems to be very solicitous, and desirous to know what he
should bring unto the Lord. For thus you may hear him speak in the 6th of
Micah: Wherewithal (says he) shall I appear before the Lord? Will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of Rams, etc.? No, says the Prophet; He has showed
thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but that
thou should do justly, etc. He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and
what does the Lord require of thee, but that thou should give him thine
heart, and that thou should love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. And therefore he here asks it of
thee. (...), My Son, give me thine heart.

These words are spoken by Solomon, but not in his own Name. It had been too
much for Solomon to have asked it for himself. It does not become the mouth of
any Creature to ask the heart to it self. But Solomon speaks it in the name of
Wisdom, and so in the name of God himself, the eternal fountain of Wisdom. It
is he that calls unto the sons of men, and bids them to give him their hearts.

And though I know that the Hebrew Idiom sometimes by giving the heart, does
imply no more, then the serious consideration, and pondering of a thing, the
laying it to heart, as we use to speak; yet I shall take the words here in a
fuller sense, as the heart in a special manner is due unto God.

Now as in Proverbial speeches there uses to be, so it is here. There is
abundance of rich variety, a great deal of Treasure locked up in a few words; we
will open some of them to you. And

I. For the Relation, My Son. Five things are very considerable.

1. He speaks here to a Son, and to not a Stranger. No wonder that Strangers
give not the heart unto God; no wonder that a Pagan gives not the heart unto
God. Such as are aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers to the
Covenant of grace. Such as are at a great distance from him; nay, that live
without God in the World; such as lie like the dry heath, and the barren
wilderness, the word of the Kingdom never dropped upon them: but thou art a
Son in near relation to him; He reveals his mind to thee; he manifests, and
displayes himself to thee; he makes his goodness pass before thee. Thou have
the continual droppings of the word upon thee; his Prophets are sent to thee
early, and late; thou have the happy Sunshine of his presence with thee,
enough to warm, and soften a stony heart; and out of such stones to raise up
children unto Abraham. Though an Indian, though an American do not give the
heart unto God; yet a Christian should. Though a Stranger do not give him the
heart; yet a Son should.

2. A Son, and not an Enemy. God does not expect the hearts of Enemies; such as
are in open hostility, and opposition against him; such as are said to be
haters of him, and hated by him; such as bid him depart from them, for they not
desire the knowledge of his ways: he does not look for the hearts of these. He
does indeed many times turn the heart of an Enemy, meet the heart of a Saul,
while he is breathing out slaughters against the Church: but whilst he is in a
state of enmity, he does not look for the heart from them. Nay, if an Enemy
could give the heart unto God, it would not be accepted by him. He will not
accept of a Traitors heart. But thou art reconciled to him, so far from being
an Enemy, as that thou art a Son. Thou have all expressions of love from him:
and thine heart it is expected by him, and it will be accepted of him. Though
an Enemy do not give the heart unto God; yet a Son should.

3. A Son, and not a Slave. A Slave does a great deal of work, and drudgery,
more work then a Son; but he does not give the heart all the while. He works
out of fear, he looks upon it as a task, as a burden; he watches an opportunity
for shaking off the yoke. But now Religion does not come thus to enslave men,
but to enlarge them, to ennoble them; it comes to beat off the chains, and
fetters, to beat open the Prison doors; it brings a perpetual Jubilee, a
perpetual Triumph along with it. Religion it flows out of filial principles:
My Son, hear my words; and My Son, give me thine heart. If the Son make you
free, why then you are free indeed; and if you be free like Sons, why then you
are free indeed. The Gospel brings with it a filial Liberty, a filial
Plerophory; an Evangelical yoke is a soft, and pleasant yoke; a Saviors burden
is onus alarm, it does no more load the soul, then wings do a bird, which
advance and promote its flight toward heaven. In Sin there is nothing but
slavery; in Religion there is perfect Liberty. Though a Slave do not give the
heart unto God; yet a Son should.

4. A Son, Non sic olim. Thou were not always so. There was a time when ye
were Sons of wrath, as well as others; children of disobedience, as well as
others. Adopted Sons, were not always Sons; now the Sons of God, are sons by
Adoption. And let it suffice you (says the Apostle) that in those former times
of your ignorance, of your folly, and vanity* that then you gave your hearts
unto other objects; but now that you are come into a state of Sonship, now
that ye have this great, and honorable Gospel-priviledge, to be called a Son
of God; now withdraw your hearts from former objects. Let them not be bestowed
upon former vanities, do not embase them so much; fix them only upon your God.
Though once thou did not give thy heart unto God; yet now thou art a Son,
thou should.

5. A Son; and so in way of mutual affection, thou art to give the heart unto
him. He has given thee his love, and his heart, and his bowels are toward
thee; and wilt not thou return some affection to him again? Relations they
consist in a mutual (...), in a graceful and reciprocal respect which they have
one to another. Is there the love of a Father in him, and shall not there be
the obedience of a Son in thee? Is there a flame in him, and is there no spark
in thee? Is there no reflecting of a Sunbeam? Is there no repairing of the
streams into the Ocean? As Bathsh^ba speaks very affectionately to her Son
Solomon: What my Son? and what the Son of my Womb? and what the Son of my
Vows? Will thou give thy strongth unto Women? So here. What my Son? and what
the Son of my loves? and what the Son of my hopes? Will thou give thine heart
unto another? Will thou give thy strength unto a Creature? (...), will thou
thus dishonor, and provoke thy God? Cor it is magn^s Cordis; If love will not
draw thee, what will? and if a preventing love will not prevail upon thee,
what love will? And if God have not the hearts of Sons where shall he have any
hearts to praise him? Who will admire him, and adore him, if his Sons will not?
And then he has given thee his only Son, he has given thee a Savior, that
has given his heart to thee, that has given his life for thee, that had his
heart pierced through for thy sake; and is there no attractive power in all
this? That is the fifth thing, thou art a Son, and so in way of gratitude, and
mutual affection thou art to give thine heart to him.

II. The Manner of yielding up the heart unto God, which is here expressed by way
of giving; which includes several things in it.

1. Give it Cheerfully. God loves a cheerful giver. Religion should be full of
alacrity; it does not come to extort the heart, to hale men to obedience, but
to lead them by a sweet, and easy manuduction; it does not rapere Cor, but
allicere* It does not storm the Castle, but has it fairly yielded up upon
terms of agreement. That efficacious work of grace in conversion, does indeed
overpower the hearts of men; but it is by making them willing, not by drawing
them whilst they are unwilling; but it takes away that Nolence, and reluctance
that is in the hearts of men, and thus compells them to come in. What freer
then a Gift? Now the heart it is to be given unto God. The Will has never more
freedom, then when it moves toward God. And those heavenly duties, and
spiritual performances are to flow freely from the soul, like those voluntary
drops, that come sweating from the Honeycomb of its own accord, without any
pressing, without any crushing at all. It is only the dregs of Obedience, that
comes forth with squeezing, and wringing. The better any thing is, the more
freely does it diffuse it self. There should be no need now of binding the
sacrifice with cords unto the Altar, unless it be with the cords of love;
those soft and silken knots of affection. Cheerfulness puts a gloss, and
luster upon Religion, and makes it amiable, even in the eyes of the world. And
truly I cannot tell how any one can give the heart to God, unless he serve
him with alacrity.

2. Give it presently. You know, Bis dat, qui cito dat. Give it him now, he
calls for it; it must be donum hodiernum. Now that it is called to day, harden
not your hearts. Give him a tender hear^ Vdum, and molle lutum es. Now give
thine heart to be framed, and fashioned by him; to be stamped, and sealed by
him. Da primitia^ Cordis. Give him the first fruits of thy time, the first
fruits of thy strength: He is the Alpha, the first of beings; and therefore
whatsoever has any priority, and superiority belongs to him. And truly Grace
it is very sweet, and pleasant in the bud (...). O how pleasant is it to see a
Virgin-light, a Morning-light of education shining out upon the soul, and in
some measure preparing, and predisposing the heart for the ways of God. O this
is an happy prejudice, an early prepossession of the soul. And this is that
which the wise Man here intends, when he speaks to a Son* to one of tender age.
And do but consider it; can you give your heart unto God too soon? Why
should thou defer thine own welfare? or is it comely then to offer thine
heart unto God, when thou can give it to none else? Da ^lorem, nonfacem Give
it presently.

3. Give it, do not lend it only. In giving there is an alteration of the
propriety, which is not in lending. When thou have given thine heart unto God,
thou art no longer thine own then. There are some that will lend their hearts
unto God, upon some special occasions, for an hour at a Sermon, for a little
while in prayer; lend it him upon a Lords day, upon a day of Humiliation, and
then call for the heart again, and bestow it upon their lusts. But so great a
Majesty will not borrow of Creatures; he will not receive hearts, unless they
be wholly given to him.

4. Give it, do not sell it. It Is very sordid, and odious to be hirelings in
Religion. They sell their hearts unto God, that serve him only for by-ends, and
self-respects. This is Donum Hamatum, a gift with an hook in it; they give
somewhat, that they may catch more. They sell their hearts unto God for some
temporal ends. Hence it is, that the Church has so many friends in prosperous
days. There are many that sell their hearts unto God. You know in the Gospel,
there were some that followed Christ for the Loaves, and not for the Miracles.
There are some that love the Additionals in Religion, more then the Principals.
Success, and Victories are the only Arguments to convince some of the
rightnesse of a Cause. Esteem of men, worldly advantages, and accommodations;
these make many men take a little tincture of Religion, who otherwise would not
have so much as a show of it. Whereas Religion should be loved for her beauty,
and not for her dowry. God should be loved for those excellencies, and
transcendencies that are in himself; for those treasures of goodness, and
wisdom, that are stored up in his own glorious Essence. Thou should love
him, though he did not love thee again. Why should not thou love a thing
truly amiable, though thou have no benefit by it? For thy happiness is but an
inferior, and secondary thing, and is not to have so much of thine heart as he
is to have. Thou art only to love thy self, as thou art somewhat of him; thou
art to love Heaven* as the enjoyment of him; thou art to love the Gospel, as
the great expression of his love, and all the promises of the right hand, and
the left, as the various manifestations of his goodness. Thou art first to
give thine heart unto thy God, and then to other things in such measure, and
proportion as they are subordinate to him.

5. Give thine heart, do not keep it to thy self. Would thou be trusted with
thine own heart? Would thou be left to thine own deceitful spirit? The best
upon earth may very well put up that prayer; Domine, libera me a malo homine
m^ipso. Lay up thine heart in the hand of a Savior. Leave it there as a sacred
depositum. Can thou lay up thy Jewel in a safer Cabinet? Let him keep thine
heart by his mighty power through faith unto falvation,

6. Give it. God is pleased to call that a Gift, which is indeed a Debt: All
thy Esse, and thy Posse and thy Possidere is due to him, yet that thy heart may
come in a way of freeness, and that he may show thee, how it is accepted by
him; he calls it a Gift, such a gift as does enrich the Giver, not the
Receiver. It is an honor to thee, it is no benefit to him; His glory does not
shine with borrowed beams: It Is neither in the power of a Creature to eclipse
the brightness of his Crown, nor to add one spark to it. If thou do ill,
what hurt has he by it? or if thou do well, what good flows unto him? any
otherwise then as he has joined his own glory, and the welfare of his People
together. Thy goodness may profit thy self, and it may extend to men like thy
self, but it can make no additions to that which is already perfect. Thy heart
is due to him, and it is thine honor that thou may give it him.

III. To whom the heart must be given.

1. Not to any created being. No creature can be a center for the heart to fix
in. The heart was not made for any creature, nor proportioned to it. Will thou
set thine heart upon that which is not? Will thou give thine heart to vanity,
and vexation? Will thou set thine heart upon that which has wings, and can
fly away when it lists? Riches have wings; honors, and pleasures have
wings, all creature comforts have wings, and can fly away when they please.
And therefore

2. Give not thine heart to the world. Give it not to the smiles, and
blandishments of the world: Let it not be broken with the frowns, and injuries
of the world: Let not your hearts be troubled, (says Christ) for I have
overcome the world. And be not overcareful for the things of the world; (...),
a Pythagorean would render it, Cor ne edite.

3. Give it not to Satan. The Devil that old Serpent would feign be winding,
and insinuating into hearts; he seeks them, and desires, and would feign by any
means obtain them; and we see how many give their hearts unto him. But what,
will thou give thy Darling to the Lion? Will thou give thy Turtle as a prey to
the Devourer? will thou give thine heart to the Destroyer?

4. Give it not to Sin, to Lust. Give it not to a Dalilah. To give it to sin,
is to give it to a Privation, to a Nonentity. Give not thine heart to that
which will weaken it; to that, that will defile it; to that, that will wound
it; to that, that will sting, and disquiet it. O! keep it calm, and serene;
keep it pure, and unspotted; keep it in its proper freedom, and enlargement.

IV. We come to consider the gift it self, what it is that is to be given unto
God: The heart,

1. Not thine outward man only, not thy body only. God dwells not so much in
these Temples made with hands, as in broken, and contrite Spirits. For he
himself is a Spirit, and the Father of Spirits, and he will be served in
Spirit, and Truth. He does not ask for a shell, but for a kernel: He does not
ask for a Casket, but for a Jewel. Give him the kernel, give him the Jewel,
give him thine heart. No question, but the body also is to be presented to him,
but it is no otherwise accepted of him, then as it is animated, and enlivened
by an obedient heart. For how else can it be (...), as the Apostle there calls
it. Give me thine heart, (1.) Not thine ear only. Though it be very
commendable to incline an ear unto Wisdom, and to receive the gracious words
that flow from its mouth; yet the ear is only to be a gate, and entrance to
let it into the heart, and to hear in Scripture Language is to obey. The word
of God must not hang like a Jewel only in the ear, but it must be cabinetted,
and locked up in the heart as its safest repository. (2) Not thy tongue only.
Religion is not only to warm thy mouth* but it is to melt the heart; it does
indeed season the discourse, so as savoury words come out of such a mouth. It
does set a watch before the lips, and bridle that same unruly evil; but can you
think that it reaches no farther then thus? Can you think that Religion dwells
here? Is it only a Lip-labor, only a matter of discourse? Nay, are there not
many that draw near unto God with their lips, and yet their hearts are far from
him? (3.) Not thine head only. Religion it is not a mere notion, it does not
consist only in speculatives. You see many times that men of the vastest
Intellectuals, are most defective in Practicals. Who of the heads of the world
believed in Christ? Who of the Scribes and Pharisees believed in him? There may
be precious pearly truth's in a venomous head. And indeed the head can never be
given unto God, till the heart be given him also.

2. The heart: not appearances not only: Not a surface, not a color, not a
shadow only; but a Reality. God is a pure Act, pure Entity, and Reality; and
therefore Appearances, that do merely pretend to entity, must needs be very
remote from him. And this is the weakness of Superstition, it gives him only a
complement, a ceremouy. They tell him, they are his servants. What more
ordinary complement in the mouths of men? they give him outward adoration;
they bow the knee to Christ, and so did they that crucified him: What do you do
more then they? And this is the vanity of Popery, it does not give God the
heart. That spiritual Jezabel gives him only a painted face, she does not give
him the heart. She is clothed in Scarlet; but she embraces a Dunghill. She puts
on an outward meretricious bravery; but within there is nothing but
rottenness. But the Spouse of Christ is all glorious within. When the shadows
are multiplied, God called for the heart then in the times of the Law; much
more now in the times of the Gospel.

3. The heart, the whole heart. Not a piece of it, not a corner of it only. The
true Mother would not have the Child divided. God indeed loves a broken, and a
Contrite heart; but he will not accept of a divided heart. This is that Royal
Law, the great commandment: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart: (...),
(...).


But the Devil observes the other rule: Divide, and impera: He would seem to be
very moderate, to be content with a piece of the heart only; but it is because
he knows by this means he shall have all. For God will not have any of it unless
he have it entire. And this is one great happiness, that comes by Religion;
the heart is thus united, and fixed upon one supreme object. Lusts, they do
divide the heart, and distract it: -- duplici in diversum scinderis hamo (as
the Satyrist speaks very elegantly). The soul does as it were, bite at two
baits at once, and is caught with two several hooks; this pulls that way, and
that pulls another way. Pride calls for this thing; but Covetousness forbids
it: which must needs breed a great confusion* and tumultuation in the soul. But
when the heart is given unto God, and yields to his Scepter, then other Lords
shall no longer rule over it. When a Savior comes into the soul, the winds,
and thestormes, and the waves obey him.

4. Give thine Heart; that is, all the powers and faculties of thy soul. Give
him thine understanding; set open the windows of thy soul, for the entertaining
of such Light as shines from Heaven. Give thine understanding to be informed by
him, to be captivated by him: Give it as wax to the Seal, to receive such
stamps, and impressions, as he is pleased to put upon it. Give him thy will,
that which glories so much in its own liberty, let it be subject to him. Give
him thine affections, those ebbings, and flowings of the heart; Fluxus, and
reflux^^ Cordis: Let thy joy be in him; let thy trust and confidence be upon
him; Let all that is withiu thee, bless his holy Name.

And thus we have run over the words in a way of Explication, and we shall give
you the sum of all in one Observation. That The Heart is to be consecrated
unto God.



I. Because it is due to him. Look upon the Heart, see whose Image and
Superscription it has: if the Image of God be upon it, (as sure you cannot but
see that, though it be much defaced) Give then unto God the things that are
Gods. If thou will not give men their due, yet sure thou will not withold
from him his due. It is due unto him upon a fourfold account.

1. As he is the Maker of Hearts; the Creator of them. All the strength of
created beings is due to him; and the nobler any being is, the more strongly it
is engaged to him; for it has received the more from him. Now the heart of man
it is a chief piece of Gods workmanship, it is (...): it is due to him, as it was
made by him, and 'twas made upon this condition, that it should return to him.

2. As he is the Lord, and ^ul^r of Hearts; (...). His Throne it is in the
hearts of men, and it is he only, that has Dominion, and Sovereignty over them.
It is the great usurpation of Popery, that it would tyrannize over the hearts
of men. That proud Antichrist would sit in the Temple of God: but there is none
Lord of the Conscience, but God alone. And he can frame them, and fashion them,
and dispose of them as he pleases* He can rule those hearts that are most
large, and unlimited, and unrestrained. The hearts of Princes he can wind
them, which way he will, even as the Rivers of waters.

3. As he is the Judge, and searcher of hearts. We only can see the outward
surface, and appearance of things, as the Optics say, Solae superficies
videntur: but God he sees into the depth and bottom of things. We look only to
the fruit, and branches* but he searches to the Root, and foundation.

4. As he is Sponsus Cordis: It Is the Prophet Hosea'^ expression, I have
espoused thee to my self in mercy, and goodness, and faithfulness; so that it
is an Adulterous heart that now goes after creatures: Ye Adulterers, (says the
Apostle) know ye not that the love of the World is enmity against God? And the
Apostle speaks of presenting Virgin-hearts unto Christ.

II. It Is very pleasing, and acceptable to him. For

1. He asks it of thee. He knocks at the door, he wooes thine heart, and
invites it to himself; and what is the whole mind of the Gospel, but to draw
hearts unto God with all Arguments of love?

2. It Is thy Totum posse. Now says the Apostle, he accepts according to what a
man has. Thou thus castest all thou have into the treasury; and if thou had
more, thou would give it him.

3. It Is a pregnant gift, a comprehensive gift, and contains many other things
in it. As the Apostle says, He having given thee his Son; how shall he not
with him give thee all things also? This is the spring of motion, that sets the
wheels on working. When this Royal Fort is taken, all the rest will be yielded
up presently. When the Heart ondites a good matter, then the Tongue will be
like the Pen of a ready Writer; then thy Glory will awake, thy Tongue will
praise his Name, and encourage others in his ways; then thy bowels will be
enlarged, and thy hands open to the necessity of the Saints; then there will
be a Covenant made with the eyes, and a watch set before the door of thy lips;
then thy feet will run to the place where his honor dwells; and all the
members of the body will become instruments of Righteousness unto Holiness.
Which shows the vanity of those ignorant ones, who thank God, though they
cannot express themselves, yet their hearts are as good as the best; though
there be not one beam of light in, nor one spark of love in them; whereas a
good heart never wanted for some real expression. He in the Comaedian was very
deservedly laughed at; who would seem to be angry, but could express it no
otherwise, then by saying Irascor; whereas true anger would soon have shown it
self in its proper colors* in its sudden, and extemporary sparklings, in its
vehement, and furious flamings. They that can show a good heart no otherwise
then by saying they have a good one; they do even desire us not to believe them

They that offered up sacrifices were wont to judge of them most according to
the inwards, and God does thus judge of performances. For

1. The least performances, if the heart accompany them, are accepted by him.
That Persian Monarch was famous for accepting a little water from the hand of a
loving Subject: And does not Christ accept of the same? He that shall give a
cup of cold water to a Disciple, in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose his
reward. What though thou can not bring such costly sacrifices, thou can not
offer up Hecatombs? Well then, bring thy Turtle-Doves, and young Pigeons; and
these shall be accepted by him. Thou have no Gold, nor Jewels; thou can not
bring any Silk, and Purple to the Tabernacle: yet bring thy Goats hair, and
Bad gers skins, and these shall be welcome to him. Thou can not bring Cedars
to the Temple, thou can not polish, and carve, and guild the Temple; Well,
but can thou be any way serviceable to it? even that shall be rewarded by
him. A few broken sighs* if they arise from a broken heart, are very potent,
and Rhetorical. A few tears* if they flow from this fountain, are presently
botled up; he puts your tears in his Bottle.

2. God accepts of your intentions, if they flow from a pure heart, though they
be blasted in the bud, though they be crushed in Ovo, though they never come to
the birth.

In magnis voluisse sat est. --
It was in David's heart to build a Temple, that is enough. The Schoolmen do very
well determine, that Tota bonitas moralis, and malitia est in Voluntate. God
judges of the souls complexion by those inward productions, though men judge
only by outward expressions. That two-edged sword of God does thus pierce to
the marrow, to the very intentions of the heart. The Law of God it reaches
intentions, as our Savior in those heavenly Sermons of his upon the Mount does
Spiritualize it, and parapbrase upon it. And God does in especial manner punish
naked intentions, because men cannot punish them. The venom of the seed of the
Serpent does most show it self in intentions. God restrains the outward acts
for his people sake. But the strength of sin is most vigorous in its first
eruptions, and ebullitions, and so the strength of goodness too.

3. When the heart is entire. Though there be obliquities, and irregularities,
yet they are past by, and not so much attended to. No doubt but Abraham's faith
staggered, when he was put to an equivocation, and we cannot easily excuse
Jacobs supplantings, and Rebekka's deceits, and Rahabs dissemblings; and the
piaefraudes of the Fathers. There was so much frailty, and imperfection in all
these, as did plainly spot, and blemish them; and yet the heart being right,
God accepts of that, and covers the rest with his pardoning love.

4. Hence it is, that God looks not to the outward lump, and heap of
performances, but looks to the manner of them, and the Spirit from whence they
come. This might spare many a Papist his beads, which he thinks so necessary
for the numbering of his prayers.

The glimmering light of Nature taught the Heathen thus much, that the gods did
not expect any benefit from them, but only a grateful acknowledgment. And this
is the reason they give, why they consecrated to their gods barren trees, which
indeed were green, and flourishing, but brought forth no fruit at all, as the
Laurel to Apollo, the Ivy to Bacchus, the Myrtle to Venus, the Oak to
Jupiter, the Pine to Neptune, the Poplur to Hercules; and so in many of the
rest. And they will tell you, that the gods did not look for any fruit from
their worshippers, but looked for homage, and obedience, and thankfulness. And
it is that which ingenuity teaches men, not to look to the quantity, and value
of a gift; but to respect the affection of him that gives it* Away then with
those vain ones, that think to bribe Heaven with their gifts, and to stop the
mouth of Justice with their performances. All duties and performances they are
but to comment, and paraphrase upon the heart. In prayer God expects a flaming
heart; in hearing of the Word, he looks for a melted heart; in fasting, rend
your hearts, and not your clothes; in thansgiving he listens to hear whether ye
make melody in your hearts. Religion it does spiritualize performances, and
does shell them, and take the kernel; it does extract the spirits, and
quitessence of them.

5. Hence it is, that without this, the most pompous performances are scorned,
and rejected. A sacrifice without an heart is an abomination to him. I hate
your burnt-offerings, my soul nauseates your solemn assemblies. Odi Danaos,
and dona ferentes. Bring me no more vain oblations; (...). A corrupt heart, it
soiles every Ordinance, it stains and discolours every Duty, it envenoms every
mercy. If such a one pray, it is esteemed houling; if he mourn, it is hanging
down the head like a bul-rush; if he sacrifice, it is cutting off a dogs neck;
if he rejoice, it is but a blaze, a crackling of thorns under the pot.

6. In Heaven when outward performances shall vanish, yet then God shall have
thine heart, and thou shall have his face; thy well-beloved shall be thine, and
thou shall be his. When Preaching shall cease, and Prayer shall cease, when
Sacraments shall disappear, yet then thy naked heart shall be offered unto God;
it shall twine about the chiefest good, and by a near, and immediate union
shall enjoy it for ever.

III. The Heart is to be given unto God, because thou have promised it him.
Remember that Primitive, and Original vow in Baptism. God then may take
possession of the heart, if he please; for he has the key of all hearts; he
has the key of an Infants heart, and can open it if he please. But however
there is an engagement upon thee by this to give him thine heart. And sure
there are few, but sometime or other, have given him several other promises of
their hearts. Did thou never offer thine heart unto him in a storm? in a
judgment? in a sickness? Well then, withal remember that God takes no
pleasure in fools, that make vows, and break them. His promises to thee are
sure, why should thine be deceitful?

IV. Give thine heart unto him, that he may make it better. It may be thou have
a flinty, and unmalliable heart; give it to him, and he will melt it, and
dissolve it. It may be thou have a barren, and unprofitable heart; give it to
him, and he will make it fruitful; he will bid it increase, and multiply. It
may be thou have an unquiet, and discomposed heart; give it to him, and he will
tune it. It may be thou have a narrow, and contracted heart; give it to him,
and he will enlarge it. It may be thou have a drossy, and corrupt heart; give
it to him, and he will purify, and refine it.

V. Give it him, that he may make it happy, that he may fill it with his love,
that he may satisfy it with himself, that he may seal it with his Spirit. It
has toiled already sufficiently, and wearied it self among vanities; it has
gone from flower to flower, and can extract nothing but bitterness; and still
Desire, which is hiatus cordis opens it is mouth wide, and cries aloud, Give,
give. Go then to the Fountain, to the Ocean, and there fill thy self. Do
thou think thou can suck any sweetness from the breast of a Creature? no,
but go to the fullness, and exuberancy of a Deity, and then stretch thy desires
to the utmost compass, widen thine heart as much as thou can, yet there will
be enough to make thee run over with happiness.

That Is the first thing, why the heart must be given to God? We Will consider in
the next place, when the Heart may be said to be given to him?

(1.) When thou actest out of a principle of love toward him* What Is love but a
giving of the heart? As Dalilah speaks to Sampson; How can thou say thou
lov-st me, when thine heart is not with me. A lover not only, quaerit costam
suam, as the Jews speak, sed quaerit cor suum, for he has given that to
another. And where there is mutual love, there is a mutual exchange of hearts.
God loves himself in thee, and thou find thy self in God. His thoughts are
for thy welfare, and thy thoughts are for his glory. In love there is a
mixing and blending of beings; it is fibula animarum; nay, it knits, and weaves
souls together. Knit my heart unto thee, O God, says the Psalmist.

(2.) Then thine heart is given unto God, when thou do act out of sincerity,
when thou art an Israelite without guile. This is Evangelicall perfection: it
is that Evangelical allowance, which is put into the balance of the Sanctuary,
so as a Christian is not found too light. As for keeping every jot, and apex of
the Law, let them speak of it, that could ever do it. Thy Savior has kept it
for thee in the full rigor, and exactness of it, and those spots which thou
find in thine own heart, thou must wash them out in the blood of the Lamb;
thou must whiten thine heart in that Fountain, which is set open for the house
of David, and for the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness.
If thou be sincere, and cordial, and faithful with thy God, then thine heart
is given to him.

(3.) Then thou do give thine heart unto God, when thou do fully comply
with him in those glorious ends, in those great interests, and designs which
he does propound to himself; when thou do submit thy will unto his, and
conform thy desires unto his; when thou do wholly resign up thy self unto
him, and sweetly close with his providence, though never so mysterious, and
unsearchable: when thou do pluck out thy right eye for him and cut off thy
right hand for him; when thou think not thy life too dear for him.

(4.) Then thou do give thine heart unto God, when thou do serve him with
vigor, and intention. Lukewarm Laodicea could not give the heart unto
Christ. Ephesus when she falls from her first love, her heart is unbended
presently, performances come dropping from her in a weak, and languishing
manner. Whereas spiritual productions they should be strong, and masculine,
springing, and rushing forth with a sacred impetus, as Gods love comes
streaming to thee with an irresistible fullness. Thine heart should boil up a
good matter, as the Psalmist speaks. But some are so cold, and flat in
performances, as that you would wonder where the heart was all the while; and
to be sure wherever it was, it was an heart of stone, a Nabals heart, an heart
sunk within them* Popery lays much stresse upon the intention of the Priest,
but the people in the mean time may be as remiss as they please. As implicit
faith, so implicit prayers, and implicit performances must suffice them. But if
they had but a Bible, or such a one as they could understand, they might turn
to that same place; Cursed is every one, that does the work of the Lord
negligently. Offer such blind, and lame sacrifices; offer them to thy Prince.
Offer such imperfect obedience to the Pope. See whether he will accept of it. I
remember I have read of one of them, who when his Catholic Creatures desired a
further latitude, and dispensation in some matters of Religion that were of
less consequence, he returned him a favorable, and indulgent answer; but
withal, he enclosed this very Text; O fili mi, praebe cor tuum mi^i. Thus
Popery would rob God of the heart, and give it to a Creature.

(5.) Then thou give thine heart unto God, when thou give it unto the
people of God. In as much as you did it unto one of these, you did it unto me,
says Christ. There Is an union between God and his people; and therefore if
thine heart be united to them, it is united to him also. And how sad is it,
that those hearts should jarre amongst themselves; who yet harmoniously meet in
the close in the union with their God!

And thus we have seen why the heart must be given unto God, and when it is
given to him. We will now shut up all in a word of Application.

1. See then how powerful Religion is, it commands the heart; it seizes upon
the vitals. Morality that comes with a pruning knife, and cuts off all
sproutings, and wild luxuriancies; I, but Religion lays the axe to the root
of the tree. Morality looks that the skin of the Apple be fair; but Religion
searches to the very core. Morality chides outward exorbitancies: but Religion
checks secret inclinations. Or at the best in Morality there is but a
polishing, a guilding, a carving of the heart; but in Religion there is a new
framing, a new modelling; nay, a new creating. That Is the power of god linesse,
it changes the heart.

2. See also the odiousness of an Hypocrite. He does not give God the heart;
and yet will give any thing else; I, and will seem to give that too. He has
(...), which the Apostle renders by (...). Now an heart, and an heart, it is as
odious as a weight, and a weight, as a balance, and a balance. Treachery, and
perfidiousnesse is that, which is so much detested by men, as that which cuts
the sinews of humane Society: and though there be some that will practice it,
yet there are scarce any that will in express terms patronize it; (...), etc.
as he there speaks. Now as perfidiousnesse hinders commerce, and intercourse
with men; so hypocrisy must needs hinder communion with God. Can you think
that a painted Sepulcher is a fit place for his Spirit to dwell in? This is
that which Christ does so much upbraid; Thou blind Pharisee, thou that never
reflectest upon thine own heart, thou that keep a continual poring on the
outside only, and look to the painting, and whiting, and daubing of that;
do thou think thus to please the pure, and bright, and piercing eye of
Omniscience? Thou have not the black skin of the Ethiopian; thou have not those
eminent spots of the Leopard: I, but thou have the plague of the heart, thou
have the Leprosy within, and is not that more deadly and dangerous? The heart
of a Publican is far whiter then thine.

3. See then the bitter root of Apostasy. There are some that never gave their
hearts unto God, no wonder if they fall from him. Hypocrisy it is the seed of
Apostasy. Take heed (says the Apostle) lest there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief, so as that you depart from the living God. He that has a
Judas his heart in him will at length betray a Savior: he that has a Demas
his heart in him will at length embrace the present World. An Apostate did but
lend the heart unto God for a while, and now he calls for it again.

4. Yet see the security of a weak Christian, he has an heart as well as
others, and he has given that to his God. He has a vital Principle, an
immortal Principle within him. What though the sturdy Oaks of Basan be broken?
what though the stately Cedars of Lebanon fall? what though the green Bay-trees
vanish, and disappear? what though men of vast abilities, of rare
accomplishments, of fair flourishes in Religion, what though these draw back
from God? yet a weak Vine may stand all this while leaning upon his beloved
laden with fruit, chearing both God, and men; a bruised Reed may last all this
while, if it be but bound up in the Bundle of Life. The smoking flax may be
kindled into so pure a flame, as that it may outshine a blazing Professor. A
worm may consume Jonah his Gourd, but a Whale shall not consume Jonah himself.
Outward profession may wither, but nothing shall separate a Sincere soul from
his God.

5. Such as have not yet given their hearts unto God, let them withold them
no longer. Put up thy weak desires, and pray him to give thee such an heart, as
may return it self to him. Does God ask thine heart of thee, and do thou
refuse to give it him? What do thou ask of him that he denies thee, if it be
good for thee? and do but think how easily do thou give thine heart unto any
other but thy God. When the World knocks, when Satan knocks, thou openest
presently; nay, it may be before they knock; and must a Savior only be
excluded? Is there no Rhetoric in the love of Christ? Is there nothing that
can draw thine heart to him? Are all the cords of love too weak? Do thou
break them all? Will not the influences of the Gospel soften thine heart? Will
not the blood of a Savior dissolve it? will not importunate wooings, and
beseechings move thee? Out of what Rock were thou hewn, O obdurate Soul? Does
a greater then Moses smite the Rock, and will not it gush out with water? Do
thou say, thou can not give it to him? this answer is ready for thee; Non
velle in causa est, non posse praetenditur; if thou had a will to give it
him, thou would have a power to give it him too. However as thou have some
faint velleities, so make some weak endeavors; when he moves thee, then offer
it to him as well as thou can, though but with a weak, though but with a
trembling hand, and his hand will meet thine, and will presently take it of
thee.

6. Such as have given their hearts unto God, here is matter of praise, and
thankfulness. Bless thy God that would receive such a vain, and contemptible
thing, as thine heart was, when first thou gave it to him. Was it not
infinite love to espouse such an heart to himself; to beautify it, and enrich
it, and prepare it for his Love; to guide it, and teach it, and rule it; to
steep it in all precious sweetness; to amplify it, and dilate it, that it
might be more capable of his Love; to set a guard about it, and to keep it
against the subtlety, and vigilance, the malice, and fury of spiritual
enemies? How can thou enough admire the greatness of this his Goodness?

THE Panting Soul.
PSALM. 42. 1. As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul
after thee, O God!


Here Is one of the sweet strains of David's harp: one of those bright and
sparkling expressions, (...), which not only carry a Majesty with them, but
even include a Deity: one of those holy and strong ejaculations, with which he
was wont e corporis pharetra (that I may allude to that of the Prophet Esay's)
to take his soul (that polished shaft) out of the quiver of the body, and to
dart it up to heaven, the place of his treasure and hope, and the dwelling
place of his God. And truly every Psalm may well say, as the Psalmist himself
says in the 139. Psalm, I am admirably made, I am curiously wrought: (...),
so it is in the Original, Acupictus sum. I am wrought with a needle. There Is a
spiritual imbroidery, a most rare and sacred needle-worke in every Psalm: they
are all wrought by the finger of the Spirit: and they are like the Kings
daughter in the 45. Psalm, Their clothing is of wrought gold, their raiment of
needle-worke, and they are all glorious within. We doubt not but that there is a
most divine Emphasis in all Scripture-eloquence, and every jot and tittle in
holy writ, as it has eternity stamped upon it, so it has a Majesty shining in
it; But yet never did heavenly eloquence ride in more solemn and triumphant
pomp, then in this book of Psalms: As if the voice had been here contrary to
that in other triumphs, Memento te immortalem esse. And as for that profane
Politician, that said he found more sweetness in Pindars Odes, then in David's
Psalms: he might as well have said (if he had pleased) that he found more
fragrancy*in noisome weeds, then in the Rose of Sharon, or Lilly of the
valleys: that he found more sweetness in a dunghill, then in a garden of
spices, then in an Eden, even a garden of God. Happy Pindar! If instead of his
(...), he had thought of these waterbrooks, and he might have hoped for a
better Crown, then either he or any of his worthies were like to obtain; if he
could have reached this heavenly tune, set by so holy a Lyrick, the sweet
singer of Israel, (...), etc. as the Septuagint render the words. And yet their
(...) speaks not loud enough to express the Hebrew (...); for though (...) may
signify a strong and earnest desire, and though (...) may intimate a desire
upon a desire, which by reduplication must needs be stronger: and granting that
(...), do still add to the vehemence of it: yet the word in the Original is
more appropriated to the panting heart, and may seem to be borrowed from that
very noise which it makes in its braying after the waterbrooks, and the Latin
glocitat is answerable unto it. Now as for the heart, alas it is but a melancholy
timorous creature at the best* a panting creature, (...) You know who 'twas
upbraided it to Agamemnon, Thou have an impudent eye, and a panting heart: and
no more usual Periphrasis, of a coward, then (...). But that which the text
chiefly aims at, is the dryness of temper in the Heart, which at some times of
the year, (in Autumn chiefly) as Aristotle notes in his Historistia Animalium,
is very excessive, especial in those hot and dry Countries, and being usually
in the desert, does more discover it self, by reason of the scarcity of waters
there. To let that alone which yet diverse tell us of its drawingup, and
devouring of serpents, and how that when it is enflamed with the venom of them,
it then breaks out into those strong anhelations and violent breathings after
the streams of water, and when it has satisfied it self with them, it then
casts off all that was burthensom in the body before, and thus renews its age
again* Epiph* adds, that if within the space of three hours it cannot quench
its thirst, it presently dies: but if it satisfy it self with the streams of
water, it usually lives fifty years longer. It Is likely here in the text, it is
meant of the Hearts panting, when it is chased by the hunter, and yet not as some
understand) when that after its many (...) and (...), it can find no place of
safety, it then pants after the waterbrooks, as the only place of refuge: but
rather (...) (as Aristotle briefly) for the quenching of its thirst, as the
following words clearly intimate, My soul is athirst, etc. Haeret lateri
lethalis arundo, the arrows of the pursuer stick fast in it, and the venom
thereof drinks up its spirits. Why now waterbrooks can hardly quench its
thirst, with Behemoth in Job, it can drink up rivers, and sup up the Ocean at a
draught, there is a combustion in its bowels, nothing but fire, fire; nature's
on fire, and would fain be quenched, and those little relics of strength that
it has, it spends in panting after the streams of water. Thus does the Heart
pant after the waterbrooks, and thus did David's soul; thus does every devout
soul pant after the living God; and thus ardently. Religion is no matter of
indifferency as vain man would imagine. It is (...), as he said of love. It
requires the very flower and vigor of the spirit, the strength and sinews of
the soul* the prime and top of affections. It is no empty wish, nor languishing
endeavor, no still-born prayer, nor abortive resolution will serve the turn.
He that is but almost a Christian, shall but almost be saved, and that will be
the very Emphasis of damnation, to have been within a step to heaven. But there
is a grace, a panting grace, we know the name of it, and that's all, it is called
zeal, a flaming edge of affection, and the ruddy complexion of the soul; which
argues it sound* and shows it lovely. This is that, that makes a Christian an
holy spark, a son of the coal, even of the burning coal, that was fetched
from the Altar. Nay, we need not go so low as this, a zealous Christian is an
incarnate Seraphim, what should I say more? he is just of his Saviors
complexion, white and ruddy, the fairest of ten thousand. This was that, that
set a luster upon those shining Rubies, that adorned the Noble Army of
Martyrs, purpuratus marty^um exercitu^; And indeed they were (...) in a better
sense, then e're* it was meant of Antipater. (...), it is true indeed, their
soul was a thirst even for the living God, they entered into heaven panting,
and there they rest themselves to all eternity. (...), There remains therefore
a rest, a sabbatism, unto the people of God. And yet there are a generation in
the world that are all for a competency in goodness, and are afeard of too
much holiness; Mediocrity, even here is golden, a Laodicean temper shall go
under the name of moderation, and a reeling neutrality shall be styled prudence
and discretion, what needs this breathing and panting? this forwardness and
eagerness? this vehemence and violence in the way of Religion? quorsum haec
perditio? And they look upon such expressions of affection as this in the text,
as upon strong Hyperbole's, or pretty Rhetorical flourishes. Jeremy surely was
strangely melancholy, when he wished his head a fountain* that he might weep day
and night; and 'twas mere fondness in the Spouse in the Canticles, to be sick
of love. Thus does the serpent hiss at the ways of godliness, and thus does
the (...) argue. But go vain man, look upon the panting heart, wonder why it
breaths so strongly after the streams of water; bid it pant moderately after
the waterbrooks, and when thy empty breath can abate its fervency, then and
not till then, nay hardly then, wonder at the strength of a Christians desire
after communion with his God: for as the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so
pants his soul after his God, so strongly.

2. So pants my soul after thee, O God! so unsatisfiably: And that in a
double sense.

1. It Is satisfied with nothing else. 2. It Is not satisfied with a little of
this.

1. Nothing can still the weary and thirsty Heart, but the streams of water, and
nothing can content the panting soul, but the fruition of his God: God never
rested till he made man, and man never rests till he enjoyes his God. He has a
soul within him of a vast capacity, and nothing can fill it to the brim, but he
that is fullness it self. Desire is hiatus voluntatis, and such as nothing but
happiness can fill it: that indeed is (as he says) Mors desiderii, silentium
appetitus, claustrum cupiditatis, modestia ambitionis, quoddam satis.

Nature has taught us all to pant after a summum bonum; And it is the voice put
into every ones mouth, Who will show us any good? indeed it is the errand for
which we are sent into the world, to find out happiness, and yet we seek it
so as if we were loath to find it. (...), As Lucian follows the metaphor most
elegantly. And happiness may well have that inscription, which Plutarch tells
us, was upon the temple of Isis, (...). We knock at every creatures door, but
there is nothing within, no filling entertainment for the soul; no creature can
bid it welcome. Would you know what they all amount to? if you will believe
Solomon's reckoning, the very summa totalis is, vanity of vanities, all is
vanity and vexation of spirit. Vexation is the very quintessence of the
creature, and all that can possibly be extracted out of it. Now if vanity can
satisfy, or if vexation can give content, if you can gather grapes of thorns,
or figs of thistles, go on then to dote upon the creatures, and to be enamored
with a shadow of perishing beauty. The Prophet Esaias tells us, that all the
creatures they are but as the drop of a bucket; when the water's emptied out of
a bucket, perhaps there is a drop stays s^ill behind, a weak drop, which
recollecting all its forces, yet has not strength enough to fall. And will such
a drop (think you) satisfy a panting heart? The creatures are weighed in the
balance of the sanctuary, and they are found to be lighter then the dust of
the balance, and this will inflame the thirst, rather then quench it. To speak
in the Epigrammatists language, they are (...), mere nothing. And surely man's
the vainest of all the rest, the index of all the volumes of vanity; that by
sin has subjected the creatures unto the bondage, under which they groan, and
wait to be delivered, and yet dreams of distilling I know not what felicity
out of them, so that (me thinks) 'twas a notable expression of him, that styled
the Orators very ambitious of empty applause (...), we may surely translate it
thrice miserable: And it is one of the Encomiums that Eunapius gave of Longinus,
(...). And as for that supposed being and excellency, which we fancy in the
creatures, it is really to be found after a far more pure and eminent manner
in God himself. The lodestone cannot draw the iron when the diamond's in
presence, and shall earthly vanities draw the soul, when the pearl of price is
in presence? Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae* Surely that is no panting
soul, that forsakes the fountain of living waters, and digs to it self broken
and empty cisterns that will hold no water. The Heart pants unsatisfiably after
the water*brooks, and the soul as unsatisfiably after communion with its God,
it is satisfied with nothing else. But

2 It Is not satisfied with a little of this, not a drop nor a taste will
suffice the thirsty heart, it does not come like Canis ad Nilum, a lap and
away, a drop can no more quench its thirst, then it could cool Dives his
tongue, though indeed he begged for no more. That short sweetness and brief
refreshment, which is shut up in a drop, does but bespeake a stronger panting
after somewhat more full and satisfactory, and it is true if ever of the waters
of life, Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntu^ aquae. Bonum as it is sui
diffusi^um in respect of others, so it is sui multiplicativum even in that
subject where it is: when it has once engratiated it self with the soul and
won upon its affections, when the soul begins to eye the beauty of it.

(...)
(...).
When the understanding once sees it, O how sweetly? how presently does the
will embrace it? and it becomes the welbeloved of the soul. O how does it
enlarge it self, for the entertainment of it? And how does it delight to
expatiate in so choice a happiness. He that has tasted but a little of Gods
goodness, thinks he never has enough of it, to be sure, he can never have too
much* there is no fear of surfeiting upon happiness. It Is true, the least
glimpse of Gods favorable presence is enough to support and cherish the soul,
but it is not enough to satisfy the soul: O how pleasant is it to see Christ
flourishing through the lattices? and yet the spouse will never leave longing
till she see him face to face. There Is sweetness indeed in a cluster of
Canaan* but yet such as sets the teeth on edge for more The thirsty heart pants
(...), and the Christian after fullness of communion with his God: Dulcissimo
Deo totus immergicupit and inviscerari, as Carthusian speaks; So pants my
soul after thee, O God! so unsatisfiably But

3* So pant^th my soul after thee O God! so uncessantly until it be satisfied.
The thirsty heart never leaves panting while it has any being; delay here does
but whet desire, and give it time for stronger forces. And what else is a
Christians whole life, but a continued anhelation after his God? and though
this may seem very wearisome and tedious, to be always a panting: yet the
Christians soul finds far more incomparable sweetness (...), solid and massy
joy, beaten joy, like beaten gold, so much (...) imports; he finds more of
this in the very panting after his God, then any worldling can, when with the
greatest complacency he takes his fill of his choicest delights, and when he
enjoys the smiles and blandishment of fortune, his so much adored Deity.

And this is that which notably differencies a Christian from an hypocrite;
Will an hypocrite pray always? says Job, or will he pant always? no, he
keeps the rule, Si ter pulsanti, by no means knock at heaven too often. What
nothing but breathing after the waterbrooks? better take up some muddy
contentment by the way, and see if that will quench his thirst: Indeed he never
tasted the sweetness of the fountain, no wonder that he so easily parts with
it. His strongest panting was but (...) as the Moralist says of passion, fraus
inflammata: the motion was merely violent, and therefore not likely to last
long. Me thinks the Greek Epigram speaks to him (...)
(...).


(...), The painters eye steals a little beauty from the face, and perhaps his
hand makes restitution, restoring it again in the picture; and this is all you
can look for of him, nay it is well if he perform so much: As for the
expression of vitals, or the representation of essentials, it is ultra
penecillum, so that he must let this alone for ever. The most accomplished
hypocrite, the cunning'st painter of Religion that sets it out, in the finest
and freshest colors (...), he does but steal a form of godliness, the
Apostle has some such phrase, (...). He cannot reach to the vitals of Religion,
nor express the essentials of holiness, sincerity cannot be painted, they deny
the power of it: And it is just with God, (...), as they cannot express the life
of a Christian, so they should not taste the joy of a Christian: no stranger
entermeddles with his joy. As no man can paint the essence of a thing, so no
man can paint the sweetness of a thing. Whoever could paint the sweetness of
the honey-combe? The joys of an hypocrite as they are groundless and
imaginary, so like his services, they are vanishing and transitory. But a
Christian as he is always breathing after his God, so he is always drawing
sweetness from him* And here 'twere easy to show, how in every condition the
soul breaths after its God, when it sees the vanity of the most flourishing
condition, it pants after fullness in its God: when it sees the vexation of a
cloudy condition, it pants after contentment only to be found in its God. But I
shall instance only in these two, as having some nearer acquaintance with the
text, the strong pantings of a tempted soul, and the secret pantings of a
languishing and a deserted soul. And

1. In temptations the soul pants after its God. They that are skilled in those
terms tell us, that an Heart is properly a stagge which has escaped a King in
hunting: And there are some such Christians, that have escaped the Prince of
the air (that Nimrod the mighty hunter) and all his fiery darts. God he has
set his bow in the clouds as a token of peace and reconciliation (the
rain-bowe, the lace of Peaces coat:) And the devil he must set his bow in the
clouds too, in the troubled and cloudy spirit, and there are arrows in the hand
of the mighty -- (...). And how shall the soul escape these fiery darts, but by
panting after its God as the only place of refuge, a strong Tower and a rock of
defense, and by breathing after Heaven, as a place where it is sure to be free
from them? (...), as he said in the Comedy. A crowned Christian is (...), and
Satan's fiery darts can by no means reach Heaven. And thus the soul pants.

Arise O Lord, and save me O my God, from the mouth of the Lion that is ready to
devour me, lest he tear my soul and rent it to pieces, while there is none to
deliver. Lo, the enemy has bent his bow, and made ready his arrow upon the
string, that he may secretly shoot at the upright in heart: But compass me, O
God, with thy favor as with a shield; keep me as the apple of thine eye, and
hide me under the covert of thy wings: Deliver me from my strong enemy, and
from him that hates me, for he is too strong for me. O send me help from thy
Sanctuary; and strengthen me out of Sion! And thus when with a sure recumbency
it leanes upon its God, it has leisure then with an holy triumph to out-brave
the enemy: And as for thee that would make a partition between me and my
God, see if thou can tear me from the bleeding wounds of my dying Savior,
rend me (if thou know how) from the bowels, the tenderest bowels of Gods
dearest compassions: see if the gates of hell can prevail against the rock of
eternity. If thou, O God, be with us, if the God of Jacob be our refuge, we
will not fear what all the powers of darkness can do against us: (...), We
are more then conquerours. These are the strong pantings of a tempted soul.

2ly, In desertions, even then the soul pants after its God; (...), when the
soul is ready to perish in the dark, it pants after the water*brooks and can
meet with nothing but waters of Marah and Meribah; God dips his pen in gall,
and writes bitter things against it. (...)* the soul is athirst, and like its
Savior it can have nothing but gall and vinegar to drink, yet still it pants
after its God. It Is under a cloud indeed, but even these clouds shall drop
fatness, they shall drop upon the dwellings of the wilderness, and the barren
soul shall rejoice: like John the Baptist, it feeds upon honey in the desert,
not (...), wild honey, such as is the worldling's joy, but honey out of the
rock, upon the tip of the rod like Jonathans, to open the eye and to refresh
the heart. A soul in a desertion* is as it were a soul in a Consumption, and
one only taste of Gods sweetest love in Jesus Christ, is a sure Restaurative
for such a languishing soul. Now in the greatest Eclipse of Gods favor, in
the total Eclipse* when there is not so much as a secret light, yet there is a
strong influence, nay stronger then at another time, for his strength is
proportioned to our weakness: And they are Paul's own words, When I am weak,
then I am strong. And even now there is (...), as Homer calls those sparkles
that seemed to be buried in the ashes, and a Christian in time may (...); nay,
there is (...) too, Light is sown to the righteous, there is a door of Hope
opened in the valley of Ach^r; and now the soul pants after God, as a Father of
mercies and a God of Consolations. A God of Consolation? what higher, what
sweeter strain? All the balm of Gilead seems to be wrapped up in this
expression. A God of Consolation; that is one, who in the strangest exigences
and greatest repugnances, when comforts fail, can create new comforts, for
that is to be a God of Consolation; Creation is his properly, can raise them out
of the barren womb of nothing, for that is Creation; can do it with a word, for
Omnipotency uses to put it self to no greater expenses: Imperatoria brevitas*
the very commanding word, let there be light in such a soul, is enough to make
it more glorious then the Empyrean heaven. And now the soul pants thus, as you
may hear David panting almost in every Psalm: How long will thou forget me O
Lord, for ever? And how long will thou hide thy face from me? Has the Lord
forgotten to be gracious? And has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Is
the hand of Omnipotency abbreviated, that it cannot help; and his arm
shortened, that it cannot save? Or is his mercy clean gone for ever, and does
his promise fail for evermore? Weeping has endured for a night, why comes not
joy in the morning? When will thou satisfy the longing soul, and fill the
thirsty with thy goodness? when will thou lead me into thy green pastures, and
refresh my soul with sweetness? When, O when! shall I enjoy an Ordinance in
its Orient luster, in its heavenly beauty, in its full and purest sweetness?
When, O blessed Savior! will thou become the lily of the valleys? the beauty
and the ornament of the humble soul? And when shall these valleys stand so
thick of corn, as that they may laugh and sing? And then it breaks it self
into some such expression, as that of a sweet singer in our Israel. * Ah my
dear God, though I be clean forgot, * Let me not love thee, if I love thee
not. These are the secret pantings of a languishing soul.

Thus you see how the soul pants after its God, even as the Heart pants after
the Waterbrooks. We are to discover in the next place, what manner of
Communion with its God it is, that the soul thus pants after, and that either
mediate Communion with him here in his ordinances, or immediate Communion with
him hereafter in glory. And

First, It strongly desires acquaintance with him here in his ordinances
Chry^ostome's very Rhetorical upon the text, and tells us, how that David, like
a Lover in absence, he must express affection: As they have their dainty
sighs, and passionate complaints: their loving exclamations, and sundry
discoveries of affection; they can meet with never a tree, but in the bark of
it they must engrave the name of their darling; (...); 'twill twine upon every
opportunity, as the Moralist speaks; * (...) * (...) * (...) * (...), as
Anacreon sings. And the true Lovers of God, they are always thinking upon him,
sighing for him panting after him, talking of him, and (if 'twere possible,)
would ingrave the name of the Lord Jesus upon the breasts of all the men in the
world; Look upon David, now a banished man, and fled from the presence of Saul,
and see how he behaves himself: not like Themistocles or Camillus, or some of
those brave banished Worthies. He does not complain of the ungratefulness of
his country, the malice of his adversaries, and his own unhappy success; No,
instead of murmuring he falls a panting, and that only after his God. He Is
banished from the Sanctuary, the Palace of Gods nearest presence* and chiefest
residence, he cannot enjoy the beauty of holiness, and all other places seem to
him but as the tents of Kedar. He Is banished from the Temple, and he thinks
himself banished from his God, as it is in the following words, O when shall I
come and appear before the face of God? The whole stream of Expositors run
this way, that it is meant of his strong longing to visit the Temple, and those
amiable Courts of his God, with which his soul was so much taken, and so it is
equivalent to that in the 63. Ps. My soul thirsts for thee, to see thy glory
and thy power, so as I have seen it in the Sanctuary, there to appear before
the face of God. In the ordinances extat Dei facies, as Calvin speaks, and the
Gospel, in 2 Cor. 4. 6. is called (...), as suppose a glass, ('it is one of our
own Divines illustrations,) when a man has looked into it, should keep a
permanent and unvanishing species of his face, though he himself afterward
were absent, we might well say there were the face of such a man. The Gospel is
such a glass, representing Christ unto us, it is (...), that I may borrow that
expression in the Hebrews, so that when we shall come to see him (...) in
Heaven, we may be able to say, Surely this is the very Savior that was
described to me in the Gospel, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat: God has made
himself very conspicuous in his own ordinances.

No doubt, but that even now God was a little Sanctuary unto David, and he had
a private Oratory in his own breast, where he could mentally retire, and shut
up his thoughts and affections in that interior Closet, and yet he pants after
the public worship of his God. Music in Consort is sweetest* And some have
took it for mysterious in nature, and one of its Magnalia, that affections are
wrought upon in public more strongly then in private. The ordinances, these
are the waterbrooks David's heart pants after, (...), bubling up to Eternity.
And yet it is not the outside of an Ordinance that the soul thus breathes for;
alas! there is little sweetness in a shell. (...), as the Apostle says in
another case, the superficies the surface of it soon passes away, and it is
practical Popery to rest in an Opus operatum. You may hear David panting in
another place, O who will give me to drink of the water of the Well of
Bethlehem? It was not the outward water that he so much longed for. You see
when that was brought him by the hazard of men's lives, 'twas but water spilt
upon the ground: No, 'twas a Savior to be born in Bethlehem that his soul
thirsted after: O who will give me to drink of the water of the Well of
Bethlehem? Thou have opened thy mouth wide (O blessed Prophet!) and thy Savior
has filled it* thou have tasted of the water which he has given thee to
drink, and thou shall never thirst any more: but it is a Well of water springing
up in thee to eternal life. A soul breathes after an Ordinance as an
opportunity of having freer intercourse with its God; (...), to have an
heavenly tincture upon it, to breath in so sweet an air, to be steep't in a
divine nature, to have some foretastes and prelibations of happiness, a
prepossession of heaven, and some dawnings of glory. And then it enjoyes it in
its orient luster, in its heavenly beauty, in its full and purest sweetness,
when it meets with its God there, and increases its acquaintance with him. And
would you see how the soul thus breaths after its God in every Ordinance.

1. In the Word, there it desires the (...), as the Apostle speaks. Homer tells
us of a People, that he terms (...); and Eustathius there tells us, that the
same were wont to be called (...), both names very well agree to them, that
desire this sincere milk of the Word that they may grow thereby. Faith pants
after a promise, a breast of consolation. The soul lies panting at the poole of
Bethesda, and waits for the stirring of the waters.

2. Baptism, that is a water-brook the Infants soul pants after; for even
that is envenomed with a Serpent. There are Errata's in these Carnea
Encheiridia, though they be the fairest Copies of innocence that are now
extant. Indeed many of the fathers apply this text to Baptism: And Aquinas
quotes it out of Jerome, that these verses were wont to be sung at those solemn
times, when Baptism was publicly celebrated.

3. As for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, why there are mellita flumina,
streaming brooks of butter and honey, as Job speaks: and O how welcome is the
panting soul hither! God has sent a messenger to invite him. O! every one
that thirsts, let him come and drink freely: Drink; yea, drink abundantly O
beloved! It Is most true here that which Trismegistus feigned, God sets a great
Cup full of Celestial liquor, with this Proclamation, (...), Up soul, and
drench thy self in this Cup of the Spirit; Calix ebrius est, as the force of
the Original is in Psalm. 23. we render it, The Cup overflows. Here if ever, the
soul is comforted with flagons, and Christ's love is (...), sweeter then wine.

4. What should I tell you; nay, how can I tell you the strong pantings of the
soul in Prayer? The Apostle calls them, Romans 8. 26. (...), groans
unutterable, when the soul becomes, as the Syriack Idiom calls the thuribulum,
domus aromatum, breathing up sweet odours unto the Throne of grace, and Heaven
it self is thus perfumed; Domus orationis, is Domus aromatum. In all these you
see how the soul breathes after Communion with its God, mediate Communion with
him here. But

2dly, it pants after immediate Communion with him in glory and the following
words will well bear this sense, though not so properly and genuine, O when
shall I appear before the face of God in glory. Thus Paul pants, I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. Thus the souls pant in the Revelation, Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly. Hic pitissamus, illic deglutiemur: Here we sip of the
water of life, but there we shall drink it up, though there be eternity to the
bottom* Here we are sons of hope, and that is a panting grace* Spes indeed is
aurora gaudii and matutina laetitia, early joy: but when grace shall be ripened
into glory, then hope shall be swallowed up in fruition; And thus we (as it is
in 2 Cor. 3. 18.) with open face (...) You see that (...) here denotes a clear
vision, whereas quite contrary in 1 Cor. 13. to see (...) is to see (...), we
see in a glass darkly. A learned Critic has well observed, that the Hebrew
(...) includes both, for it signifies vision and speculation: we clearly
beholding the glory of God, are changed into the same image from glory to
glory, that is either, from his glory we become glorious, or else (...), that is
from grace to glory, for grace is glory in the bud, as glory is grace at the
full. Surely glory is nothing else but a bright Constellation of graces; and
happiness nothing but the Quintessence of holiness. And now the soul by an
holy gradation ascends higher, from those first fruits and earnest-penies of
joy here, to the consideration of the fullness of glory which it expects
hereafter.

* (...), * (...), * (...) * (...) * (...), as the Lyrick strains sweetly,
when the soul shall be unsheathed from the body, (that I mayallude to the
Chaldee Idiom,) how gloriously shall it then glister? or to speak in Plutarchs
expression, (...), when the soul shall be unclouded from the body, in what
brightness shall it then appear? what? did David's soul, his panting soul,
here leap for joy, when he remembered thee, O Sio^? O how triumphantly then does
his glorified soul now sing in the new Jerusalem! Did his soul sing so
sweetly in a cage of clay? what melody (think you) does it now make, being let
loose to all eternity? Is there such deliciousness in a Cluster of grapes, cut
down in the brook E^hcol, what look you for in the Vintage of Canaan, the Land
of Promise? Is but a Prospect of that holy land upon the top of Mount Pisgah so
pleasant and delightful? surely then their lot is fallen to them in a fair
ground, and they have a goodly heritage, that enjoy the sweetness of that land
that flows with milk and honey. Has but a glimpse of Gods favorable
countenance, such a powerful, such a satisfying influence upon the soul? O
think (if you can) how it shall be ravished with the fullness of the Beatifical
Vision! when the clarifi'd soul shall drink in the beams of glory, and be
filled with joy to the very brim. When the panting soul shall rest it self in
the bosom of a Savior, and fix his eye upon the brightness of his Majesty to
all eternity; nay, when eternity shall seem too short for the beholding and
admiring of such transcendent excellencies, and for the solemnizing of those
heavenly Nuptials between Christ and his most beloved Spouse: where all the
powers of heaven shall dance for joy, while a Consort of Seraphims sing an
Epithalamium. Beloved, (says the Apostle) now are ye the sons of God, but it
appears not as yet what ye shall be. This choice Prerogative of adoption does
but shadow out your future glory, for it appears not as yet what ye shall be.
Now ye are sons, but in your minority; sons, but yet insulted over by servants.
Now ye are sons, but then ye shall be heirs, heirs of glory and co-heires
with Christ. Now you see in a glass darkly, (...), in a riddle, and that book
which is called the Revelation, is most veiled with obscurity; but then you
shall see face to face, (...) -- as God promises to manifest to Moses; And some
think, that this place of the Apostle alludes to those very words, taken out of
Numb. 12. 6. The riddle of summum bonum, that has posed so many, shall then be
explicated, happiness shall be unmasked, the book shall be unsealed, the white
stone shall sparkle most oriently, you shall behold with open face the glory of
God, you shall know as you are known: not as if a finite creature could
comprehend an infinite essence, (as some of the Schoolmen seem fondly to
imagine,) but the words will easily bear a double Hebraisme. You shall know as
you are known, that is, either you shall know as you are approved, or else you
shall know as you are known, that is, you shall know as you are made to know;
(...), that is, (...), says Beza, (...), says Heinsius: for indeed (...), is
the same with the Hebrew (...), and if it be rendered Hellenistically, he tells
us the words will run thus, (...): I shall know, so as God is pleased to be
known by me, to manifest himself unto me. O let every pious Panting Soul, with
its apprehensions raised and its affections advanc'^, wait and long and breath
for so glorious a time, when the Panting Soul shall become an enjoying, an
embracing Soul. When waterbrooks shall be turned into rivers of pleasure, ever
springing from Gods right hand, who is the fountain of being, where the
glorious rays that flow from the face of Christ shall gild those pleasant and
crystalline streams, and there shall be fresh and eternal ebullitions of joy,
so that the pure soul may bathe it self in bliss, and be for ever steept in
unexpressible, in unconceivable sweetness.

Mount Ebal.
JUDGES 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz, (says the Angel of the Lord) Curse bitterly the
Inhabitants thereof, because they came not out to the help of the Lord, to the
help of the Lord against the Mighty.


THis Chapter is filled with a Triumphant Song, that was made by Deborah, that
glorious Nursing-mother in Israel, after a great and famous Conquest, which God
had given her and Barak over Jabin and Sisera, and all their mighty Hosts. She
presently after the victory breaks out into a Psalm of Thanksgiving, she stirs
up her soul to the praise of her God, and excites Barak* to bear her company
in this her joy: Awake Deborah, Awake etc. Deborah in the Hebrew Language
signifies a Be; A Be by them is called (...), a working, industrious
creature; And this Song may well be looked upon as Deborahs Honey-combe, a
sweet and precious Song, dropping from her gracious lips, Deborahs Honey-combe;
I but withal this Be, it has a sting. Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the
Lord, Curse ye bitterly, etc. These words they are the sting of Deborahs Song,
which strikes through all such as maintain not the cause of God against his
enemies, that come not out to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the Mighty.

If you look but upon the foregoing words, you may see there how this holy
Prophetess takes an exact view of the behavior of the several tribes in this
time of war and commotion, when the People of Israel were now opposing the
Canaanites, such enemies as God had devoted to destruction, and had given the
Israelites full Commission to destroy them. And after special notice taken, she
gives just Encomiums and commendations of all such as were forward and active
in the Lords cause, and withal, sharp reproofs and cutting reprehensions, to
all such as were remiss and negligent in this their duty. And first she begins
with the praise of them that deserved it.

Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek.] This tribe sent in
aid to Israel, and the root that sprang from hence against Amalek was Deborah
her self, who judged Israel, dwelling under a Palm Tree, between Ramath and
Bethel in Mount Ephraim, and by her charge and authority the war was
undertaken, it was she that whetted Barak, and encouraged the Israelites
against their enemies.

After thee Benjamin, among thy People.] Against thee, O Amalek; some of this
tribe also adjoined themselves to Deborah.

Out of Machir came down Governors.] The tribe of Manasseh branch't it self
into two noble families, that of Machir, and the other of Jair; And out of
Machir there came worthy men to help in the battle.

And out of Zebulon they that handle the Pen of the Writer.] Learned men, and
skilful Lawyers, such as handle the Pen, these helped forward in the War both
(1.) By their Counsel and Advice: and this is none of the smallest aides: One
Ulysses better then many an Ajax. Or (2.) By weapons and outward aid; Such as
were wont to handle the Pen of the Writer, they now handle the spear of the
Soldier.

And the Princes of Issachar were with Deborah,] choice and worthy ones, Heads
of the People.

And Issachar.] Not only the Princes, but the rest of the tribe. And also
Barak.] He was the Captain, chief in the War, the primum mobile. He was sent on
foot into the valley.] He was the Leader of the footmen in the valley. Thus
far she commends, in the next words she reproves.

For the Divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart; why abodest
thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? for the
divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.] There were great
wonderings why Reuben came not out to help their brethren; for the divisions of
Reuben, that they should hold back and not accompany the rest of the tribes,
many searchings and enquiries why Reuben came not. This tribe dwelt beyond
Jordan in fat and goodly pasture; and they too much minded their Cattle, and
neglected the care of the Commonwealth. They were hearing the bleatings of the
sheep, and the bellowings of the oxen, when their brethren heard the Alarm of
War, the noise of the Trumpet, the beating of the Drum. Why abodest thou among
thy sheepfolds? have thou no care of Isreal's troubles, of the bleeding
condition of thy brethren? do thou take more care of thy sheep then of them?
see how the fierce enemy like a Wolf, comes to devour them, and proud Sisera
is ready to tear them in pieces? will thou not take as much care of them as of
thy sheep?

Gilead abode beyond Jordan.] Both the families of Manasseh, Machir and Jair
dwelt in Gilead, and possessed it; Now the family of Machir was commended
before, so that here is meant of Jair. Or else the words are to be took thus,
as an answer to Reuben, why could not thou come from beyond Jordan as well
as Gilead; Gilead abode beyond Jordan, and yet he came, and so this tends to
Gileads praise, and to Reubens dishonor, the first sense is most genuine.

And why did Dan remain in ships?] Either 1. To shelter themselves from the
enemies, when they heard of Iabin and Sisera's coming they slipped themselves
away. Or else 2. Dan remained in ships, he minded his own business and
merchandise, his traffic and commerce. And why did Dan remain in ships, when
all Israel was almost suffering shipwreck?

Asher continued on the seashore, and abode in his breaches.] The words
include a double excuse which Asher had, why it came not to help Israel; 1.
They dwelt afar off by the Seashore. 2. Their towns and cities were ruinous
and not well fenc't, and therefore they stayed at home to defend and fortify
themselves, they abode in their breaches; I but there was another breach that
Asher might have thought of, a breach of Gods Law and Commandment, which
enjoined his People mutual love, and a joint opposition of their enemies.

Zebulun and Naphtali were a People that jeoparded their lives unto the death
in the high places of the field. After a more general commendation of some
tribes, and reproves of others, she then comes to a special Encomium of these
two, as most eminent in their service, and a more stinging reproof of such as
were inexcusably negligent.

Zebulun and Naphtali reproached their lives, so it is in font: they esteemed
them not worth the having with Isreal's ruin: they preferred Gods cause before
their lives. They reproached their lives.] For it seemed a strange thing to
others, and little better then ridiculous, for a small number, a little handful
of men, to go against a vast army, enemies clothed with terror, that might
even blow them away in less then an hour: And yet they go out against Jabin
and Sisera, they fear not his nine hundred chariots of iron. What means Sisera
to brandish his glittering sword, to bend his bow, and prepare his deadly
arrows? No weapon against them shall prosper. Zebulun and Nephtali, if they
were less then they are, they would adventure their lives, and if they perish
they perish.

In the High places of the field.] On Mount Tabor, where they might have a view
of Sisera's army, a terrible prospect for Zebulun and Nephtali one would have
thought. And yet they march forward with an undaunted courage and resolution.
Zebulun and Nephtali, more eminent in their forwardness and obedience, and so
have a more singular commendation given them.

And Meroz has a more bitter curse then any of the rest. God took notice of
all the others remissness, and has left it upon record to the view of all
Posterity; I but Meroz has a Curse with a greater emphasis.

Curse ye Meroz.] The Jews have a Proverb, we must leap up to Mount Gerizim,
but creep into Mount Ebal. You know upon Mount Gerizim all the blessings were
pronounced by Moses, as upon Mount Ebal all the Curses; So then, you must leap
up to Mount Gerizim, be forward and ready to bless; but creep into Mount Ebal,
be slow and unwilling to curse; I but where God gives a special command to
curse, there you must leap up to Mount Ebal too.

Gurse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the Lord.] This does not come out of any
revengeful thoughts, or private respect that Deborah had, but she has a
special command to curse them Says the Angel of the Lord.] Expositors are
dubious, (...): -- it may be rendered Nuncius Jehovae, and so some take it to
be Barak* who call*d out (as is very like,) this City to the War, but they
refused to come; But whether it be meant of an Angel properly, or of any that
had a Prophetical Spirit, Gods Messenger, his Angel; this we are sure, the
drift is to show that this Curse comes by divine authority, by heavenly
mandate, by the dictate of the Spirit, Curse ye Meroz; says the Angel of the
Lord.

Curse ye bitterly.] Curse ye with Cursings, an usual Hebraisme. Object.
But how comes Meroz to have a more bitter and sharp Curse then any of the rest
that came not? This City was Resp.
very near the place where the battle was fought, it was very nigh Mount Tabor,
the inhabitants were within the noise of the Trumpet; other tribes had excuses,
this City none. And no doubt but they were requested by Barak to help, and yet
they came not out.

Because they came not out to the help of the Lord.] Why? does the Lord need
any aid? And does the God of Hosts need the help of Meroz? Is the hand of
Omnipotency abbreviated that it cannot help, or his arm shortened that it
cannot save? Does the mighty God call for help, and the great Jehovah need
auxiliary forces? what means this holy Prophetess, when she says and
repeates this, They came not out to the help of the Lord, etc.

They that help Israel are said to help the Lord. What is done to the Church,
God reckons as done for himself, Inasmuch as ye did it to one of these little
ones, you did it unto me; O the infinite goodness of God, that has conjoined
his own glory, and the salvation of his People together! He has wrought
Isreal's name in the frame of his own glory; it is for his honor to save
Israel; They that come not out to help Israel, they come not out to help the
Lord.

God needs not the help of men, he can save his people miraculously, he did so
here; The Stars fought in their courses against Sisera; He can raise a
glorious Army of Stars, and can order them as he pleases; they shall all keep
their ranks, they fight in their courses against Sisera. How did the Stars
fight against him?

Their beams and influences were their weapons; they wrought impressions in the
Air, and raised meteors rain, hail, lightning, thunder; The Stars like
bright and eminent Commanders, lead under them an Army of meteors, their
trained Soldiers, they set them into their several postures, like the
Centurion they say to one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he
comes. If they bid the clouds discharge, they instantly dart out
lightningflashes, and present a volley of thunderclaps; They Will try what they
can do with proud Sisera: And if Israel be too weak for them, the Host of
Heaven shall fight against them, The Stars fought in their courses against
Sisera; I, but all this is no thank to Meroz; nay, it rather aggravates their
sin, and so embitters their curse; shall inanimate creatures more sympathize
with Israel, then their fellow-brethren? Shall the Stars fight in their
courses, and shall not Meroz stir a foot to help them? And the river Kishon
sweeps them away (as dung) that ancient river, the river Kishon, now swelling
by reason of the excess of rain, and drowning many of the Canaanites, as the
Egyptians were once drowned in the Red Sea; they sink like lead in the mighty
waters. Stars and Rivers fight for them, but Meroz will not help them.

Against the mighty,] Jabin and Sisera, (...), potent, puissant enemies. The
Church of God has had always mighty opposers, great enemies; Satan the Prince
of the Air, Antichrist and his forces. These and many such like observations
lie scattered in the words, and might be gathered out of them, but we will
unite them all in this one truth, which is directly aimed at, and intended in
them.

Doct.
Doct Every Christian should be of a public spirit; he is bound under pain of
a bitter curse, (as much as in him lies, to promote the cause of God, and to
help Israel, to help the Church of God against its mighty enemies.

We Will branch it into these two particulars.

1. It Is a thingfull of reason and equity, that every one that professes
himself an Israelite, should help Israel, that Christians should be of a
public spirit; it is but just that Meroz should aid Israel.

2. How every one may help the Lord against the mighty, and stand for the peace
of Sion; by what means they may do this.

(1.) A Christian should be of a public and enlarged spirit not seeking only
himself and his own ends, with a narrow and contracted heart; but he should
seek the glory of God, and the good of Sion, of his Church and people.

1. It is the very nature of goodness to diffuse it self abroad in a spreading
and liberal manner; for it does not thus lose any thing, but augments, and
increases its being by communicating it self.

2. You may see some prints and footsteps of this in Nature, some obscure
representations of this truth there. The Sun, it does not monopolize its beams,
and engrosse its light; but scatters them abroad, gilds the whole world with
them; it shines more for others then it self, it is a public light.

Look on a fountain, it does not bind in its streams, seal up it self, and
enclose its waters, but spends it self with a continual bubbling forth; it
streams forth in a fluent, liberal, and communicative manner; it is a public
spring.

Nay natural bodies will part with their own properties, leave their motions;
nay, cross their own inclinations for a general good. The Air, a light and
nimble body, that mounts upwards, and does naturally ascend; yet for an
universal good, rather then there shall be a breach and rupture in nature, a
vacuum, it will descend for the stopping of that hiatus. In the body of man,
the inferior members will venture themselves for the good of the whole; The
hand will be cut off, and lose its own being, rather then the head shall be
endangered; you see some shadows of this truth in Nature.

3. And the weak and glimmering light of Nature shows thus much, that a man is
not borne for himself alone; he is a sociable ^reature, and sent into the world
for the good of others. The ^oice of an Heathen, A man's country, and his
friend, and others challenge great part of him. It is a miserable (...) to make
his own self the center of all his actions.

4. Consider, that every man's private welfare is included in the public. The
welfare of Meroz depended upon Isreal's safety; what would have become of Meroz,
if the rest of their fellowbrethren had perished? So that it was a part of great
folly in Meroz, not to come out to the help of Israel. When the disease seazes
upon a vital part, as the head, or the heart, or the like, so as to endanger
the whole; then every member is in danger, though for the present they may be
free from pain. The well-being of every private man, depends on the public
good. A single drop is soon dried up and consumed; I, but a drop in the Ocean
when it is united to a multitude of other drops, it is there more safe; and a
drop by it self is weak, and can make no resistance: I, but a drop in the Ocean
is terrible. Men have a more safe, and a more honorable being, as joined to
the whole, then taken single by themselves. A single drop can do nothing; but a
multitude of drops joined together, will make a stream, and carry all before
them: A single beam is obscure; but in the Sun the center of rays, meeting in
the public point, they are glorious.

And these arguments may prevail with you as men, living in common society;
but then as Christians.

I. Consider, that Gods children have been always of this disposition, of
public spirits, seeking the glory of God, and the good of Sion. Exodus 32. 32.
If not, blot me I pray thee out of thy Book; Moses out of a pang of vehement
zeal, would part with his own happiness, rather then Israel should perish; If
it would make more for the glory of God, he would be content to be damned, or
at least to have the beams of Gods favorable presence withdrawn from him. Romans
9. 3. I could wish, that my self were accursed from Christ, (or separated) for
my brethren, my kinsmen, according to the flesh, for the Jews, Israelites;
which is meant of the poena damni: I could be content to have the face of
Christ hid from me for my brethrens sake, as Gods face was once hid from Christ
upon the Cross; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? A most strong
affection and zeal for the public good. Paul knew what the face of Christ
was; how glorious a sight it was, to see God face to face: And he knew what
answer God had given to Moses too; Him that sins, him will I blot out of my
Book: And yet out of a most ardent desire of the salvation of the Jews, he will
part with the face of Christ, so they may be saved; here were public spirits
indeed.

What should I tell you of Vriah that famous Soldier, his brave and heroical
resolution; how he would take no complacency in outward things? and mark his
reason, 2 Samuel* 11. 11. The Arc, and Israel, and Judah abide in tents, and my
Lord Joab, and the servants of my Lord are encamped in the open fields; as if
he should say, What shall the Arc be in danger, and shall Vriah be secure? Or
shall my Lord Joab be more forward then I am in Isreal's cause? As thou live,
and as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing; He raps out an Oath like a
Soldier, which he might have well spared, but yet he shows a most generous and
public spirit; And this was no small aggravation of David's sin.

137. Psalm; See how the Psalmist and the rest of Gods people behave
themselves. By the rivers of Babylon; we sat down and wept, when we remembered
thee, O Sion! We hanged our Harpes upon the Willows in the midst thereof; If I
forget thee, Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. David had a most
delicate touch upon the Harp, a soft and silken touch; He could still Readiness
evil spirit with his Music; but if I forget thee, Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget her cunning.

And when did Jeremy make his Lamentation, that whole book of mourning; but
when the glory of Sion was laid in the dust; when Jerusalem, the Lady of
Nations was made desolate? Gods people have been always of public spirits,
and have sympathiz'd with the Church.

II. That you may follow so good example; think whose cause it is: The cause of
Israel, is the cause of God; To the help of the Lord, etc. Can you have a
better cause? The good of the Church, and the glory of God are knit together by
an act of Gods gracious will. So that he that seeks the good of the Church,
does in the same act seek the glory of God: And he that helps not Israel, comes
not out to the help of the Lord. Now you are bound to maintain the cause of
God, and to help the Lord.

1. By many and several engagements; As creatures at his beck, he has a
sovereignty and dominion over you. Not to obey the great God, is to deny his
supremacy. You are bound in a way of thankfulness, to stand for him and his
cause, by those sweet mercies, those precious pledges of his love, which he
every moment heaps upon you; by those many blessings that come swimming to you
in the blood of a Savior.

2. By many Promises, Vows, Protestations. Your first and Original vow in
Baptism, obliges you to maintain the cause of God, and of his Church, against
all the enemies thereof. And you have often repeated this Vow, and sealed it
again in the Lords Supper, for you know that is a sealing up of the Covenant;
Now what is the Covenant but this, That he shall be your God, and you shall be
his people? And then you cannot but remember a late Vow that you have made too;
the very sum of which was this, to stand for the public good.

3. Certainty to prosper; it is the cause of God; A Christian is of the surest
side, of the winning side. There Is none but has a mind to prosper, then pray
for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. There Is none can
eclipse the glory of God; it is beyond the limited power of a creature, to dim
the luster of his Crown; God will maintain his own cause, or else he should
lose of his glory; his mighty Arm will get himself the victory. Christ is the
Captain of this Church, and he is the chiefest often thousand, (the
Ensigne-bearer.) And this is comfort enough for a Christian, the enemies must
conquer Christ, before they can overcome his Church. Christ the head of the
Church is impregnable. This is the second ground why Christians must stand for
the cause of the Church; because it is the cause of God, to which they are
bound. (1.) By engagements, many and great. (2.) By Vows. (3.) Encouraged with
certainty of success.

III. A Christian's bound to be of a public spirit, by virtue of the communion
of Saints. Every Christian's a member of Christ's mystical body, and so must
take care for the good of the whole. He that is united to Christ the Head, must
be knit also to the other members; He that does not sympathize with the Church,
is not of the body; He that can hear of the breaches of Sion, and the decays
of Jerusalem; He that can see the apples of Gods eye pierced through, and not
be affected with it, will ye call such members of Christ's body? He that is not
truly affected with the bleeding condition of the Christians in Ireland, does
virtually and in effect deny this Article of his Creed, The Communion of Saints.

IV. It is against the Mighty: Christians had need have public spirits,
because they have public enemies; the Devil, a public enemy; Antichrist, a
public enemy: They are private enough in respect of their malice, and
subtlety; but public in force, and opposition. As there is the paw of the Lion
for strength, so there is the head of the Serpent for wisdom; but yet the head
of the Serpent is broken, their wisdom infatuated: He that is in heaven, can
counterplot them, and laugh them to scorn: But yet thus much you may learn of
the enemies of the Church, to study the public good: They seek the ruin of
the whole, and why should not you seek the welfare of the whole? If they be so
sedulous and industrious, so forward and active in a bad cause, will you be
negligent and remiss in the best cause, in the cause of God, in the helping of
the Lord? All that they do, they will tell you it is for the Catholic cause, they
are for the public. What will not a Jesuit do for the Catholic cause? He Will
compass Sea and Land to gain one proselyte. They do public mischiefs, and
have a malignant and venomous influence into all places where they come; and
why should not Christians do as public service for God, as they do for the
Devil? Come out therefore against the m^ghty to the help of the Lord. That
which was Meroz his excuse perhaps, because the Canaanites were mighty ones,
therefore they durst not come out against them; this God makes the very
aggravation of their sin; for if the enemies were mighty, Israel had more need
of their help and aid, Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the Lord, etc. And
Meroz might have considered, that as there are mighty enemies, so there is a
mighty God too, an Almighty God, that can crush proud Sisera, and dash in
pieces the strongest enemy. And now by this time you have seen that it is but
fit and equal for a Christian to be of a public spirit, to come out to the
help of the Lord.

(2.) The manner, how every Christian may promote the public good. And here by
way of premisall;

1. It must be in a lawful and warrantable way They that come out to help the
Lord must help him in his own ways, such ways as his word allows, or else,
they do not help the Lord, but offend the Lord in breaking his commandments;
Job 13. 7. Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? Does
Gods glory depend upon man's sin? does he allow any man to sin for the advancing
of his glory? Nay, does he not forbid it, and detest it? It is a clear and
undeniable truth of our Savior; You must not do evil, that good may come of
it. A speech of one of the Ancients; You must not tell the least lie, if you
could save the whole Church by it. You remember the clause in the Protestation,
as far as lawfuy I may; he that seeks the public good in an unlawful course,
breaks his Protestation. To the right conducting of an action, besides the
intention of an end truly, there must be also the choice of just direct means
for the accomplishing of it.

2. In a prudent and orderly way. They that come out to the help of the Lord,
must keep their ranks; The Stars fought in their courses against Sisera.
Christians must keep their several stations; if there be confusion, you cannot
tell a Canaanite from an Israelite, a friend from a foe. Let every Christian
that studies the public good, keep his own place; The Magistrate his; the
Ministers theirs; and the people also theirs. And now there are some ways very
good and warrantable, by which Christians may come out to the help of the Lord,
and to the aiding of Israel.

(1.) By Prayer. To be sure this is a lawful means; I, and it is a prevalent
means too, and has great influence upon the public good; Exodus 17. 11. When
Moses held up his hand, then Israel prevailed. It Is a special benefit that
Christians have by the communion of Saints, the prayers one of another. There Is
a stock of prayers the Church has, and the weakest Christian has a share in it.
Thou have the benefit of many Christians prayer, whose face thou never saw,
whom thou never heard'st of; perhaps he lives in America, or some remote corner
of the world; but wheree're he be thou have the benefit of his prayer, as a
member of the mystical body. For there is no prayer put up to God for his
Church, but it encludes every particular member of the Church in it; so that
prayer does wonderfully promote the public good. Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, pray for it, that is the way to have it. And many an one that can use
no other means, yet may use this. There Is many cannot help the Christians in
Ireland; but there is no Christian but may pray for them. There Is many that
cannot fight against the Rebels; and yet they can pray against them, to have
them restrained and subdued. Many a weak and aged and sickly one, unfit for
war, and yet powerful in prayer. And these weapons of our warfare, they are
not carnal, but mighty. You cannot encounter an enemy; I, but you may thus
wrestle with the Almighty. You cannot batter down a strong hold; but yet ye can
besiege* the throne of grace with concentred abilities. You are not fit to be
set in a Watchtower, to spy out the approach of an enemy; but yet you may
watch unto prayer. And this is a great advantage that Christians have over
their enemies; The enemy knows not how to pray; they know how to curse, and
swear, and blaspheme the name of God; but they know not how to pray: Or if they
do pray, and tell their prayers with their beads, that they may know the number
of them; yet their prayer is turned into fin, The prayer of the wicked is an
abomination. Let them cry aloud to their Idols, and see if they will hear them;
they cannot look that God should hear them: For, If I regard iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. O then let Christians know their own
happiness, and make use of this spiritual weapon of prayer, that opposes the
enemy more then all other weapons whatsoever: Let them brandish the glittering
sword, etc.

And this is the chief use you are to make of all the news you hear, to know
how to order your prayers accordingly. No question more ordinary in men's mouth,
then, what news? And I find no fault with the question, it is good and
fitting: But news are not to be enquired after only for the satisfying of men's
minds, and curiosity; as the Athenians spent all their time in enquiring for
some news: But this is the main end of it, to know how to send up your prayers
for the good of the Church; and your praises for such mercies as God bestows
upon it. All news heard by a public spirit, will stir up prayer or
thanksgiving. This is the use you are to make of news; if sad news of the
Churches misery and desolation, then send up more fervent prayer, that God
would repair the breaches of it, and settle it in a flourishing condition; if
welcome news, then praise God for his free goodness, and desire him to perfect
the great work which he has begun. This is one special means to promote the
public good, the prayer of the righteous. And God always when he intends any
great mercy, he poures upon his people a spirit of prayer, he stirs up their
hearts in this way; he opens their mouth wide, before he fills it.

(2.) Self-Reformation. This has great influence upon the public good. And how
can you expect a public and glorious Reformation, unless first you reform in
private? Look upon the grievances of your own soul; hearken unto those many
petitions that are put up to you by the Ministers; who beseech you to be
reconciled unto God. Every sin adds to wrath; it provokes God, pulls down his
judgments, and ripens a Nation for destruction, and has a malignant and
venomous influence upon the whole. So then the turning from sin, and reforming
your ways, is the means to divert judgments, to bring down mercies, and bring
down public good. If there were more private Reformations in men's spirits;
there is no doubt, but God would bless the public Reformation. Sin puts
more rubs in the way, then any enemy or opposer whatsoever. This is the great
Mountain that hinders the going up of the Temple; if this one were but took
away, all other would quickly become a plain. They are very injurious to the
public good, that go on in a course of sinning, against so gracious a God,
that does such great things for us. One sinner destroys much good, as the wise
man speaks.

(3.) United spirits, and a sweet harmony of Affections, graciously consorting
together, would help forward the cause of Israel. Jarres and dissensions
amongst Christians themselves, sound very harshly: For the divisions of Reuben,
there were great thoughts of heart. What is there can give greater advantage to
an enemy, then to see Israelites fall out amongst themselves? You may learn
more wisdom of them that are wiser in their generation, then the children of
light; what a strait union and confederacy have they among themselves? Gebal,
and Ammon, and Ama'ek, the Philistines, with them that dwell at Tire. These
scales of Leviathan (as that in Job is usually allegoriz'd) are shut together
as with a close seal. And if they should be at variance, and discord among
themselves; yet they have a sure way of reconciliation, by a joint opposition
of the godly. Ephraim against Manesseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, both
against Judah. Herod and Pilate made friends in crucifying Christ. If wicked
men can agree in opposing of goodness, why should not Christians in helping
forward goodness?

All ye that come out to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against
the Mighty; come with united hearts, and agreeing spirits. Why should there be
strife between you, seeing you are Brethren?

And then consider; What will not united forces do, when you shall join to the
work of the Lord with one consent, with one shoulder? What is it that this
union will not bring to pass? It will strike terror to the Churches enemies, and
strengthen the hearts of friends: It will mightily promote the public goood,
and tend to the glory of Jerusalem. If men would but lay out themselves, and
their several gifts and abilities in one general aim for the advantage of
their Master, and good of their fellow servants; what glorious times should we
then see?

This is one clause in the Protestation, to stand for the union of the three
Kingdoms.

(4.) I might add that, with outward aid too, you are bound to promote the
public good; with liberal contribution to relieve the necessity of the
Christians, as the Church of Macedonia gave above her abilities. And also such
as by authority shall be sent forth against the Popish-Rebells, they are to
fight with courage, and alacrity, for it is for the cause of God; They come out
to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the Mighty.

And now for a word of Application.

Use. 1.
It is for the just reproof of most men, that mind not at all the public
good: How do they think to avoid the curse of Meroz, seeing they come not out
to the help of the Lord, etc.? There is a principle of corrupt self-love in
men, that makes them of narrow and contracted spirits; All their aims are for
themselves, and their own ends; they do not mind the good of the Church. If
they hear but of a worldy loss, some ship cast away, and their estate be
weakened, this will pierce and affect their spirits; 'twill sad and darken
their joy: But they can hear of ruins of the Church, the breaches of Sion;
that the Church has many rollings, and commotions, and not be wrought upon, not
be much moved with it. Men are more affected with their own private good, then
with the public; and more moved with private miseries, then public. If they
themselves be in the least danger, or some of their near friends, then you
shall have mourning, and sighing, and lamentation: But if the Church lie a
bleeding, the Saints, (those precious ones) be killed all the day long, and
accounted as sheep for the slaughter; they can be merry enough for all this.
How many are there that have not shed a tear for Ireland! That have not spent
a sigh for them, nor put up a prayer for them! God he has a Bottle for your
tears, and he knows how many you have put into it; I am sure it will hold a
great many more then you have shed. I speak not so much for outward weeping,
there is many perhaps cannot shed a tear upon any occasion: But I call for a
spirit of mourning, a sympathizing spirit; a spirit took up with the public
good, as its best employment O how many are there, that this bitter curse of
Meroz will fall heavy upon! And upon your days of humiliation, be sure to
humble your selves for this; your want of a public spirit, your not praying
for the peace of Jerusalem. How do you know but that, if you had sent up more
prayers to heaven, God might have freed the distressed Christians by this
time? As they are guilty of the Christians blood in an high degree, that shed
it in a most inhumane manner; so I know not, how they can excuse themselves
from some guilt of it, that do not help them by prayers, and endeavors as much
as in them lies.

2. It is against all such as are in a kind of indifferency, and neutrality;
they neither are for one nor other. What is this but the very same case with
Meroz? Meroz did not fight against Israel, it did not fight for the Canaanites;
no, but it did not come out to the help of Israel, and therefore it has this
bitter curse. Vain men that think to content themselves with this, that they do
not hurt: but every man that does not good, does hurt, he most do either one or
other; the soul is not idle, it is either doing good or evil.

Suppose that a man did no hurt, yet this is not enough, unless he do s good
too: for there are sins of Omission, as well as of Commission. Not doing of
public good, is a public hurt.

3. By way of Gradation a majori ad majus. If there be such a bitter curse upon
Meroz for their negligence, and remissness in duty, for not coming out
against the Mighty, what severe judgments and dregs of wrath shall be poured
out upon all them that come out against the Lord, that are against the public
good, that wish ill to Sion, that would fain see her in the dust, that hate and
persecute Christians, that oppose the power of Religion, and the life of the
Gospel, that are in the very gall of bitterness? All the curses that are
written, and not written shall flame against them; and the vials of Gods
fiercest wrath shall be emptyed upon them. Meroz's curse is bitter; but in
respect of theirs, sweet and easy.

Bless God for men of public spirits; for Zerubbabels and Jehoshuah's, Use. 2.
such as are building God a Temple; Pray God to increase the number of public
spirits, such as may come out to the help of the Lord. As there is a great and
bitter curse laid upon Meroz, for being negligent in the cause of God, so
there are choice and eminent blessings for such as are forward and active in
it. God will abundantly recompense all the labor of love, which any shall show
for his name; Their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

THE White Stone: OR, A Learned and Choice TREATISE OF Assurance: Very useful
for all, but especially weak BELIEVERS.
2 PET. 1. 10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


ASsurance of salvation is a truth of great and precious consequence, of sweet
and comfortable influence into the whole life of a Christian: A truth which has
scarce had liberty to unmask and show it self in former times, and so has
seldom or never been fully treated of: A truth which could never be more
welcome and seasonable then in times of danger and uncertainty; when all other
things are in a doubtful and wavering condition, then to make our calling and
election sure; to set up a spiritual Militia, and to put the soul in a posture
of defense, in such an heavenly preparation, as it may be fit to meet with all
conditions; He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting
in God: He is just like the Philosophers good man (...), apiece, that,
cast him where you will, like a Die, he falls always sure and square; He Is
built upon the same foundation that the whole Church of God is; He Is built upon
a Rock, and though the Waves dash, and the winds rise, though the storm
increase, and the floods beat in, yet the house stands, the foundation's sure,
it is built upon a Rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
I Will make him a pillar in the Temple of my God, as Christ promises to the
Church of Philadelphia; even like one of those Pillars in Solomon's Temple: The
name of the one was Jachin, and of the other Booz; nothing but stability and
strength, as the words imply; Christian Assurance fortifies the soul, and
prepares it against all conditions.

Now, as for the drift of our Apostle in this chapter, 'twas to persuade the
Christian Churches of ^onous, Ga^atia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bithynia, to whom he
wrote that they would be fruitful and abundant in the graces of God, that they
would grow in grace, and add grace to grace, and so to increase in them all,
till they came to a full and perfec^ stature in Christ For ^e that lacks these,
(says the Apostle, is blind, and cannot see afarr^ off* he is poreblinde, and
cannot see so far as heaven and heavenly things: And theu he is forgetful too
of the very first principles and rudiments of Grace; he forgets that he was
purged from his former sins in the Lavour of Regeneration, in Baptism, when he
first entered into Covenant with God.

Wherefore do ^e rather give diligence* to make your calling, etc. You that
have a spiritual eye, and an enlight'ned soul, and can disce^ne the things of
God, and you that are mindful of the Covenant made with him, do you, brethren,
give, etc. for this if any thing will make you fruitful in the works of Grace;
for by these you must maintain your Assurance; these are the fruits and
evidences of your solvation; the fruits of the Spirit, and the first fruits of
eternal life. Christians that make their Calling and Election sure* will and
must be fruitful in good works. The Papists interpose (...) in this verse; and
Beza says indeed that he found it in two ancient copies, but though it be left
out in the letter, yet we enclude it in the sense; good reason to leave it out
in the text, because all the Greek copies do, two only excepted; but yet we
take it in in the interpretation, and freely acknowledge that no Christian can
be assured of his salvation, who is not fruitful and abundant in good works, as
Fulke and Carthwright do very well satisfy the Rhemists Translation.

In the words you have (1*) An usual compellation, Brethrer. (2.) An
Apostolical exhortation, and that to a double duty, one subordinate to another.

The (1.) and principal in intention, to make your calling and election sure*
The (2.) (which is a means to the former,) to give diligence. And if you look
upon the first again, you shall find in it. (1.) A propriety, your calling and
election. (2.) A method and order, first your calling* and then your election.

As for two of the particulars, we will but point at them, because they are not so
properly intended in the words. For

The compellation is frequent and obvious in every Epistle; and

1. An Apostolical Sua^a, by which they were wont to wind and insinuate
themselves into the affections of the people, to eng^atiate themselves with
them; for affection does strongly engage the judgment. And all Rhetoric is
little enough to win hearts and prevail upon some men's spirits.

2. An Apostolical meekness: Peter a Star of the first magnitude, yet calls
the lesser Sporades his brethren; A glorious and eminent Christian, a tall
Cedar in Lebanon, yet acknowledges the meanest and lowest Christians his
brethren. He learnt this of his Lord and Master, who was not ashamed to call
them brethren; And shall the disciple be above his Lord? 'Twere well if the
Pope* who will needs be Saint Peter's successor, would follow him in this. And
who art thou, O profane Ismael, that scoff'st at the children of the promise
under this very name and notion of brethren?

And then as for the propriety, (...), your calling and

1. None can be assured of another man's salvation, unless it be of such whom
the Scripture tells us were in the state of Grace; whose sincerity is made
famous to all the world; to whom the Spirit has set its broad seal, and given
them a public Testimony that they were within the Covenant: for others we know
in general, that there are a select and peculiar company whom God has chosen
out as his jewels, but we cannot say certainly and infallibly of such a
particular person, of any Individuum, that he is a chosen vessel. Of some it is
evident and apparent, that for the present, they are not in the state of Grace;
we are sure that as yet they are not efficaciously called, but we know not
whether they be chosen; for others we have great hopes, and an high degree of
probability, that they are truly born again, but yet we have no absolute
certainty; for Hypocrisy will go so far, as that the best Critics may be
deceived. And a man can never tell certainly another man's sincerity, unless he
could supply the place of Conscience. An Hypocrite may spin so fair a thread, as
that it may deceive his own eye, he may admire the cobweb, and not know himself
to be the Spider; how much more easy may he deceive a stander by? And as for
any extraordinary spirit of discerning, I know no ground for it, nor any
promise of it in the Scriptures.

You Will say, this takes much from the communion of Saints, and from the
sweetness of Christian society, if we cannot tell who are true members of the
Mystical body, fellow-brethren and fellow-heirs of the same promise.

1. Though we cannot tell absolutely and infallibly, yet we may know very
probably; we know there are such a peculiar people, a chosen generation, a
Royal Priesthood, and we know that such and such are the likeliest in the
world to be of this number, so as we have no reason to distrust them.

2. We must commend much of this to Gods providence, who very seldom suffers
Hypocrites to go undetected; he that is the great searcher of hearts will be
sure to meet with them: he hates a rotten heart, and will be sure to make it
odious.

3. It Is fitting that this and many other privileges should be reserved for
heaven, that so we may long after that the more. There shall be a pure and
unmixt communion, the perfect beauty of holiness. Nothing shall enter there
that makes a lie, nothing of Hypocrisy; but glorious Angels and glorified
Saints sunning themselves in the presence of God, shall keep company together
to all eternity.

2. (...)* Christians are chiefly to look to their own calling and election.
They are indeed bound to promote the good of others, and to look upon their
lives with such Rules as Christianity allows; but they must be sure to dwell at
home, and be acquainted with their own breasts, to make their own calling and
election sure* for they cannot be sure of another man's condition, so as they
may be of their own.

And thus we have dispatched those two particulars which lay more collateral in
the words, and were not directly intended in them. We now come to the very
mind and drift of the Text, which branches it self into these four
propositions* that will fully explain the nature of Assurance, though we keep
within the bounds of the Text: It streams into these four particulars.

Observe. 1.
1. A Christian may be assured of his salvation.

Observe. 2.
2. Assurance of salvation requires all diligence.

Observe. 3.
3. Assurance of salvation deserves all diligence, both implied in Give
diligence.

Observe. 4.
4. The way to make our Election sure, is first to make our calling sure.

And now you may look upon the Text, as on a pleasant Vine, situated in a
fruitful place, (...), i. e. in the horn of the Son of Oil or fatness, as the
Prophet speaks, you may sit under the shadow of it, and its fruit will be sweet
unto you. For you see how it has spread it self into spacious and goodly
branches, such as are all laden with fair and swelling clusters* clusters of
Canaan, that are ripened with those heavenly Sunbeams that shine out upon
them; and richly filled with all spiritual sweetness. And this fruit of the
Vine will cheer the heart of man to all eternity. As for us, we'll be sure to
prune off all such sproutings and luxuriancies of style* as may any way steal
from the sap and strength of so great a truth in hand, as the Hebrews call
those sproutings, (...), i. e. little Epicures, always feasting upon the
sweetness of the tree, and putting the root to continual expenses: we'll prune
off all these. And if there be any clusters lie lurking under the leaves,
truth's not so obvious to every eye, we'll (if we can) spy them out. The
Vintage will be long, we shall gather but a cin ster at a time, and press it
in the Application.

Observe. 1.
A Christian may be assured of his Sa^^ation, for Saint Peter would never
exhort them to give diligence, for an impossibility, for that which could not
be obtained. We Will move in this order, and show

1. What Assurance is.

2. Arguments for Assurance.

3. The manner how Christians are assured.

4. The special times of assurance.

5. Make Application.

I. And here first, what Assurance is.

It Is a reflex act of the soul, by which a Christian clearly sees, that he is
for the present in the state of grace, and so an heir apparent to glory; or in
the words of the text, by which he knows his Calling and Election.

It Is a reflex act, and so

1. Assurance is situated in the souls most noble, most closett^^, most
private* and most spiritual operation.

1.) Reflex acts are the most noble and most royal operations, the most
rational and judicious acts of a most intelligent Spirit. Reason is now in its
exaltation, it sits upon the Throne, and exercises a Judge-like power; all the
faculties of the soul must appear before its Tribunal, and give up a strict
account, (...), as the Pythagoreans were wont to pose and catechize themselves:
your inferior sensitive creatures can go poring on upon a present object, and
blunder on in a direct way, but are far enough from any reflex acts; although
some talk of reflexivenesse in sense too, (as to see that they see, or the
like) but it is but a fancy of their own; Sensitive Creatures could never reach
so high as a reflex act; and indeed sensual men know not what belong unto it,
but the reasonable soul can retire into it self, and take a view and survey of
its own actings.

2.) It is the most secret and retired operation; the soul withdrawes and bids
the body farewell, and even here becomes an anima separata: it retires into its
Closet, and bolts its self up, where none can peep in, none can evesdrop it.

3.) The most refined and spiritual working of all, this is most abstracted
from matter. The soul here does not commerce with outward drossy objects, but
looks upon it self, fixes its eye upon its own face. This is the most spiritual
employment of the soul, which does most strongly argue its immortality, and
shows it to be a spark of Divinity: How does the prime and fountain Being
spend all Eternity, but in looking upon his own transcendent and glorious
Essence? in viewing the bright Constellation of his Attributes, and seeing some
shadowy and languishing Representations of himself in the glass of the
Creatures? It Is one of the chief works of a Christian, to reflect upon himself,
Vita est in se reflexio; as the grave Moralist Seneca speaks. The Prodigal came
to himself, when he came to reflex acts* so 1 King* 8. 47. When they shall
turn to their own hearts, etc.

II. But yet this working of the soul is but weak and transient, it is fleeting
and desultory, it quickly vanishes; which shows a great disorder and
irregularity in the Spirit, that that which is the noblest and most proper
operation, that borders upon Divinity, men are least ver'st in it. How rare is
it for men to reflect upon their own conditions, to enter into an exact trial
and examination of their own ways? Radius reflexus languet, as the Optics
speak; The beam begins to be weary, and is ready to faint, it gives a weak and
languishing Representation: it is true of intellectual beams too, radius
reflexus languet. O how quickly are men weary of serious thoughts and
considerations? They look upon them as melancholy interruptions, turbida
intervalla. You had need of good arguments to persuade men to entertain a
serious thought; outward objects, these divert the mind, and take it off from
its greatest work. As a man that sees his natural face in a glass, (as St.
James speaks) goes his way, and presently forgets what manner of man he was.
The soul scarce knows its own visage, it looks abroad and is a stranger to it
self. Many a man's soul has scarce looked upon it self all his lifetime.

III. It consists in a reflex act, (1 John 2. 3. (...).) and so differs from
faith; it is one thing to believe, and another thing to know that I believe.
Our Divines go somewhat too far, (Calvin, Perkins, etc.) when they put all
justifying faith in a full persuasion. Ames says, it is when they deal with the
Papists, who put it in a bare assent: but (me thinks) they should rather be
more wary there, lest they give the enemy too much advantage. I rather think,
that being men eminently pious, it was as they found it in their own souls,
but all are not so strong in Christ* Assurance is the top and triumph of faith:
faith, that is our victory, by which we overcome the world: but assurance,
that is our triumph, by which (...), we are more then Conquerours. It Is flos
fidei, the very luster and eminency of faith. Faith that is the Root, Assurance
is the Top-branch, the flourishing of faith, faith with a gloss upon it.
Justifying faith, that does not only dwell in the understanding, in nudo
assensu, but requires an act of the will too, which must embrace a promise:
indeed it calls for an act resulting from the whole soul, which must receive
Christ offered unto it: but now assurance consists only in the mind, and so
there you have the difference between faith of Adherence, and faith of
Assurance. The first is an act of the whole soul, the latter is a work of the
mind only; it arises e sensu quodam spirituali; whereby we know and perceive
that we believe. And when I say every believer may be assured of his salvation:
I don't say that every believer is assured of it; No, every one is to labor
for it, to give diligence, as our Apostle speaks: but every one has not yet
obtained it: Assurance is not of the Essence of a Christian^; A man may be a
true child of God, and certainly saved, though he have not Assurance; He can
have little sweetness and comfort without it, little joy and peace, but yet he
may be in a safe though in a sad condition. It Is required to the been esse, not
to the esse of a Believer.

1. For the Promise is made to the direct act, and not to the reflex. Believe,
and thou shall be saved, that is the voice of the Gospel: Not, know that thou
do believe. Now there is many a weak Christian that has faith, and yet does
not know that he has it; Faith like a grain of mustard seed, lies hid for a
while, but it has a vigorous and operative spirit, and will work out in time,
and spread it self into goodly branches. The least degree of faith, if it be
true, brings salvation, but it does not bring assurance.

2. Many true Christians are in a state of desertion: all their light is
eclipsed* their joy and comfort is put out. Nay, they look upon God as an
enemy; they are so far from being assured of their salvation, as that they
verily think themselves in a lost condition, and yet all this while are in a
true state of grace. Their condition is cloudy and dark, and very uncomfortable
for the present, but yet it is safe; they are true believers, and yet far enough
from assurance. An excellent place in Isaiah for this, Isa. 50. 10. Who is
among you that fears the Lord, that walks in darkness and has not light?
let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God; some may truly
fear God, and yet walk in darkness, and have no light, not the least glimpse
of assurance no beam of Gods favorable countenance, yet let him trust in the
Lord, and stay himself upon his God. He may do this though he has no light, he
may multiply direct acts, though he has no reflex acts. And here he may lay
all the stresse of his salvation, lean upon the grace of God in Christ, and
with a sweet recumbency rest himself upon his God.

And this consideration may strengthen many a bruised reed, and revive many a
drooping Spirit, who for the present do not know that they believe, their case
may be good for all this. Thou may be a true believer, though thou art but a
weak believer, nay, though thou think thy self no believer; I do not speak this
that any should rest in this condition; no, this were against the text; All
must give diligence to make their calling and election sure: And a Christian
can have little or no quiet, till he attain to assurance.

And thus you have seen the nature of Assurance, we shall in the next place
prove, that a Christian may be assured of his salvation.

1. Ab esse ad posse. Many a Christian has been, and is assured of his
salvation. Scarce any eminent Christian in the whole Book of God, but has set
his Seal to this truth by his own particular experience. This is so clear as
the adversaries themselves cannot deny, but that many choice ones have had a
full and satisfying light springing in upon their soul, and clearing their
eternal condition to them. But they say it is by way of extraordinary
Revelation, a special Privilege vouchsafed to some few of Gods choicest
Worthies by a rare indulgence. But this is spoken gratis, and is contrary to
the present experience of many thousands of Christians; 1 John 5. 13. The very
drift of St. John's Epistle, is that Christians might have assurance. And
besides, those mediums by which Christians attain to Assurance* are common to
all: All of them have the Spirit dwelling in them: all have the fruits of the
Spirit, and a sweet testimony of their own Spirits; though some have it in a
weak measure and cannot reach to a Plerophery: all come not to this full
assurance; but yet these are the usual ways, by which men attain to it, which
have nothing in them of extra ordinary Revelation: they are via Regia, and yet
via trita too. Add to this the scope of the text. St. Peter exhorts all to
give diligence to make their Calling and Election sure, which, to what purpose
were it, if it came only by special and extraordinary Revelation, which does
not depend upon their diligence?

2. Search into the nature of faith it self, and you will see that it does much
tend to assurance, and has some vicinity with it. There Is a double act of
faith, as the most acute Ames observes* (1.) The actus primus, by which I
believe in Christ for the remission of my sins, and justifying of my person,
which is properly justifying faith* (2.) Actus ex fide emanans, by which I
believe that my sins are remitted, which does necessarily presuppose the former
act: for thou have no more reason to believe that thy sins are remitted then
any other, till thou have first received Christ for the Remission of thy sins.
And this is contained in the Article of the Creed, I believe the remission of
sins; not only in general, for this the devils believe and yet tremble: but the
Christian peculiarizes it, and draws sweetness out of it, I believe the
forgivenes of my sins* And of this latter it is meant, that fidelis certus esse
potest ^ertitudin^ fidei de Remissione peccatorum, Romans 5. 1. Being justified
by faith, (...), a sweet (...), and holy security of Spirit, for Assurance is
nothing but apex fidei, the highest degree of faith. And it is the speech of
Aquinas, Quicunque habet scientiam vel fidem, certus est se ^abere, nam de
ratione fidei est, ut homo sit certus de his quorum h^bet fidem. Faith does of
its own accord raise and advance it self to Assurance, and that by reason of
the applying and appropriati^g virtue which is in it; It Is faiths Idiom, My
Lord, and my God: by a sweet Monopoly it engrosses all to its self; and yet
leaves enough for others. Now a man that strongly grasps a Jewel in his hand,
knows that he has it; The hand of faith lays hold on Christ, and knows that
it receives him: so the want of Assurance in a Believer does merely flow from
the weakness of faith, for though it be true, that to believe, and to know
that I believe, be two distinct acts: yet this you must know and observe, that
the strength and clearness of a direct act, will necessarily infer a reflex
act. Those truths which I do clearly and evidently know, I also know that I
know them. And that which I strongly believe, I know that I believe it: So the
want of assurance comes from the imbecility of Faith. And the Papists that
place Faith only in a mere assent, may well deny Assurance; for they take away
that clasping and closing power by which it should unite it self with its
object.

3. From the nature of the promises: for this is the drift of the promises, (as
it is Hebr. 6. 18) that the heir^ of promise might have strong consolation: Now
a believer can have but weak and unstable comfort without Assurance. What if
all the clusters of Canaan were laid on an heap? What if all the Cordials of
the Gospel were strained into one cup? were the soul any thing the better if it
must only Tantalize, see them and want them? What sweetness can a Christian
draw from a promise till he knows that it belongs unto him? Will this enrich a
man, to know that there are Pearls and Diamonds in the world? Will this
satisfy a fainting Israelite, to know that there is a Canaan, a land that
flows with milk and honey, although (it may be) he shall never come neer't?
Nay, is it not a greater sting and vexation for the soul to think I know there
are pure fountains and pleasant streams, but yet I may die with thirst? there
are spiritual dainties, and precious delicacies, but I am not sure to have one
taste of them* many a promise looks with a pleasant and propitious eye, but
it is not fixed upon my soul; so that take away a Christians interest and
propriety in a promise, and what becomes of his consolation? God has given his
word, his oath, his seal, his earnest, and all to this very end, that a poor
Christian may be assured of his salvation, that he might have strong and
vigorous consolation; so that to deny him this, is to annihilate the word of
God, to frustrate the oath of God, to evacuate the seal of God, and as much as
in them lies to make him lose his earnest, and to leave the soul in an
intricate and perplexed condition.

4. From the nature of Christian hope; There Is a vast difference between the
Moralists hope, and that which is the Theological grace, and yet this is scarce
took notice of; they require these three ingredients into the object of hope:
that it must be (1) bonum* (2.) futurum, (3.) incertum; but Christian hope is
certain and infallible, it looks upon good as to come, and as certain to come;
indeed it is nothing but (...), as Clem. Alexand. elegantly, blood running in
the veins of Faith; if hope expire, Faith will presently bleed to death. That
good which Faith sees, Hope waits for; Faith eyes it as present, but yet at a
distance, and Hope tarries for it till it come. Christian hope is nothing but a
waiting and expectation of a certain good; you have a pregnant text for this in
Hebr. 6. 19. Which Hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast. Hope were but a poor Anchor if it should leave the soul to the
courtesy of a wave, to the clemency of a Rock, to the disposing of a storm.
Hope were but a weak Anchor if it should let the soul be lost with
uncertainties, if it should leave it in danger of shipwreck. I, but this Anchor
is (...), and it pierces within the veil, it will be sure to have fast hold,
'twill fix upon heaven it self, upon the sanctum sanctorum. See another, Romans
5. 2. (...); Now that is a poor glory to triumph in uncertainties* to triumph
before the victory; little cause of joy and exultation, till the soul be
provided for eternity. I can tell you the very possibility of being damned, is
enough to extinguish joy; so that till the soul come to be in a safe condition,
safe for all eternity, and till it know it self to be in this safe condition,
it is so far from being joyful, as that it cannot tell how to be quiet. A
probable hope will bear up and support the soul, a door of hope in the valley
of Achor: but it will not quiet and satisfy the soul. The least dawning of
hope in the initials of grace, does mightily cherish and encourage the soul. O
how pleasant are the eye*lids of the morning! how welcome is the daybreak
after a dark and disconsolate night! Nay, the very possibility of being saved
was that which first drew us all to look after heaven; the very consideration,
that there was Balm in G^lead; But the weary soul will never rest here; the
Dove will never take this for an Ark: No the beams of Gods love will shine out
stronger and brighter upon the soul, and ripen his hope into assurance.
Christian hope when it is in its full vigor, is all one with assurance, Romans 5.
5. (...), but if hope could be frustated, it then might make ashamed:
disappointment would cause a blush; hope differr'd will make the heart sick,
and uncertain hope will scarce make the soul well; a Christians hope is not
like that of Pandora, which may fly out of the box, and bid the soul farewell:
no, 'twill never vanish, till it be swallowed up in fruition. The hope of the
Hypocrite, it is as his righteousness, like the morning-dew: but the hope of a
Christian it is like the morning-light, the least beam of it shall commence into
a complete Sunshine, it is Aurora ga^dii, and it shall shine out brighter and
brighter till perfect day. We shall further clear this truth, if you consider
the manner how Christians are assured of their salvation, the third thing we
propounded.

1. By the graces of God which are in them, those precious seeds of
immortality, and the Prints of the Spirit, by which they are sealed to the day
of Redemption. Grace is the Spirits stamp by which it marks the soul for its
own; The first fruits of the Spirit, the least grace, if true and sincere, is
sufficient to salvation, and therefore the sense of the least grace is
sufficient to Assurance.

Object.
But how shall the soul know that it has these graces in truth, and not in
shadow and color only? how shall it be certain that these are not counterfeit
and painted?

Sol.
There might be given many signs and characters of true grace, that it must
flow from a principle of sincerity, from a principle of love, that it must be
conformable to the grace of Christ; But all this will not satisfy, for the
soul will still question, how shall I know that my graces are such? so then
that which we must ultimately resolve it into, is that in Romans 8. 16. For in
the mouth of two or three witnesses every thing shall be established; Now we
have here two witnesses omni exceptione majores, we have a double Testimony, a
twin-Testimony. The same Spirit bears witness with our Spirits that we are
the Sons of God; (...), he confirms what the other says; both the witnesses
do fully agree, and make up one entire testimony, the soul may say here, as
Paul, Romans 9. 1. I speak the truth, I lie not, my Conscience bearing me
witness by the Holy Ghost.

The whole work of Assurance is summed up in this Practical Syllogism,
Whosoever believes shall be saved: but I believe; and so shall certainly be
saved. The Assumption is put out of doubt.

1. Conscience comes in with a full testimony: And if natural Conscience be a
thousand witnesses, then sure an enlight'ned and sanctified Conscience can be
no less then ten thousand* 1 John 3. 10. He that believes has a witness in
himself, a Certificate in his own breast, (...): for as the same Apostle, 1
John 3. 2. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God. (...) here is the same with Conscience, for the Hebrews have no
other word for Conscience but (...). So then, if our heart acquit us, (...), we
have as much liberty as we can desire. It fears not now the edge of the law,
nor the fiery darts of Satan: it does not stagger with sense of its own
weakness and unworthiness, but comes with confidence to the Throne of grace.

Object. 1.
Jer. 17. 9. (...). Supplantativum Cor prae omnibus, so Arias Montanus, (...),
and inscrutahile, desperabile, so Hierome and our Translation, desperately
wicked: it is properly insa^abile. Some think Paul alludes to this place, and
does explain it in Romans 2. 5. (...). The Seventy read the words, (...)* and
translate it accordingly.

Sol. 1.
1. Now as for the mind of the place: I find Expositors of great name and
worth, understanding it of the unregenerate heart, of the heart of man, that is
in the state of corrupt nature, of whom it is said, that All the imaginations of
the thoughts of man's heart, are altogether evil continually.

Sol. 2.
2. The drift of the text is to show the deceitfulness of men's hearts in
respect of others, for it is brought in by way of Objection. The Jews they are
cunning and subtle, and can delude the Prophets, and so think to evade the
Curse. No; but I the Lord search the hearts: I have a fair window, an open
prospect into the most reserved Spirit: it is as clear as Crystal to my eye.

Sol. 3.
3. Yet it is true, that the most sincere heart is very deceitful, the heart of
a David, of a man after Gods own heart, is full of windings and turnings, and
many deviations, such secret passages as himself knows not of. For who has
known the error of his ways? No man yet had such a piercing insight into his
own soul* as to be acquainted with every motion of it. None can so anatomize
his own Spirit, that it shall be (...), so as every vein and nerve and muscle
shall be obvious and apparent to his eye; But what does this hinder, but that
the general frame and bent of the Spirit, the byas and inclination of the soul
may be clearly known? The soul knows which way its faculties stream with most
vehemence. Conscience cannot be bribed, 'twill give in true judgment,
especially an illight'ned Conscience. There Is none, but if he search and
examine his own soul in a strict and impartial manner, may know whether he be
sincere and cordial or no. There Is none but may know the general frame and
temper of his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 11. Who knows the things of a man, but the
Spirit of a man that is in him? The Testimony of Conscience is certain and
infallible. Many a wicked man by this is assured, that for the present he is in
a miserable and damnable condition; he knows certainly that as yet he is out
of the Covenant; and hence many times there are lightening flashes of terror
fly in his face, the very sparks of hell compass him about. Does not thy
Conscience often tell thee, O profane wretch, that as yet thou art a child of
wrath, and galloping to damnation with a full Cariere? why then may not the
heart of a Christian tell him as certainly* that he is a child of God by
Adoption and an heir of Promise? nay, speak, O Christian, where e're thou art,
and speak aloud that we may hear thee, does not thine own soul tell thee that
thou art in a sure and happy condition? so sure as nothing shall be able to
separate thee from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord. Why are Christians
so often enjoined, (...), to try their own hearts, to search their Spirits, if
that after all their diligence they cannot tell what to think of them? All uses
of examination were vain and frivolous, which yet are the very life and spirits
of preaching* And Ames tells* us of a donum discretionis* which Christians
have, by which they can discern true grace from counterfeit. There are certain
(...)* by which they may distinguish them, and judge of them in themselves,
though not in others certainly.

Object. 2.
If all thus by the Testimony of Conscience may know their own frame of Spirit
whether they be upright or no; why then are not all true Christians assured of
their salvation? what have they not their consciences and hearts about them?

Sol. 1*
1. Many are not sufficiently acquainted with their own Spirits, they do not
keep* so strict a watch over themselves, they are not verst in their own
hearts* they don't try and search their ways, they have riches and a treasure,
and do not know of it.

Sol. 2.
2. It is in so great and weighty a matter* Eternity does so amaze and swallow
up the thoughts, as that they are ready to tremble* where they are certain and
secure; A man on the top of a tower knows that he is safe enough, and yet when
he looks down, he is afraid of falling.

3. Conscience sometimes gives a dark and cloudy testimony, when it is
disquieted and charged with new guilt, the soul cannot so clearly read its
evidences. And then it begins to question its condition. It may be it has dealt
hypocritically in some one particular; and now it begins to question all its
sincerity.

We do not say then that Conscience does always give a clear and full
Testimony, but sometimes it does, and that with absolute certainty.

2. Now comes in the second witness, and the great and supreme testimony of
the Spirit himself, witnessing with our Spirits that we are the Sons of God,
Romans 8. 16. we render it, the same Spirit, but in the fountain it is the Spirit
it self, not (...), but (...), not only the gifts and graces of the Spirit, but
the Spirit it self.

Object.
This Testimony seems to be coincident with the other, for a man cannot tell his
own sincerity: it is the Spirit that must reveal a man to himself; The soul
cannot see its own face unless the Spirit unmask it; The Spirit is more present
and conversant with the soul, then the soul is with it self. He does not only
know our hearts, but he is greater then our hearts, and knows all things.

Sol.
We Will easily grant, that to the least motion in spirituals, there is
necessarily required the concurrence of the Holy Ghost; but withal, we say that
there is a mighty difference between the working of the Spirit, and the
Testimony of the Spirit. There Is a powerful and efficacious work of the Spirit,
when faith is wrought in the soul: but yet there is not the Testimony of the
Spirit, for every believer has not presently the Seal set to him; so that
though the Testimony of our own spirit cannot be without the help and influence
of the Spirit, yet it is clearly distinct from the Testimony of the Spirit; for
here the Spirit does enable the soul to see its graces by a present light, by
the souls light; But when it comes with a Testimony, then it brings a new
light of its own, and lends the soul some auxiliary Beams, for the more clear
and full revealing of it, so that you see according to that plain text in the
Romans, There are two distinct Testimonies, the Spirit witnessing with our
spirits; And St. John is most express, Beloved, if our hearts condemn us not,
then have we confidence toward God. Now the Testimony of the Spirit is

1.) A clear Testimony, a full and satisfying light springs in upon the soul,
scatters all clouds, all doubts and questions; it is as evident as any
demonstration; 1 John 3. 2^. By this we know that he dwells in us, by the
Spirit which he has given us. Christ when he went to heaven, he left the
Comforter, not only to the Church in general, but to every particular soul
that believes, to print his love upon the soul, (...), etc. Chrysostom* If a
Creature, though never so glittering, should tell men so, there might still be
some hesitancy; I, but the Spirit witnesses. The secret and inward Testimony of
the Spirit is as strong and efficacious; nay, more powerful then if 'twere with
an outward voice. If an Angel from heaven were sent on purpose to a Christian
by Christ himself: Go tell him that I love him, that I shed my blood for him,
etc. 'twere not so certain.

2.) A sure Testimony, for it is the witness of the Spirit, who can neither
deceive, nor be deceived, (...), sufficientissimum Testimonium, as Cajetan.

1* He cannot deceive, for he is Truth it self.

2. He cannot be deceived, for he is all Eye, Omniscience it self: And he does
(...), he dwells in the breast and bosom of God: he is fully acquainted with
the mind of God, and he reveals it to the soul. The Papists make the Spirits
Testimony to bring but a conjectural certainty. But the most renowned Perkins
answers them, (1.) That it is such a certainty as makes them Cry Abba Father:
not only think so, and speak so, but with all courage, confidence, intention of
Spirit, Cry Abba Father. (2.) It is opposed to the Spirit of bondage, and
therefore takes away doubtings and tremblings. (3.) The very end why the Holy
Ghost comes to the soul, is to make all sure, and therefore is called a seal
and an earnest. God has given us the earnest of the Spirit, and he will not
lose his earnest. Now he assures the soul

1. By a powerful Application of the promise, for as faith does appropriate the
Promise on our part, so the Spirit applies it on Gods part. As Satan, that
lying Spirit, casts in doubts, and fears, and tremblings, and working upon the
remainder of corruption, plots against the Peace and well-being of the soul;
so this holy Spirit, by the comforting working upon that principle of grace,
which he himself has planted in the heart of a Christian, does study and
contrive the welfare of a Believer. And as the Spirit of bondage does strongly
apply wrath and the curse; so this sweet Spirit of Adoption applies grace and
mercy. The Spirit of bondage strikes terror into the soul, by a mighty
Application of wrath; this curse flames against thee; this threatening is shot
off against thee; these vials of wrath are prepared for thy soul: So the Spirit
of Adoption does set on strong and vigorous apprehensions of mercy; this pear^e
of price, it is to enrich thee; these Evangelical cordials, are to revive thee;
this balm in Gilead is prepared for thy soul. The Spirit of Adoption speaks
love and peace and pardon; and that by particular Application of the Promise to
us; As when the Promise of remission of sins, and life everlasting by Christ is
generally propounded in the Ministry of the Word; the holy Ghost does
particularly apply it to the heart of such a one, and does seal up the Promise
to the soul; That when Faith says, this Promise is mine, this belongs to me;
the Spirit does strongly apply it; this is thine indeed, and this does belong
to thee: These are the secret (...), the whisperings and breathings of the holy
Spirit, the secret (...) by which it converses with the soul; The Spirit of God
has free, and often intercourse with a believing spirit. And this is far enough
from any vain Enthusiasme, any extraordinary Revelation; it is no imaginary
thing, but such as many a soul is acquainted with, and has tasted of.

2. By a bright irradiation beaming out upon the soul* and clearing its
evidences, discovering its graces, and showing them to be true and genuine; not
only by giving the soul a spirit of discerning, (for that we referred to the
former Testimony;) but the Spirit brings in its own light, and makes those
graces, which were visible before, more eminently conspicuous; The spirit of a
man, was the Candle of the Lord, (as the wise man speaks) which gave a weaker
and dimmer light* but yet such as was enough to manifest the Object: I, but now
there are glorious Sunbeams come rushing in upon the spirit, the Spirit shines
in the soul with ^ealing under his wings. The graces of the Spirit these flow,
like a pure and Crystalline stream; and the light of the Spirit shines out upon
them, and gilds the water. See a plain Text for this, 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have
received the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which are
freely given us of God: Light sets a gloss upon all the world, and this
spiritual light gives a luster and oriency to graces: it puts a beauty upon
them, such as the soul is much taken with; We have received an heavenly light,
that we may see heavenly things: Now thou know thy Faith to be lively, and
thy Repentance to be sound; thy Sorrow to be ingenuous, and thy Obedience
sincere; thy Love to be unfeigned, and thy fear to be filial: for the Spirit
has set his seal to all thy graces, and has acknowledged them for his own.

Object. 1.
O but many have thought they have had the Spirit, when they had it not: and
the Devil, that foul spirit, can transform himself into an Angel of light.

Sol.
But 1. One man's self-deceit does not prejudice another certainty. What if one
man flatter himself in a false light, and please himself in a mere shadow of
Assurance; must all men needs follow his example? A man that is in a dream,
thinks himself awake, when he is not: I, but (I hope) for all this, a man that
is awake, may certainly know, that he is so. Many a traveller has thought
himself in the right way, when he has been out of it: and yet this does not
hinder, but that he, that is well acquainted with the road, may know that he is
in his way. What if one man take Copper for Gold, must all men do so too? One
man's folly and vanity does not at all hinder another Assurance.

2. The Spirit comes with a convincing beam; Light shows both it self and other
things too; the Sun by its glorious beams does paraphrase and comment upon its
own glittering Essence; and the Spirit displayes himself to the soul, and gives
a full manifestation of his own presence. The soul knows the aspect of the
Spirit, better then we do the face of a friend. The light of a presumptuous
wretch, is like a blazing Comet, and does but portend his ruin: it carries a
venomous and malignant influence in it; and the light of an hypocrite is but a
flash, and coruscation, very brief and transient. A man may sooner take a
glow-worme for the Sun, then an experienced Christian can take a false delusion
for the light of the Spirit.

3. There is a twin light springing from the word and the Spirit. Try the
spirits; To the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this
rule, it is because there is no morning in them.

The Scripture was all endited by the Spirit, and the Spirit cannot contradict
himself: You do but grieve the Spirit, (whoer'e you are) that pretend to any
Revelation, that agrees not with the Word; Nay, the Spirit has revealed his
whole mind in the Word, and will give no other Revelation, any otherwise then
we have spoken of. And whoever he is that rebels against the light of the
Word, he fhall never have the light of the Spirit. Whilst thou do not follow
the directing light of the Spirit, thou shall never have the quickening and
cherishing beams of it.

And thus you have heard the double Testimony: the Spirit witnessing with our
spirit, and now you must know, that

1. The Testimony of Gods Spirit is always accompanied with the Testimony of
our own spirit: and so that word, Rom 8* is significant, (...) which is
properly of one, that does only confirm what the other says: But then

2. A man may have the testimony of his own spirit, that has not the witness
of Gods Spirit. The Spirit as it breaths when it pleases, so it shines when it
pleases too: Well then the question is, whether the Christian, who has but the
single testimony of his own spirit, may be assured of his salvation?

Mr. Perkin's propounds the case, and resolves it thus: If the testimony of the
Spirit be wanting, then the other testimony, the sanctification of heart, will
suffice to assure us. We know it sufficiently to be true, and not painted fire,
if there be heat, though there be no flame; thus he: And his meaning is as
indeed the thing is, that it is a true Assurance, though not so bright an
Assurance. I may see a thing certainly by the light of a candle, and yet I may
see it more clearly by the light of the Sun. And for my part, I think that
certainty does not consist in puncto, but may admit of a latitude; and receive
magis and minus: And the contrary principle does delude many. There Is an
absolute and infallible certainty in faith, and by this I know the creation of
the World: well, but besides this I know it by reason and by unquestionable
demonstration, and I think this adds to my certainty. So here; though one
testimony be enough for Assurance, yet a double testimony makes it more
glorious. Certainty admits of degrees, and a man may be more certain of a
thing, that he is already certain of. Take two Christians, both may be assured
of their salvation; and yet one may have a clearer assurance then the other
has: One may have a double testimony, and another but a single. Nay, the same
soul may have at one time a double testimony, and at another but a single. The
light of the Spirit may, and does often withdraw it self, and leave only the
witness of our own spirit; and yet then the soul has Assurance. But yet the
soul should aim at the highest Plerophory, at the top of Assurance: Then
quench not the Spirit, lest you put out your own joy; grieve not so sweet an
inhabitant, that comes to comfort you, give him no cause to withdraw his light.

Quest. But what if the soul have not the witness of Gods Spirit, nor of its
own spirit neither? What if it have no present light, no certain evidence?

Answ. There Is one way left yet; have recourse to former Assurance. Do thou
certainly know and remember, that once thou had a sweet serenity of soul?
that an inlight'ned consciscience upon good grounds, did speak peace unto thee?
Did thou never see the light of the Spirit crowning thy soul with satisfying
beams? Art thou sure that once he did bear witness with thy spirit, that thou
were the child of God? Why then, be sure still, that thou art in the same
condition; for there is no total falling from grace. Thy light (it may be) is
put out for the present: Conscience does not speak so friendly to thee, as
'twas wont. And thou have grieved the Spirit, and he has took it unkindely, and
has held off his-light for a while: But now can thou remember the days of
old, when the Rock poured out Oil unto thee, when thy branch was green and
flourishing? Can thou certainly recall thy former Assurance? Can tell the
time when the Spirit did set his Seal unto thee* and confirmed all thine
Evidences? Well then, lay down but perseverance for a ground, and thou art
still assured of thy salvation. The Spirits testimony is of an eternal truth:
And heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, then one beam of this light shall
vanish though now it be not apparent to thy eye When the soul for the present
is cloudy and dark, it may cherish it self with former Assurance. Now that a
soul may have no sensible Assurance for the present, and yet may remember
former Assurance, is clear in that holy man David, Psalm. 51. 12. Restore unto
me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. David's joy was
extinguished, and he would fain have it lighted again: Three things implied in
the word Restore. 1. That for the present it was taken away. 2. That once he
had it. 3. He remembers that he had it, and therefore prays, Restore unto me
the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit; that was the
spring of David's joy, the testimony of the Spirit witnessing with his Spirit,
was that which did uphold and staff up the soul. David's own spirit was now
very unquiet, and Gods Spirit did withdraw himself; and now the best
refreshment that David has, is from former Assurance. It Is true, there is some
sadnesle and bitterness in this consideration, when a Christian shall think
what he has lost. O, my soul was once a beautiful Temple, full of fair
windows, and goodly prospects, and glorious light; I could take a prospect of
Canaan when I pleased, but now I dwell in the tents of Kedar, nothing but
blackness and darkness. There is trouble and a sting in these thoughts; but
yet there is some honey and sweetness too: Was I not once a friend of God, and
does he use to forsake his friends? Did he not once speak peace to thee, and
does he use to recall his words? Did not he shed his love in thy heart, and is
not his love immortal? Did not his Spirit seal up thy soul, and is not the
print of that seal indelible? Speak, did not he once show thee thy name
written with his own had in the Book of Life, and does he use to blot out what
he has written? Do not thou remember; did not he smile upon thee in such and
such an Ordinance, and are his smiles deceitful? O no! rest satisfied, O
Christian soul* and quiet thy self in those rich expressions of his Love, which
he has formerly bestowed upon thee; O quesion not his goodness, but prepare
thy self for receiving of it. The streams are dried up, but yet the fountaine's
full; thou have had some tastes of it, though now thou art dry and thirsty: and
thou shall have in time fresh bubblings up of his grace toward thee: in the
interim, take this for a cordial. Those former drops which thou have tasted of
it, will cherish thy soul to all eternity. The least drop of grace shall never
be exhausted, the least spark of true joy shall never be extinguished; all the
floods that the Dragon can vomit out of his mouth, shall never be able to
quench it. But then

4. Put the case thus, that there be no Sun-light, nor Starrelight, nor
relics of former light; neither the testimony of Gods Spirit, nor of our own
spirits, nor any recalling of former assurance; what must the soul do now? Now
look to the dawning of the day, to the first Crepusculum; look now to the
initials of grace, to the preface of Sanctification. Thou can not, it may be,
show any fair and lively pourtra^cture; I, but have thou the first draughts,
and rudiments of holiness? Thou have not any goodly and delicious clusters of
Canaan; O but see if the tender grape do bud. There are not any ripe fruits of
the Spirit, but yet are there some blossomings of holiness? They graces don't
flow out in fo full and fair a stream; but can thou see any bubblings up of
goodness in thee? Thou have not yet the strength of a well grown Christian;
well, but is there the vagitus of an Infant? Look now to the souls prizing of a
Christ, to the whimperings after the breast, to the breathings and longings
after its Beloved, thoughts upon him, desires for him, endeavors after him;
there is much comfort and sweetness in these: I, and some kind of Assurance.
For

(1.) Be sure, that God that has begun this great work in thee, will never give
over till it be full and complete; he does not use to leave his work imperfest.
The least tendency to goodness, is cherished by him; The very first motion*
it is of his own planting, and it shall lack for no watering, and he himself
will give it an increase.

(2.) The least seed of grace, as it is choice and precious; so it is very
vigorous and operative, it will never leave working till Christ be formed in
thee. Who has d^spised the day of small things? Thy spark may spread it self
into a flame, and thy tender bud may flourish, and bring forth much fruit. He
that is richest in grace, began with as little a stock. He that is now a tall
Cedar, was once a tender plant. Improve but present strength, and God will send
thee in fresh supplies Auxiliary forces, and thou shall walk from strength to
strength, till thou appearest before God in glory. Thy light shall shine out
brighter and brighter till perfect day, Donec stabiliatur dies, according to
the Syriac, till thou come to a firm and well established Assurance. The
least peeping out of light, the least dawning of the day is pleasant and
comfortable.

5. If thou can not spy out any grace in they self, borrow light of another.
Lay open thy soul to an Interpreter, one of a thousand, he may explain they
condition, and paraphraze upon thy soul better then thou thy self can. This
Interpreter, one of a thousand may more exactly analyze thy condition, and show
the context and coherence of it. It Is the speech of Elihu, Job 33. 23. There
meets him a messenger, an Interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto him
his uprightness; He Will show thee, here is grace, and there is grace; here is a
true pearl, and there is a spark though in ashes, and there is an evidence. A
discerning and experienced Christian may show thee cause of joy, when thou
can find none thy self. It Is no shame to borrow light, especially spiritual
light.

6. One step further. What if after all this there be not the least glimmering
of light, nothing of a spark, nothing of a beam; a total eclip^e, all clouds
and blackness and darkness and the very valley of the shadow of death? yet
even here will we fear none ill.

1. When reflex acts are wanting, be sure to multiply direct acts: when there
is no certainty of Evidence, yet even then have a certainty of Adherence and
Recumbency. Now grasp a Promise, take fast hold of that precious offer, roll
thy self upon the free grace of a God in Christ; lay all the stresse of thy
salvation upon it, with a gallant and heroical resolution; If I perish, I
perish. Thus Job, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. Thus our Savior,
My God, my god, why have thou forsaken me? And this must needs be a strong act
of faith, even then to rely upon God when he seems thine enemy; to trust in an
angry and displeased God, and when he frowns on thee, yet then to lean upon
him. Like men ready to be drowned, be sure to take fast hold; cast Anchor,
though in the dark.

2. Study self-denial, and though thou long and breath after Assurance; yet
resign up thy self wholly to his will, and be content to want Assurance, if he
see it best for thee. Take heed of murmuring in the wilderness, in the saddest
and most deserted condition. Throw thy self at his feet, with this resolution;
O my God, I Will bless thee for those eternal treasures of sweetness that are
in thy self, though I should never taste of them: I Will bless thee for those
smiles of thy face, which thou bestowest upon others, though thou will not cast
one gracious look upon my soul: I Will bless thee for those rich offers of
grace thou make unto me, though I have not a heart to lay hold of them.

3. Put thy soul into a waiting posture, and stay till he please to display
some of himself unto thee, and make some of his goodness pass before thee.
One beam of his countenance, one gracious smile, one propitious glance of his
eye, the least crumb of the hidden Manna; it is worth waiting for all thy
lifetime. And when I speak of waiting, I mean not that the soul should stand
still, and do nothing; no, this were against the Text, Give diligence, etc.
improve all present strength; wait upon him in prayer, beg one glimpse of him,
be earnest for a taste, for a relish of the hidden Manna; and wait upon him in
his Ordinances, here the Spirit breaths, here Manna's rained down, here God
shows his face; here is the sealing place, the Spirit confirms the word, and
prints it upon thy soul. Thus wait upon him in his own way; I, and wait upon
him in his own time too, don't think time tedious; He that believes, makes not
haste, which St. Paul renders; He that believes, is not ashamed; as if to make
haste and be ashamed, were all one. God will wonderfully prepare the soul,
that he means to fill with his love. Assurance is too precious a thing to be
poured into every spirit: He will not put new wine into old bottles. God is all
this while making thee more capable of his love; and though for the present
thou have no Assurance, yet thus trusting and waiting upon him, thou art in a
great tendency to it. And put the worst that can be imagined, that thou
should dye under a cloud; yet thy condition were safe, and thou shall come
then to a full Assurance; nay, to a full possession of thine inheritance; and
thou shall see the glorious Sunneshine of the face of God, a beam of which thou
did so much long for here.

We come now to the fourth particular; those special Sealing times, when
Christians have their Assurance and Plerophory.

1. Many times at their first conversion, God does then seal up the work of
grace in the soul. When the Spirit of Bondage has past upon the soul, and by a
strong conviction, has applied particularly guilt and wrath unto it; the fatal
sentence is pronounced, and the soul is filled with the scorching
pre-apprehensions of hell and damnation, and trembles at the very thought of
eternity: Now for the Gospel to bring thee welcome news of a pardon, and for
the Spirit of Adoption to apply grace and mercy unto the soul: for the
prison-doores to be broken open, and a poor captive set at liberty; to have all
the chains and fetters beaten off, and to be brought into a mavelous light;
to have all the balm of Gilead poured into him, Evangelical fruitions and
cordials prepared for him, and which is the very extraction and quintessence of
all, the love of a Savior shed into his heart: What strong impressions of joy,
think you, must there be in such a soul? What precious infusions of spiritual
sweetness? What secret springings and elevations of Spirit? What triumphs,
what Jubilee's, what love-raptures? I am my Beloved's, and my Beloved is mine.
I must appeal to your breasts that have found this great and heavenly work
wrought upon your soul; it is you only that have tasted the joy of the holy
Ghost, that is glorious and unspeakable. And do you tell us, had not ye then
the first relish of the hidden Manna? was not it very sweet and delicious?
had not thou then the first glimpse of the White Stone? and was not it very
bright and orient? had not thou then the Spouse kiss, and was not it
precious and more worth then a world? did not thou t^^n first hear the soft
language and whisperings of the Spirit, and was not his voice lovely and
pleasant? I know your souls dance within you, with the very recalling of so
happy and golden a time, and you pant and breath after more of this communion
with a Savior, and truly he deserves an Anathema, that does not prefer the
very possibility of having of it before all the world. Hosea 11. 1. When Israel
was a child, then I loved him; I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by
their arms, (...): I taught him to foot it on the ways of Religion, (...); I
drew them with the cords of a man, all gentle and persuasive solicitations,
with bands of love, I was to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws,
and I laid meat unto them. The yoke of bondage the soul was under, God freed
the soul, brought him to an easy, pleasant yoke, to an Evangelical yoke. God
has a special care of tender plants; when Israel was a tender vine, O then he
fenced it, and hedged it, and shone out upon it, etc.

Now Christ is thus pleased to reveal his love, to unbosome himself unto the
souls of young Converts, for their greater encouragement in the ways of grace:
At the first step to heaven, he gives them a viaticum. If after the soul had
been steept in legal humiliation, and possessed with fears and terrors and
amazements, compass't with clouds, and now at last it has been drawn by a
mighty work to receive a Savior; If after all this it should have no
Sunshine, 'twould droop and languish, and be ready to pine away; 'twould be
very unfit and unserviceable, the wheels of the soul would move heavily* God
therefore oiles the wheels, poures the Oil of gladness into the soul. And now
it moves like the chariots of Aminadab, with a nimble spontaneity. Christ
begins to flourish through the Lettices, lets in some of his love into the
soul; I, and gives it a sense of this love too, and this constrains it to
obedience; and sets the soul a longing for more of this love, and for more
sense of this love; and so it will never leave longing, till it have a full
fruition of it in heaven. This is Gods method, this is the usual progress of
grace in the soul.

And hence you may see why young Converts are usually so active in the ways of
Religion, so forward and vehement. O, they have fresh apprehensions of the love
of a Savior; with an eminent alteration he has wrought in them; how they are
raised from death to life? O, they can tell you long stories of his goodness;
what great things he has done for their soul. So that their affections are
raised; there is a flush of joy, the soul runs over, and knows no banks, no
bounds. Thus God does many times seal up the work of grace in the soul, and
gives a satisfying light at the first conversion: but yet I cannot say that
this is always so, for there are diversities of workings, and grace sometimes
wrought in the soul after a more still and undiscernable manner; as we shall
have occasion to speak more hereafter.

2. Sacrament-times, are sealing times. I speak of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; for as for those secret breathings of the Spirit upon Infants in that
other Sacrament of Baptism, they are altogether unsearchable, and past finding
out. Now in the Lords Supper you have the New Covenant sealed up unto the soul;
the soul has not only his graces increased, but they are printed clearer; that
seal of the Spirits does print a Christians evidences with a clearer stamp.
You have plain and visible representations of the love of a Savior; and you
have the sense of this love poured out into you. A Christian feeds not only
upon Sacramental bread, but upon hidden Manna too, and has tastes of that love
that is sweeter then wine. Here Is a feast of fat things; The soul is satisfied
as with marrow and sweetness; spiritual refreshments like fat things, they are
sweet, and they are filling too; yet not like other fat things, that have a
cloying fulsomenesse in them; no, these carry a delicious relish with them,
such as the soul takes present complacency in them, and has a longing appetite
for them. The soul never nauseats the feast of fat things; but the more it
feeds upon them, the more it hungers after them. Now the two grand ends of this
Sacrament in reference to a Christian, are (1.) Growth of Grace. (2.) Sense of
Grace. It Is a Sacrament of Augmentation by which a new-borne-infant-soul may
grow up to its just proportion and full stature in Jesus Christ; and it is a
Sacrament evidencing this his condition to the soul. Christians come hither ad
corroborandum Titulum; the smoking flax comes hither to have some light, and
the bruised reed comes hither to have some strength; the worm Jacob crawl's
into the presence of a Savior, and is sent away with an encouraging voice,
Fear not, thou worm Jacob. Many a tender babe in Christ, has stretched out its
weak and trembling hand, to lay hold of a Savior, and has found virtue coming
out from him. Many a thirsty soul has come breathing and panting after the
streams of water; 'thas opened his mouth wide, and he has filled it. The
longing and affectionate soul has come with vehement and enlarged desires, and
has found full expressions and manifestations of his love toward her. Many a
cloudy soul has come hither to see if he could spy out one beam, and has been
sent away brighter then the Sun in all its glory. You that come hither with the
most ample and capacious souls; tell us whether you ben't filled up to the
brim, whether your cup don't overflow? O what heavenly intercourse is there
between you and a Savior? what pleasant aspects? what mutual love-glances?
what smiles and blandishments? Don't you find in your own souls* a full
Paraphrase upon the book of the Canticles, that book of Loves? He comes with an
earthy and drossie soul, that is not raised and advanced with such glorious
mysteries.

And yet my meaning is not, as if every true Christian that had received this
Sacrament, must needs have Assurance; No, we know

1. Believers themselves may receive unworthily, as the Christian Corinthians,
(when Paul tells them) they came together for the worse, and not for the
better, he speaks it of such as were truly in the state of grace. Thus he
concludes his discourse, You are chastened of the Lord, that you might not be
condemned with the world. And thus the soul may go from a Sacrament with less
comfort then it brought thither.

2. Many that have much joy and sweetness from a Sacrament, real and spiritual
joy, I and strengh and vigor too, yet it may be have it not in so great a
proportion, in so high a measure; their cup is not so brim-ful, as that it
should reach to Assurance. All that do truly partake of these heavenly
delicacies, yet don't go away equally satisfied. Some have but a taste which is
enough to cherish them, others a full draught which does mightily enliven them.
So then, all we say is this, those Christians that have assurance, have it
usual at these times, and some Christians that have wanted assurance, yet here
have found it, which should strongly engage all to come hither with great and
solemn preparation, quickening and exciting their graces, emproving all present
strength, breathing and longing after these pleasant streams, widening and
enlarging their affections, opening their mouths like a dry and thirsty land
that waits for some satisfying showers, and would fain be filled.

3. Times of employment are sealing times. When God intends a Christian for
great and eminent service, he first makes his goodness pass before him, he
sheds some of his love into his heart, which does both constrain him to
obedience, and encourage him in it; his smile makes the soul go cheerfully
about his work, his presence gives life and vigor to a performance. The
servants of God wait on him, fix their eyes upon him, look whether he gives
them a propitious glance, they walk in the light of his countenance, they
follow the directions of his eye; they will not move unless he breath on them.
Moses will not stir without Assurance of his presence. All the clusters of Canaan
shall not entice him, he had rather dwell with briars and thorns in the
wilderness with the good will of him that dwells in the bush: He had rather be
in a barren, and desolate, and howling wilderness: then in a pleasant and
fruitful land, in a delicious land without the presence of his God. He knows
there is no sweetness in Canaan without him; there is more sting then honey in
the land of Promise, unless he be there; and Canaan it self will prove a
wilderness if he withdraw himself. The beams of his gracious Presence, these
gild a place: they can turn a desert into a Paradise, and can make a prison
glorious. The love of God in Christ it is attractive and magnetical, and draws
the soul along when it is once touch*t with it, this will draw Moses to the
land of Promise, this will carry him through all difficulties. God sheds some
of this love into Moses his heart, and then he goes on with cheerfulness and
alacrity. And so 'twas with his Successor Joshua. God calls him to an
honorable employment, to be the Shepherd of his little flock, to guide and
govern his People Israel. Now how does he prepare him for so great a work? why,
he strengthens him, and heartens him with a Promise of himself, with assurance
of his love; Fear not, but be of courage, I am with thee: Thou have my
presenee, thou shall have my blessing; I have done much for thee, and I will do
more for thee; be faithful in my service, and be courageous, and don't doubt of
the love of God toward thee. Thus God when he called Abraham to that great
expression of obedience in the sacrificing of his Isaac, he first warmes his
heart with his love, and seals up the Covenant of Grace to him: he spreads
before him ample and comprehensive Promises, I am thy God All-sufficient; I am
thy Buckler, and thine exceeding great reward; and this will bear up and
support Abraham, though the staff of his old age be taken away, and by his own
hands cast into the fire.

And this was his usual dealing with the Prophets, when he sent them with great
and weighry messages. He first reveals his goodness to them, before he
reveals his mind by them; he assures them of directing mercy, of protecting
mercy that shall bear them company, that shall go along with them: and this
puts a generous undauntednesse upon them, that they fear not the frowns of
men, nor the threatenings of men, nor of the greatest of men: this makes Jeremy
to set his face like a flint, and Esaias to lift up his voice like a Trumpet, to
tell Israel their sins, and Judah their transgressions.

And this is that which prepares the Martyrs for their sufferings. God tempers
and allayes that Cup, he drops some of his goodness into it, and sweetens it
to them. He first sets his seal to their souls, before they set their seal to
his truth; he diets them with the hidden Manna, and gives them beforehand the
White Stone, as a sure pledge of victory. What is it but this that makes them
devour torments, and come to them with an appetite? it is this that softens the
flames, and turns them into a bed of Roses; it is this that fills their souls
with joy, and their mouths with praises: that makes them more cheerful in their
sufferings, then their Savior in his; for they usually have the face of a
reconciled God shining out upon them, which was wholly with drawn from him,
when he cried out, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me?

4. Praying times are sealing times. The same Spirit that endites the Prayer,
seals it up. When Hannah had put up her Prayer, 1 Samuel* 1. 18. the text says
expressly, *that her countenance was no more sad. As it is the great Privilege
of Assurance. that Christians may then with confidence cry Abba Father, so also
it is a great means to Assurance. The hearing of Prayers is a mighty
strengthening to faith; and the strengthening of faith does strongly tend to
Assurance. Besides, Christians may pray for Assurance; they may be importunate
for a glimpse of his face, for one beam, for one smile, and his bowels will not
let him deny them. Hence you shall find it, that such as are most frequent in
Prayer, are most blessed with Assurance. Praying Christians have much intercourse
and communion with their God. And thus there may be a National kind of
Assurance, I say a National plerophory; when God shall pour out a Spirit of
Prayer and Supplication upon his people, and they with united and
concentricated abilities shall besiege the Throne of Grace; there is no doubt,
there can be no doubt, but at length he will yield up such a mercy to his
praying People.

5. Times of outward exigencies are sealing times, 2 Cor. 4. 16. Though our
outward man decay, yet our inward man is renewed daily; that feeds upon hidden
Mannah, a precious restaurative for a fainting Christian: Manna you know was
rained down in the wilderness; and when the Israelites provision failed them,
then Manna was rained down. When the water-pots are filled up to the brim, then
water presently turned into wine: and so this hidden Mannah is provided for sad
and cloudy conditions. We except only the case of total desertion, when the
soul has not the least light shining in upon it* which is the severest
judgment that a true Christian is capable of: but in other distresses,
especially outward and temporal distresses, he does reveal himself more
immediately to them. And though the creature frown, yet he will smile upon
them. Believers they are the friends of God, and it is no part of friendship to
forsake them in the saddest times. St. John, when a banished man in the Isle of
Pathmos, then God shows him that glorious Revelation. Paul and Silas, when in
prison, then brim-full of joy, which breaks out into Psalms of Praise. In the
fiery trial, as there is some scorching, so there is some light too. And God
does prepare his People for the seal of the Spirit, by thus melting and
softening their heart; for the softer the heart is, the clearer will the Print
of his love be. When God had brought that great sickness upon Hezekiah, and
thus had dissolved and soft'ned his heart, he presently prints his love upon
it: (...), Thon have loved my soul from the grave. God does then most express
his love, when they have most need of it. The white Stone sparkles most
oriently in the darkest condition. O how gloriously does God shine in upon the
prisons of Martyrs? what frequent visits does he give them? it might even make
men ambitious of their sufferings, that they might have some such expressions
of his love toward them.

6. Times of Victory and Conquests over lusts and temptations are sealing
times. God after such victories will give his People a triumph. This is expressed
in that text of the Revelation, Rev. 2. 17. (...), To him that overcomes will I
give to eat of the hidden Mannah, etc. Thus when Saint Paul was wrestling
with, and conquering that great temptation, whatever it was, that is mentioned
in 2 Corinthians 12. God then gives to eat of the hidden Mannah, and
strengthens him with this, My grace is sufficient for thee. He gives him the
white Stone with that Motto graven in it, My grace, etc. Thus that noble
Christian, and famous Convert of Italy Galeacius Caracciolus, when he had
scorned the pomp and luster of the world, and had trampled upon all relations
for the love of a Savior: when Satan that cunning Angler of souls had spent
all his baits upon him, and he had refused them all: O then what a deal of
precious sweetness slides into his soul? what rushings in of glorious joy? he
had never such joy at Naples, as he had at Geneva. You may hear him pronouncing
an Anathema to all such, as shall prefer all the gold and silver in the world
before one days sweet Communion with Jesus Christ. As none have more dregs of
wrath then relapsing and apostatizing Spirits, (Remember but Spira's case;) so
none have sweeter and choicer mercy then the faithful Servants of the Lord
Jesus, that follow him in the hour of temptation. Apostates are sealed up to a
day of vengeance, but these are sealed up to a day of Redemption. Thus the
Mourners in Ezekiel, that would not yield to the abominations of the times must
have a seal set upon them. Thus that Virgin-company in the Revelation, that
would not prostitute their souls to Antichristian folly, have the seal of God
in their foreheads. This is the happiness of a Christian, that he has a sweet
satisfaction in selfdenyal; in denying sin, in repulsing lust, in conquering
temptation, in pulling out his right eye, in cutting off his right hand, in
mortifying the body of death, he has a sweet satisfaction in all these. And
thus you have seen those special sealing times when Christians have this high
plerophory, these riches of Assurance: we come now to speak of them in a more
Applicatory way.

1. Times of Assurance, they should be times of humility and dependence upon
God. When Moses had been so long in the Mount, and had a luster upon him by
conversing with God himself, presently at the foot of the Mount he meets with
matter of humiliation. The Israelites have made them a golden Calfe; Thy
People, says God to Moses, they have done this. And the Apostle Paul, when he
had been rapt up into the third Heaven, and had heard there some of Arcana
Coeli, things that neither could nor might be uttered; for both are implied in
(...): there then comes a messenger of Satan to buffet him, he must be put in
mind of himself by a thorn in the flesh, and that lest he should be exalted
above measure with abundance of Revelations. A creature cannot (...)* a little
thing will puff up a bubble, a small happiness will swell up the sons of men.
Pride as it twines about the choicest graces, so it devoures the sweetest
comforts. But yet there is nothing tends more to soule-abasement and
self-examination, then the beholding of Gods face, then the seeing of his
glory, this will make the soul abhor it self in dust and ashes. The more God
reveals himself unto the soul, the more will the soul see that huge
disproportion that is between it self and a Deity. There Is none here below that
ever saw more of Gods face then Moses and Paul had done, and there were none
that ever had lower apprehensions of themselves. They knew well enough what the
Sunshine of his presence was, what a glorious sight it was to behold his face,
and yet they had rather part with this, then he should part with his glory.
They are like men amazed with the vastness and spaciousness of the Ocean, and
make nothing of a little inconsiderable drop of Being. They that know not these
treasures of love and sweetness, those heaps of excellencies that are stored
up in God, these are the grand admirers of themselves. But when the soul comes
to have a prospect of heaven, and fixes its eye upon an object of the first
magnitude, the creature disappears, self vanishes and loses it self in the
fullness of God. And if God do assure thee of this his love, thou can not but
wonder at the greatness of his goodness, especially when thou shall recollect
thy self, and think upon thine own unworthiness. Thou that did not deserve a
beam of his face, what does he give thee a full Sunshine? Thou that could
not look for the least taste of his love, what does he give thee a whole
cluster of Canaan? Thou that did not deserve the least crumb of the hidden
Mannah, does he fill thee an Omer full of it? Nay, yet higher* Thou that did
deserve a brand from his Justice, does he give thee a seal of his love? he
might have given thee gall and vinegar to drink, and does he flow in upon thee
with milk and honey? he might have given thee the first flashes of hell, and
does he give thee the first fruits of heaven? what could thou have looked
for but an eternal frown, and do thou meet with so gracious a smile? O then
fall down and adore his goodness, and let all that is within thee bless his
holy name. Tell me now, is there any ground for pride in such a soul? Does not
Assurance bespeak humility; and speak a meet dependence?

2. Times of Assurance, they should be times of trampling upon the creature,
and scorning of things below. Do thou now take care for corn, and wine, and
oil, when God lifts up the light of his countenance upon thee? is this same*
Angels food, this same hidden Mannah, is it too light meat for thee? Now thou
art within the land of Promise, feeding upon the grapes and pomegranates of the
land, do thou now long for the garlic and onions of Egypt? Now thou art
within thy fathers house, and the fatted Calfe is slain, will thou now still
feed upon husks? Art thou clothed with the Sun, and can not thou trample the
Moon under thy feet? O let them scramble for the world that have nothing else
to live on. Pray give room to the green Bay-trees to spread themselves abroad;
but don't thou lose thy fatness and sweetness to rule over these. Art thou
sure of heaven, and would thou fix thy Tabernacle upon earth? Is it good for
thee to be here? or would have any more then the light of Gods countenance?
is it not enough that thou art sure of happiness? is not a fountain enough for
thee? why will thou drink in muddy streams? and thou that art filled with the
love of a Savior, can thou tell how to spend a thought upon the world? is
not there more beauty in a Christ then in the Creature? is not he the fairest
of ten thousand? Away then with adulterous glances, for why should thou
embrace the bosom of a stranger?

3. Times of Assurance they should be times of watchfulness, and more accurate
walking with God. To sin against revealed love, is a deep and killing
aggravation. To sin against light is too too much, but to sin against love is a
great deal more: this height'ned Solomon's idolatry, (1 Kings 11. 9.) that he
turned from the God of Israel which had appeared to him twice. What will thou
with Jeshurun wax fat and kick, and kick against bowels too? To provoke God in
a wilderness is not so much as to provoke him in a Paradise. What could he
have done more for thee then he has done! and what could thou have done more
against him then thou have done! and will thou still requite him thus? will thou provoke him with Mannah in thy mouth? Does he give thee the sweet clusters
of the land, and do thou return him wild grapes? that which is the strongest
engagement to obedience, do thou make it an encouragement to sin? art thou so
willing to dash thy joy, to lose thy peace? And O how will it please the powers
of darkness to see thee abuse a beam? The devil has several designs against
the welfare of a soul. First, if it were possible he would keep thee from
having any grace at all. But secondly, if he cannot do that, he would keep thee
from strength of grace, from growth in grace; he would break the bruised reed,
and he would quench the smoking flax But then if he cannot prevail here
neither; then in the third place, he would keep thee from sense of grace, in a
sad and cloudy condition: he envies thee one beam, one smile, one glance of his
eye. But then if the riches of Gods goodness do so run over, as that he will
give thee a sense of his love; then fourthly, in the last place, he would have
thee abuse his grace, and turn it into wantonness. But when God has planted
thee in so happy a Paradise, don't thou listen to the whisperings of the
Serpent. Thou that art sealed by the Holy Spirit, don't attend to a lying
spirit. The devil that great plunderer of souls, would feign rob thee of thy
Jewels, of thy joy, and peace, and happiness: but do thou hide them in a
Christ, in the wounds of a Savior; and take heed of blotting thine Evidences;
thou that art a Child of light, be not ruled by a Prince of darkness. If God
give thee a sense of his love, walk more steadfastly, walk more accurately with
thy God.

4. Times of Assurance they should be times of inviting and encouraging others
in the ways of grace. Thus the Psalmist, when his Cup overflowes, he calls
others to taste of it, O taste and see how gracious God is, that ye may trust
in him. Thou may now bring a good report upon the land of Canaan, thou
may show them the goodly fruits of the land, that were cut down at the brook
Eshcol. Men look upon Religion as a rigid and austere thing, that comes to rob
them of their joy, they must never have a smile more, they must never have a
Summers day after it; but thou can tell them of the sweetness and
deliciousness that is in the ways of grace, thou can assure them that all
the ways of wisdom are pleasantness; thou can satisfy them, that grace
does not mean to take away their joy, but only to refine it; that it does not
mean to put out the light, but only to snuff it, that it may burn brighter and
clearer. There Is no such joy to be found in the ways of sin, there is no such
joy to be extracted from the Creature; no, the sweetest and purest honey it is
sucked from a flower of Paradise. Spiritual joy it is the most clarifi'd joy; I,
and it is solid and massy joy, beaten joy, like beaten gold, (...). I, and it is
lasting and durable joy. All the Creatures make but a blaze, but the least
spark of this it is immortal. Can there be a sweeter Sabbatisme of Spirit? can
there be a happier composedness of soul, then to be provided for eternity; to
be sure of heaven, of happiness and glory; to have the revealing of Gods love,
the displaying of himself, the beamings out of his face? is not the least
appearance of his love more worth then a world? are not the gleanings of
spirituals better then the vintage of temporals? Me thinks an assured
Christian, like a Caleb or a Joshua, should be able and ready to confute all
the false intelligence of the Spies, and to answer the weak objections that
they bring against the land of Promise. Awake O sluggard, and arise, there is
no Lion in the way, or if it be it has honey in it: There are no sons of Anak,
or if there be, before Israel even these mountains shall become a Plain.

5. Times of Assurance they should be times of store, (...). Now treasure up
beams, heap up light, store up hidden Mannah. To be sure, this Mannah will not
breed worms. Then thou may confidently applaud thy self, Soul, take thine
ease, thou have goods laid up for many years. Happy thou, if this night thy
soul be taken from thee* Storing up of former evidences, is a good provision
against a cloudy day.

6. Times of Assurance should be times of breathing after full possession. The
espoused soul should long for the Nuptials, for the full consummation of its
joy: and by a heavenly gradation it should ascend in its thoughts. Is there
such sweetness in one cluster of Canaan, what shall there be in the full
vintage? is there such pleasantness in a prospect of the land upon the top of
Mount Pisgah, what happiness shall there be in enjoyment of the land? is there
such glory in a beam of Gods face, what shall there be in an eternal Sunshine?
is there such a sparkling luster in the white Stone, what then shall there be
in all those pearls that garnish the soundations, and make up the gates of the
New Jerusalem? is there so much in the preface of glory, what shall there be in
the inlargements and amplifications of it? is there so much in the Aenigma,
what is there in the explication? can you see so much beauty in happiness,
when her Mask is on, how glorious then will she appear when she is unveiled?
does the soul sing so sweetly in a Cage of clay, what melody* think you, shall
it then make when it is let loose to all Eternity?

We now come to wind up all in a word of Application.

Now the more pure and delicious a truth is, the more do the men of the world
disrelish it: the more bright and shining it is, the more offensive to their
eyes. The more orient the Pearl, the more do they trample upon it. Evangelical
discoveries meet with the fiercest oppositions. The Serpent will be sure to
wind into Paradise, and the seed of the Serpent ever knew how to still
venomous and malignant consequences, out of sweet and flowery truths. It Is the
devils work to imprison all truth, but the nobler and more precious truths
must be sure to be put in the lowest and darkest dungeons. As here now,
Assurance of salvation, it is the very Crown and joy of a Christian; the Flos
lactis, the Cream of that (...), that is to nourish souls: it is the budding
and blossoming of happiness, the antedating of heaven, the Prepossession of
glory; it is the very Pinnacle of the Temple, the (...); how fain would he throw
Christians from thence? how would he blast glory in the bud? how feign would he
pull down the suburbs of the New Jerusalem? how would he stop all the fresh
springs that are in these? how would he seal up the luscious influences of the
Pleiades? how fain would he Lycurgus-like, cut up all the vines of Canaan, that
no Spy might ever bring one Cluster of the Land of Promise? He himself must
feed upon nothing but dust, and how does he envy them their hidden Mannah? That
Son of the morning is now bound in chains of darkness, and how does he envy
them their light and liberty? how feign would he cloud and eclipse their Sun,
and stop it in its race? nay, set it ten degrees backward? How does he envy
them one beam of Gods face* a grape of Canaan, one smile, one glance of Gods
eye? Now he could find out no fitter instrument to rob Christians of their
joy, then Antichrist that grand enemy of the Church, that spiritual Nero, that
Tyrant of souls that vice- Beelzebub, that Prince of darkness that rules in
the children of disobedience. He rules them, and yet they are children of
disobedience for all that. This Bestian Empire, (for so it is stilled in the
Revelation,) delights only in sensuals, and strikes at spirituals. It strikes
at the vitals of Religion at the power and essence of godliness. Here are the
men that must cry down Assurance under the names of presumption, security, an
heap of Enthusiasmes, as if this hidden Mannah would breed all these worms. If
men do but dip in the honey-combe, and take some of these voluntary drops that
sweat from it freely* of their own accord, as Saul told Jonathan, they must
certainly die for it. O this were a way to open their eyes, as it did
Jonathant. They are loath to let men taste and see how gracious God is, lest
they might trust in him.

There are therefore two things which I shall here endeavor by way of
Application.

First, to give you a brief discovery of those grounds that necessitate the
adversaries of this truth to deny Assurance.

Secondly, to take off that vain and frivolous cavil, that assurance is a
Principle of Libertinisme, and that if men be once assured of their salvation,
they may then do what they list.

And first for the grounds that make them deny Assurance. And though I might
here show at large, that all Popery, the Quintessence of it is extracted out of
guesses and conjectures, their whole Religion is but a bundle of uncertainties,
a rude heap of contingencies, built upon the thoughts of others, upon the
intentions of a Priest; yet I shall let that pass now, and give you these
four considerations that prevail with them to deny Assurance.

1. They lay too much stresse upon good works. Now Assurance is too goodly a
structure to be built upon such a foundation. They part stakes between grace
and merit, and so leave the soul in a tottering condition. There is so much
pride bound up in the Spirits of men, as that they are loath to depend upon
another for their happiness* they would have an innate and domestic
happiness within themselves. But alas, self-bottomings are weak and uncertain,
and they that build upon their own good meanings, and their good wishes and
good resolutions, upon their good endeavors and goodworks, when they have done
all, they have built but the house of the Spider. These that spin salvation out
of their own bowels, their hope it is but as a Spiders web* And there are many
that neither thus spin nor toil; and yet I say unto you, that a Pharisee in
all his glory is not clothed like one of these If men do but enquire, and look
a little to the ebbings and flowings of their own spirits, to the waxing and
waining of their own performances: surely they will presently acknowledge, that
they cannot fetch a Plerophory out of these* Believe it, the soul cannot anchor
upon a wave, or upon its own fluctuating motions. So that it is a piece of
ingenuity in them, to tell men, that whilst they build upon the sand; they can
have no great security that their house will last long: they may safely say of
the Spider, that it can have no certainty that its house shall stand. Whilst
they lean upon a reed we will allow them to question whether it will not break or
no; nay, if they please, they may very well question whether it will not pierce
them thorough. They can be sure of nothing unless they be sure of ruin.
Assurance cannot be founded in a bubble, in a creature, for the very essence of
a creature is doubtful and wavering, it must be built upon an immutable Entity,
upon the free love of God in Christ, upon his royal word and oath, the sure
expressions of his mind and love, upon the witness of the Holy Ghost, the
seal of God himself. Here the soul may rest, and lean, and quiet it self, for
with God there is no variableness nor shadow of turning. The creature is all
shadow and vanity, it is filia noctis; like Jonah's gourd, man may sit under its
shadow for a while, but it soon decays and dies. All its certainty is in
dependence upon its God. A creature, if like a single drop left to it self, it
spends and wastes it self presently: but if like a drop in the fountain and
Ocean of Being, it has abundance of security. No safety to the soul, but in the
arms of a Christ, in the embraces of a Savior. No rest to a Dove-like spirit,
but in the Ark of the Govenant, and there is the pot of hidden Mannah. You know
that dying Bellarmine was feign to acknowledge, that the nearest way to
Assurance, was only to rest upon the free grace of God in Christ. And they that
cry down duties so much, if they would mean no more then this, that men must
not trust in them, nor make Christ's of them, nor Saviors of them, (as they use
to express it) we will easily grant them this if they will be content with it.

2. They take away that clasping and closing power of faith it self, by which
it should sweetly and strongly embrace its own object. They would have the soul
embrace clouds and dwell in generals; they resolve all the sweetness and
preciousnesse of the Gospel, either into this Universal, Whosoever believes
shall be saved: or else, which is all one, into this Conditional, If thou
beleevest thou shall be saved Now this is so far from assurance, as that the
Devils themselves do thus believe and yet tremble. The thirsty soul may know
that there is a fountain but it must not presume to know that ever it shall
taste of it. The wounded soul (with them) may take notice that there is balm
in Gilead, but it must only give a guess, that it shall be healed. They will not
allow the soul to break the shell of a Promise, so as to come to the kernel.
They silence Faith, when it would speak in its own Idiom, My Lord, and my God.
O what miserable comforters are these: How can they ever speak one word upon
the wheels, one seasonable word to a weary soul; when as all they can reach
to, by their own acknowledgement, is to leave the soul hovering betwixt heaven
and hell? And as they say in matter of Reproof, Generalia non pungunt: so it is
as true in matter of Comfort, Generalia non mulcent. Yet to see how abundantly
unreasonable these men are; for in the matter of their Church, there they
require a particular appropriating faith, a Monopolizing faith, that the Church
of Rome is the only true visible Church: and this is no presumption with them.
Thus they can embrace a dull Error, and let go a precious Truth. But the true
Church of Christ, as it is it self built upon a Rock; so every Member of the
Church has the same security. And the soul with a Spouse-like affection, does
not only conjecture who is her Well-beloved, but is in his very arms, and
breaks out into that expression of love and union; I am my well-beloved's, and
my well-beloved is mine. But how strangely does their conjectural certainty
take away the sweetness of such Relations? Christians with them must only
conjecture that they are the Sons of God, the Spouse must only guess at her
beloved husband; the sheep must hope that this is the Shepherds voice. O how do
they emasculate and enervate Religion! how do they dispirit it, and cut the
very sinews of the power of godliness! But all you that would find rest to
your souls, must know that you can never apply a Christ too much, that you can
never appropriate a Savior enough, that whole happiness is in union with him.

3. They deny perseverance, and so long may very well deny Assurance. And yet
the Arminians have an Art of reconciling Assurance, and Non-perseverance. They
allow men a little brief Assurance for one moment, a breve fulgur, a little
corruscation of joy, that only shows it self that it may vanish and disappear.
The sum of their meaning amounts to thus much: For that moment that thou art
in the state of grace, thou may be sure on it, but thou can not be sure
that the next moment thou shall be in the state of grace. As if a Christian
were only a Ball of fortune to be tossed up and down, at her pleasure. And indeed
they make grace as voluble and uncertain, as ever the Heathen did fortune. And
if they would speak out, grace with them is ^es vitrea, quae dum splendet
frangitur. And vasa gloriae with them are little better then vasa fictilia:
they can dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel. And then make no more of it
then Epictetus at the breaking of a pitcher. (...), it is but a usual thing;
Hodie vidi fragilem frangi. Vain men that think the grace of God as mutable and
unconstant as they themselves are, that can remove men from heaven to hell as
often as they please, that with a daring Pen can blot names out of the book of
Life, and reverse the seal of heaven when they list. This must needs strike at
the root of Assurance, and leave the soul in such sad doubts as these. It Is
true, I am now feeding upon the milk and honey of the land of Canaan; but I may
return to the wilderness again, to the bondage of Egypt again. It Is true, I
am now a Temple of the holy Ghost; but how soon may I become a prison, a
dungeon, the receptacle of every unclean spirit? What though I be now a vessel
of honor, how soon may I become a vessel of wrath? and though I be for the
present in the loving hand of a Savior, yet I may be to morrow in the
unmerciful paw of the Lion. Pray tell us now, has the soul any great security
all this while? are the friends of God no surer of his love then thus? It Is
happy for Christians, that it is not in the power of these men; no, nor of all
the powers of darkness, to put a period to their joy; no, not to put the least
comma or interruption to it. No, they may as soon dethrone the Majesty of heaven
it self, they may as soon pluck the Crown from his head, and wrest the golden
Scepter out of his hand: nay, they may as soon pluck out the Apple of his eye,
they may as soon annihilate a Deity, as pull thee out of his hands, as rob him
of one of his Jewels. Thou art kept by the mighty power of God through faith
unto salvation. We cannot close up this better then with that heavenly (...),
those triumphant expressions of the Apostle Paul: For I am persuaded, that
neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor
height, nor depth, etc.

4. They never had any Assurance themselves, and so they would willingly deny
it to others. There is so much pride and envy in the spirits of men, as that
they are very loath, that others should have more happiness, or be more
sensible of happiness then themselves. They do here Calamum in Cord tingere;
they tell you what they find in their own hearts, nothing but conjectures, and
shiverings, and tremblings, nothing but slavish doubts and fears. But the
voice of Assurance, it is a still voice, the Spirit speaks; (...). That soul
only hears it, to which it speaks. The sparklings of the White Stone are secret
and undiscernable to a carnal eye: No man knows it, but he that has it. It Is
Manna (...); not the visible and obvious Manna that was rained down by the
tents of the Israelites, but that that was reserved, and laid up in Vrna aurea.
Spiritual tastes and relishes, spiritual experiences, they are wholly
unexpressible, they are altogether unimitable. There are two things which the
most refined and accomplished Hypocrite cannot possibly reach unto. (1.) He cannot
express the life and power of a Christian. (2.) He cannot express the joy of a
Christian. As no man can paint the Being of a thing, so no man can paint the
sweetness of a thing. Who ever could paint the sweetness of the Honey-combe?
the sweetness of a cluster of Canaan? the fragrancy of the Rose of Sharon? the
sweet voice of a Lute? (...), etc. The Painters eye steals a little beauty from
the face; and perhaps his hand makes restitution, restoring it again in the
picture, and that is all you can expect of him; nay, it is well if he perform so
much: As for the expression of vitals, or the representation of essentials,
it is Vltra Penecillum* so that he must let this alone for ever. Believe it,
Sincerity cannot be painted. The joy of the holy Ghost cannot be painted. It Is
easier painting of faces, then of hearts. Men in an unregenerate condition,
cannot know what Assurance is, till their hearts be changed, or unless they
could read the hearts of Gods people. Men will deny the most certain and
unquestionable things, if they themselves have no experience of them. Upon this
account many a fool has said in his heart, There is no God; because he had no
communion with him, he did not attend upon him. Thus others deny that there is
any such sweetness in the ways of God, because they were never acquainted
with them.

In Music, what though there be never such variety of graces, such
inarticulate elegancies, such soft and silken touches, such quick stings and
pleasant relishes, such musical amplifications, and flourishes, such nimble
transitions and delicious closes; you will scarce convince a deaf man of all this,
till you can give him his hearing. Or suppose a blind man should obstinately
deny that there were a Sun; truly I cannot tell how you could well convince him,
unless you could give him an eye, or else persuade him that he is defective in
somewhat which others have. To speak of Assurance, and the voice of the Spirit
to some, is but to speak Riddles and Paradoxes. Here I have told you much of
Light, and Beams, and Glory; I had as good told some of you, of clouds, and
shadows, and darkness. I have spoke much to you of the fruits and clusters of
Canaan; had I not as good have set before some of you briars and thorns, would
you not have had as much sweetness in them? I never promised to show you the
Manna; for I told you 'twas hidden: yet we have told you the things which we
have seen and known, and what we have tasted of the Word of Life; and that
which I doubt not, but many of you can set your seals unto.

We come now to take off that vain and frivolous Cavil, that Assurance is a
principle of Libertinisme; that the Apples which the Spouse longs for in the
Canticles, will breed too much wind; that hidden Manna will breed worms, that
those flaggons full of wine, which the Spouse would so feign be comforted
withal, will fume up too much into the head. O, say they* if men be once
assured of their salvation, they may then do what they list. But

1. God will not put now wine into old bottles. God never prints his love upon the
heart, till the heart be renewed and prepared with Evangelical meltings; and
the same Seal that prints his love, prints his Image too. A flinty heart will not
take the seal of the Spirit The sparkling White Stone is never given, till the
heart of stone be taken away. The new name is not given, till the new creature
be framed. God will not distill one silver drop of such precious sweetness upon
the soul, till it be enclosed for his own garden. And though the outward
Sunshine with liberal and undistinguishing beams, shines both upon the good
and the bad, upon the Rose and Nettle; yet the light of Gods countenance beams
out only upon the Apples of his own eye: the Sunshine of his gracious
presence, gilds only the vessels of Honor, and puts a luster upon none but his
own Jewels. And though the pourings forth of ordinary goodness fall upon a
wilderness sometimes, as well as on a Paradise; yet these more choice and
luscious influences of heaven, slide only into the hearts of Gods peculiar
ones. Believe it, thy soul must first become an Arc of the Covenant, before
thou shall ever have a Pot of hidden Manna in it.

It Is true, that if God should thus display his goodness, and seal up his love
to the soul, whilst it were still in an unregenerate condition, whilst it did
still hanker after its lusts and corruptions, 'twould then indeed sport it self
more securely in this Sunshine of mercy, and turn this grace of God into
wanto^nesse. Thus men of sordid and ignoble spirits, will trespass more upon a
friend, then upon an enemy; an injury will keep them in better order, then a
courtesy. Thus nettles will sting most violently, when they are handled most
gently. Thus the wretched Indians adore the Devil, because he is their enemy,
and neglect the Majesty of heaven, because it is so propitious. When God shines
out upon ungrateful dunghils, they return him nothing but venomous and
malignant evaporations. We Will easily acknowledge, that if these men should have
the White Stone, they would trample upon it: For you see how they deal with
ordinary mercy, which the bounty of heaven heaps upon their heads.

There are such Pleonasms of love in God, such runnings over of goodness, as
that much falls upon these. God breaks the box of common mercies, and fills the
whole world with the savor of it. But what tribute and Revenues of glory has
he from them for all this? Why, they violate his Laws, and profane his Name,
and fight against him with his own weapons, (...), with his most precious
mercies, gifts and parts, and all they have shall oppose him that gave them. Of
their Jewels they make a golden Calfe. Do you think now that God will trust
these with his more special mercies, with his viscera and tender mercies? He
tried the vessel with water, and 'twont hold that. Do you think he will pour
wine into it? No, God reveals his love to none but to his friends; he sets his
Seal to none, but to such whom he sets as a Seal upon his heart and on his
arm; such as have an happy conformity to him, and a full compliance with him;
such as have the same interests, and the same glorious ends with himself; such
as delight in his Law, and feed upon his precepts* as upon an honey-combe. Do
you think he may not trust these with his mind; such as have a plain antipathy
against sin, against the very picture and appearance of sin; such as prefer
Hell it self before it; such as loath it, even as himself loathes it; men that
are ready to pluck out their right eyes for him, to cut off their right hands
for him? Do you think he may not manifest his love to these? What says the
Apostle John? He that is borne of God cannot sin; it is a plain impossibility
that he should so far put off his filial affection, as to make it his work to
displease him: much less can he take so strong an advantage of his goodness,
as therefore to provoke him, because he knows that God loves him. These men
only tell us what they would do if they had Assurance; but truly they are not
like to have it, till their hearts be changed, and then they will be of another
mind.

2. Love is a sweeter and surer and stronger principle of obedience then fear.
So that God did infatuate the counsel of that Achitophel, Machiavel I mean,
when he stilled that venom into the hearts of Princes, that they had better
rule their Subjects with a Rod of iron, then with a Scepter of gold; that they
had better enslave them by fear, then engage them by love. The truth is, he
had given them such Rules, that he knew if they followed them, they could not
possibly be loved; and therefore he would feign persuade them, that it is better
to be feared. And though this may seem to add some sparklings to Majesty, and
to brighten the Crown of Sovereignty; yet it leaves it far more tottering,
more unfixt and unsettled upon their heads. There is such a virulency mixed with
fear: such a tincture of hatred in it; both these affections are much of a
color, sad and pale. And therefore that Tyrant was so wise yet as to expect
hatred; Oderint dum metuant, says he, he knew whilst they feared him, that
they would hate him; And then there is a reluctance and Aversation in fear; And
those workings upon the soul, that come only from terrors, they usually prove
Abortive. And what though a body be pulled and haled and scared into obedience?
the soul is not conquered with all this. A slave does but watch an opportunity
for shaking off the yoke. And then there is a depressing and disenabling power
in fear, it contracts and freezes up the motions of the soul; it clips the
wings, it takes off the wheels, it unbends the bow. Trembling and Paralytick
motions are weak and languishing. Indeed fear it is nothing but Praecox
tristitia, a crude and indigested kind of sorrow; and it is the sowrer, because
it is not ripe. And therefore God himself that is a most absolute Monarch, and
has a boundless and infinite supremacy over all things; yet has far more glory
from them that love him, and only passive obedience from them that fear him.
Indeed he never goes about to rule any by fear, but those that have first
trampled upon Love, and are no longer Subjects, but professed Rebels. It Is love
that glews and fastens the whole Creation together. Those seeds of love which
God himself, (who is love) has scattered amongst Beings; those sparks of love
which God himself, (who is love,) has kindled amongst Beings, and those
indeleble prints of love which God himself, (who is love,) has stamped upon
Beings, maintain the whole fabric of the world in its just beauty and
proportion. The harmonious composure of Beings* the tuning of the several
strings, makes them sound out his praise more melodiously. O how comely is it
to see the sweet context and coherence of Beings, the loving connection and
concatenation of causes: one being espoused to another in faithfulness and
truth; the mutual claspings and twinings, the due benevolence of entities.
Behold, how goodly a thing it is and pleasant to behold Beings, like Brethren
to dwell together in unity: It calls to mind those precious drops of love,
that fall from the head of the first Being, and fell down upon the skirts of
inferior entities. And is not there as much of this love to be seen in the new
Creation, in the work of grace in the soul? Is not the foundation of the second
Temple laid in love? is not the top and pinnacle of it set up by a hand of love?
Are not the polishings and carvings of it, the works and expressions of love?
the witty inventions of love? Is not the structure maintained and repaired at
the constant expenses of love? Is it not inhabited by a Prince of love? one
more loving then Solomon is there; nay, what is the whole Gospel else, but
(...), a cluster of Redemption, as some render it; what is it else but a bundle
of love?

The Law that was an hammer to break hearts; I, but the Gospel that is a key to
open hearts. And truly all the terrors of Mount Sina, the thunderclaps and
the lightning flashes, the earthquakes and the smoking of the Mountain, and
the voice of the Trumpet, have not so much power and prevalency in them, as one
still drop that falls from Mount Sion. You are now come to the Mount of Olives,
a Mount of Peace and sweetness, a Mount that drops fatness, and in this Mount
will Christ be seen. And he comes to restore all things to their Primitive
love: he restores the powers and faculties of the soul to their first and
original concord; he knits his gifts and graces in the bond of love: he comes
to reconcile Beings, to make antipathies kiss each other. The Wolf and the
Lamb must be at peace, the Leopard and the Kid must lie down together. The
whole Gospel like the midst of Solomon's bed in the Canticles, (...), it is paved
with Love. Now sure you cannot question whether this be the more prevailing way:
For, O think but a while, what a potent oratory there is in love, what a
welcome tyranny, what a silken bondage, what a downy and soft necessity.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou Lady and Queen of Affections! thou art
the firstborn of the soul, and the beginning of its strength. Who would not
be captivated by so sweet a Conqueror? Who would not be mel^ed in so delicate
a flame? What heart would not entertain so pleasant an arrow? The Psalmist was
struck through with one of thy darts, when he panted so after the streams of
water. The Apostle Paul had another of thy arrows sticking fast in him, when
he cried out, The love of Christ constrains me* Vulnus ^lit venis, and S^cro
carpitur igni. Believe it, the strongest arguments are fetched out of Loves
Topics. We need not use many persuasions to such a soul, it has a fountain of
Rhetoric within. There is a present expansion and amplification of spirit for
the wellcomming of so happy an object. O how will such a soul twine about a
Precept, suck sweetness out of a Command, catch at an opportunity, long for a
Duty! How does it go like a Be from flower to flower, from Duty to Duty, from
Ordinance to Ordinance, and extract the very spirits and quintessence of all,
(...), crop the very tops of all. There will be in such a soul, the constant
returnings and reboundings of love. 'Twill retort the beams of heaven, 'twill
send back the stream of its affection into the Ocean. So that now as the soul
is assured of the love of God, so God also has a most absolute certainty that
the soul will (...). And thus is completed the sweet and perfect circle of
Love. Now there cannot be a more strong and a more mutual security, then that
which is thus founded* And therefore nature chooses to maintain her self by
these impressions. We see this plainly in filial and conjugal relations, where
the sweetest and surest obedience flows from principles of love. And where is
there more certainty then amongst friends; where there is a borrowing and
lending of souls, a mutual exchange and transmigration of souls? Now you know
all these Relations are clarifi'd and refined in grace; you are the friends of
God; nay, you are the Sons of God, you are the Spouse of Christ. And the
Apostle John, that speaks so much of Assurance, and tells you that a Christian
cannot sin; consider but a while, who he was. Why, he was the Beloved Disciple,
he that lay in the bosom of love, and breathed out nothing but pure love. I,
and his reason, it is founded in a relation of love: He cannot sin, because he
is borne of God. He resolves it into the (...), that same impression of love
that abides in him.

3. Consult a while with your own experience and observation, and then tell us
whether ever you knew any to walk more accurately with their God, then such as
were assured of his love. If you look up to heaven, there you see glorious
Angels, and glorified Saints, that have not only a full Assurance, but a full
possession of the love of their God: that are no longer taking a prospect of
Canaan, but are now feeding upon the fruits and clusters of the land of
Promise: that have not only some scattered, and broken beams of glory, but a
constant and an eternal Sunshine. And O how do they (...) only, but (...).
They have not only as we here below, some drops and sprinklings of happiness;
but they are at the very Fountain, and have fresh bubblings of joy, full
streamings out of sweetness, and can swim in the rivers of pleasure. Surely
these men will allow the Angels somewhat more then only to conjecture that they
are happy. What must glorified Saints still dispute about their Summum Bonum,
lest they be too secure; and must Angels only be of opinion, that they are in
heaven? must they only guess at the face of God? What* will they clip the
wings of the Cherubims too? Where has God more cheerful obedience then from
these? How joyfully do these ministering Spirits run about their glorious
errands? How does he bid one* Go, and he goes, and another, Come, and he comes.
And that which sets a fair gloss upon happiness it self is this, that they
are out of all possibility of displeasing their God. And so they are held forth
as patterns of obedience; Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Well, but then if they tell us that there is more danger of frail men that
dwell in houses of clay, and carry the body of death about with them.

1. We must bid them entertain honorable thoughts of the Excellent ones of the
Earth: for though it be true that they are not yet (...); yet God has made them
little lower then the Angels, and he has crowned them with glory and honor.
They walk with little coronets upon their heads: Though the most massy and
brightest crown be reserved for a day of Inauguration. They now feed upon
Angels food. God steeps them in his own nature, and in his own love; he
gradually prepares them for heaven. They are Inceptours in happiness, they are
Probationers for glory.

2. What though there be some unworthy dealings with their God, yet these flow
only from those relics of slavish principles that remain in them, some
fragments of the old Leaven that was not thoroughly purged out. And not by
virtue of a Gospel-Plerophory. What does the knowing that they are Sons of
light, does this dispose them to works of darkness? Does the knowing that they
are the Spouse of Christ, does this bespeak adulterous glances? It Is true, the
Sons of God may provoke him, but must they therefore needs do it under this
very notion, because they know they are his Sons? nay, must they do it the more
for this? This were the extremest malice that were imaginable; more malice
then the devils themselves are capable of. What bold blasphemy then is this
against the Sons of God, and against the sealing Spirit. I, and it envolves a
flat contradiction too, it puts an esse and a non esse simul; because they know
they are friends, therefore they will deal like enemies; and because they know
they are Sons, therefore they will deal like slaves. O what fine repugnancies are
these? Thus would they not only veil and cloud, but also spot and deface so
beautiful a Truth; but that it shines out with such victorious and triumphant
beams. But if any can yet doubt, whether Assurance do advance obedience, let
them but a while compare men assured of their salvation: (1.) With others in
the state of grace that want Assurance, or with themselves when once without
it: And then let them tell us, whether they don't differ as much as a bruised
Reed, and a stately Cedar in Lebanon? The doubting Christian does but smoke,
when the assured Christian flames. What faintings and shiverings and paleness
in the one? what vigor and liveliness, what a ruddy complexion of soul in the
other? How is the one left to the pleasure of a wave, when as the other lies
safe at Anchor. The one can scarce lift up his weak and trembling hands in
prayer, when the other is wrestling with Omnipotency. The one comes behind and
touches the hem of his Saviors garments, when as the other is in his very
arms and embraces. The one dares scarce touch a Promise, scarce cast an eye
upon a Promise; when as the other claims it, and grasps it, and appropriates
it. The performances of the one are green, and crude, and unconcocted; the
others are ripened, and mellow'd with a stronger Sunbeam of Love. The one like
a Lute with his strings loose and languishing; the other is tuned up to its
just height of affection. The one like a Bow bent, sends forth his arrows very
vigorously; the other does but drop them, and let them fall. How does Satan
wound the one with many a fiery dart, that the other quenches! How does the one
fear the roaring of the Lion, which the other tramples under his feet! (2.) If
you should compare them with men in an unregenerate condition; O what a (...),
what a vaste gulf is there between them? Sure you don't question, whether God
has more service from Israelites that feed upon hidden Manna; or from Egyptians
that feed upon Garlic and Onions? Men that are under the damning and
domineering power of lusts, and are only kept a little in awe, by some
thundrings from Mount Sinai: Though they spend a few sighs sometimes, and drop
a few tears sometimes; yet when they are thus washed, how soon do they return
to their wallowing in the mire? The chaining of a Wolf, does that meeken and
soften him? or the putting a hook into Leviathan, does that transform him?
Though wicked men by fears and terrors have their bounds set them, like the
Sea, which they cannot pass; Yet they are still like the raging Sea, they
swell and foame and cast out their mire and dirt. And who more wicked then they
that are desperate? Those black and damned Potentates of hell, because they are
out of all possibility of mercy; how do they act ad extremum virium in all
expressions of malice and wickedness? And therefore God out of his infinite
goodness, though he does usually seal men up to life and happiness, and lets
them make their Calling and Election sure; yet he does scarce ever, or very
rarely so seal men up to ruin, so as to let them know certainly that they are
Reprobates: for this would make them desperate; there would be no living with
them in the world. Or if he does show them this, he does withal let them run
into some act of violence, that presently frees the world from them. That hope
which wicked men have of being saved, though it be groundless, yet it keeps
them within their bounds and compass. Though it be but like the Spiders web;
yet the very spinning of that web, keeps them in the mean while from a full
expression of their venom. And that same shadow of obedience which God has
from Hypocrites, it is founded in some shadow of hope that they please
themselves in: and when this hope of their own framing vanishes and deceives
them, then they back-slide and apostatize.

4. Are there not other judgments enough to waken them out of a sinful
security? are there not Rods? are there not Scorpions? is there nothing but
present disinheriting? Sure you cannot but remember that famous place where God
speaks to David, and points at Solomon, Psalm. 89. 32, 33. If his children break
my statutes, etc. God will make his own people know that it is a bitter thing to
depart from him, and to forsake their first love. Nay, this is most certain,
that wicked men themselves are not capable of such severe temporal judgments
as the Sons of God are. That which is here done to the green tree, cannot be
done to the dry. For

(1.) They may fall from Assurance. Though they cannot lose the seed and the
root of grace, yet they may lose the flourishing and fragrancy of it. Though
the foundation of God remain sure, yet they may fall from their top and
eminency. Though they be built upon a Rock, yet they may be dashed with waves.
Though the Seal of God be of an eternal efficacy, yet they may deface the
Print and sculpture of it, so as that it may not be visible to their eye. Now
what a sad alteration will this be? Thou must not look for any more stroakings,
for any more smiles* for loveglances any more. Thou must bid thy fountains of
joy farewell. Thou must not look to see thy Spouse flourishing through the
Lattices any more. Thou must expect clouds, and shadows, and veils, and
curtains, and walls of separation. The fig tree of Canaan shall not blossom,
and there shall be no fruit in the Vines, and the labor of the Olive shall
fail. Thou must pass many a day without one Sunbeam; God will seal up his
sweetest influences, he will shut up the windows of heaven and stop the bottles
of heaven; he will rain down no more Manna upon thee. Go to thy husks, and see
if they I feed thee. Nay

(2) They may not only fall from Assurance, but even in a total desertion look
upon God as an enemy, and instead of a filial Plerophory, may come to afearful
expectation of the fiercest wrath of God. Now this I say is more judgment then
wicked men are capable of here; in this respect that they never had his love
once revealed to them: Whereas these are thrown down from the very pinnacle of
the Temple. And God does not only eclipse the luster of their former joy; but
dips his Pen in gall, and writes bitter things against them. He was wont to
shoot nothing but the fiery darts of Love; I, but now his envenomed arrows
stick fast in them. They did once furfet of the Grapes and Clusters of Canaan;
but now he hedges them in with briers and thorns. They were wont to taste of a
cup of sweetness, a cup of love; but he has now prepared for them a cup of
trembling and astonishment. They had once a Springtime, a budding, a
blossoming-time, the dew of heaven dropped on them, the beams of heaven visited
them: But now comes a sad and disconsolate Autumn, a fading and withering
time. Their gloss and greenness is gone; Heaven reveals it self in
thunderings and lightning flashes against them, so as they shall even envy
green Bay-trees, then men of the world that are free from all this. Now is not
this enough to keep a soul in awe? The Psalmist was very near this which we
speak of; He often tells you, that his joy was put out, that his peace was
gone, that he was even ground to powder, that he was banished from the face of
his God; that he was excommunicated from that happy and heavenly intercourse
with God, which once he had. These are frequent complaints; And yet he was one*

1. Of a pleasant and cheerful Temper. The Scripture paints him out as one of a
Sanguine complexion, the men of the world would have said he had been
melancholy else. He was one that was like a green Olive Tree in the house of
his God; a most flourishing and fruitful Christian. As if he had been one of
the Church triumphant, he was always singing fresh Hallelujahs. He had a soft
and delicate touch upon the Harp, he could still Saul's evil spirit with his
music; I, but he could not thus tune and compose his own troubled and
distempered spirit. He was feign now to hang his Harp upon the willows; and
the voice of his Lute was turned into sighing. And if he does sing sometimes
with a thorn at his breast, it is some penitential Psalm or other.

2. And yet all this while he was a King upon the Throne, he wanted not the
pomp and bravery of the world. I but a Scepter will not conquer fears, and a Crown
of gold will not cure an aching head, much less an aching heart. The smiles of
the world they brought him to all this, and therefore he cannot take much
complacency in them. And then for when he does so often envy the men of the
world, and is ready to stumble at the prosperity of the wicked; it was not so
much for the outward things of the world which they enjoyed, for those he had
himself too in a plentiful measure; but it was for the quietness of their
spirits, they were calm and serene, if compared with him, not in such fears
and doubts as he now was: they had not such conflicts and Paroxysmes and
tumultuations of soul as he now had. And yet he was one that once had the face
of God shining out upon him. And therefore he desires him to restore the joy of
his salvation: Lucem read, abes jam nimium diu; Instar veris enim vultus u^i
tuus affulsito, populo gratior it dies and soles meli^s nitent, as he once
spoke to Augustus.

So that you see here are ways enough to keep men from a carnal security. And
thus we have took off that bold calumny, so as we hope that, Nihil adhaerebit.

Having laid open at large the nature of Assurance; we now come to handle
briefly the second observation; And that is

Observe. 2.
Christian Assurance requires and calls for diligence.

Sure I need not tell you, that the most precious things are Cabinetted and
locked up under difficulties. If you look to Nature, you see how she reserves
her Jewels in secret repositories; she sets them in her own bosom, and
enhances their price by rarity. There is, indeed, a vein for silver, as Job
speaks; but Nature is not so profuse to open it, to let it run waste, and
exhaust her self. she hides her treasures, and puts them out of the reach of an
ordinary Plunderer.

Or, if you look to Arts: There are indeed some things which float at the top,
(...), those that are but initiated into them, are presently acquainted with
them; Hence some beginners, when they have but tasted these, think they have a
present kind of Omniscience. O but stay a while, there are most mysterious
things, which lurk at the bottom, and require a profounder search: they must
dive deep before they fetch up these Pearls. Thus it is in Languages, the
choicest elegancies many times are coucht in Idioms, those arcana linguarum,
you may see them like so many Pearls glittering amongst the rubbish of the
Tower of Babel. Thus it is in civil affairs, some things are visible and obvious
to a vulgar eye; the rude heap and mass of people can take notice of them:
some wheels move so plainly, as that they can see them. I, but there are more
secret springs of motion, more intimate contrivances, politic riddles, which
they only can read that are a secretioribus. Every design must not have a
window in it, it is comely sometimes to see Moses with a Veil upon his face.

And thus it is in the wise Economy and dispensation of the Gospel. It Is true,
the whole Gospel is pregnant with heavenly mysteries: It Is like that heavenly
(...), the milky way, which the wise ones of the world take for a Meteor only,
a brief (...); I, but those that are enlightened from above, know that it is
made up ex flore lucis, it is compounded of Stars less discernable; and even
here one Star differs from another in glory. There are Mysteria primae
magnitudinis, such transcendent and dazzling mysteries, as that the Eagle must
be feign to shut her eye, and the Seraphim must be glad to wink. And there are
not only intellectual, but practical depths in the way of Religion: And
Christian Plerophory is one of these. For a soul to be filled with the
breathings of the Spirit; And to move with full sail in the Ocean of Gods love;
And when it pleases to lie safe at Anchor; I, and to be sure of coming safe to
the haven, certainly the soul must needs cry out all the while (...), O the
depth of the goodness, and love of God! how mysterious are his ways, how are
his mercies past finding out!

(1.) Now for a Christian to arrive to so full a sense of Gods love, hic labor,
hoc opus est:

It requires diligence; For

1. There are but few that have any right and interest in the love of God in
Christ, at all.

2. Of those few that have a share and portion in his love, yet all of them
have not assurance of his love. There are but few that enter into the Temple;
I, but there is only some Aaron that enters into the sanctum sanctorum, and
casts his Anchor within the Veil. And

First, there are but few upon whom God bestows his love. 'Twas always a
principle in Morality, that sweet and intimate friendship cannot be extended to
many. Friends usually go by paires. Now God, though he be of vast and
boundless love, and has love enough to satisfy a multitude of worlds, yet he
has chose ^o concentricate it all in a few picked out of the world: that he
might thus engage them the more to himself. His large and precious love is kept
for his only Spouse.

Secondly, of those few whom he loves, some are not assured of his love. He
loved them all from everlasting, yet none of them could be then assured of his
love. A nonentity cannot reach to a Plerophory. Well, but when they peept out
of their first nothing, truly they were not any rare objects of love: much
less could they then be assured of the love of their God; when they were in a
state of enmity and opposition, and the children of wrath as well as others:
Well, but when he put them into a state of love, and made them lovely with that
beauty and comeliness, with those jewels and bracelets, which he had put upon
them: when he loved them as his new creatures, as his vessels of honor, that
were now cast into their just mold and fashion: When he loved them, as his
newborn sons: yet these babes in Christ could not presently cry Abba Father.
They were his Epistle, written in a fair and goodly character, dated from
eternity, folded up and kept secret, at length sent into the world: the
superscription was writ in time, in Vocation: Well, but all this while they
were not sealed, till the spirit comes and stamps a clear impression of Gods
love upon their soft'ned and melted spirits. It Is true, they were sealed as
soon as they were written, in Gods eternal Decree, but they were not visibly
sealed, till now. Now what pantings and breathings? What longings and
entreaties? What preparations were there in the soul, before it could obtain
this?

Secondly, it requires diligence to keep assurance. O take heed of wasting and
crumbling away thy hidden Manna. God may break the staff of bread, and what
will thy weary soul do then? Take heed of losing the White Stone, take heed of
forgetting thy new name. O maintain the Oil of gladness in the Cruse. Thou
that art a Vine of Canaan laden with generous fruit; would thou willingly
part with thy sweetness, and fruifulnesse? Thou that art a green Olive Tree
flourishing in the house of thy God; would thou be content to part with thy
fatness, and pleasantness? Thou were wont to stay and Anchor thy soul upon
thy God; And would thou now be left to the courtesy of a wave? What? Art
thou in love with the Tents of Kedar? They are black indeed; And do thou
think them comely too? Art thou weary of the Sunshine? And would thou cool
thy self in the shade? Do thou begin to loath thy hidden Manna, and would
thou return to the Garlic and Onions of Egypt? Art thou cloyed with the
clusters of Canaan, and do thou nauseate the Honeycomb? O remember, thou
did st not so soon obtain assurance, and will thou so soon lose it?

Thirdly, give diligence to recover assurance, if lost: O when will the winter
be past? when will the rain be over and gone? that the flowers may appear, and
the time of singing may come: That the Vines of Canaan may flourish again, that
the tender Grapes may appear. Awake O South-winde, and with thy gentle
breathings, blow upon the Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out! Never
leave till thou find'st thy Spouse again, thou that art sick of love: Tell him
that thou long'st for a cluster of Canaan; That thou art even famished for want
of hidden Manna. Desire a new edition of his love, with all the enlargements of
affections. Lay thine heart before him, and desire new stamps and impressions;
tell him that though thou have lost the print, yet he has not lost the Seal:
Tell him that thou will now prize his love more then thou ever did or
could do before. Give him no rest, till he give thy soul rest, and fill it
with himself. Surely thou would not willingly set in a cloud: thou would
not go out of the world with thine Evidences blotted and blurred: Surely thou
would not willingly be tossed and dashed with waves in sight of the haven.
Had thou not rather go to thy grave in peace? O desire himto shine out upon
thee a little before thou go hence, and be no more seen.

(2.) Now surely, we need not tell you, why Assurance does thus require
diligence, For

1. You know the hearts deceitfulness, how it loves to please it self in a
shadow, in a painted joy, to flatter it self into an imaginary happiness. Most
men in the world are so confident of heaven, as if they had been borne heirs
apparent to the Crown of glory: as if this new name had been given them at
their baptism, or as if they had been born with hidden Manna in their mouths.
They never knew what a question or a scruple was, nay they wonder that others
trouble themselves with them; as for them, they have a connate kind of
Plerophory* These fabri fortunae suae* have a key to heaven of their own
making, and can go to it when they please. These crown themselves with their
own sparks, and think them more glittering and precious then the White Stone.
As if they were Custodes sigilli, they can ^eale themselves to the day of
redemption when they please. Thus do vain men cheat their own souls: when as
'twere their wiser way, rather to commune with their own spirits, to criticize
upon their own hearts, to see what a false print they are of, what false
glosses there be, what variae lectiones? what corruptions and degenerations
from the Original? whether there be any spiritual Idioms? what are the genuine
works of the Spirit? what are spurious and supposititious?

2. Give diligence, because thou have a diligent enemy that would so feign
quench thy joy, and keep it from flaming into Assurance. He envied the grain
of Mustard Seed, when 'twas first sown: how then does it vex him to see it now
spread into such goodly branches* that the soul can build its nest there? He
envied thee the first blushes of the day, the buddings of the Rosy morning;
that those fair and Virgin eyelids should open and glance their light upon
thee: how then is he scorch't with thy fuller Sunshine? How do his eyes water
at thy noonday brightness? He that would have broke thee when thou were a
bruised Reed, how would he triumph in thy fall, now thou art a stately Cedar?
If he could, he would have dispirited and took off the vigor of that immortal
seed, by which thou were born again; He would fain have spit his venom into
that sincere milk, which fed thy infant-soul; how then does he envy thee those
flagons of wine, with which thou art now quickened and enflamed? He would fain
have hindered the foundation of the second Temple, and now he would fain
demolish the structure, and down with it even to the ground.

That son of the morning fell himself not only from a complete Assurance, but
from a possession of glory; and that into the most extreme darkness that was
imaginable, into a total impossibility of ever being happy; and now he would
very feign (as much as he can) envolve others in the same condition: But
certainly it does add much of hell to him, in that he perceives that the sons
of God are now fixed in an immutable condition; whereas he was left in so
voluble a state, so that now all that he can possibly do is this, to damp their
joy for the present* to raise clouds, and storms, and tempests; And in this
that Prince of the air does his endeavor to the utmost. And yet Christians
may frustrate him here too, and by a strong and clasping hand of faith, may lay
such fast hold of a God in Christ, as that they may even make the Devil give
over: and to all his former, may add this new despair of ever eclipsing their
glory: and may send him away as weary as he would be, if he should go about to
interrupt the joy of a glorified Saint, or of one of those Angels that still
dwell in glory. So that the more frequent his Alarms are, the more should
Christians stand upon their watch, the more should they fortify themselves,
and look to their spiritual Panoply: they should fly to the name of the Lord,
which is a strong Tower.

3. Give diligence, because it is in a matter of so great consequence: and to be
deceived here will prove the most stinging aggravation of misery that can be.
The house that was built upon the sand, great was the fall of it. There is a
counterfeit Plerophory, a blazing kind of Assurance, a bragging kind of
confidence, you know the name of it, it is called Presumption, that great
devourer of souls, that uses to slay its ten thousands; It Is so far from
being an Anchor, as that it is but a swelling and impostumated wave, which
tosses up the soul a while, that it may sink the deeper. And can there be a
greater Emphasis of misery then this? Thou took'st it for granted, that thou
were in the ready way to heaven, and now thou art dropping into hell
irrecoverably: Thou expected'st no less then a crown of glory, but can find
nothing but chains of darkness and a gnawing worm. How golden was thy dream
of happiness? did thou not fancy the light and beams of heaven ripening the
fruits of Canaan for thee? did not thou think thy self upon the top of Mount
Pisgah, refresht with soft and delicate breathings, taking a full prospect of
the beatifull land of Promise? Nay did not thou think that some of the milk
and honey of the land flowed into thy mouth? That thou were plucking off green
Apples from the trees? Nay, that thou had the very tastes and relishes of
the Olives, and Figs, and Pome-granates, and Grapes in thy mouth? But behold,
thou wak'st, and art in a Wilderness, amongst Briers and thorns, amongst
fiery Serpents, in a dry and thirsty land, where no sweetness is* Thou took'st
that for the whispering of the Spirit, which was but the hissing of the
Serpent. Thou thought thy self in the very Suburbs of the new Jerusalem, in
the Temple, in the sanctum sanctorum; when as thou were all this while but in
an Egypt, in a Babylon, in a Prison, in a Dungeon. Thou did exalt thy self
like the Eagle, and build thy nest in the Stars: But with what indignation were
thou swept from thence? How thou art fallen, O Lucifer, son of the morning!

(3.) Consider what kind of diligence is required. And

1. Be diligent in self-reflexion. A clean heart chews the cud, and ruminates
upon its own actions: Give thy heart frequent visits, and see whether it keeps
that print which the sealing Spirit stamped upon it: read over thine Evidences;
if there be the least blot wash it out. Try thy graces by a Scripture-Sun-beam.
Have thou within a continual feast? Why then do not thou envite thy thoughts
thither, that they may be satisfied as with marrow and fatness? Why do not
thou compel them to come in? Let them drink sweetness out of their own
fountain, let them bless the womb that bare them, and the breasts that gave
them suck.

Let them be afraid of entering into their hearts, that have no quietness
within, unless like the Leviathan, they can sport themselves in a raging sea,
that foams out mire and dirt. But thou can steep and bathe thy thoughts in a
calm and composed spirit. Why do not thou listen to thine own music? Why
do not thou glance upon thine own beauty? Assurance consists in a ^eflex
act* and by such workings it is maintained, iisdem alitur, quibus gignitur.

2. Be diligent in Prayer. Believe it, assurance does not come with those weak
wishes and velleities, that are so frequent in the mouths of many, O that we
were sure of heaven, of happiness! O that our souls were well provided for! O
that we knew what should become of them to eternity! Truly these are but gaping
and yawning desires, as if hidden Manna would drop into their mouths. This
great blessing requires a wrestling prayer. The White Stone is given to none
but a Conqueror. The Spirit will not set his seal to a faint and languishing
velleity. An Echo will not answer a whisperer; a weak voice is not worth a rebound.

The truth is, there is a great deal of Vicinity and friendship, nay I think I
might say Consanguinity, between Assurance and Prayer. Prayer should be
Plerophoria quaedam explicata. Assurance does mightily enliven and animate
Prayer, and Prayer does (...), cherish and maintain Assurance.

Go then unto thy God, and be importunate with him: beg a smile, a glance, a
beam of his face: desire him to take all worldly things again, unless he will
sweeten them with his love. Tell him, thou can no longer feed upon husks,
and desire him to give thee somewhat that is fit for a soul to live on.

3. Be diligent and frequent in communion with thy God. Conversing with God
puts a luster and radiancy upon the soul; descending to the creature, puts a
Veil upon that former brightness; sweet and familiar intercourse with thy
God, puts thee into the number of his friends; and friendship brings Assurance
and Confidence along with it.

Would God (do thou think?) admit thee into his most shining and beautiful
presence? would he thus display himself to thee, and make known his most secret
treasures of goodness and sweetness unto thy soul, unless he loved thee?
would thy Savior thus smile upon thee? would he thus unbosome and unbowel
himself to thee? would he thus flourish in at the lattices, unless he were thy
Spouse? would he thus kiss thee with the kisses of his mouth? would he tell
thee so much of his mind, unless his heart were with thee? would he accept of
thy prayers and thy performances, thy spiritual sacrifices, if he meant to
destroy thee? did thou ever know him deal thus deceitfully with any? would
he give thy soul such frequent visits* such gentle breathings? would he so
often whisper to thee, that which the world must not hear, if thou were an
enemy as well as they? can thou think thy self* in darkness, when the Sun
looks upon thee? Can thou doubt of quenching thy thirst, when the fountain
bubbles out, and flows upon thee? Can thou doubt of liberty in the year of
Jubilee? What is the Dove in the Arc, and yet can it find no rest to the
soale of her feet? Can thou question thy safety under the wings of Christ?
No, whatever it was that put out thy joy, it did first estrange and alienate
thee from thy God. And could thou but recover thy former neernesse to him,
thou need'st not doubt of the same affectionate expressions from him. Communion
with God, it is that which gives an heavenly and eternal Plerophory; it is that
which maintains the assurance of glorious Angels, and glorified Saints. And
that which takes away all hope from the damned is this, that they are
perpetually banished, irrecoverably excommunicated from the face of their God:
Depart from me, I know you not: there is more in that then in fire and
brimstone. But God has said unto thee, Seek my face, and let thy soul echo out
its resolut^on, Thy face, Lord, will I seek: for all certainty flows from God,
from that fixed and unshaken Entity, from that Original immutability that is in
him. And when God sets his seal unto thee, he prints somewhat of this upon
thee: And therefore the more God gives of himself to thee, the more Assurance
he gives thee.

Go then to the place where his honor dwells, go to the place where his glory
shines. You know that the Apostle Thomas, when he was absent from the Apostles
meeting, he fell into a strange distrust of that which the others were very
well assured of. Go then to those Ordinances, that drop golden Oil upon the
soul, and make its countenance to shine. Hide thy self in those clefts of the
Rock, that God may make his goodness pass before thee. God will there beam
out upon thy soul, he will warm it with his love, and will then seal it to the
day of redemption.

Observe. 3.
Christian Assurance deserves diligence.

It Is a miserable thing to toil for vanity and emptiness; to sow the wind,
and to reap the whirlewinde. But to take pains for happiness, who would not be
willing to this? An Israelite that would be loath to spend his time in
gathering stubble, would willingly spend it in gathering Grapes. A wise Virgin
will cheerfully put in so much Oil, as will make the Lamp to shine. The soul
will never be weary of gathering hidden Manna. Assurance is a very satisfactory
thing; men take a present and complete acquiescence in it.

1. Consider it in Temporals, what will not worldlings do to secure their lands,
and goods, and estates? How do they seek for Bonds, and Seals, and Oaths, and
Sureties; and yet think all this too little? They have set up an Ensurers
Office, and will scarce venture a Ship at Sea, unless it can have an
unquestionable Plerophory; unless one will secure it from wars; and another
from rocks; and a third from winds and tempests. And this is one of those
stings and vexations which God has put into temporals, that they are uncertain.
Many a worldling has pined away under this very notion, that his riches had
wings, and could fly away when they list. And this was the reason, why the
Epicures were all for enjoying the present moment; because that was all they
were certain of; and therefore they would have devoured and soopt up the
quintessence of all happiness in a (...) if they could. Thus Anacreon sings
(...). And this was that which made the Heathen so angry with Fortune, a
goddess of their own framing, because she put them always upon blind
uncertainties, This made the Stoics to run into the other extreme, to fix
themselves in an unevitable certainty, in a sullen necessity, to anchor upon
fate, rather then to be left to a wavering contingency.

2. Assurance in Intellectuals is very satisfactory. There Is nothing that
tortures the soul more then scruples and difficulties; it makes it to dwell
like a lily amongst thorns.

The Scepticks were a perpetual wrack to themselves. Objections fly like dust
into the souls eye, and sometimes it is feign to weep them out. How does it vex
the Naturalist that his head is so non-plust, as that he must fly to the
refuge of an occult quality? How impatient was Aristotle, what boylings and
toslings in his breast more then in Euripus, because he could not give a full
account of the ebbing and flowing of that river? He threw himself into it, as
if he thought to find more rest there then in his own spirit, discomposed only
with this uncertainty. Every question checks the understanding, and makes it
remove a little from certainty, as the learned Verulam observes. Every question
it is some grace to error, and some repulse to truth.

But how sweetly does the mind relish those first and common notions, that
carry a native light, and convincing evidence and certainty in them, and will not
give the soul leave to doubt? and how does it bathe it self in those
crystalline streamings out, those pure derivations of secondary notions, that
freely bubble out from these fountain-principles, which for their certainty
sometimes are honored with the name of axioms? And some give this rule for a
trial and touchstone of notions: Whatsoever Proposition the mind does fully
close with, that is unquestionably true, because the mind cannot rest satisfied
but with certainty. And that which it gives but an hovering and imperfect
assent to, is but probably true. Now though sometimes a falsity may come under
the fair disguise of an apparent certainty, yet this is also sure, that the
mind cannot so fully and sweetly acquiesce in an apparent certainty, as in a
real certainty. As neither can the Will so fully close with an apparent good,
as with a real good; for in realities there is a sure Entity at the bottom,
which is a just foundation for appearance, whereas the other is a mere color,
a surface, a shadow. And the more perfect any intellectual being is, the more
of certainty it has.

Our knowledge therefore here is but cloudy and enigmatical, shadowy and in a
glass. The nearer to God any being is, the more it has of certainty. And
therefore the Angels and Spirits that see God face to face, are satisfied with
his image. Truth then plucks off her veil, pulls off her mask, that the soul
may salute her. And this is the great Prerogative of that infinite and supreme
Being, God himself, that he has an independent and eternal certainty, and
beholds all beings and motions of beings past, present, and to come, without
the least shadow of variation. And those things which pose created beings, are
more plain and obvious to his eye, then first principles are to ours. The very
intimate forms of beings are naked and anatomized before him. He looks down
upon the sons of men, and sees them rolling and fluctuating, tossed and tumbled
up and down in uncertainties, sometimes even questioning him in his ways and
his dealings, while as he rests in a full and absolute Omniscience. And this is
his great goodness, that he allows us Certainty in those things that concern
our welfare and happiness.

3. In spirituals and eternals, Assurance is very satisfactory. Religion should
be above syllogismes and disputings* Spiritual notions should have the seal of
God in their foreheads; they are not to be struck like sparks out of a flint:
but are to spring like light from the Sun; they are to flow like streams from
the Ocean. And Principles of Religion must be built upon a rock, upon the most
sure and unquestionable grounds that can be. Men that build for eternity, had
need to lay the foundation sure, and they must build gold and precious stones
upon the foundation, that which has a solidity, and a firm Certainty in it.
And if this were observed.

1. You would not have such jarres and divisions in the Church. You would not
be so much troubled with the noise of Axes and Hammers. Imposing things
questionable as certain, is agreeable to that spirit, which allows no other
Assurance but this; that their Church is the true Church.

2. The mixing and blending of Religion with uncertainties, is that which does
emasculate, and dispirit, and endanger it; it is a dashing the wine with water;
it is an adulterating the gold with dross, so as it will not endure the fiery
trial.

3. The taking up Religion upon uncertain grounds, does put men upon an odious
luke-warmnesse and neutrality: for men cannot be zealous for a thing they doubt
of. It puts them upon variableness and unconstancy, upon the very brim of
Apostasy; and (it may be) plunges them into it. Nay, it strongly tends to
Atheism: some do so long question, which is the true Religion, as that at
length they resolve to have none at all.

4. The leaving the success of Religion uncertain, does damp and cool the
spirits of men. The learned Moralists amongst the Heathen, could never content
themselves with a fair probability only of summum bonum, but did spin it out
to an imaginary certainty. The Stoics would have a domestic Plerophory, they
must be unavoidably happy: A mere certainty will not suffice them, it must be
condensed into a necessity. A wise man with them must irreversibly seal up
himself to happiness: And so though he were in Phalaris his Bull, he must
glory and triumph and sing Halelujahs. But the fairer Moralists, were willing
to depend more upon the bounty of heaven, which yet they looked upon as a sure
and unquestionable thing; nay, they pleased themselves not only in a
Plerophory, but in a present possession. For you know virtue with them was
Praecox ^eatitudo, as grace with us is glory not fully ripe. And serenity of
natural conscience was their hidden Manna; their White Stone. Thus were they
fain to still their souls in some shadows and appearances of certainty. This
sweetened Socrates his Cicute, and made him a cheerful Martyr for Philosophy.

And all wicked men that go on merrily and securely in their ways, do frame
some imaginary certainty to themselves; which (it may be) they found upon sure
principles, but falsely applied; as this, That God is merciful, or the like.

All this I bring to show that the soul does catch at certainty, and Assurance,
and will rest satisfied with nothing else. For, for men to apprehend themselves
uncertain of happiness, what is it else but to be for the present miserable?
Nay, would not some (do you think) choose rather to be certain of a tolerable
misery, then to be in continual suspense of happiness? And truly such men as
have no Assurance of obtaining this great end of their being, they are of all
creatures most miserable.

The Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, and shall not the
sons of men have where to lay their heads? Every being loves certainty: How do
Naturals combine together and unite their forces, that they may secure
themselves by an happy association? Nature will have a Plerophory, will not admit
of a vacuum, the least schism and rupture would prove fatal and put it upon
uncertainties. Sir Francis Bacon spies this in those fallings down of water,
that thread and spin themselves into such slender ^tillicids, that thus they
may preserve their continuity, and when they can reach no longer so, then they
fall in as plump and round a figure as they can.

And if every Being loves Assurance* then surely such a noble Being as the soul
of man, cannot be satiated with a changeable good; it cannot fix it self upon a
moveable center. Immortality is near a kin to Immutability. Besides, if it were
only this, that the ^oul did doubt of happiness, it were a lighter burden; but
there is necessarily conjoined with this a fear of extremest misery. Now for a
soul to be perpetually hovering betwixt heaven and hell; nay, to have far
more ground to fear the one, then to hope for the other, and so to tremble at
the very thoughts of eternity; is not this a piece of the gnawing worm? and
must the soul live in this perpetual slavery? Is there no redemption from it?
Did not Christ come to take away this sting among the rest? Did not he come to
draw thee to himself, to quiet thee in his own bosom? Return thee to thy Rest,
O my Soul! Return to thine Arc, O my Dove! And look upon this
Gospel-Plerophory, as one of those great privileges that were purchased for
thee by a Savior. For

1. By this, thy Soul, thy darling, it is fully provided for, for eternity. Thy
lot is fallen to thee in a fair ground, and thou have a goodly heritage; Could
thy soul open its mouth any wider? Could thy soul desire any more then this, to
be sure of being for ever completely happy? What would the damned in hell give
for a possibility of happiness? What would some wounded spirits give for good
hopes and probabilities? when as thou in the mean time have an overflowing
Plerophory. What would the one give for a drop to cool their tongue? What
would the other give for a pure stream to wash their bleeding fowls? When as
thou all the while art bathing in the fountain, art sailing in the Ocean, art
swimming in the Rivers of pleasure. Thine understanding may well rest
satisfied, for it is sure to fix its eye upon an eternal beauty; upon the face
of its God. Thy will may rest it self in the embraces of its dearest object:
for it is espoused to the fairest good, and is sure to enjoy it with an
indissoluble union. Thy purer and more refined affections may sport themselves
in the Sunbeams of heaven. There may thy love warm and melt it self, and
there may thy joy dance and exult. All that thou have to do here below, is
this; Thy Virgin-soul that is here assured and contracted, must wait a while
for the Nuptials, for a full fruition of its God, for a full consummation of
its joy.

2. This must needs sweeten all present conditions to thee. Eat then thy bread
with joy; and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God accepts thy person,
and smells a sweet odor in thy sacrifice. Are there any pearls in the Gospel?
thou may lay claim to them* Is there any balm in Gilead? thou have a share
in it. Are there any Gospel-priviledges? thou know they are thine, and are
intended for thee. Does God bestow temporals upon thee? thou know that he
first dips them in love and sweetness. Mount Gerizim is thy portion* And how
art thou above waves? when as some are shipwrackt, others are toss*d and
disquieted; thou have an happy protection in all thy ways.

1. Thou are secure against the srownes of the world, for heaven smiles upon
thee. Thou may laugh at the false judging and esteems of men. It may be, the
world brands; I, but the Spirit seals. It may be the seed of the Serpent
hisses; I, but the holy Ghost breaths. What, though thou be forty years in
a Wilderness? Nay, what though thou be seventy years in Babylon? Will Not
Canaan, and will not the new Jerusalem make amends for all?

2. Thou art secure in times of judgment. As Job speaks of the Leviathan, The
sword of him that lays at him cannot hold, the spear, the dart, nor the
habergeon. The arrow cannot make him flee, darts are counted as stubble; he
laughs at the shaking of the spear. Who is like him upon the earth, one that is
made without fear? When God thunders upon the men of the world, he speaks but
in a still voice to thee; he darts lightning flashes in their faces, but he
lists up the light of his countenance upon thee. Judgments are intended for
the sweeping away of Spiders webs, not for the sweeping away of Gods own
jewels. Or if they be envolv'd in a common calamity, yet how is it rolled up in
sweetness to them? when as the other can taste nothing but gall and wormwood.
Their body may be tossed a little in the world, but their soul lies safe at
Anchor.

3. In the hour of death. Thou know that providence then, means only to
break the shell, that it may have the kernel. Let them tremble at the knockings
and approaches of death that know not what shall become of their precious
souls: Men who through the fear of death have been all theirlife-time subject
unto bondage? But thou may safely trample upon the Adder, and play in the
Cockatices den. The Martyrs (you know) did thus, when they embraced the flames,
and complemented with Lions, and devoured torments, and came to them with an
appetite. Assurance of the love of God in Christ, this and nothing but this
pulls out the sting of death. It Is true, that death has lost its sting in
respect of all that are in Christ; but yet such as know not that they are in
Christ, fear death still as if it had a sting: Only an assured Christian
triumphs over it; O death, where is ^hy sting!

4. Assurance fills the soul with praise and thanksulnesse. The real presence
of a mercy is not enough, but there must be the appearance of a mercy, and the
sense of it, before it fill thy hear with joy, and thy mouth with praise. A
doubting Christian is like a bird entangled and in a snare, the soul has not
its comfort, nor God has not his praise: But an assured Christian is like a
bird at liberty, that flies aloft, and sings most cheerfully; It begins those
Halelujahs in time, that must last for ever; It breaks out into the Psalmists
language, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless h^s
holy Name.

Observe. 4.
The fourth and last Observation which we propounded out of the Text was: That
the map to make our Eleation sure, is first to make out Calling ^ute. And this
is sufficiently warranted from the just order and method of this* Apostolical
exhortation, Make your Calling and Election sure; First your Calling, then your
Election; and by your Calling, your Election: Methodus Analytica best becoming
creatures.

Many have handled this point at large; I shall do it very briefly, and I shall
give you all that I intend to speak to it in these six particulars.

1. Election in it self is secret and mysterious* For (1.) it is from eternity,
and so there was none could know it but God alone; none could know Election,
but he that made an Election. A Being that is spann'd by time, cannot reach to
what was done from everlasting: You cannot imagine that Nonentity should
listen and hear what* was whisperd in the Secret Council of Heaven. Thou go
only by the clock of time; but those decrees were written with an eternal
Sun*beam; thou turnest up thy houre-glasse of time, but these were measured by
an infinite duration. Was it possible that Esau not borne should see God
frowning on him; or that Jacob should perceive a smile? Thou art as far from
meriting Election as a Non entity and thou art as far from knowing it as a
Nonentity. (2) God has a mind to keep it secret, and therefore he has set a
seal upon it; not only a seal of certainty, but a seal of secrecy. You know
creatures themselves have their closet-determinations; men have their thoughts
under lock and key; they have not windows into one another breasts, much less
into the breast of a Deity. Thou caust not fathom sometimes a shallow
creature, and do thou think to reach to the bottom of infinite depths? Has
God given thee secret springs of working; has he made the wheels and motions
of thy soul secret, and undiscernable, and may he not have the same privilege
himself? So then, if God has put a veil upon Election, do thou think to see
into it? When he has shut and clasp't the book of Life, do thou think to
open it and read it?

II. Vocation comments upon Election. Gods decrees, that were set from
everlasting, do bud and blossom, and bring forth fruit in time. Election buds
in a promise, and blossoms in an offer of grace. The Book was written before
the foundations of the world were laid; but it was not published till God
himself gave it an Imprimatur. The Letter was dated from eternity; the
Supersociption was writ in time, in Vocation. Now you know though the Letter be
writ first, yet the Superscription is read first by him that receives the
Letter. 'Twas decreed from eternity that Decrees should be known in time. And
the (...), is (...), the fullness of time, is the time when Gods decrees are
fulfilled. When the decrees of God are ripe, then he lets the soul taste them;
and then they are sweetest. Then thou perceivest that thou art a vessel of
honor, when God puts thee upon an honorable imploiment. That fountain of love
which ran under ground from everlasting, bubbles up and flows to thee in time.
That (...) that was in Election, becomes (...) in Vocation. Thus thoughts of
men, when they would appear, they put on words; they take wings to themselves
and fly away.

III. There is a strict and an inseparable connection betwixt Election and
Vocation. For who is there that can blast the decrees of Heaven, or who can
reverse the Seal of the Almighty? Who can break one link of this golden
chain? To be sure, it is not in the power of created Beings to evacuate and
annihilate the counsels of God. A creature, as it had no influence upon
Election, so neither has it any power to alter it. A shadow does not alter the
Sun, but rather shows you what time of the day it is. And then to be sure God
himself will not reverse his own seal. Nulla est litura in d^cr^tis sapientum,
say the Stoics; A wise man will scorn to blot out any thing. Nulla sunt
litura in libra vit^. God is so full of light, as that there is no shadow of
change in him. Therefore, has God picked thee out as a Jewel, and laid thee up
in a secret repository, in the Cabbinet of his secret council? He will then
bring thee out, and show thee in time; he means to polish thee, and put a
luster upon thee; he means to set thee as a Diamond in his Ring, and to put
thee upon the band of a Savior. Did God from all eternity resolve to set thee
as a captive soul at liberty? Truly then thou need not doubt, but that he
will in time break open the prison-doors; and beat off thy chains and thy
^etters, and give thee full enlargement. God has been preparing a feast for
thee from everlasting, a feast of sweet and fat things, a refined, an
Evangelical feast: To be sure then he will invite thee in time; he will stand
at thy door and knock; nay, he will compel thee to come into it. God glanced
an eye of love upon thee, when thou layest hid in the barren womb of nothing;
to be sure then in time he means to woo thee, and to win thee, and to
espouse thee to himself in faithfulness and in truth.

IV. Election and Vocation, though in respect of us they have gradual and
climbing accomplishments; yet in respect of God they are equally present. For
there is no succession in eternity. There can be no Pri^^ and posterius where
there was no beginning. It Is true that our finite Beings, as they cannot
sufficiently graspe an infinite Essence, so neither can they measure an
infinite Duration. And therefore, our understandings put many times several
periods there, where there ought not to be the least Com^^ because we span out
things by our own narrow Duration.

For Duration is nothing else but permano^^ia in esse, a continuation and
abiding in Being, the spinning out of Entity: And therefore as the soul cannot
see the face of God, so neither can it see the vastness of his Duration, which
is adequate and commensurate to the degree of his Entity. So that we being but
of yesterday, are not competent judges of Eternity. And as the soul imprisoned
in a body, can but darkly conceive of spiritual Beings, and cannot behold the
luster and oriency of an Angel; nay, it cannot behold its own beauty, much
less is it able to behold the glory of God himself: So being here conversant
with transient things that have their Ortum and Occasum, their Fluxum and
Refluxum, their Spring and Autumn, their bounds and their bottom, and
dwelling among temporals; it is not so well acquainted with the vast Duration of
Eternity. And yet it can far better behold the back-parts of Eternity, then the
face of it; Eternity a part post, then Eternity a part ante; because the soul
it self is measured by that Duration. Whereas only that one Supreme Being, God
himself has the compleatnesse and perfection of Eternity. No wonder then that
our understandings put several periods there, where there ought not to be the
least comma, because we span out things by our own Duration; that which bubbles
from Eternity, comes flowing to us in time. But Vocation is as eternal as
Election; In respect of God, Jacob was as soon called as he was chosen, and
that not only in respect of the secret counsel and decree of God; but
whenever God does actually call Jacob, he calls him ab Aeterno; for Eternity
is not at all spent and exhausted by continuance, but is always in vigore
viridi. It Is a flourishing Duration that never withers, nor decays. Indeed
Vocation is nothing else but Election pulling off her velle, and smiling upon
the soul, and telling her that God loves her, and manifests and displayes his
love to her.

V. It is altogether irregular and anomalous for the soul. 1. To pry into
Election. It Is dangerous to tread on the highest round first; and here it is
impossible. Thus the soul forgets that it is a creature, it forgets its own
Duration, and would be measuring it self by Eternity. The windows of the soul
must be set open for the entertaining of such light as does more immediately
flow in upon it; and the understanding must close and comply with such objects
as are best proportioned to it. Now you know that those things which are first
intelligible in their own nature, yet are not always first presented to the
view and eye of the soul. For whatsoever is first in Being may first be known;
Entity being the root and just foundation of intelligibility. And yet sometimes
secondary and junior Entity is feign to prepare the way like a John Baptist for
one that comes after it, and yet was in worth and being before it. Thus
sometimes the causes of things lurk, and lie coucht, they hide their heads,
only a little flourish out at the Lattesses, peeping out of an effect or two.
Thus the Text may be in Hebrew, when the Commentary is in Latin; many may
understand the one, that cannot read the other. Election, it is the Original;
Vocation, it is the interlineary gloss for the help of weak beginners. If God
should let thee see into Election before Vocation, it were the only way to
frustrate and disappoint his own decree. For if God should show thee thy name
in the book of Life, before thy heart were changed and renewed; what would this
but make thee sin more securely, and turn his grace into wantonness?
Whereas the wisdom of God never determines the end, but it also determines the
means; and as the end is always glorious, so also are the means powerful and
efficacious. Now thou can not more clearly demonstrate that thou art in a
good tendency and proximity to the end, then by a thanfull use and seasonable
application of the means. And what do they do but lay a snare for their own
souls, that catch and entangle themselves with such a desperate fallacy as
this is; If we be elected, we shall be unquestionably saved; and if we be not
elected, we shall be unavoidably damned, and therefore we may do what we list.
O what a bold and blasphemous inference is this! What is this else, but to
distill the rankest poison out of the richest and most sovereigne cordial? To
kindle Hell out of a spark of Heavenly truth, which if it were blown up gently
by the Spirit that breathed it, and kept within its just bounds; 'twould only
cheer, quicken and enliven the soul. Because thou do not as yet know whether
thou art a vessel of honor, will thou therefore presently dash thy self in
pieces? because thou do not for the present certainly know that thou shall
come safe to the Haven, will thou therefore court the waves, rush upon a Rock,
and make Shipwreck of faith and a good conscience? would thou do thus in
temporals? Why, thou do not know how long thou shall live, the number of thy
days is certainly fixed, and thy time is an appointed and determined time: will thou therefore refuse to lean upon the staff of bread? Will thou not repair
thine earthly and decaying tabernacle? Will thou not maintain the oil in the
cruze? that Balsamum radic^le, with such fresh supplies as are afforded to
thee? Will thou break thy glass in pieces, because thou can not tell how
long it will run?

Is it not a mercy that God vouchsafes thee the means? Why should thou
distrust of obtaining the end, more then any other? There is not a curtain
that hides Election more from thee then from any other; it is equally hid to
all, till it shine forth upon some in the use of means, till the curtain be
drawn, and then it will equally shine out upon thee, if thou usest the same
means. If all should argue as thou do, there would none be saved; if all
men, because Election is absolute and uncertain, should resolve to live as
they list; who would then set his face toward Canaan? where would God have any
glory in the world? What would become of his great Name? but he will root out
such an unsavory principle as this is out of the hearts of all that love him;
and that truth which is made a fat all stumbling block to some, shall prove a
solid foundation of joy and sweetness unto them. The very possibility of
Election should banish all such thoughts as these. Who can tell but God may
have been gracious unto thee, and have fixed an eye of love upon thee? Oh then
breath after him, pant and long for him, desire him to express his mind to
thee, to communicate his love to thee.

Besides, though thou do not know Election, will mere love do nothing?
Though thy God did not intend to glorify thee; yet thou should intend to
glorify him; Though he does not choose thee for his servant, yet thou should
choose him for thy Lord. There is worth in him, though there be none in thee.

Resolve that into what condition soever he throw thee, though into hell it
self, that there thou will love him, and there thou will praise him, and long
for him; that there thou will adore and honor him, and wilt grieve only for
this, that thou can honor him no more; that thou will admire his goodness
to others, his justice to thee; I, and his goodness to thee too, that lays
less upon thee then thou deservest. Such thoughts as these would make hell it
self lightsome.

VI. As Election is secret and mysterious, so Vocation may be easily known.
That Astrologer was deservedly laughed at, that was so intensely gazing upon the
Stars, so admiring their twinkling beauties, as that unawares he tumbled into
the water; whereas before, if he had but been pleased to look so low as the
water, he might have seen the stars there represented in that crystal
glass. Such as will needs be prying into the stars, that will ascend up into
heaven, and gaze upon Election; they do but dazzle their eyes, and sometimes by
this are overwhelmed in the depths of Satan: whereas they might easily see the
stars in the water; they might see Election in Sanctification, in
Regeneration. Now Vocation does plainly and easily appear by that great and
eminent alteration which it brings along with it. It is a powerful Call, it is
an audible and quickening voice; the voice of the first trumpet that awakens
men out of the graves, and makes them happy, by having their part in the first
Resurrection; great and sudden alterations they are very discernable. Now
here is a most notorious, and signal change made; Old things are past away, and
all things are become new: here is a change from death to life, from darkness
to light; and what more discernable then this? A living man may know that he is
alive, and that without any further proof or demonstration, whatever the
Scepticks old or new would persuade us to the contrary; Will you not allow a
man to be certain that he lives, till a jury of life and death has past upon
him?

Could not the blind man in the Gospel (think you) perceive when his eyes were
opened? could he not easily tell that now he could see and discern variety of
Objects? or must he only conjecture that he sees, and guess at a Sun-beame?
must he still at noonday go groping in uncertainties. And is there not an
easy and sure difference between those thick veiles and shadows of the night,
between those dark and Ethiopick looks, and the virgin blushes of the morning;
those beautiful eyelids of the day? The smilings and flowerings out of light,
much more the advancement of light to its Zenith and Noon-day-glory? And why
then cannot an Intellectual eye discern as well, that now it sees? that now it
looks upon God with an eye of love, with an eye of faith, with an eye of
confidence? and that now God looks upon him with an eye of tenderness and
compassion, with an eye of grace and favor, with an eye of delight and
approbation? Who but an Anaxagoras will go about to persuade a man to
disbelieve his eyes? and if a corporal eye deserve such credit, why may not a
spiritual eye then expect as much? Say not then in thine heart, Who shall
ascend into heaven, to bring down Assurance from above? who shall unclaspe the
book of life that is sealed, and turn thee to thy name? or who shall bring
thee a certificate that it is written there? Behold, it is nigh thee, even in
thine heart: The work of grace there, the Law written on the tables of thine
heart, by the finger of the Spirit is the exemplification and counterpane of
that Decree; the safest way, the best way, the only way to make sure of
Election, is first to make sure of thy Vocation; Make your Calling and Election
sure.

FINIS.
SPIRITUAL OPTICS: OR A GLASS Discovering the weakness and imperfection of a
Christians knowledge in this life.

BY NATHANAEL CULVERWELL, Master of Arts, and lately Fellow of EMMANVEL
COLLEGE in CAMRIDGE.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. and are to be sold by John Rothwel at the
Sun and Fountain in Paul's Churchyard.

1652,

To the READER.
Reader,
I Here present thee with a little Mirror, wherein thou may easily discern
thine own imperfections, unless they stand in thy light; and if thou will but
use to reflect upon thy self, a^a dwell at home, thou ^ayest easily find that
thou have little reason either to admire thy self or contemn others. If thy
knowledge puff thee ap* thou have so much the less. He was counted a wise, man
who said that he knew but one thing, and that was, that he knew nothing; though
another durst not own so much; and a wiser man then both tells us, that he that
is wise in his own eyes, is of all fools the most uncurable; and another, that
if any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as as he ought
to know. So that it seems to be agreed on by those who are best able to judge,
that the first priece of wisdom is to be sensible of ignorance. Then I hope
this Discourse may prove not unprofitable, truly nor unseasonable neither in
this confident age, when every ignorant one is so prone to lean unto his own
understanding, that he thinks himself too good to be taught, whereas indeed he
has not yet wit enough to learn. But it is the Devils subtilty to dazzle them
with new light (as Boys do Geese) that they may wink conceitedly while he
pulls them naked, and makes them become ridiculous. It is sad to think how he
puts out men's eyes, and then makes himself cruel sport with them; and the game
of it is, that still they think themselves seers, and know not that they are
blind, and naked, and miserable. Now if this Glass prove but instrumental to
reflect so much old light upon them, as to discover to them their own
blindness, there will be some hope of cure. But Reader, I must entreat thee
neither to condemn this piece because it is imperfect, nor yet contemn it for
being little. It is imperfect, I confess: but so is all our knowledge here,
which is the subject of it; and if we know but in part, no wonder if we
prophecy also but in part; besides, if Saint Paul himself could not utter the
words which he had heard, then truly we may very well excuse this Author for
not expressing that in words, which neither ear has heard, nor eye seen nor
the heart of man conceived. But it may be what is here said* may at first seem
but little: it may be the sooner read; Do but peruse it, and if it please thee,
it is enough; if otherwise, too much. But indeed it was intended only for a
taste, and to bear the Mace into the world before that learned and elegant
Treatise, which this ingenious Author has left behind him concerning The
Light of Nature; Which now waits only to see what entertainment this will meet
withal. Perhaps it may be expected that I should add something in praise of
the ^uthour; but I am not ignorant that a friends testimony is prone to be
suspected of partiality; and although such an one have most reason to know the
truth, yet Cassandra-like, he seldom has the hap to be believed. The best
on it is, he needs it not, his works will commend him most effectually; which if
I shall endeavor to bring into public view, I hope thou will find them such,
that I shall not be thought either to have abused thy le^sure, or to have
wronged the memory of my deceased friend.

W. D.
Emman. Dec. 24. 1651
1 COR. 13. 12. For now we see through a glass darkly; but then face to face:
now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am known.


PAUL that was of a piercing eye, and had as clear an insight into the
mysteries of Salvation, as any other; whose soul was always mounting toward
that third Heaven, whither he had once been rapt, and had there heard words
that neither could nor might be uttered (for so much is employed in (...)) we
find him here granting the imperfection of his knowledge, those weak and
shadowy apprehensions which he had of the Divine Majesty* while he saw through
a glass darkly; and encouraging himself with the consideration of the full and
clear Vision, which we shall have of him hereafter, when we shall see God face
to face in glory. Whithout any further preamble we will open the words of the
Text, that we may see this Glass clearly, and not (...).

Our Apostle here advances charity to the highest pitch of commendation, as a
triumphant grace, a grace that had eternity stamped upon it. It out-lives faith,
for that gives place to Vision; it out-lasts Hope, for that is swallowed up in
fruition; Prophecies they shall vanish, and Tongues shall be silenced, and
Knowledge shall pass away: for it is weak and imperfect here, it is in its
minority; yea, in its infancy: When I was a child, I spoke as a child. It Is
cloudy and obscure here; For now we see through a glass darkly.

NOW we see, etc. Now that the Gospel beams out upon us with a powerful and
glorious ray. It was likely that at the first peeping out of Heavenly light, at
the Evangelical daybreak, before the shadows were fully scattered, that then
there would be some obscurity; I, but 't has shined out brighter and brighter
till perfect day, and yet still we see thus darkly.

Secondly, (which is the true and genuine meaning) Now whilst we are in this
house of our earthly tabernacle, whilst the understanding of a man, which the
wise man calls The Candle of the Lord, while it is hid in the dark lanthorn of
the body; Till this partition wall be beaten down, we cannot see God face to
face. There Is no reaching of perfection here, it is treasured up for a better
life. He that will shoot high may aim at a Star, but he must not think to hit
it. Nihil est ab omni part beatum. B^atum and perfectum are both one. Alas!
Now when the soul does hut (...), try the wing, and flutter toward heaven,
it is presently pulled down with an earthy body we carry* about with us; it is so
deprest here, as it can hardly look up to heaven: how then shall it see God
face to face?

Now WE see through a glass, etc. We that have an holy (...) that teaches us
all things; we that have many secret (...), the whisperings and breathings of
the holy Spirit, that leads us into all truth; we that are acquainted with the
mind of God, that have had many a gracious aspect from him, yet WE see but
darkly. No wonder that the Sun's too bright for Owls, when Eagles are dazzled
with it, and become dimme-sighted; it is like that such as are aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, will be wholly ignorant of these Magnalia, when they
that are a secretiorsbus, know them but in part: if (...), the sons of the
morning, the (...), children of light; if they see so darkly, then surely a
child of darkness will see nothing at all: If Paul now a glorious Apostle see
no more, what could he see when he was a furious persecutor, before the scales
fell from his eyes?

Thirdly, We that are no novices in Christianity, but have made much progress
in the ways of Religion, yet we see but darkly* 'Twas likely at the first
opening of the souls eye, at the first cast of it upon heavenly things, that
then 'twould not see so clearly. I, but it has been long fixed upon God, eying
of his goodness, gazing upon the riches of his free grace, viewing all his
ways, looking at and prying into his several dealings; and yet still it sees
thus darkly. And if a tall and eminent Christian see so little, what shall a
Babe see, a newborn Babe? If a vigorous and sparkling eye see no clearer*
what shall a weak distempered eye, a bleer-eyed soul, what shall that see? If
an experienced Apostle, a Paul see no more; what shall a new Disciple see, a
Nicodemus that comes by night? he must needs see but darkly.

Now we see through a glass, (...). Some that would be more critical then
they need, would fain show us a difference between (...) and (...) indeed with
them is a looking-glass: but (...) is some other glass; either such an one as
is for the help of weak and aged eyes, and then it is, we see th-ough
Spectacles; or else such as presents the object though afar off, and so it is,
we see through a perspective. The Vulgar Latin, that will have it Per
transennam, through a Lattice; as the Spouse in the Canticles is said, to
flourish through the Lattices. And all these urge the force of the Preposition,
(...), we see through a glass, or through a lattice. But they might easily
know, if they pleased, that (...) here, is the same with (...), and though it
be true that (...) is the more usual word for a looking-glass; yet it is as
true that (...) signifies the same. Hesychius makes them ^^nonyma: and the word
is but once more used in the New Testament, Jam. 1. 23. and there can be no
doubt but there it is taken for a looking-glass* Well then, our dark imperfect
knowledge of God here is thus set forth by seeing in a glass.

1. Because it is no immediate Vision: the object is not primarily and
immediately presented to the eye, but by way of resultancie, and mediante
speculo, by the conveyance of the lookingglasse, which is a silent interpreter
of the object. And such is our knowledge of God here, and such our communion
with him; only some broken beams of glory, some glimpses of his presence
scattered here and there, in this Ordinance, and in that, Glasses of his own
making, means of his proper institution.

2. It Is a weak and imperfect Vision: For, First According to some, not res
ipsa but imago rei, only the shape and resemblance of the thing is seen; the
effigies of the object drawn with the pencill of a beam is presented to the
eye. And Secondly, as the Optics tell us, radius reflexus languet, the beam
begings to be weary, and is ready to faint, it gives a weak and languishing
representation; it is an imperfect Vision. And O how dark is our knowledge of
God here! What poor manifestations have we of his presence, in comparison of
that sight which we look for hereafter! when his Essence shall be displayed
with a most glorious Emphasis.

3. Seeing through a Glass is a vanishing and transient Vision, as Saint James
expresses it; A man having seen his natural face in a glass, goes his way, and
presently forgets what manner of man he was. A dying species could not make any
strong impression. One direct view of an object is more full and satisfactory,
then the often seeing it through a Glass.

Our Apostle has applied it to our purpose; Knowledge passes away, in respect
of that weak and imperfect way of knowledge which we have here; for thus Saint
Paul glosses upon his own Text; When that which is perfect is come, then that
which is imperfect shall be abolisht.

But besides all this, Beza and some others think that our Apostle has
allusion to that way of knowledge which the Philosophers show us, and so often
speak of; That the understanding does (...), intellectus speculatur
phantasmata, and thus sees (...). No light springs into the mind but through
the window of sense; the sense, that is the first receptacle of the species,
which flowing from a material object somewhat thick and muddy, they must be
clarified and thoroughly refined by the Intellectus ag ns, (for that they
suppose) poured out from vessel to vessel, and taken off from the Lees before
the soul drink them in as her proper nectar. This remote and far-fetcht way of
knowledge, Saint Paul opposes to the quick and present view which we shall have
of things (...), when we behold them in speculo divino, we shall see in that
Glass clearly. But there is a place in 2* Cor. 3. 18. where Saint Paul seems
to oppose his own expression; for there to see through a glass may seem to
import a clear and open Vision: Hear what the words say, We all with open face
beholding as in a glass the glory of God, are changed into the same image from
glory to glory, as by the Spirit of our God.

A learned Critic has well observed that the Hebrew (...) includes both, for
it signifies both vultus and speculum. So that to see (...) may either be to
see (...), or else, (...). I know such as I formerly mentioned would have
recourse to their difference of (...) and (...); but if we look more accurately
into the words, I think we shall find that even there to see through a glass,
implies a dark and imperfect vision. For the Apostle compares those present
advantages which we in the Gospel have over them which were under the Law; they
were all under a cloud* and Moses had a veil upon his face; but we (...), with
open face behold the glory of God; and yet it is but beholding it through a
glass; for thus the state of the Church under the Gospel is described, Rev. 4.
There Is a throne compassed with a sea of glass, (...), verse. 6. Under the Law
it was mare aereum, but now in the Gospel mare vitreum, clearer
representations, as that renowned Interpreter of the Revelation observes. Well
then, in reference to them under the Law we behold with open face, but yet in
respect to that clear sight which we shall have hereafter, it is but (...). and
so it follows, we are changed into the same image from glory to glory: which
though it may be thus understood, from his glory we become glorious; yet I
doubt not but it is meant of the several degrees of glory: and thus (...) is
from grace to glory. For grace is Aurora gloriae, the dawning of the
beatificall vision. Grace is glory in the bud, and glory is grace at the full.
Surely glory is nothing else but a bright constellation of graces, happiness
nothing but the quintessence of holiness. And yet if any shall much contend,
that there to see through a glass, expresses a clear and unobscure vision, it
is nothing prejudicial to our present purpose: for here Saint Paul doubles his
expression, (...), we see through a glass darkly in a riddle, (...).

AEnigma is properly obscura allegoria, an allegory with a mask on; it is a
borrowed speech and a cloudy speech. A knotty intricate speech sealed up and
locked from vulgar appehensions, that is a riddle: and our knowledge of God here
is thus cloudy and enigmatical, and that if you take it in those three several
ways which are usually given of it.

First, by way of removal or negation, when we take away all such things as
are inconsistent with a Deity. And thus the Sripture riddles him forth; with
him is no beginning of days, nor end of life. He is not a man that he should
lie, or the son of man that he should repent. With him is no variableness nor
shadow of turning, etc. And in this sense Dionysius tells us that (...)* and he
there admires (...), the transcendent beams of Divine darkness; for so that
Areopagite is pleased to speak. Now you will easily grant that this is a dark
and cloudy knowledge, when we cannot tell you what a thing is, but what it is
not: for ex puris negativis nihil concluditur.

Secondly, when we conceive of him in a superlative way, in a way of eminency
and transcendency: and thus the forenamed Author (if he be the Author)
speaking of his Being, says that (...). Many divine perfections are scattered
and broken amongst the creatures, as the same face may be represented in
several Glasses; and all the excellencies of the creatures are collected, and
meet eminently in God, as several faces may be seen in one Glass. The
creatures must be winnowed from all imperfections, and the finest and choicest
of them must be taken to give some weak resemblance of a Deity; the ruddinesse
of the Rose, and the purity of the Lily; nay, the top and excellency of the
Creation must be brought to shadow out the Spouses beauty; and yet that this
knowledge is weak and imperfect, will easily appear. 1. Because these inferior
Beings are so gross and material, as that the purest of them, the very
quintessence and flos creaturae is mere dregs, if compared with so pure an
Essence; its gold becomes dross, its silver tin. And when heavenly
perfections are set out by the creatures excellencies, it is but a stooping low
to humane capacity: The soul would be dazeled at so bright a Majesty, unless
he were clouded with such expressions. 2. This way of beholding him breeds
rather admiration then begets knowledge; for when we hear of so goodly an
Essence that has all excellencies bound up in one vast volume, we wonder what
that should be: and admiration is at the best but semen scientiae, or abrupta
scientia, as the learned Verulam calls it, a stupefied kind of know'edge. 3.
This rather sets the soul a longing, then gives it any true satisfaction. For
when we hear there is so choice a thing, we long to know what it is; which was
sign we knew it not before, or but very weakly. For true knowledge satiates
the soul, there is a complacency and acquiescence in it, especially when it is
conversant about so high an object; so that this way is but dark and full of
riddles.

Thirdly, when we consider of God by way of causality, in that vast influence
which he has upon all things, as with him is (...), (as the supposed
Areopagite) Springing beams of goodness, and overflowing effusions of light,
as he is causa fontana, a fountain-essence continually bubling forth, from
whence the several drops of inferior beings have their original: and as he is
the main spring that sets the wheels of those petty entities on working: for in
him we live, move, and have our being. Now this rather shows us that there is a
God, then what he is: that there is indeed such a prime being, a self-being, an
allbeing, a giver of being, a quo omnia, per quem omnia, propter quem omnia,
but still we are to seek what this being is; so that these apprehensions of him
are very weak and shadowy, (...), we now see through a glass darkly.

But then] Then when a believing soul returns to God that gave it, it sees him
face to face, and fixes its eye upon him to all eternity. As soon as ever the
soul is unsheathed from the body, it glisters most gloriously; as soon as ever
it is unclouded from corruption, it shall beam forth most oriently; as soon as
it is let loose from this cage of clay, it sings most melodiously: nothing
hinders a Christian from a sight of God face to face, but the interposition of
a gross earthy body; it is deaths office, to break down this wall of
separation, that the soul may be admitted into the presence of God.

Secondly, Then, at that general day of refreshment, when God shall sit upon
his Throne in beauty and excellency, as a center of light, streaming forth to
the glorious circumference of the four and twenty Elders, that sit (...), as
it is in the 4. of the Revelation.

Face to face] (...). This is opposed to seeing in a glass, 1. As a more
immediate vision: 2. A clear and perfect vision: 3. As a permanent and eternal
vision: 4. As the learned Piscator, (because those things which we see in a
glass, are a tergo) excepta facie and corpore proprio.

In the words there is a plain allusion to that place in the 12. of Numbers the
8. where God promises to manifest himself to his servant Moses, (...), as the
Septuagint render it very agreeable to our purpose, and that which is he^e
(...) (...) is in other places, (...) and in Esaias (...). and is translated by
St. John, (...), by our Apostle elsewhere (...), and here (...).

And yet we must not think that by virtue of this Promise Moses had so full and
beatifical a vision of God, as we expect hereafter in glory. No, it is spoken
only of Gods communicating himself to him in a clearer way then he would to any
of the Prophets: he would speak to them in riddles, to Jeremy in the riddle of
an Almond-tree, of a Seething pot, and so to the rest of the Prophets; I but he
conversed familiarly with Moses, as a man talks to his friend face to face. And
as for Moses his Petition in the 33. of Exodus the 18. I beseech thee show me
thy glory, it was only a desire that God would show himself in some corporeal
resemblance, so as to assure him of his presence, that that would accompany
him. And this is Gods answer, I will make all my goodness pass before thee.
Besides, there is a plain denial; God tells him he cannot see his face; Moses
saw no more of God then we do here, the back-parts of his glory; he saw them in
a corporeal resemblance, and we in an intellectual vision. You see the allusion
this place has to that in Numbers.

Now as for the meaning of the words, but then face to face.

1. It is not meant of seeing Christ in his humane nature face to face, as Job
speaks, With these very eyes I shall see my Redeemer: for thus the wicked also
shall see him with terror and amazement, when the mountains shall be esteemed
an easler burden, if they could but cover them from the face of an angry
Savior that will frown them into hell.

2. As for the error of the Anthropomorphites, it is so gross, as it neither
deserves to be repeated, nor needs to be confuted.

3. I take it to be meant of an Intellectual beholding the very essence of God,
according to that, 1 John 3. 2. When he shall appear, we shall be like unto
him, and see him as he is, (...)* and yet it can by no means be a comprehensive
vision: for that is a mere repugnancy, that a finite ereature should grasp an
infinite essence. Or by the face of God may be meant his glory and perfections;
for the face is the throne of beauty.

In the following words St. Paul gives a plainer expression of that which
before, he had spoke more darkly.

Now I see through a gl^sse darkly, now I know in part; but then face to face,
but then I shall know even as also I am known. As when two see one another face
to face, the one knows the other by sight, as he is known by him.

Now I know in part] St. Paul on set purpose changes the person, that he may
acknowledge his own impersection. He had included himself before, Now WE see
through a glass darkly* I, but he will do it more apparently, now I know in
part; and when so great an Apostle inculcates his own defects, me thinks none
should boast of their self-sufficiency.

2. Now I KNOW in part] Here is a reason of our imperfection here: If the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? Knowledge is a
leading principle, and all graces follow it in a just measure and proportion:
if we knew God more, we should obey him more; if we knew more of his goodness,
we should love him more; if we knew more of his Majesty, we should fear him
more; if more of his faithfulness, we should trust him more; nay if we knew
him perfectly, all these would be perfect: when knowledge is complete,
obedience will be exact.

3. Now I know IN PART: according to the Syriack, parum de multo. 1. Little of
that I should know. 2. Little of that I might know. 3. Little of that others
know. 4. Little of that I desire to know. 5. Little of that I shall know
hereafter in glory.

4. Now I KNOW in part. 1. Religion is no fancy, opinion; or conjectural
thing: no, we have a certain knowledge of God and his ways here; we see
through a glass, though it be but darkly: there is truth in a riddle, though
it be obscure. 2. A Christian begins his acquaintance with God here: he that
knows him not in part here, shall never see him face to face in glory. We have
here the first glimpses of heaven, a prospect of Canaan, the (...) of
happiness, the initials of Glory.

But then I shall know, (...) differ. (...). It is bringing me better
acquainted with a thing that I knew before, a more exact viewing of an object
that I saw before afar off. That little portion of knowledge which we had
here shall be much improved, our eye shall be raised to see the same things
more strongly and clearly. Our knowledge here was but scintilla futurae lucis.
When the soul shall say as the Queen of Sheba did to Solomon in 1 Kings 10. It
was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thine acts and of thy
wisdom; howbeit I scarce believed the words until I came, and mine eyes had
seen it, and behold the half was not tole me. Happy are thy men, O happy are
these thy servants that stand continually before thee.

Even as also I am known. (...). The words if they be put to it, will endure a
double Hebraisme. I shall know as I am known.

1. I shall know as I am approved, sicut and agnitus sum; nay Cbrysostome makes
(...) Causall; I shall know because I am approved.

2. I shall know as I am made to know. (...), that is, (...), says Beza; and
(which is a wonder) Heinsus agrees with him. (...) says he; and indeed (...)
is the same with the Hebrew (...), and he tells us if we would render the words
Hellenistically, they would run thus, (...) I shall so know as God is pleased
to be known by me, to manifest himself unto me. And yet Piscator rejects both
these senses; the words themselves being sufficiently tempered with the
particle (...), which is not anote of equality, but of similitude, as in many
other places.

And thus much may serve for explication of the text, for clearing the glass,
for opening the Aenigma. If you now look into the words, you will find them full
of Spiritual Optics. Here is Visio reflexa; for now we see through a glass
darkly: and here is Visio recta; but then face to face. We will begin with the
Catoptrica: Now we see through a glass darkly; and here I shall present many
glasses to your view.

First, In the glass of the Creature, in speculo mundi. This is a common and
obvious glass presented to every ones view, and there are some glimmerings of
common light, a lumen naturae diffused among all, by which they may see into it.

Our Apostle shows us this glass in Romans 1. 20. (...), The invisible things of
God from the Creation of the world are clearly seen. The words in the fountain
run thus, (...), and deserve to be cleared from an unjust interpretation: for
some would have (...) to be a creaturamundi: others a creatione mundi, ex
creatione mundi: so Beza. But all these are far enough from the meaning of the
place: for their sense is, That the invisible things of God are seen by the
creatures, or by the creation. It is true, our Apostle says so much in this
verse, but not in these very words; for then it should be (...), when as I
doubt not but (...) is the same (...), a mundo condito. Piscator and Drusius
both meet in this, and the Syriack translation is clear for it (...) a jactis
mundi fundamentis. And then the words speak thus much: From the first infancy
of the world, ever since it was created, the eternal power and (...), which are
the (...) mentioned in the former verse, and the (...) in the beginning of this
verse, the eternal power and Godhead have manifested themselves, and the prime
cause has been very apparent in those effects of his, which are here styled
(...), and could not possibly be produced by any inferior Being. And as for
that which we render is clearly seen, in the Original it is no more then (...).
I know not how it comes to denote so clear a vision; sure it may well consist
with (...), and yet withal they are so clearly seen (...), which though some
would have the same with (...), yet here I shall easily yield to the learned
Interpreter, and grant that it includes somewhat more.

This vast volume of the creatures set out by God himself without any errata in
it, was printed in so fair a character, as he that ran might read it; and the
least letter in it made show of a most Divine impression. But alas! sin,
besides weakening of the souls eye, has soyled and defaced the book; and hence
we come to see in it so darkly. And yet still the letters are visible, and
carry with them the print of a Deity. The world is, as one calls it, Aenigma
Dei. And it is full of looking-glasses: for God has communicated several
resemblances of himself to the creature, as the face sheds that image or
species upon the glass whereby it self is represented. I need not speak of the
blessed Angels, those pure and crystal mirrours, what glorious representations
they give of their Creator: Look but into your selves, and you will find
immortal souls showing forth that image according to which they were made; or
if you will look up to that vast and polished looking-glass, you will see The
heavens declaring the glory of God, and the firmament showing his handy work.
Or cast but an eye upon the poorest and most abject Being, and even there you
will find some faint resemblances of a Deity. For as in the most glorious
creature, as a creature there is aliquid nihili; so in the most contemptible
creature, as a creature, there is aliquid Dei. I but the Atheist ^e shuts his
eyes, and quid caeco cum speculo? what should a blind man do with a
looking-glass? And yet sometimes there are lightening flashes of terror
darted into him, and he begins with the Devils to believe and tremble. The
Papists, as if there were not glasses enough of Gods making, they must have
images of their own to put them in mind of God; their painted glasses: but
surely they see through these very darkly. The Heathens they shall be judged
for not ordering their lives and dressing themselves according to this glass;
for resisting those relics of primitive light that shined out so strongly
upon them. Well, here are glasses, but we see in them very darkly, and that by
reason of a double defect.

1. Ex part speculi.

It Is true, some of Gods attributes here clearly show themselves; his power and
Sovereignty; I, and his wisdom, and goodness too; but those sweetest
manifestations of his love, the treasures of free grace and infinite mercy, the
whole plot of the Gospel, not the least shadow of these to be found. Now for
this very cause, the Gentiles in Ephesians. 2. 12. are called (...), because they
were without the knowledge of God in Christ. You know they had a goodly company
of gods, an whole troop of Deities: I, but they were without God in Christ, and
hence they are styled (...), without God in the world.

2. Ex part ^culi.

1. Adam in innocence had a glorious soul full of light, bright and sparkling
eyes, (...). He could read the smallest print, the least jot and tittle in the
book of Nature. See how quickly he tumbles over the vast volume, and in a name
gives a brief gloss upon every creature, a concise epitome of their natural
histories. He had a fair portion of knowledge, if he could have been contented
with it. I, but he would fain have more, he must needs be tasting of the tree
of Knowledge; and hence springs our ignorance; we have ever since had an
unhappy (...), the soul has been darkened and dim-sighted. Perhaps it can see
some goodly capital letters, some fair flourisht character; I, but there are
multitudes of beings in a smaller print, that it takes no notice of.

2. The soul might see more, if it would employ it self more, and look oftener
into this glass of the creatures. Meditation would raise the creature higher,
and distill sweetness out of every object. It Is (...), as the elegant Moralist.
The soul is busy with every thing it sees, as busy as a Be; it goes from
flower to flower, and extracts most precious sweetness.

3. Some eyes have been dazzled too much with the glitterings of the creatures,
so as to take the servant for the Master; and have been so much in admiring the
glass, as they forgot the glorious beauty that it represented. What worship
and adoration has the Sun had? even almost as much as the great Creator of
heaven and earth himself; strange that they should see so darkly, as not to
discern the face from the veil that covers it. For the Sun is at best but umbra
Dei, and nubecula cito transitura; a mere spot, a cloud, if compared with so
bright an Essence; and as he faith notably, The Suns worshippers must needs be
(...), Atheists in the nightime. You have seen the glass of the Creatures,
and how in it we see very darkly.

Secondly, in learnings glass, in speculo scientiarum. Learning brightens the
intellectual eye, and clarifies the soul; the Hebrews wise men are (...)
aperti, men with eyes open; and it sets a man on higher ground, and gives him a
fairer prospect of Beings, and many advantages over others. (...), when as
(...), they have eyes and see not; I, but these see, and yet very darkly. What
need I tell you how invincible doubts blemish their brightest notions? How the
Naturalists head is non-plust with an occult quality, and he knows not how to
take it off: How the choicest Moralists are posed with the riddle of summum
bonum, and cannot tell how to extricate themselves. Look up higher to
M^taphysicks, which some style fimbria Theologiae; I, but you may touch the hem
of its garment long enough before you find any virtue coming from it. Converse
but with the Schoolmens Works, and there you shall meet with aenigmata infolio,
voluminous riddles. It Is their grand employment to tie a knot, and then see if
they can undo it; to frame an enemy* and then triumph over him; to make an
objection, and then answer it if they can: there are speculations enough, but
if you see through them, it will be very darkly.

But if you could see very clearly in all these, yet how weak and insufficient
are they to acquaint you with the Arcana of Religion, and the great mysteries
of Godliness?

1. Some such as have been most eminent in them, and as he speaks, have had
wits of elevation situated as upon a cliffe, but how little have they seen of
heaven and heavenly things! Aristotle with the rest of the Heathen. what
uncertain and fluctuating notions had they of a Deity? We are beholden to their
dying speeches for most of their Divinity.

2. Many under the light of the Gospel, and furnished with helps of humane
learning; how strangely unacquainted are they with the knowledge of Christ
crucified! A plain experienced Christian (notwithstanding all their Auxiliary
forces) only by the help of a Bible, will put an whole army of them to flight:
Surgunt indocti and rapiunt coelum, when they in the mean time do but, as he
speaks, ornare Diabolum; they become learned spoils, Sapienter descendunt in
infernum, they go cunningly to hell. And yet me thinks none should be so silly
and malicious as to put the fault in learning, whereas there is no greater
vicinity then between truth and goodness; and heaven is full of knowledge, as
it is of holiness; and it is brimfull of both.

3. Sciences themselves are weak and imperfect things, and therefore (...), as
our Apostle tells us, Knowledge shall be abolisht, and Tongues which are
vehicula scientiarum, they shall pass away. So then in this Glass we see but
darkly.

Thirdly, in the Glass of the Scriptures, in speculo verbi. This is a pure and
spotless Glass, representing the will of God unto us, an eternal Glass that
shall never be broken, more durable then heaven it self: David was looking in
this Glass day and night.

There are many false flattering glasses in the world; I, but here the soul may
see its face in a most exact resemblance: it will show the least spot and
deformity; the sinfulness of an idle word, of a vain thought, of a first motion
though without consent, the least tendencies to sin, the first bubblings up of
corruption. It deals so plainly as many are offended with it, and swell the
more against it; and thus sin takes occasion by the commandment, as Romans 7.
Fond Lais breaks her looking glass, because it shows the wrinkles in her face:
and gives the reason, Me cernere talem qualis sum no^o, qualis eram nequ^o.
Well, the Law that is a glass to show us our spots, but it cannot wipe them off;
I, but the Gospel is a pure well of salvation, there one may see them and wash
them too.

In that Evangelical mirror you may see the face of a Savior, coming in an
amiable way with smiles of love, with offers of grace and saving mercy. Nay,
the Gospel is called the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. (...). As suppose a
glass when a man had once looked into it, should keep a permanent and
unvanishing species of his face, though he himself afterward were absent; we
might well say, There was the face of such a man; the Gospel is such a Glass,
Christ has looked into it, and shed his image upon it, and ever since it has
given most glorious representations of him: it is (...), that I may borrow that
expression in the Hebrews: so that when we shall come to see him (...) in
heaven, we shall be able to say, Surely this is the very Savior that was
described to me in the Gospel; -- fic ille manus, fic or a forebat. And till we
come to heaven it self, we cannot meet with more full manifestations of God and
Christ, and all the mysteries of salvation, then in the word of God; and yet
here we see but darkly.

For if we consider them under the Old Testament, how long was there comfort
locked up in that Aenigma, that primitive promise, which was Aurora Evangelii,
the first dawning of the Gospel; The seed of the woman shall break the serpents
head? and when truth began to show it self in some fuller discoveries, yet
still it was mixed with much obscurity.

They had a twofold glass. 1. Speculum ceremoniarum. 2. Speculum prophetiarum.

1. In the glass of the Ceremonies they saw very darkly. We could not look for
much light where there were so many shadows; where there were so many veils,
they could not see face to face. That the Jews worshipped a cloud for their
God, was a mere calumny; but that they worshipped their God in a cloud we will
easily grant, for all our fathers were under the cloud, 1 Cor. 10. 1. The
Ceremonial law was nothing else but an heap and miscellany of riddles: who
amongst them could tell the meaning of them? nay it is well if we that have the
type and antitype meeting together, can give a just explanation of some of
them. Well, this glass is now broken: for Ceremonies like false looking-glasses
represent the object with too much shadow; and yet still the scarlet whore will
be dressing her self by them, because like flattering glasses they make her
seem fairer and more beautiful. Majoresque cadunt altis de montibus umbrae.

2. In speculo prophetiarum. Prophetia est speculum in quo videntur sutura.
Here they might see the presence of a deferred deliverance, they might see the
face of a promised Messiah. Buxtorf, in his Synagoga Judaica, tells us that he
is persuaded this is one maine reason why the Jews are so ignorant of the
Messiah, because they are so little vers't in the Prophets; they spend their
whole time upon the Law, but will not cast an eye upon them; He speaks of the
modern Jews. God in much mercy has given them glasses, and they will not
vouchsafe to look in them: they were always an obdurate and stiff-necked
people, rebelling against the Prophets, and they go on to fill up the sins of
their fathers. Well, but yet the Seers themselves saw but (...), and they saw
in them very darkly.

For 1. Prophecies (as the learned Verulam) have gradus and scalas complementi,
climbing accomplishments, springing and germinant accomplishments. A Prophecy
in the bud is not so easily seen as when it shoots out further, and spreads it
self in larger growth: such passages in Esaias as seem to us clear as the day,
were to them dark and Enigmatical: and we see how obscure St. John's prophecy
seems to us. And the devil, who was always Gods Ape, he overimitated here; for
his oracles were wrapped up in so many clouds, and withal so full of fallacies,
as none ever could tell their meaning till event had given the interpretation.
The Prince of darkness would make all his sayings wear his livery: Divine
prophecies are as clear as crystal, if compared with his cloudy oracles.

2. Prophecies at best are but weak and imperfect things, and therefore they
also shall be abolished, no need of them in heaven: they were very beneficial
to the Church militant, to acquaint her with approaching judgments, and
prepare her for intended mercies; but when happiness is present and complete,
no need of them then in the Church triumphant.

Thus you have seen how they under the Law saw but darkly: and if Gods peculiar
people had so little knowledge of him, in what gross and palpable ignorance
did they live that had none of this his light shining upon them; for in Judah
was God known, and his Name was famous in Israel. He has not dealt so with
every nation, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his Law.

And now if we look upon our selves that live under the light of the Gospel,
even we in this Sunshine see but darkly.

1. There are many Evangelical riddles, a God incarnate, a crucified Savior;
which are such, 1. as the Angels themselves see but darkly, and therefore they
are still prying to see more. 2. Reason that great patron of unbelief wrangles
against them; and yet reason it self will dictate thus much, That the mysteries
of Religion should be above the reach of reason. 3. The greatest part of the
world reject them: the Greeks esteem them foolishness: they think there is not
so much in them as in a riddle; in that there is some hidden sense, but these
are plain foolishness in their esteem; and Evangelium to the Jews is no more
then (...), for so they blasphemously call it, volumen iniquitatis. They
stumble at a crucified Savior, and yet themselves were the crucifiers of him.
The veil of the temple rent at his death; I, but the veil is still upon their
hearts, and yet that e're long shall be rent too: and they shall see him whom
they have pierced, and shall mourn, and be in much bitterness; and confess
(...), We crucified our Love, we crucified our Savior.

2. There are many Practical truths which are mere riddles to carnal spirits;
as to forsake all for a persecuted Christ, to cut off right hands, pluck out
right eyes, pray for enemies, not to do evil that good may come thereof; these
principles they can hardly digest; and there are many Christian privileges which
they know not what to make of, assurance of Gods favor, communion with him,
hidden Manna, joy in the holy Ghost glorious and unspeable. These and such like
puzle their apprehensions; for they never entered into the heart of a natural
man to conceive, it is too narrow for them to enter.

3. There are many passages which to Christians themselves are dark and
enigmatical, such as we cannot easily understand. The book of the Revelation is
all veiled with obscurity, the first thing we meet with almost are seven Seals:
it is full of hidden secrets, and who is there that can unseal the book? Our
adversaries the Papists catch at this, and are ready with a double inference:
The Scriptures are enigmatical; therefore clear them with Traditions, therefore
keep them from the people.

But 1. When we speak of the Scriptures darkness, it is but comparatively in
respect of those bright manifestations we shall have of God hereafter. A pearl
may be clear and orient, and yet dark in respect of a star: a star may be
bright, and yet obscure if compared with the Sun.

2. All truths belonging to the Essence of a Christian, are plain and
perspicuous: and there is an assisting Spirit, which though they perhaps may
scoff at, and some others may unjustly pretend to, yet without doubt it shall
lead Gods people into all truth.

3. Is their Cabala so pure? are their Traditions so clear and crystalline, as
that we shall see in them better then in the word? If you cannot see in a
pellucid stream, do you think to see in a muddy standing pool?

But Secondly, The Scriptures are enigmatical, therefore keep them from the
people. Nay rather, therefore explain them to them: therefore set up a faithful
Ministry, whose lips may preserve knowledge, and acquaint them with the
mysteries of salvation, and open to them these hidden oracles. And let the
people themselves search the Scriptures, dig for knowledge as for silver, and
for wisdom as hid treasure. Again, they had better see in a glass, though but
darkly, then not to see at all; truth in a cloud, in a riddle is more amiable
then a black and palpable ignorance.

Thirdly, They keep the Scriptures from them, not because they see in them so
darkly, but lest they should see in them too clearly; And above all they lock
up the Revelation, not as it is obscure, but because it threatens the seven
hills so much. And thus we have looked upon the third particular, the Glass of
the Scriptures.

Fourthly, In speculo providentia. Here Gods glorious attributes shine forth,
his wisdom, justice, goodness, and the rest of that glorious constellation.
And Providence sets before us examples, they are glasses in which we may see
either the beauty of holiness, or else sins deformity. And it is no small
felicity of this latter age, that we have the use of these glasses, the benefit
of so many former examples; and yet we see in them but darkly, they are a cloud
of witnesses, as it is Heb. 12. 1. though in another sense. Providence is very
mysterious and there is no readier way to Atheism then to question it when we
cannot give a sufficient account of it. The Indians have a custom, once a year
to cast a golden bushel into the Sea: and thus they think they set a measure
and bound to its proud waves, so as it shall not invade their land. Their
custom is ridiculous enough, and yet they are far more vain that go about Doum
suo modulo metiri, to circumscribe an Immense being with the narrow compass of
their reason. Audacious men, that go about to set Providence a platform, which
if it shall transgress, it presently passes the bounds of justice.

Saint Paul that could have dived as deep as another, and brought up many
precious pearly observations with him, yet dares not venture in, but standing
aloof off upon the shore, admires the vast and boundless Ocean, and as one
amazed, and almost swallowed up with the very consideration of it, he cries
out, (...), O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! (...), his
ways are in the deep; there is no (...) of them, not the least print or
vestigium, no tracing of a Deity. That God from all eternity should smile on
Jacob, and frown on Esau, and that before they had done either good or evil,
that the one should become (...) vas desiderii (...), and the oother (...),
that God should break open the heart of a rebellious sinner by his efficacious
grace, and deny sufficient aid to one that has improved his present strength
far better; that he should shine out only upon some few spots of ground with
the light of the Gospel, and shut up the rest in palpable darkness; that he
should suffer his dearest children to be wronged and insulted over, when
wickedness in the mean while triumphs securely: these and many such like are
aenigmata providentiae; we see in this glass darkly.

Fifthly, In speculo fidei. Here we see (...), for faith is a sure
perspective-glasse, by which Abraham's aged eye saw Christ's day though afar off;
and the rest of the Saints (...), they saw them at a distance, and yet embraced
them: a glass by which Moses saw him that was invisible. It is speculum
coloratum, and does imbuere objectum colere suo: it can see a mercy in a
judgment, and deliverance in a captivity, help in an exigency: and promises
they are faiths glasses, and they speak as the looking-glass in the Greek
Epigram, (...), if you look on me I look upon you; if you apply me, I belong
unto you.

And yet we see here but darkly: for faith it self (not to speak of those many
doubtings and waverings, those rollings and inquietations of Spirit that
accompany it: for many cannot reach to assurance, few attain to a plerophory,)
is opposed to vision, 2 Cor. 5. 7. (...): we walk by faith, and not by sight,
and non per aspectum. Faith as it lives in the mount, (for in the mount will
the Lord be seen) so it dies in the mount too like Moses, it never enters into
the land of promise; for it had its Canaan here, A land flowing with milk and
honey.

Sixthly, In speculo Sacramentorum. Such great and transcendent mysteries as
the apprehensions of Angels cannot reach unto, are here presented to the senses.

Baptism, that is a looking-glass where the first beam of Gods favorable
countenance shows it self, the first expression of his love to a sinful
creature. The laver under the Law was made of looking-glasses; and the laver of
regeneration under the Gospel is its self a looking-glass, where you may see a
God in Covenant with you, and yet he does not show himself with a spreading and
immediate ray, but only in a sacramental reflex: and Baptism, though it be
styled (...), yet we see in it but darkly, in a riddle, much like that of
coelum in tribus ulnis. You may see heaven in this well of salvation. As it was
used by way of immersion, there was a riddle of the Resurrection; as by way of
sprinkling, there is a riddle of sanctification. You would say, It were no
wonder if I should tell you the Infant sees in it but darkly; I, but who is
there of riper years that looks on this glass, or makes any use of it? Who is
there almost that spends a thought upon his Baptism?

And as for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; why, here is a glass that Christ
left with his dear Spouse when he went away from her, in which she may still
see his face and be mindful of him. (...), Do this in remembrance of me, and do
it to put me in remembrance of you: for (...) includes both. There is mutual
aspect, and reciprocal glances between Christ and a believing soul in the
Sacrament. Christ looks upon the soul with a gracious eye, and the soul looks
upon him with an eye of faith. And here are aenigmata convivalia, like that of
Samsons, Out of the strong comes sweetness.

And thus we have shown you the several glasses through which we see but
darkly. There remains the visio recta, a sight of God face to face, to know as
we are known. But this hereafter.

READER, What this to know as we are known should be
FINIS.
THE Worth Of Souls.
MATTHEW. 16. 26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?


OUr Savior in the foregoing words had told his followers; that if they meant
to be his Disciples, they must take up their cross and so must follow him.
They must be willing to part with all things here below, if he should call for
them; they must be content to trample upon all relations, for the love of a
Savior, if they stand in competition with Christ; they must be ready to lay
all creatures and creature comforts at his feet. Now because this might seem
somewhat an hard task, and not so easy and Evangelical a yoke as he had
promised them: In these words he begins to sweeten his commands, and to show
the reasonableness and equity of this, that he requires of them. You may well
part with other things, for this will be a means to save your soul.

Now says he, if you could graspe the whole world, and if you had it all in
possession, and should lay it down all only for the winning of a soul, you
would have no great cause to complain. Whereas if you could embrace the present
world, and could gain it all; nay, if there were more worlds for you to enjoy,
and if you could have them all only for the loss of a soul; you would have no
great purchase of it. What is a man profited? There Is a plain (...), in the
words more is meant, then is spoken: You would be so far from having any
profit, as that you would have the greatest loss that is imaginable, the
greatest damage and detriment that such a creature is capable of. You would
have changed Gold for Dross, and Pearls for pebbles, (...).

Now our Savior in these words, does as it were, take a pair of balances in
his hand, the balance of the Sanctuary; and he puts the whole world in one
scale, and the soul of man in the other. This little sparkle of Divinity in one
scale, and the great Globe of the world in the other. And the soul of man, this
spiritual being: this heavenly sparkle; it does mightily outweigh the great
Globe of the world, the vast bulk of water, the huge fabric of the Creation.
The world it is weighed in the balance, and it is found too light.

In the words you have these two things very considerable.

1. That absolute worth and preciousnesse that is in the souls of men, which is
strongly implied and envolv'd in the words. D. The souls of men are exceeding
precious.

2. A comparative preciousnesse, which is most directly and expressly laid
down in this, in respect of the whole world besides D. One soul it is more worth
then a world.

For the first. The souls of men are very precious.

The preciousnesse of the souls of men will easily appear from these four
several heads of Arguments.

For though all men, or most men that know what a soul is, will easily grant
that their souls are precious enough; yet they don't attend to those several
respects in which they are thus precious; much less do they take notice of
those several results and consequences that flow from it.

Now this absolute preciousnesse and worth of a soul, does thus show it self.

(1.) From the several Excellencies of the soul it self.

There is a fourfold excellency in the souls of men, which speaks them choice
and precious.

1. The excellency of their Original; they are of a noble descent; they came
from the Father of spirits, from the Father of lights. God lights up souls in
the world; they bubble forth from that fountain of spirits, that spiritual
Essence. They are the breast of a Deity; God breathed into a man a living soul.
They are a beam of the glorious Sun; God beamed into man a glittering soul. The
body indeed 'twas raised out of the dust; we dwell in houses of clay, whose
foundations are in the dust. But the soul 'twas of an higher and Nobler
Original. Yet there is a great deal of cost bestowed upon the body; much
Embroydery and Needle Work in that. I am admirably made, I am curiously
wrought, I am wrought with a Needle, says the Psalmist* Acupictus sum; he
speaks it in respect of the choice and elegant composure of man's body, much
needle work in that; and then that is but the sheath of the soul, the casket for
the Jewel to lie in. The soul it is like the Queens daughter in the 45. Plasme,
Her clothing is of needle work, and she is all glorious within. Now all the
workmanship that is bestowed upon the body, is only that it may be serviceable
to the soul, that the soul may Been habitare, that it may be a fit Tabernacle
for the soul to dwell in; that the soul may say, It Is good for me to be here.

The body 'twas raised out of the dust, but the soul sprang from heaven; 'twas
(...), a bud of Eternity.

And truly that the souls of men should now be extraduce; it does somewhat
degrade them from that height of excellency that belongs to them. I know that
question's full of briers and thorns; but yet we may very well say thus much,
that some Scripture-passages favor and countenance this most, that God still
breaths into men living souls, that they flow immediately from him in a way of
Creation; and that the soul and body do still differ in their Original. That Is
the first, the excellency of the souls Original.

2. The excellency of its Operations.

Do but look upon the several workings of the soul. Consider the several
layings out of the soul, and you will see they have worth in them. Do but view the
wheels and motions of the soul, the several faculties and employments of them,
and you will see they are all choice and precious.

What should I tell you of the Understanding crowned with Beams, compast and
surrounded with Light; of the Will sitting like a Queen upon her Throne, and
swaying the Scepter of Liberty in her hand, with all the affections waiting and
attending upon her.

There Is a five-fold excellency in the workings of the souls of men.

1. The workings of the soul are quick and nimble. Material Beings move
heavily. Matter clogs them, and dulls their motion. They go like the Chariots
of Pharaoh in the Red Sea; but spiritual Beings, they move freely and
presently, like the Chariots of Amminadab, they run with a cheerful
spontaneity. What quicker then a Thought? what nimbler then the twinkling of an
intellectual Eye? It Is true, there is a weakness and irregularity in the souls
motions, when its best workings are too flitting and desultory, too gliding and
transient: but take the soul as it is regular and orderly in its motions, and
then the freeness and presentnesse of its working; it is the high privilege of
a spiritual Being: For God, that is a pure Spirit, is Omni-present in his
motions. And the Angels, that are ministering Spirits, make haste of those
glorious errands they are sent about: The wings of the Cherubims fly very
swiftly. And the souls of men, that are next in motion, as they are next in
Being; they do the will of God on earth as it is done in heaven, with such
freeness and alacrity.

2. They are vigorous and indefatigable. The wings of the Cherubims are not
weary with flying, nor are the wheels of the soul weary with going, the
sparklings of the soul never vanish; but every motion has immortality stamped
upon it. Spiritual Beings in all their motions are never weary, nor out of
breath. But material Beings, as they are dull and sluggish in their motion; so
they are faint and languishing The body, that is soon tired. And yet (which is
worth the observing) only animate Beings are capable of weariness: The Sun is
not weary with shining, but is always ready like a Giant to run's race; nor
the fountain is not weary with flowing* but the bird is presently weary with
flying. Only animate Beings are weary, not by virtue of the soul, but because
the body cannot keep peace with the soul. Thus many times the string breaks,
when the Lutanist is not weary. The Spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
The soul would fain be working, when the body is not serviceable. That which
wearies the soul most, is to be quenched in its motions, to be dulled by an
earthy body, by the interposition of that to be clouded, to have its wings
clipped, so that 'twas said of that noble Platonist Plotinus, that he so lived
(...), he was loath to be in the body, as others were loath to be in prison, as
if he had cried out with the Apostle, O who shall deliver me from this body of
death! And therefore the souls of just men made perfect, that are set at full
liberty, they are never weary in their workings, never weary of praising God,
never weary of singing Hallelujahs to him.

3. Vast and comprehensive. All beings they are within the souls Horizon. What
cannot it graspe in its thought? what cannot it take in its eye? It can take in
the several drops of Being, and it can take in much of the Ocean of Being. I
deny not but some men have such narrow and contracted souls, as they can
commerce with nothing but outward and drossy objects; they can scarce have a
wish, thought, mind only earthly things; their Corn, and their Wine, and
their Oil. But this only shows their souls degenerated from their native
perfection, from their primitive glory. For the soul of it self is more large
and spacious, and scorns to be bounded with material objects; it self is a
spirit, and so it delights more in spirituals. Nay, it will not be bounded with
real objects; it will set up Beings of its own, Entia Rationis; Reason's
creatures; such as the hand of Omnipotency never gave a real Being to.

And then the desires of the soul how vast are these, and comprehensive? the
soul can quickly open its mouth so wide, as that the whole world cannot fill it.

4. Self-reflexive and independent upon the body. And these indeed are the
choicest and most precious workings of all, the very flower and quintessence of
an immortal soul* When the soul shall sit judge upon its own actions; when it
shall become Speculum suiipsi^s, view its own force, bid the body farewell, and
even here become an Anima separata, withdraw and retire it self to its
Closet*operations, to its most reserved and Cabinet-counsels. I could at large
show the excellency of these workings in several respects, but that I must
hasten*

5. The workings of the soul are secret and undiscernable. The creatures eye
cannot pierce them. Who knows the things of a man, but the spirit of man that
is in him? The Devil cannot tell the thoughts of men; at most he has but a
guess and shrewd conjecture, unless they be such as are of his own casting
in; he has reason to know these, for they are his own.

If men had ^enestrata pectora, there were scarce any living in the world. What
mutual rage, and envy, and malice, and heartburnings would they then behold?
Yet lest men should abuse this privilege, and from hence take liberty to sin,
God often puts them in mind of this, that he searches and sees the heart; it is
his great prerogative, and he is greater then the heart, then the soul, he
knows all things.

This is the second particular, the excellency of the souls Operations.

3. The excellency of its Capacity. Do but consider with your selves, what a
reasonable soul is capable of. It Is capable of the image of God. The soul, it
has his superscription; In the image of God made he him. Now there is little or
nothing of Gods Image to be seen in the body; for God is a Spirit, and so
stamps his Image upon the spirits of men. And here indeed are some shadowings
out of himself, some faint and languishing representations of a Deity. The soul
it is made in the Image of God, and it is capable of such stamps and impressions
as God is pleased to put upon it. It Is endowed with reason, the apple of the
souls eye. It Is capable of knowledge, of learning, of all the advancements and
ennoblements of reason; but what should I speak of these, this will seem to
some in the world no great matter; as good be without them, or it may be better
in their fond esteem; well then, it is capable of grace, of glory; sure they
will not slight these too. It Is fit to be a companion of Angels, to bear them
company to all eternity. Nay, it is capable of communion with God himself; they
are the friends of God. The souls of men must make up a Church for him. They
are fit to be the Spouse of Christ. It Is the Apostles phrase, That I might
present you Virgin-souls unto Christ. They are capable of such things, as
neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor e're entered into the heart of man to
conceive; the soul it self cannot conceive, what great things a soul is capable
of. Though the workings of the soul were more vast and comprehensive then they
are, yet they cannot reach them.

4. The excellency of its Duration. Do but think upon this a while; how that it
shall run a line parallel to all eternity. The body indeed, it is soon resolved
and crumbled into its first principles. Dust thou art, and to dust thou must
return. But the soul returns to God that gave it. As it did not depend upon
the body in some of its workings, so neither does it depend upon it in its
Being. It Is a very remarkable speech that of St John to Gaius; I wish (says
he) that thy body prosper, even as thy soul prospers. For most men in the world
we might very well invert the wish; we wish their souls prosper'd, even as
their bodies prosper. But Saint John speaks it, of a lively and vigorous
Christian, strong in the faith. I wish thy body prosper, even as thy soul
prospers. For many times you know, in an aged and decayed body, you have a
lively vigorous soul; Old men are most famous for wisdom, Nestor is for
council: In a languishing and consumed body, you have many times a flourishing
and well-complexion'd soul. Men of the liveliest souls, are not always of the
strongest and goodliest bodies, none of the longest lives. Sometimes the soul
is so acute as that it cuts the sheath of the body asunder. Sometimes the
Lutanist scrues up the strings so high, as that they crack immediately. Many
times the soul is in the full, when the body's in the wane.

That which we usually call a lightning before death, some think it is but the
souls finding of its former liberty, that is now to be loosened from the body,
to be enlarged and set out of prison; and that makes it so cheerful. To be sure
there are (at least) strong and pregnant probabilities of the souls immortality
to a natural eye, to a Philosophical eye with common light: And they that tell
us of the souls Mortality; we may very well question, what manner of souls they
have; to be sure as the Psalmist speaks, They are become like the beasts that
perish. Others are so far in love with the souls immortality, that they would
have every soul immortal; sensitive and vegetative souls. But it shall suffice
us that the souls of men are so, and this is the fourth excellency of the souls
of men; the excellency of their Duration.

And this is the first head of Arguments by which you see the preciousnesse of
a soul, from the several excellencies of the soul it self.

(2.) If you would know the worth and preciousnesse of a soul; Consider what
value and esteem they put upon it, that are best acquainted with the worth of
it. This is one of the wisest and surest ways, to know the worth of a thing;
to consider how they prize it that best know it.

See then how they value souls, that know them best.

I. God himself, the Creator of souls, 1. The Father of spirits; He must needs
know the worth of souls, for he made them, and he weighs the spirits of men, he
has often put them into the balance, and he knows the worth and weight of
them. Now see how he esteems them; He has laid out his thoughts from
everlasting, for the bringing in of some souls to himself; He has picked them
out as his Jewels. The counsels and contrivances of heaven have been spent upon
them. Now do you think that God would lay out his thoughts upon them from
everlasting, unless they were very precious?

II. Jesus Christ, the great Purchaser of souls; he bought them, and so must
needs know the worth of them. It was no ordinary price that he paid for them
neither; You were not ransomed with corruptible things, etc. Now do you think
that Jesus Christ would have laid down his own life, spent his own precious
blood for them except they had been very precious? There Is nothing that does
speak the worth and excellency of a soul, then what was laid down for them to
redeem them. And these words in the Text are the words of him that bought
souls; the words of Jesus Christ himself, the great Redeemer of souls, he tells
you, that one soul is more worth then a world.

III. The Angles, they are Spirits themselves; and so are more acquainted with
the nature of Spirits then we are. See, how they esteem them.

1. The Good Angels; what care do they take for souls? They are ministering
Spirits for the good of souls. They pitch their Tents about them; they have
charge of souls; they rejoice at the conversion of a soul. Heaven is always
full of joy, brimfull of joy; but it runs over with fresh joy, when a soul is
brought in to a Savior.

2. The Evil Angels, those great Plunderers of souls, those black and damned
Potentates of Hell; the Devils, these know the worth of souls too well.

For (1.) What variety of temptations have they for the beguiling of a soul.
How many thousand hooks and baits for the catching of a soul? How many designs
and stratagems for the ruining of a soul? what ambushes and underminings for
the undoing of a soul? how does he spread abroad his nets, and fill the world
with snares, for the entangling of a soul? what serpentine windings and
workings, what depths and methods of deceit, what flatteries and insinuations,
and all for the deluding of a soul?

2. How does he rage when a soul is plucked out of his paw? The whole legion of
them is in an uproar and commotion; when they have lost one of their prisoners,
they look upon it as a great loss.

3. How does he envy Jesus Christ, the saving of one soul? How does he think
souls too precious for him? If all the powers of darkness could hinder it,
there should not be one soul translated out of their kingdom.

4. How does he glory and triumph in the conquest of souls? If hell were
capable of joy, it would have it then; when souls are captivated by this Prince
of darkness. These are his spolia ampla, the goodly trophy's and monuments of
his victory.

5. How many factours and agents does he employ to bring in souls to his
kingdom? how many are serviceable and isntrumental to him? and how does he go
up and down like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour? Do you think he
would take so much pains about souls, if they were not worth it?

6. In his formal Contracts; he does not stand long a cheapning, he will give them
what they will ask, he knows he cannot outbid himself. A soul is worth more, he
knows, then he has to give for it.

7. How does this torment him, that he is in a chain, and can do no more hurt
to souls? that there is an hook in this Leviathan, that he is restrained and
limited so as that he cannot have his will of souls?

So that by all this you see, the evil Angels the Devils know the worth of
souls too well.

And this is the second head of Arguments, by which you see the preciousnesse
of souls, etc.

3. Arg. Because other things are precious in reference to the soul. The worth
of the soul puts a luster upon other things.

1. Precious Faith; why is that so precious? because it is for the saving of a
precious soul; it is such a radical and essential Grace; [We believe to the
saving of the soul.

2. Precious Promises; why are they so precious? because they are for the
welfare of a precious soul. Cordials to revive a fainting soul; balm for the
healing of a wounded soul; restauratives for the recovery of a languishing soul.

3. Precious Ordinances; Why? but because God does here in especial manner
display himself, and reveal himself to souls; He gilds them with his own
glorious presence; they are the wells of salvation, out of which souls must
quench their thirst.

4. Precious Ministers; why such a luster upon that Calling more then upon
others? why they so honorable, but because they are more immediately
conversant about souls? The converting of souls, that is the crown of the
Ministry; You are my Crown, and my Joy, says Paul to his converted
Philippians. No wonder then if contempt be poured out upon the Ministry, if
once they come to neglect souls; if Cura Animarum be made but a slight
business. But they that convert souls to righteousness, says the Prophet
Daniel, they shall shine as the stars in the firmament, they shall have a
more bright and massy Crown, answerable to a greater degree of service.

4. Arg. If you would still see more clearly the worth and preciousnes of
souls; do but consider the variety of Gospel-dispensations in respect of souls.

1. Those many invitations that are made to souls to come into Christ, that
sweet Rhetoric, those strong motives, those powerful persuasions, those
precious wooings and beseechings of them. We beseech you by the mercies of
Christ, by the bowels of a Savior; we beseech you, as if God himself should
beseech you to be reconciled unto him. Do you think there would be so much
wooing and beseeching, if they were not very precious? Do you think the Spirit
himself would so entreat, do you think the Holy Ghost would be so importunate
with them else? Nay, these souls are so precious, as that he will have some for
himself; he will take no denial, no refusal; Go and compel them to come in.

2. Consider those sad Lamentations that are made when souls will trample upon
their own mercy; as Christ speaks to Jerusalem; in that passionate strain, and
dips his words in tears; O Jerusalem* Jerusalem, etc. This great lamenting
shows that it is the loss of a precious thing.

3. Know, that the World is kept up for this very end, for the bringing in of
some souls for a Savior. Do you think that God is at this vast cost and
expense in maintaining this vast fabric of the Creation, only for men that
oppose him, and provoke him, and violate his Laws? No, it is for the gathering
of his Jewels, for the binding up some precious souls in the bundle of Life. If
'twere not for this, the very pillars and foundations of the world would crack
asunder.

4. Think upon the great Preparation that is made for the entertainment of
souls; how that Christ is gone to prepare a place for them. What treasures of
love and sweetness, what heaps of joy are stored up for them? what a weight of
Glory? what Crowns? what Thrones? what glorious and unexpressible, and
unconceiveable Privileges shall they then enjoy?

Thus by all these several Arguments you have seen the worth and preciousnesse
of souls.

Use. 1. And now when we consider the worth of them, we might even take up this
sad lamentation; How is the gold become dross? how is the most fine gold
changed? The precious souls of men that were purer then Snow, ruddier then
Rubies, more polisht then Saphirs in their first Original; now their visage
it is blacker then a coal. How are they become the reproach of him that made
them, the body's slaves, the devils captives, the scorn of every lust and
temptation. Nay, you might even melt and dissolve into tears under this sad and
serious consideration, that so few of these precious souls shall be saved; that
there are so many of them that drop into hell irrecoverably. And though there
be a generation of men in the world that will never go over this narrow Bridge,
unless they put on Spectacles, that so they may tumble in more Artificially:
men that lay down such large and reaching principles of so vast a latitude, as
that they scarce make it possible for any to be damned: men that widen the
narrow gate in their own apprehensions; yet God has revealed his mind
expressly, and it is the constant voice of the Gospel it self, that there are
but few of these precious souls that be saved. And, which is more, that as for
men of the rarest and most admirable endowments, of the choicest
accomplishments, men of most orient and glittering souls; there are fewer of
these then of others. Not many wise, etc. And yet all this comes not about
because of any want of Gospel-provision: not but that there is Balm enough in
Gilead, Oil enough in that horn of salvation; not but that there are abundance
of bowels in God, which yearn toward the precious souls that he has made; but
because men refuse his goodness, and abuse his mercy; imprison his truth, and
shut it up in unrighteousness.

Now when men are told of the worth of their souls, when they are put in mind
of their preciousnesse again and again, when they have all means for the
welfare of their soul, and when they are directed in the ways that tend to the
saving of the soul; when they are convinced that such and such lusts fight
against their souls; and when they know that the present season of grace is all
they are sure of, for the welfare of their soul; If they shall stubbornly
refuse their own mercy, and wilfully and violently rush into their own ruin;
though their souls were ten thousand times more precious then they are, yet
they perish deservedly.

Use. 2. Me thinks therefore at length men should come to such thoughts as
these: It Is time now to provide for our own souls; It Is time now to build for
Eternity: Tanquam semper victuri. If he that does not provide for his own
house, is worse then an Infidel; then surely, he that does not provide for his
own soul is little better. Yet how many are there in the world, that live so as
if they had no souls to save? Many that take no notice of their own souls.
These are spiritual Beings, and run not into their outward senses, and so they
never mind them. These men's souls are so dark, as they cannot see themselves.
Others that do take some little acquaintance with their own spirits; yet how do
they leave them in a rolling and fluctuating condition; how do they venture
Eternity? upon what strange uncertainties do they leave a precious soul? as he
that was ready to die, said, He should know by and by, whether the soul were
immortal or no; that was all he made of it. Or as that other, that
complemented with his soul* in that sporting language, Animula vagula, blandula;
Quae tandem abitura es in loca?
And yet it is an impression engraven upon every Being with a Pen of Iron, and
with the point of a Diamond. Nay, it is a (...) stamped upon every Being by the
finger of God himself, that it should look to its own preservation; to the
maintaining of it self: so that it is matter of amazement and astonishment, that
the souls of men being such precious Beings, should look to their own welfare
no more: And it can be resolved into nothing else, but into that same first and
grand Apostasy from their God, the fountain of their life and happiness. When
they lost their God, they lost themselves; and when they fell off from him,
they Apostatized from their own Essence. And now they mind the body, and take
care for things here below, and neglect themselves; If there be any that can
repair the ruins of Nature, or that can wrangle a little for men's estates;
these shall have honor and esteem in the world, and the things of the world at
their command: But they that take care only for souls, these must live upon
mere benevolence; as if the Ministers of the Gospel were nothing indeed but
souls; as if they were properly Angels, that must assume a body, and deliver
their message, and then must disapper. This does strongly convince that men
prize their bodies and their goods above their souls; because men of such
employments, Lawyers and Physicians these find better entertainment in the
world, then the Ministers of the Gospel.

Hence it is also that men neglect the seasons of grace, opportunities of
mercy, advantages for their souls; which they would not neglect in other
things. The Sabbath, the market day for souls, how is it slighted, profaned?
yet the Sabbath was made for man; for the soul of man chiefly, for that is the
chief of man. And yet God had used very strong and powerful means to engage men
to seek the welfare of their own souls. For out of his own infinite love and
goodness he has by a strict connection, knit and united his own glory, and the
salvation of souls together: He has wrought Isreal's Name in the frame of his
own glory. That whereas now if these two were severed, a man were bound to seek
the glory of God, before the salvation of his own soul. For though the soul be
very precious, yet the glory of the Creator of souls is infinitely more
precious. God therefore out of the riches of his grace, has so joined these
together, as none can put them asunder. He that seeks the glory of God, does by
this promote the welfare of his own soul; and he that seeks the saving of his
own soul, does in this advance the glory of God. He that seeks the one, must
seek the other also.

Use. 3. If the souls of men be so exceeding precious, then admire the
goodness of God, that does not leave them in the power of men.

1. Some souls, the souls of his own people are so precious, as that he will not
leave them in their own hands. You know how Adam disposed of his own soul, when
he had it in his own keeping. And such men as are left to themselves, you see
how they lay out their souls. But God has laid up some precious souls in a safe
and sure hand; they are laid up as a rich Depositum in the hand of a Savior,
and they are kept by his Almighty power through faith unot salvation.

2. Souls are so precious, as that he will not leave them to the disposing of
other men. He keeps these Apples of his eye under the lid of his own
Providence. The sword of an enemy, can reach but the sheath of the body. An
enemy though never so fierce and furious, can but cut the sheath of the body
asunder. Fear not them that can kill the body, and that is all they can do, etc.
Yet such is the fury and implacablenesse of men, as that if they could reach
the soul, that should be the first they would strike and wound; and they would
damn other men's souls as surely as they do their own. As that desperate
Italian, that having an enemy of his at advantage threatened to kill him,
unless he would curse and blaspheme and renounce his Religion; that foolish
man too covetous of a frail and fading life, yielded to him; but as soon as he
had ended such blasphemies as were prescribed him, the other stabs him
presently, and then triumphs and applauds himself in his bloody victory: O,
says he, it is a kindly and delicate revenge; O, it is an orderly and methodical
revenge, first to damn the soul, and then to stab the body. You see what the
rage and fury of men would reach unto; but that God has set souls, (...).

3. And therefore thou that wilt trust him with thy precious soul* wilt not
trust him for things here below? Will thou trust him for Eternity, and not for
a moment? will thou trust him with the Jewel, and not with the casket? will thou trust him for thy Soul, and not for thy body, thy state, thy name? Think
upon our Saviors Argument: Consider but the Lilies of the field; they that
have but vegetative souls, two or three removes off from matter; They neither
spin nor ^^ile: why should thou then have spinning and toiling thoughts? will
he not much more take care for thee?

Use. 4. See here the top of Antichristian fury; his cruelty to souls, as if
the souls of men were Antichrists slaves, to be hurried up and down at his
pleasure; as if an heap of precious souls, were but Antichrists footstool, for
him to get up to his throne by. Consult but with that place in the 18. of Rev.
verse. 12, 13. You Will see there that Antichrist trades there in very rich and
costly commodities, Gold, Silver, Pearls, Purple, Silk, etc. But amongst the
rest, he has one more precious then ordinary, and it is a sure and staple
commodity that he trades in, and it is in the souls of men. And that which
bespeaks the ruin of Antichrist, and cries aloud to that God to whom vengeance
belongs, and 'twill pour out the very dregs of the vials upon him; his deluding
of souls, his imposing upon souls his multiplying the bricks, putting out the
eyes of souls, making them grind at his mill, to goround in an implicit
faith; and like his slaves he buys them and sells them at his pleasure. The
blood of souls is the Paint of that same spiritual Jezabel, and the Scarlet of
the Babylonish whore; it is double-dy'd in the blood of Saints.

Use. 5. This speaks aloud to the Prophets, and sons of Prophets, that they
would lay out all their golden talents, and precious opportunity for the
welfare of souls; not only their own souls, but for the souls of others too; to
be men of public influence, to spread light abroad in the world. It Is the
strongest expression of love you can show to a Savior; Peter, love thou me?
feed my sheep; feed my lambs: Let this be a token of thy love, and sign that
thou love me. Does not it pity you to see so many precious souls famisht for
want of the bread of Life? so many ignorant souls rushing upon their own ruin
for want of light; so many souls poisoned with unsound doctrine and strange
opinions; so many unstable souls beguiled by rude and illiterate men that
torture the Scriptures, and feed men so, as if Nonsense were the only Nectar
and Ambrosia for immortal souls to live on. Don't you see how thirsty souls
are, that they will drink in muddy waters? had not they rather, think ye, drink
in pure and crystalline streams? Do they take in Error so fast, and would not
Truth be more pleasant to them? You are the hope and the expectation of souls;
if you should frustrate and disappoint them, whither should they go, or where
should they betake themselves? Where shall the thirsty soul go, unless the
fountain afford it some streams? where shall the newborn soul satisfy it
self, unless the breasts afford it sincere milk? How shall the wandering soul
find out its way, unless the Seers and Watchmen be pleased to direct it? How
shall souls be seasoned with grace, if the salt it self be unsavory? If the
eye be darkness, how great must the darkness be? O lay out your selves so, as
that thousands of souls may bless you, and have cause to bless God for you.
Truly the harvest is great and precious, and the laborers are few; pray ye
therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his
harvest.

FINIS.

