TWO TREATISES: The First of BLOOD-LETTING, AND THE Diseases to be cured
thereby. The Second of CUPPING AND SCARIFYING, AND THE Diseases to be cured
thereby.

By Nich. Culpeper Gent. M. Ruland, And Abdiah Cole, Doctor of Physic.


LONDON. Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, at the Sign of the
Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1663.

Books Printed by Peter Cole and Edward Cole, Printers and Booksellers of
London at the Exchange.
Several Physic Books of Nich. Culpeper, Physician and Astrologer, and Abdiah
Cole Doctor of Physic, commonly called, The Physitian's Library, containing
all the Works in English of Riverius, Sennertus, Platerus, Riolanus,
Bartholinus. Viz.
1. A GOLDEN Practice of Physic: after a new, easy and plain Method of
knowing, foretelling, preventing, and curing all Diseases incident to the body
of Man. Full of proper Observations and Remedies, both of Ancient and Modern
Physicians. Being the fruit of one and thirty years Travel, and fifty years
Practice of Physic. By Dr. Plater, Dr. Cole, and Nich. Culpeper. 2. Sennertus
Practical Physic; the first Book in three Parts. 1. Of the Head. 2. Of the
Hurt of the internal senses. 3. Of the external Senses, in five Sections. 3.
Sennertus Practical Physic; the second Book, in four Parts. 1. Of the Jaws and
Mouth. 2. Of the Breast. 3. Of the Lungs. 4. Of the Heart. 4. Sennertus Third
Book of Practical Physic in fourteen Parts, treating, 1. Of the Stomach and
Gullet. 2. Of the Guts. 3. Of the Mesentery, Sweetbread and Omentum. 4. Of the
Spleen. 5. Of the Sides. 6. Of the Scurvey. 7 and 8. Of the Liver. 9 Of the
Ureters. 10. Of the Kidneys. 11. and 12. Of the Bladder. 13. and 14. Of the
Privities and Generation in men. 5. Sennertus fourth Book of Practical Physic
in three Parts. Part. 1. Of the Diseases in the Privities of women. The first
Section. Of Diseases of the Privy Part, and the Neck of the Womb. The second
Section. Of the Diseases of the Womb. Part 2. Of the Symptoms in the Womb, and
from the Womb. The second Section. Of the Symptoms in the Terms and other
Fluxes of the Womb. The third Section. Of the Symptoms that befall al Virgins
and Women in their Wombs, after they are ripe of Age. The fourth Section. Of
the Symptoms which are in Conception. The fifth Section. Of the Government of
Women with Child, and preternatural Distempers in Women with Child. The sixth
Section. Of Symptoms that happen in Childbearing The seventh Section. Of the
Government of Women in Childbed, and of the Diseases that come after Travel
The first Section. Of Diseases of the Breasts. The second Section. Of the
Symptoms of the Breasts. To which is added a Tractate of the Cure of Infants.
Part 1. Of the Diet and Government of Infants. The second Section. Of Diseases
and Symptoms in Children. 6. Sennertus fifth Book of Practical Physic, Or the
Art of Chyrurgery in six Parts. 1. Of Tumors. 2. Of Ulcers. 3. Of the Skin,
Hair and Nails. 4. Of Wounds, with an excellent Treatise of the Weapon Salve.
5. Of Fractures. 6. Of Luxations. 7. Sennertus sixth and last Book of Practical
Physic in nine Parts. 1. Of Diseases from occult Qualities in general. 2. Of
occult, malignant, and venomous Diseases arising from the internal fault of the
humors. 3. Of occult Diseases from water, air, and infections, and of
infectious diseases. 4. Of the Venereal Pox. 5. Of outward Poisons in general.
6. Of Poisons from Minerals and Metals. 7. Of Poisons from Plants. 8. Of
Poisons that come from Living Creatures. 9. Of Diseases by Witchcraft,
Incantation, and Charms. 8. Sennertus Treatise of Chemistry, showing the
Agreement and Disagreement of Chemists and Galenists. 9. Sennertus two
Treatises. 1. Of the Pox. 2. Of the Gout. 10. Sennertus thirteen Books of
Natural Philosophy: Or the Nature of all things in the world. 11. Twenty four
Books of the Practice of Physic, being the Works of that Learned and Renowned
Doctor Lazarus Riverius, Physician and Counselor to the late King, etc. 12.
Idea of Practical Physic in twelve Books. 13. Bartholinus Anatomy, with very
many larger Brass Figures, than any other Anatomy in English. 14. Veslingus
Anatomy of the Body of Man. 15. Riolanus Anatomy. 16. A Translation of the New
Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of London, in Folio and in
Octavo. Whereunto is added, The Key of Galen's Method of Physic. 17. A
Directory for Midwives, or a guide for women 18. Galens Art of Physic. 19. A
new Method both of studying and practicing Physic. 20. A Treatise of the
Rickets. 21. Medicaments for the Poor: Or, Physic for the Common People. 22.
Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic 23. One thousand New,
Famous and Rare Cures, in Folio and Octavo. 24. A Treatise of Pulses and Urins.
25. A Treatise of Blood-letting, and Cures performed thereby. 26. A Treatise of
Scarification, and Cures performed thereby. 27. The English Physician enlarged.
The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a great Caracter in Latin.
Divinity Books Printed by Peter Cole, etc. Eighteen Several Books of Mr.
Burroughs's viz. on Matthew. 11.
1 Christ's Call to all those that are weary and heavy laden, to come to him for
rest. 2 Christ the great Teacher of Souls that come to him. 3 Christ the Humble
Teacher of those that come to him. 4 The only easy way to Heaven. 5 The
Excellency of Holy Courage in Evil times. 6 Gospel Reconciliation. 7 The Rare
Jewel of Christian Contentment. 8 Gospel Worship. 9 Gospel-Conversation. 10 A
Treatise of Earthly Mindedness, and of Heavenly Mindedness, and Walking with
God. And eight several Books more.
Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumes,
Viz.
1 Scripture light, the most sure Light. 2 Christ in Travel. 3 A lifting up for
the cast down. 4 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false
Apostle tried and discovered. 7 The good and means of Establishment. 8 The
great things Faith can do. 9 The great things Faith can suffer. 10 The great
Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from
Christ's Priestly Office. And eleven several Books more.
New Books of Mr. Sydrach Sympson, VIZ.
1 Of Unbelief, or the want of readiness to lay hold on the comfort given by
Christ. 2 Not going to Christ for Life and Salvation, is an exceeding great
sin, yet pardonable. 3 Of Faith, Or, That believing is receiving Christ; and
receiving Christ, is believing. 4 Of Coveteousness.
Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volumes: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto.
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker made in New England, are attested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin and Mr. Philip Nigh, to be written with the
Authors own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volume being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer, in the seventeenth o^ John. Wherein is
showed, 1 That the end why the Saints receive all Glorious Grace, is, That they
may be one, as the Father and Christ are one. 2 That God the Father loves the
Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ. 3 That our Savior desires to have the
Faithful in Heaven with himself. 4 That the Happiness of our being in Heaven,
is to see Christ's Glory. 5 That there is much wanting in the Knowledge of Gods
Love, in the most able Saints. 6 That the Lord Christ lends daily Direction,
according to the daily need of his Servants. 7 That it is the desire and
endeavor of our Savior, that the dearest of Gods Love, which was bestowed on
himself, should be given to his faithful Servants. 8 That our Union and
Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our happiness in Heaven.
Ten Books of Application of Redemption by the effectual Work of the Word, and
Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners to God: By Thomas
Hooker of New England.
Dr. Hills WORKS.
The Kings Trial at the High Court of Justice. The wise Virgin: Published by
Mr. Thomas Weld, of New England. Mr. Rogers on Naaman the Syrian, his Disease
and Cure discovering the Leprosy of Sin and Self-love, with the Cure, viz.
Self-denial and Faith. A Godly and fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of
Peter: By Mr. John Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex. An
Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew: By Mr. Ward. Mr. Rogers
his Treatise of Marriage. The wonders of the Lodestone: By Samuel Ward of
Ipswitch. The Discipline of the Church in New England: By the Churches and
Synod there. Mr. Brightman on the Revelation. Great Church Ordinance of
Baptism. Mr. Loves Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative and Speech. A
Congregational Church is a Catholic visible Church By Samuel Stone in
New England. A Treatise of Politic Powers. Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians. Vox
Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace. Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's
Overthrow. Pious Man's Practice in Parliament time. Barriffs Military Discipline
The Immortality of Man's Soul. The Anatomist Anatomized. The Bishop of
Canterburys Speech. Woodwards sacred Balance. Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter.
Abraham's offer, Gods Offering: Being a Sermon by Mr. Herle, before the Lord
Major of London. Mr. Spurstows Sermon, being a pattern of Repentance. Englands
Deliverance from the Northern Presbitery: By Peter Sterry. The Way of God with
his People in these Nations: By Peter Sterry. The true Way of uniting the
People of God in these Nations: By Peter Sterry. Mr. Sympson's Sermon at
Westminster. Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major. The best and worst
Magistrate: By Obadiah Sedgwick. A Sermon. A Sacred Panegyric: By Stephen
Marshal. A Sermon. The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries: By
Matthew Newcomen of Dedham. A Sermon. Mr. Nyes Sermon of the usefulness of a
powerful Ministry to the Civil Governor. Dr. Owens stedfastness of the
Promises.
Mr. Stephen Marshals New WORKS.
1 Of Christ's Intercession, or of sins of Infirmity. 2 The high Privilege of
Believers, That they are the Sons of God. 3 Faith the means to feed on Christ.
4 Of Self-denial. 5 The Saints Duty to keep their Hearts, etc. 6 The Mystery of
Spiritual Life.
Tailors Capitulae Patrum. -- on the Lamentations in Latin Fullwood of Errors.
Des Crates on the Passions of the Soul. Hobbs de Corpore Politico. Whites State
of future Li^e. Greaves Grand Seraglio: Or the Turks Court. Cowells Institutes
of the Civil Law. Montross Redivivus. Or the History of Montross, etc. The
Royal Game at Picquet. Jones Cause and Cure o^ our Divisions.
To the Physical Reader.
THe greatest Reason that I could ever observe, why the Medicines prescribed in
the Physic Books before mentioned, do not (sometimes) perform the Cures
promised, is, the unskilfulness of those that make up the Medicines. I
therefore advise all those that have occasion to use any Medicines, to go or
send to Mr. Ralph Clarke Apothecary, at the sign of the three Crowns on
Ludgate Hill, in London; where they shall be sure to have such as are skilfully
and honestly made.

OF BLOOD-LETTING AND THE Diseases to be cured thereby.
What Blood-letting or Phlebotomy is?
IT is an Universal evacuation of fullness of humors or Plethory. And Plethory
is the increase of humors above equality in the Veins.

The knowledge of Complexions is requisite to Phlebotomy.

The signs of a sanguine complexion are containd in these Verses.

By nature they are fat and love to hear
News and reports, to drink and make good cheer,
To court fair Ladies, and to laugh and sing
And play the Poets, and learn any thing.
To Wrath not prone, but noble, kind and free,
Abounding much in liberatilie.
Of red Complexion like the fragrant rose,
And bold as Hector to affront their foes.
Signs of Plethory and Blood abounding.
When blood abounds the face is over red,
The eyes fart out, and cheeks are fully fed,
The body is unwildy, pulse is quick,
Full, soft, and in the forehead there does stick
A tearing pain, the belly it is bound.
The tongue is dry, with thirst, and sleep profound.
Spittle is sweet, and when they sharp things take
The taste is sweet, it cannot no difference make.
Signs of the choleric Complexion and of Choler abounding.
Choler's a humor raign's in furious men
That strive to lord it over their brethren;
They learn but slowly, but can eat apace
From whence they grow, in stature, and in face
And heart are bold, still soaring above all
Crafty, deceitful, angry, prodigal,
Slender, rough, dry, and yellow is their skin.
If tongue be parcht with heat, and noise within
The ears, with watching, and with vomiting,
And thirst, fat stools, and pain, and belly wing
With loathing: heartach: want of appetite.
If pulse be hard, and swift, and hot, and light,
Mouth dry and bitter, and of fire thou dream,
Be sure that choler is in thee supreme.
Signs phlegmatic Complexion, and of Phlegm abounding.
Phlegm makes men strong; of stature broad and low
They flatter, then the sanguine men do grow,
They idleness affect, their sense is dull,
And in much sleep they do their bodies lull.
They move as slowly as the housed snail,
And are of color very wanne and pale.
Phlegm makes unsavory taste, which meat does loath
With spitting; pain in head and stomach both
The pulse is seldom, slow, and soft, and wide,
With dreams of water, where the phlegm does guide.
Signs of Melancholic Complexion and of Melancholy abounding.
It makes men evil, sad, and slow to speak,
To be contemplative, and sleep to break,
To be resolved, but think nothing fast,
Envy and avarice in them does last.
Deceit and fear, the color of their skin
Is sad and black, pulse hard, and urin thin.
They dream of Ghosts, Hobgoblins and Cells.
They yawn and belch, from wind that in them dwells.
They spit, and spawle, and relish very sour,
And in their left ear is a noise each hour.
What Age is fit for Phlebotomy.
Before the seventeenth year draw none at al.
In middle age often for the Surgeon call.
Old folk and children must but little bleed,
And then when as there is apparent need.
An Addition.
At this time in great necessity, especially in a Pleurisy and other strong
diseases, we bleed with good success; in the fourth or fifth year three or four
ounces. The middle age is from thirty to forty five or fifty.

What things hinder Phlebotomy.
Bleed not at all, when the Complexions cold
Nor in cold weather, nor when pain does hold
With violence, nor after thou have been
In baths, or sporting with thy Fancy's queen
Nor after tedious sickness, nor when
Thou art by meat or drink a shame to men.
Bleed not too young, nor when thou art too old,
Nor when thy stomachs weak with sense of cold.
Addition.
To these add. Bleed not in the beginning of a Disease, for the Crisis is the
day of the motion of sickness, or in the fit, nor before the Guts are cleansed
from excrements, nor in the time of the Natural courses of women nor in the
flux of the Haemorrhoids; nor after a choleric disease, and the like, of which
we shall speak in the Aphorisms for bleeding.

At what time Bleeding is good.
In every month thou lawfully may bleed,
If blood abound, and thou a vent do need.
April and May the Liver-vein is best.,
September's for the Spleen; and for the rest
In Winter take the Vein comes from the head,
And in the Autumn let the Feet be bled.
In Summer, open still the Liver-vein.
In Spring, that of the Heart called Median.
What is to be done in Bleeding.
When you let Blood make a large orifice to let out the Wind and the Blood more
freely, after Bleeding let him not sleep for six hours: make not too deep an
orifice, least thou prick a Nerve, and let him not eat presently after
bleeding. It is good to bath two or three days before bleeding and three or
four days after, give Wine before and in time of bleeding, if you fear
swounding, move before and after by gentle walking.

What is to be avoided after Bleeding.
Abstain from milk, meats and drink, and cold things, and keep from foul
weather: clear Air is good and rest; for motion often hurts

Of the Effects and profit of Phlebotomy.
It cheereth the sad, appeaseth the angry; and keeps Lovers from madness: it
cleereth the sight, and makes the Brain warm, and the marrow. It purges the
bowels, stomach and belly, purifieth the senses, causes sleep. It mends the
hearing, and voice and increases strength.

What Vein is to be opened safely, and profit bleeding brings.
I. The Vein between the Eyebrows in the middle of the Forehead, called Recta
or Preparata is opened.
Against old Infirmities, foul Ulcers, the Leprosy, Scab, Morphew, Impetigo,
Itch, diseases of the Eyes, old Headache, heaviness behind in the Head,
diseases of the Brain, Madness.

II. The two twisting Veins in the Temples are opened either of them.
Against the half headache, great headache, and long sickness, old sore Eyes,
blear Eyes, mists in the Eyes, spots, films tears and webs in the Eyes, scabs
in the Eyelids, Nyctilops, and to make barrenness.

III. The Vein against the little corner of the Eye is opened a little above
the jugal bone.
Against diseases of the Eyes, Head-diseases abated, Headache, half Hed-ach,
Pannus, Tears, old sore Eyes, Nyctilops, scabs in the Eyebrows.

IV. The Veins about or behind the Ears in the hollow, which appear when the
Throat is tied, and are in that place where you may feel a beating with your
finger are opened
Against half Headache, old Catarrhs, scald head, to refresh and restore the
memory, ulcers in the Ears and Neck, to cleanse the Face, against Toothache from
defluxion, the head open, and against ulcers and all pain.

V. The Vein in the tip of the Nose between the two Gristles is opened.
Against Phrenzies, sharp Fevers, old Headache, old red Faces, diseases in the
Eyes and bleareyedness, heaviness of head, Haemorrhoids, Itching of the Nose,
Apostem of the Nose, Bothor.

VI. The two visible Veins under the Tongue are opened.
Against Imposthumations of the throat and mouth, and other Distempers there,
and Quinzy after the Head-vein is first opened, of Imposthumes in the Almonds,
heaviness of Tongue, Apoplexy, Toothach, and Diseases in the Gums, Catarhs,
Pannus, Cough, and distempers in the Jaws and Cheeks.

VII. The Vein between the Skin and lower Lip is opened.
Against stinking breath, Corrosion of the Gums and rottenness, Ulcers of the
Nose, and distempers in the Face and Nose pains in Women's breasts and headache.

VIII. The Veins in the Lips are opened.
Against Imposthumes of the Mouth and Gums, the Head-vein being first opened.
Against want of Breath and Leprosy.

IX. The two Veins in the sides of the Neck, call d Gindegi, they grow large in
Singing-men, and when men hold their breath, if the Neck be bound with a Towel
are opened
Against Impetigo or Serpigo or Itch, Noli me tangere or Canker, swollen Gums,
Quinzy, Asthma, Hoarsness. Imposthume of the Lungs, Dispnoea, fits of the
Spleen, side-pains.

X. The Head-vein called Cephalica humeraria, and Cubit between the Thumb and
forefinger without danger is opened there, and in the upper part of bending of
the Arm.
Against hot pains of the Heart, half Headache, Madness, Flux of the Eyes,
Epilepsie, all Diseases in the Ears, Tumors in the Head, all hurts in the
Tongue and distempers of the Stomach, and Fevers if it be opened in both Hands.

XI. The Median in the middle of the bending of the Arm, between the Head-vein
and the Basilick or Liver-vein It is called the common, black or Heart-vein is
opened.
Against evacuation of all humors and hot distempers of the whole body, all
Diseases in the Heart, lost Appetite, all Passions; of the Ribs, Stomach,
Spleen, Liver, Sides, Lungs, Breast, and whole body.

XII. The Basilick Vein which is called the great Vein, or inward or Liver-vein
is opened for evacuation and all Diseases
In the Liver, Breast, Lungs, Stomach, Spleen, Pleura, against Choler from the
Liver too hot, Toothach, or pain of the Back, Ribs, Sides, and all the members,
bleeding of the Nose, and Fevers.

XIII. The Salvatella or veins called Scelles or Spleen-vein, between the ring
and little finger, is opened safely in the right hand, for
Stoppage and Diseases of the Liver; and in the left hand, for diseases of the
Spleen: it is good also against evacuations and Diseases of the Spleen, Liver,
Breast, Voice and Stomach, Heart-ach, Jaundies, all Fevers, stoppage of the
Breast, want of Appetite, distempers in the Face, Paleness, and yellowness of
the Eyes.

XIV. The Ham-vein called Vena poplitis under the Knee in the bending is better
to be opened than the Saphena.
To provoke Terms, against pain in the Fundament and Loins, Haemmorrhoids, and
pain in the Bladder and Stones and Feet, all Gouts or Joynt-pains

XV. The Sciatica vein in the Ankles of both Feet or thereabout is to be opened.
Against Sciatica Gout, Elephantiasis or Leprosy, Va^ices, pains in the
Bladder, Dysury or difficulty of Urin, Ulcers and swellings in the Stones, and
swellings, and Ulcers of the Kidneys and the like.

XVI. The Saphena under the inward Ankle of both Feet, sometimes upon the Ankle,
or on the sides of it, is often opened.
Against all passions of the Mother, and of the Stones; against old Scabs and
salt phlegm, pains of the Hips and Legs to provoke the Terms, and Haemorrhoids
to purge the Womb, Afterbirth, to take away Barreness; against Diseases of the
Yard and Stones, to draw blood from the Mother, Yard and Stones.

XVII. The Vein in both Insteps upon the great Toe, is opened
Against Diseases of the Bladder, and spots in the Face, Ophthalmy or sore
Eyes, redness and Bleareydness, Cancer and Varices or Veins in the Legs, and
the Diseases which the Saphena is opened against.

XVIII. The Veins in both the little Toes are opened.
Against hurts in the Reins, Heaviness and Weariness of Limbs, Apoplexy, Palsy
and Epilepsie.

A Catalogue Alphabetical OF ALL Diseases that may, and ought to be cured by
Phlebotomy.
A
ABortion to avoid it, open the Median in the first months. Against Alcola or
Imposthume in the mouth, open the Veins in the Lips. Anchus, open the Sciatica.
Against Anhalitus or difficult breathing, open the Gindegi or Veins on each
side the throat, or the Veins under the tongue. Anhelitus foetor or stinking
breath, open the Vein under the Chin. Against Angina or Quinzie, first open the
Head-vein and then these under the tongue, or Gindegi in the Neck. Almonds
imposthumed, open the vein under the tongue above the Chin, or both Veins under
the Tongue. Animi deliquium of Swounding, open the Vein in the middle of the
Forehead. Anus or Fundament, if it be distempered, open one of the four veins
above the Groyns on both sides. If pained, open the Saphaena. If inflamed, open
that of the Arm. If there be a hot Imposthume, open the Basilick. Against
Aposthumes of the Anus, if cold, open the Head-vein in the Hand. If it come
forth, open the Vein under the Ankle and the Salvatella. Against the Appetite
dog-like, open the Salvatella on the left Foot. Apoplexy, open the Ham-vein or
Ankle-vein, or Humeraria in the bending of the Arm, or that between the Thumb
and Forefinger, or let the Nose bleed. If you first open the Saphaena, and
then that in the tip of the Nose it does wonders. Or open the two Cephalicks,
or the two Veins in both little Toes, or them under the Tongue. Against
Apostems internal, open the Median. Apostums of the Liver, see Jecur or Hepar.
Apostums and pains of the Kidneys, Loins, Thighs, Hips, Bladder, open the Veins
under both Knees. Arthritick, Articular, or Joynt-pains, open first the
Basilick, then the Saphena, or Sciatica Vein; and the right Basilick, if it be
on the right side, and the left, if on the left. It it be in the Hand, open the
Sciatica on the same side, or the Ham-vein. Against Asthma, open the Median on
the right side, if it be from Blood, if from Vapors on the left side, or the
two veins on each side the Neck; or open the veins under the Tongue, or the
Basilick, or internal Vein in the Arm. Auditus or Hearing to quicken, open the
beating Vein, or that on both sides the Nose. Aurium dolores, or d^seases of
the Ear, open the Veins in the Temples, or first the Cephalic on the contrary
side, and then on the same side. If Blood flow out of the Ears, open the
Cephalica on the contrary side. If there be an Ulcer, open the hearing Vein, or
about the Ear. If Inflammation and Almonds, open that under the Ear. If there
be noise or deafness begun, open the veinabout the Ear. Against Axillarum
tumorem, or Swelling in the Armpits, open the inward vein of the left Arm, if
it swel not, to the bending of the Arm.
B.
Bilious or Choleric Humors, are evacuated by opening the internal Vein in the
Arm. Bilis atra or Melancholy, by the inward Vein on the left Arm.
C.
Against Calculus or Stone in the Kidneys, open the Sciatica Vein, or Saphena
in the Ankle on both Feet. Calculus or Stone in the Bladder, open the
Saphena's. Calor or Natural heat abounding, open the Vein by the Thumb. In
Diseases Capitis, or of the Head both internal and external, open the humerary
Vein, or Cephalic in the right Arm; if on the right side and the left, if on
the left, or that between the Thumb, and the Forefinger, or the Nose, or the
Vein under the Chin. Or that under the Tongue, or the external Jugular Vena
puppis, or the Cephalic of the left Hand, or those of the Temples, or the
Salvatella, for pain before in the Head, open that in the middle of the
Forehead, for Fevers with Headache, open the Median. For old Headache, the
frontal vein or the Arteries behind the Ears, or the Temple Veins. In Catarrhs,
open Vena puppis, or those under the Tongue, or that in the Nose, or about the
Ears. External Jugular, or those on both sides of the Nose, or the four Palate
veins. Against heaviness, or pain behind the Head, open the Frontal Vein.
Against Ulcers and Scabs in the Head, open the Nose Vein, or in the Temples, or
about the Ears. Against Trembling, Giddiness and Pain, open the Vein in the
Hollow of the Ear. Against Melancholy, open that between the Thumb and the
Forefinger on the right Hand. Against Carus, first open the Head, then the
black or Median Vein. Casus or Imposthumes by falls, open the Basilick.
Cephalaea or old Headache, open the Forehead vein, or them behind the Ears.
Cerebri passiones, or Diseases of the Brain, open the Veins in the Neck or the
Salvatellas, or Spleen Veins, Nose Veins, or frontal Vein. Against Cogitations
fantastic, open the Vein in the Forehead. Choleric Blood, open the two Veins
in the little Toes. Choleric heat that between the thumb and the right
Forefinger, or both. Cholick, the right Basilick. Collum or Neck ulcerated,
the Vein about the Ear, if swollen the Thumb vein. Against Diseases Cordis of
the Heart. In all Passions, the Median Salvatella and the Artery. Trembling and
Palpitation, the internal Vein of the left Arm, the Saphena, and then the
Basilick, thirdly apply Cupping-glasses to the left Shoulders. In Repletion,
open the right Basilick, in Vapors, open the left Basilick, in oppression of
the Heart, the Median, in Aposthums, the Basilick or the Artery. Against
Diseases Costarum of the Ribs, open the Median pricking in the short Ribs the
Salvatella. Coxendicum of the Hips, the Saphena and Sciatica. Crudities, the
inward Veins in both Arms. In Diseases Crurum of the Legs. Heaviness, the Ham
or Sciatica Vein. Pain and Aposthume, the Veins in the great Toes, the Hams and
Saphena. In Swelling, the Saphena. In Inflammations of the Legs, the Arm Veins.
D.
In Dilirum or Doting, open the humerary in the Arm, or the Vein between the
Thumb and the Forefinger, or the Nose. In Diseases Dentium Of the Teeth, open
the Cephalic on the contrary side, the Palate Vein, first the Shoulder Veins,
then under the Hips. Those behind the Ears, under the tongue. If the lower
Teeth ach, that under the Chin, in pain and putrefaction, that between the Chin
and under the Lip. In Diarrhoea, open the left Basilick. In Diaphragma.
Inflamed and ulcerated, open the inward Vein on the left Arm. And in all
Diseases below the Diaphragma, the Basilick, and above, the Cephalic. In Dolor
Or pain of the Kidneys, Loins, Feet, Thighs, Bladder, open the Ham Vein: of the
Back, first the Basilick then the Sciatick. If there be Plethory, in the Joints
and Feet, the Ham Vein. See Articulorum dolor or Joynt-pain. In Dysentery, open
the Liver-vein on the right side if there be Repletion. In Dyspnoea, open the
Gindegi in the Neck.
E
In Elephantiasis or Leprosy, open the Salvatella on the contrary side, and
then the Ham Vein or Sciatica. In Empyema, open the black Veins on that side.
In Hepatis Or Liver-diseases, open Basilica or Salvatella on the right Hand in
a Sanguine Imposthume, the Basilick or Cephalic, or Saphena on the same side,
or the right Basilica. See Jecur. In Epilepsie or Falling Sickness, open first
the Saphena then the Cephalic, thirdly that under the Tongue. Also the Ham or
Ankle vein, or left Hand Cephalic, or left Salvatella. In Erisipelas, open
that between the Thumb and forefinger in the right hand.
F
In Diseases of the Face, as flux and other passions, that in the Forehead. In
Tumors, Knobs, Redness, open the Palate-vein and Cephalic on both Hands. In
Leprosy, Redness, Pustles, that under the Chin, the frontal. Those behind the
Ears, the two Veins in the first Joint of the great Toe, that Palate Veins. In
Redness Pustles, Spots and ill Color, the Frontal. In deformity, Foulness,
Spots, Scabs, Pustles. And either Vein in the little Toe, that behind the Ear
or in the Temples, under the Chin or Tongue. In all Fevers, the Salvatella on
the left Hand, or both, or both Cephalicks. In Fevers, Synoch the internal
right Arm-vein. In Women with Child, the Saphena and Ham in a burning pestilent
Fever. Tertian, Quotidian, Intermitting, and Semitertian, the inward Vein of
the right Arm. In all Quartans, the inward Vein in the left Arm. In Fistulaes,
the Lip-veins. In Fluxes, with Phethory, the Cephalic on the right Hand, and
that in the Arm first, and then that in the Ham, as Sciatica, also the black
Vein, Head-vein under the Tongue. When the feet have water, the Sciatica, or
that under the little Toe. The Nose, the Saphena on the same side, and the
Cephalic. In a flux of the Belly of blood not excoriating, open the black Vein
or the Basilick. If it be from the Veins of the upper Guts, open the Basilick
or Salvatella on the same side, or the Axillares under the Belly. In Flatus or
Wind of the Belly, the cephalic. In Foetor or Stink and Putrefaction of the
Teeth or Gums, that in the Chin and lower Lip.

G
In Genitalium morbis, or Diseases of the Privities, the Sciatica, Popletica or
Saphena. In Gums diseased, first the Humerary, then under the Lips and Tongue.
If imposthumed, first the Cephalic, then the Lips. If Pain, or Imposthume, or
Ulcers, open the Veins in the Neck or Lips. In Putrefaction, Stink, Ulcer,
Inflammation, that between the Lips and Chin, or that in the corner of both
Lips. In Gibbosity, the Basilick. In Gonorrhaea, the Basilick. In Diseases.
Gutturis of the Throat swollen etc. the veins of the Palate under the tongue,
the Jugulars. In passions of the Gurgulion or Weasand the two under the tongue.
H.
Haemorrhoids, to open them the Saphena, Ham, Sciatica or Ankle-vein.
Hemorrhoids to stop, that in the Arm called Basilic right or left, the left
Salvatella is better, the Lip-veins or that in the Nose. In Hemicrania the
Cephalic, Temple-veins, or behind the Ears, the Frontal, the veins behind the
Head. Humerorum morbis, or diseases of the Shoulder that on the top of the Arm,
in tumor; the left internal, unless it reach to the Elbow. In humors crude: the
internal vein on both Arms. In Hpdrops or Dropsy: the two Ham-veins, or that
under the Prepuce in general swelling: or the Cephalic if it be Wind. In
Hypothondries distempered the Salvatella on the right hand.
I.
In Jaundies yellow, the right Salvatella whether a Fever or no: or the
basilick Jaundies black, the left basilick, and then the Salvatella. In Jecoris
morbis or diseases of the Liver. The Salvatella on the left hand, the basilick
on the right in an Imposthume: see Aposthume by fall or stroke, the Basilick on
the other side, or the same in a Phlegmatic Imposthume, the right Basilick, or
on the same side in obstruction. First the black vein, then the Basilick, and
right Salvatella. In Inflammation of it in the inward Vein of the right Arm. In
Impetigo the frontal. Inflammations, first in the Arm if that does not prevail,
then in the Ham or foot: If it be a light Inflammation, open the Vein beneath
on the same side. In Inflammations, under the Reins open the inward vein of the
Arm on the same side. Of the Fundament, Privities, Bladder, Groyns, Thighs,
open the upper veins in the Arm. Inflammation of the Groyn the upper vein in
the Arms. Insania or Madness, the Humerary vein in the Arm, the Cephalic or
the Nose, Vena puppis or in the cavity of the Ear, or in the crown of the Head,
or in the Frontal. Joints pain and Diseases, see Arthritis. Ischias or
Sciatica, the Sciatica-vein.
L.
In Lachrimae tears or flux of the Eyes, open the Temples, the Humerary on the
same side, or that Vein in the great corner of the Eye. see Oculus or Eye.
Lactis abundantia or Milk abounding, first the Saphena, then scarifie the
Thighs and open the Basilick. Lassitude or laziness of Limbs, the Ham-veins.
Laterum dolor or side-pain the Gindegi or Median. Lentigo, the tip of the Nose,
or that in the Lips, or under the Chin. Leprosy, the frontal or Gindegi in the
Neck. To lighten the body and mind, the vein of the Prepuce. To lighten the
feet and legs, the Ham-vein. In Diseases. Linguae. Of the Tongue, In
Imposthumes, Tumors, first the Cephalic on the right side, then the Lip-veins
or under the tongue. In slowness or hinderance of speech, the vein under the
Tongue, or when it is swollen the veins under it, or the Cephalic.

Lipothymia or swounding, the frontal. Lippitude or Bleareyedness and redness,
etc. open the veins between the Thumb and forefinger, or the Cephalic of the
left hand, or in the tip of the Nose, or in the Temples, or in the corners of
the Eyes. Loins pained and other Diseases, both the Hams, the Median, the
Saphena, both the great Toe-veins, and the Sciatica.
M.
In Mammillarum or Pap-diseases, open the Vein under the Chin. When the Paps
are swollen or imposthumated, the Saphena. Madness; first the Basilick, then
the Median or Saphena, the Cephalic, or humerary in the Arm, in the Nose, see
Insania or Madness. In Mother-diseases, open the Salvatella in the left hand,
the Sciatica or Saphena. When there is an Ulcer or Imposthume, open first the
Basilica, then the Saphena. When there are clefts, the left basilick or left
Saphena. When a Cancer, first the basilica, then the Saphena. In an
Inflammation, open the Ham or Ankle-vein. When there is Itch, open first the
Median, then the Basilica. When it is discolored upwards, open the Saphena.
When fallen down, the Basilica. When it is suffocated, the Saphena or Ham-vein:
to purge and cleanse the Mother, open the Saphena. Maxillarum affectibus or in
diseases of the Jaws, first open the humerary veins, then under the Lip and the
Veins of the Palate. In the Diseases of the under Jaw and Mandible, open that
under the Tongue: when they are swollen, open the Gindegi and the veins above
the Ears. Melancholy, open the right Cephalic or the left vein of the Back,
the left Basilick, or first the black vein, then the basilick or Foot-vein.
Memory to repair and keep it open, the veins behind the Ears, or the Nose-vein.
Menstrua or Terms to provoke, the Saphena and that behind the Clavicula or the
Knee-vein, or that in the Ham: or first open the basilick, then both the
Saphenaes, or open one one day and the other the next, and take four ounces: or
open the vein in the great Toe, or that in the little Toe, or the Sciatica
vein. To stop them open the Basilica. Mictus sanguinis or pissing of Blood,
open the Basilick and Saphena, or the Cephalic, if it bleed from the bladder,
Liver, or Spleen: if bleeding come from Reins, Kidneys, or back, open the
Saphena. Mole, open the Saphena often. Morphew, open the Frontal, or vein in
the Nose, or that under the Chin.
N.
Nostrils bleeding, open the Saphena on the same side, then the Cephalic, in
Bothor or Itch open the Nose-vein in an Ulcer the Saphena, if the Terms or
Hemorrhoids begin to flow, if not open the Cephalic and Nose-vein, or that
under the Chin: if they stick open, the Cephalic and then the Nose-vein.
Nerves when weak, the Ham-vein. Nyctalops, the Cephalic or lachrymal veins in
the Nose, then in the Temples, or the Arteries behind the Ears.
O.
Occiput or the hinder part of the Head pained, open the vein under the Tongue,
the Vena puppis, or of the neck. Oculi the Eyes, in their Diseases, open the
upper Vein in in the Arm, those in the Temples, that in the Forehead, or under
the Thumb, or first the Cephalic, then the Frontal, or in the corners of the
Eyes. In pain or dim sight, open the great Toe vein, or them in the corners of
the Eyes by the Nose: in spots of the Eyes and redness, the Nose-vein, in
Lippitude, Catarracts, Clouds, Dimness, Moisture, etc. open the Temple-veins on
both sides, the right Cephalic, both Veins in the great corners of the Eyes.
In heaviness, open the Frontal, in redness, the Nose, in heat and pricking,
those in the corners of the Eyes. In Tears, Defluxion and Moisture, the
humerary on the same side, or that in the great corner of the Eye, both
Cephalicks, both the Temple-veins, and that of the Nose. In Lippitude, that
between the thumb and the forefinger in both hands, the Nose-vein, and both
the Temples, both the veins, and in the great corners of the Eyes near the
Nose, the left Cephalic: in Tumor or Ulcer, both the veins between the Thumb
and the forefinger, both the great Toe veins, and that in the middle of the
Forehead: in Inflammation and salt Tears, open the humerary on the same side,
or that in the great corner of the Eye. Omnes humores or all humors, to purge
and cure all Diseases. If the blood offend, open the Median. In all Diseases of
Nutritive members open the Sciatica or Saphena. In all Diseases above the
Diaphragma, open the Cephalic. In all Diseases in parts under the Diaphragma,
the Basilick. Ophthalmy, the Cephalic in the contrary hand; if there be
Plethory, first the opposite Basilick, then the Cephalic, or first the Saphena
on the same side if the matter be little and a flux, the Cephalic on the same
side, also the Temple-veins, or them in the great Toe, or between the Thumb and
forefinger, or the Arteries behind the Ears. Orifice of the the Stomach pained,
the Artery is to be opened. Oris or Mouth-evils, the Tongue-veins, in pain, the
Palate-vein; stink, that under the Chin, or that between the Chin and the Lip,
or that in the hollow of the Ears: in Imposthumes and Ulcers, first the
Cephalic, then the Lip-veins, and under the Tongue.
P.
Palpebrae or Eyebrows if Scabby, the Cephalic or Lachrymal veins, or of the
Temples, if thick, the Cephalic. Palpitation of the Heart: the inward veins of
the left Arm. Pannus the Temple-veins, and the two Arteries behind the Ears.
Palsy: both the veins in the little toes, or that under the Tongue. Parotis:
that under the Ear. Pectoris of the Breast: the Basilick on the left Arm, the
Neck veins, or the two under the Tongue. To cleanse the breast: open the
salvatella. Pedum of Feet, in all pains open the Ham vein, or in the little
Toes, when swollen and red, the Ham and sciatica-veins. In itch or scabs, the
two great toe veins. Peripneumony: the basilick opposite, if the pain reach to
the Throat, Breast or Arm, open the internal vein on the same side. Percussion
or stroke causing imposthume: the Basilick. Pestilent Fever: the right Arms
inward vein. Plague, if it be in the Neck: open behind the Ears, if in the
Cervix, the Cephalic in the Arm or Thumb. If in the Chin or Forehead, the
veins under the Tongue. If in the Head, Shoulder, Breast, the Median. If in the
Arms, Ribs, Breasts, Armpits, the Basilick, Median and salvatella. If in the
Thigh, the saphena. If in the Knees, Shins or Ankles, the sciatica vein. If in
the Loins and Feet: open the Palsy vein near the little Toe. Frenzy, first
the Hand Cephalic, or the Saphena which is better, then the Forehead: but take
heed that he move not much in, or after bleeding, or the humerary, or between
the Thumb and forefinger, or in the Nose. Phthisis or Consumption, first the
left Basilick, then the Salvatella. Pleurisy, the opposite Basilick, at the
beginning when the matter flows, when there is plenitude; or first open the
Saphena, and then the Basilick. If it be in the right side, open the right
Saphena, when there is but little plenitude, or when the matter is flowed, then
open on the same side, or the Gindegi and Median. If the pain reach to the
Throat, Papps or Arm, open the internal Vein on the same side. Plethory, when
no part is affected any Vein may be opened with benefit. In Plethory, that
makes diseases from unknown causes, open the Liver-vein in the right Arm.
Plethory of crude humors in internal Veins in both Arms. Plethory from Terms
stopped, the Saphena. Plethory great with Defluxion, first the Veins in the Arm:
and if that will not do, the Leg or Foot-veins. Plethory of Melancholy, the
inward Vein in the left Arm. Plethory of Choler, the inward Vein in the right
Arm. Podagra or Foot-gout, first the Basilick, the then Arthritick or Saphena:
and the right Basilick, if it be in the right Foot, if in the left, the left;
also the Ham vein. See Arthritis. Podex inflamed, the upper Veins in the Arm.
Praegnantes or Women with Child, bleed about the fifteenth week, again when
they open again about the twenty sixth week, open the Hepatick against the
little finger. Andrenatus allows to Plethorick women with child, bleeding in
the second, third or fourth month, but not in the eighth or ninth month.
Priapism, first the black Vein, then the Basilick. Pudendi or Privities, the
Saphena, the Genital-vein, Sciatica, Ham-vein, or the Veins above the Pecten.
When there is Ulcer or Tumor, open the great Toe veins. See Virga. Puerpurae or
Women with Child in fevers, open the Saphena and Ham-vein. Pulmonum or
Diseases in the Lungs, the Median, the Veins under the Tongue, the inward Vein
in the left Arm, the Salvatella. In Imposthums of the Lungs, the Gindegi.
Punction or pricking under the small Ribs, the Salvatella. Pupil of the Eye
dilated, the Cephalic or lachrymal Veins, and the Temples.
Q
Quartan Ague, the inward Vein in the left Arm. Quotidian daily, intermitting,
and seminary, the inward Vein of the right Arm.
R
Rhagades or Clefts of the Womb, open the Basilick in the left Hand, or the
Saphena in the left Foot. Raucedo or Hoarsness, the Gindegi, the two Veins on
both sides the Throat near the Neck. Reins, in all Dieases, the left
Salvatella, the Veins in the Knees, the Vein in the Glans of the Yard. In pain
present or to come, the right Basilick, then both Saphenaes. In plenitude, the
Ham-vein or Ankle. In obstruction, the Basilick often, then the Saphena. To
evacuate and mundifie, the Sciatica, to strengthen the Veins between the Loins
and Buttocks. In inflammation, the inward vein of the right Arm, if the right
Kidney, suffer in the left, if the left Scabs, the Basilick. Apostems and
Ulcers, the common vein if there be Repletion: or the Basilick on the same
side, if humors offend, or the Cephalic, if the matter be above. Or the
Saphena on the same side, and the Ham-vein. In the Stone, the four veins above
the Pecten, or the Sciatica. Rheum: the Palate vein. Rheum upon the Eyes sharp:
the temporal Arteries must be opened.
S
Sanguinis in blood abounding and unclean: open the Basilick or right
Salvatella, or the little Toe when it is hot and choleric: open both little
Toe-veins. When there is Melancholy: open the veins between the Loins and
Buttocks. Scab or Itch: open both little Toe-veins. Sciatica: the Sciatica vein
on the same side, Saphena or Ham vein. Speech hindered: the veins under the
Tongue. Sleep profound, first the Cephalic, then the Median. Spatula or
Shoulder diseases: open the vein in the top of the Arm. Spiration with
difficulty and the like: that under the Tongue, the Median and Salvatella.
Spiration or breathing parts pained in Fevers: open the inward Vein in the
Arm. In Spleen diseases: open the inward Vein in the left Arm, Gindegi; first
the left Basilick, then the Salvatella, or the Sciatica and Saphena. Spondil
Diseases: the Vein in the top of the Arm. Spitting of blood: the Saphena, with
Ulcers, the inward Vein on the left arm. Spitting of blood from Terms stopped:
open the Basilick twice or thrice, or the Saphena once. Spitting of matter: the
black vein on, the same side. In Sterility or Barrenness from moisture: both
Saphena's. Stomach passions: the Median, Basilick, and the vein of the under
Lip. Stomach Imposthume: the right hand Basilick, if Plethory be first the
Saphena, then the Basilick or Median. Stomachs evil Complexion with matter: the
black vein, if there be Plethory. Stomachs Orifice hurt the salvatella.
Strangury: the two veins on the sides of the Pecten. Stupour: first the
Basilick, then the Cephalic, then that vein that is proper to the nummed
Member. Subet from blood: first the Cephalic, then the black vein. Synanche or
Quinzie: first the Humeraries under the Tongue, or both Cephalicks, then the
Gindegi. Syncope or Swounding: the vein in the Forehead. Synoch Fever simple
and putrid: the inward vein of the right Arm.
T
In Tabes or Consumption: the inward left vein. See Phthisis. Tenesmus: the
right Basilick, or the left, if there be repletion of blood. Tertian burning,
pestilent, quotidian, constant or intermitting, and semitertian: open the
inward vein in the right Arm. Testicles or the Stones, to empty the saphena. In
diseases of them, both the veins on the sides of the Pecten, or that in the
Knee. In pain, the saphena. Tumor and inflation, both saphenaes, the sciatica,
the Groyn-vein, both great Toe veins. In imposthumes of the stones, the right
Hand veins, if pain or imposthume be in the right side, after that the saphena
on the same side, if the imposthume be on both sides, in both Hands. In a wound
of the Testicles: the Basilick, especially if there be repletion. Thorax or
Breast: open the internal Cephalic of the left Arm. See Pectus or Breast.
Tibiae or Legs pained: the Ham or sciatica vein Trembling of Heart: the saphena
then the Basilick, thirdly apply Cupping-glasses to the left shoulder. In
repletion, open the right basilick, in vapors the left. In Tristitia or
Sadness: the Cephalic. Tumors of all sorts: the Groyn vein and Cephalic.
Tumors in the Armpits or shoulders: the inward vein of the left Arm. Tumors of
Tongue and Jaws: the right Cephalic. Tussis or Cough: the Cephalic, if matter
falls, or the black vein, if there be matter contained, or the basilick, if the
Liver being hot cause it, or the saphena, if the Terms be stopped. If blood be
coughed up: open the inward vein on the left Arm.
V
In Varices: open the sciatica, saphena or Ham vein. Venture or Belly diseases:
the basilick. In Belly-flux. See Diarrhaea or Fluxus. In Vertigo or Megrim: the
Cephalic, Ham or Ankle vein, or the Arteries behind the Ears. Vesica or
Bladder offended: open the veins on each side the privities or saphena. If it
be imposthumed: the left basilick or left salvatella. If inflamed: the upper
veins in the arm. If a Stone in the bladder. See Calculus. In Virgae or the
Yard diseases: the sciatica, saphena, Ham, the four veins above the Pecten, the
basilick on the same side. In inflammation, open the upper veins in the Arm.
Tumor or Ulcer, both the great Toe veins. Visus or Sight weakened from many
spirits: first open the basilick, then the Cephalic. if there be great
repletion, take first the saphena. If it be from the spleen, open the left
Cephalic. See Oculus. Vomica or Imposthumes: open the two veins in the little
Toes. Vomiting the Head, or black vein, or basilick, when there is Choler. If
blood abound, open the left basilick or the saphena, if the Liver cause it,
open the right side basilick. Voice hurt: the salvatella or veins under the
Tongue. Urin difficult, the basilick and then the saphena, or the veins on both
sides the privities. See Mictus or Pissing. In Vteri malis or diseases of the
womb, open the salvatella of the left Hand, sciatica or saphena. In
inflammations of it, open the Ham or Ankle veins. Uvula fallen: open the right
Cephalic or Basilick, if there be Repletion.
APHORISMS TO BE Observed in Bloodletting.
Hippocrates his Aphorisms concerning Phlebotomy.
IF the Vessels be emptied as they should be, it does good; and the Patient
likes it well, if otherwise not. Therefore consider the Climate, Time and Age,
and Diseases, whether you ought to bleed or no.

All diseases by repletion, are cured by Evacuation or Blood-letting, if large
and violent, or much at the nose.

If any be dumb on the sudden, open the vein in the right arm. A Woman with
child will miscarry upon bleeding, and the sooner as her child is older.

In acute diseases open a vein, when the disease is vehement, and the patient
in his youth, and strong.

The veins behind the Ears being opened, cause barrenness.

If you will let blood, by reason there is blood gathered together, to turn it
from the place, do it at a great distance from the part afflicted. The opening
of the veins beneath in the Groyns, Thighs, Legs and Ankles, makes men
unfruitful. It is good for a man to bleed sometimes: the time of bleeding begins
at February, and again at September.

The Aphorisms of Galen, concerning Bleeding.
THere are three Considerations in Blood-letting, the vehemence of the disease,
the youth of the Patient, and the strength of the Faculty.

Nor too young, nor too old are to be let blood.

They need no blood-letting that have any natural evacuation.

Many need bleeding after long Diseases by the three considerations mentioned.

We bleed when there is no fullness, when there is great pain, or in a Fracture
or dislocation, or any contraction in a Joint.

Bleeding requires strength agreeable to the evacuation.

It is not good to bleed often in one year.

When you let blood, keep off far from the Artery.

Bleeding and Water-drinking are chief remedies of containing Fevers.

When you will cure obstructions first open a Vein though there be no fullness.

Necessity allows and commands blood-letting at any time or hour.

It is a good Remedy in continual Fevers to let blood til they faint, if the
Patient be strong.

Two hours after bleeding the Patient may eat.

In bleeding in continual Fevers consider not the number of the days, but
only the strength.

If at the time of bleeding the Terms chance to flow, or the Haemorrhoids,
observe it, and if the quantity voided be sufficient, leave the whole business
to Nature and that flux, but otherwise bleed a little.

These are the inconveiencies that follow, loss of too much blood, Faintness,
worse habit of body, a colder temper, discoloring of the whole body, and
falling into long deadly Diseases.

In all Fevers bleed at the first if the Patient be strong.

It is lawful by bleeding to evacuate superfluities in a Fever.

In a Phlegmon of the Liver, the blood that flows thicker must be let out by
opening the internal vein in the right Arm.

In a Phrenzy and Lethargy, bleed at first coming of it.

In a Carbuncle bleed til they faint.

In great Diseases, always bleed, but with respect to the age and the strength.

You must bleed plentifully in a Lassitude with a Phlegmon, sometimes til they
faint.

After bleeding you must not presently refresh the Patient.

Abstain from bleeding when the blood is good and little, and other humors are
abundant; but when it is contrary let blood.

If you forbear bleeding by reason of the age or for fear, let the Patient
purge the more.

To open the Haemorrhoids, or provoke Terms, or open the Ankle-vein, and then
purge is good with bleeding in the Arm.

When blood abounds, it must not presently be let out: for fasting, slender
diet, looseness of belly, or purging, or bathing often, or exercise alone, or
much rubbing will abate it.

After the opportunity of bleeding is passed, other evacuations are dangerous*
when there are excrements either in the Brain or the Instruments of the Spirits.

Bleeding must be at the beginning of Diseases, and sometimes purging.

Bleeding is a common way to cure diseases by repletion.

Bleeding whatsoever, or wheresove^ or howsoever done, equally evacuateth the
whole body.

The Aphorisms of Cornelius Celsus out of his Book 2. Chap. 9.
THere is scarce a Disease in which bleeding is not allowed.

It is an old custom to let blood young men and women not with Child.

But not Children and old folks, and Women with Child, for the Ancients thought
the first and last age could not endure this kind of help, and were persuaded
that if a Woman with Child ^ould be let blood, she would abort: but after this,
Custom has showed that it is otherwise; for it is not matterial what age the
party is of, or what is in the body, but what strength the Patient is of.

therefore if a Youth be weak, or if the woman be not with Child, and be also
weak; it is not good to let blood, for so the strength that remains will be
taken away: but a strong Boy or old Man, and a hearty strong Woman with Child
may be cured by bleeding according to Celsus.

But the Physician may be deceived if unskilful, because in those ages there is
less strength.

A Woman with Child has need of strength after her cure, not only for her self
but to sustain the Child.

The chief art is to consider the strength of a Child, old Man, or Woman with
Child.

There is difference to be observed between a fat and a lean body, a strong and
a weak.

The thin bodies have more blood, the full bodies have more flesh.

They endure the loss of blood better, and a fat man is sooner disturbed with
it if it be too much.

Therefore the strength of the body is better to be found by the Veins than the
Form.

Nor are these only to be considered; but the Disease, what kind it is, whether
abundance or want of matter hurts, whether the body be corrupt or sound.

For if the matter be wanting, or be sound, that is another thing: but if it
offend in plenty or be corrupt, it can no way be better helped than by bleeding.

Therefore in a vehement Fever when the body is red, and the veins are swollen
bleeding is required.

But if the Fever be vehement, and you let blood in the height of it, you kill
the Patient.

Therefore expect a remission: if it decreaseth not, but has ceased to
decrease and you hope for no remission, then though it be worse bleeding then
before, avoid not the opportunity.

Sometimes make two days work of it, if there be necessity, for it is better
first to refresh the Patient, and then to do it thoroughly, then to spend all
the strength at once.

If you bleed for the whole body, open the arm, if for a part, bleed in that
part, or near it. But this cannot be done every where, but in the Temples,
Arms, or about the Ankles.

Some say that blood must be drawn far off from the part affected. For that
will divert the course of the matter, and take away that which offends.

But that is false. For it emptieth the nearest part first, and blood flows
thither from the remote while it bleeds: when it is stopped it will not be drawn.
And experience shows, that if the Head be broken, that it is best to bleed in
the Arm.

If there be a fault in the shoulder, the contrary Arm is to be blooded,
because if there be any evil, the part that is affected will sooner receive it.
Sometimes blood is diverted when it breaks out in one part, and you let blood in
an other. And it cease to flow by applying things that stop to the part,
first bleeding, and giving it another vent.

Though bleeding be easy to an Artist, yet is it hard to an ignorant person.
For the vein is joined to the Arteries and the Nerves to them. Therefore if the
Lancet touch the Nerve, there is stretching of the Nerve, which his grievous.

But an Artery cut, neither grows together, nor will be healed, but sometimes
causes a violent flux, but if a Vein be cut, the heads or orifices being
pressed down the blood stops.

If the Lancet be fearfully applied, it only cuts the Skin and not the Vein.

The Vein must be cut in the middle out of which when blood flows you must
observe the color and habit of body; for if blood be thick and black, it is bad
and fit to be lost.

If it be red and shining, it is sound, and the loss of it (instead of profit)
hurts, therefore it must be stopped.

But these things cannot happen to a Physician that knows what Body ought to
loose Blood.

If it be all black, let it often out, and bleed not again, if you have enough
before fainting.

Tie up the Arm with a Pledget dipped in cold water, and open the vein with your
nail the next day, for the new Escar will easily come off, and it will bleed
again.

But whether it be in the first or second day, that blood which first was thick
and black, begins to wax red and clear, there is enough taken; therefore let
the Vein be presently bound up, and kept so till there be a strong Eschar which
will quickly be in a Vein. This Celsus.

THE APORISMES OF Arnoldus de Villa nova out of his Book of the Regiment of
Health.
AFter Bathing, or Venery, or great Exercise, bleed not by any means.

And also after a long sickness.

They which serve in hot houses, and take great pains in their calling to
resolve the Body, must not be let blood.

Bl^ed not in very hot nor very cold Weather.

The Spring and Autumn are best times to let blood in.

Bleed not in a pestilent Air, cloudy, or stormy Weather, or when the
South Wind blows.

In Summer bleed at eight in the morning, in Winter at noon.

Let young men bleed in the first quarter of the Moon, and old in the last.

Sanguine men must bleed in the first quarter, Choleric in the second,
Phlegmatic in the third, and Melancholic in the fourth.

If the Moon be in a sign with a evil aspect, or to any member, bleed not in
that member

In Aries, bleed the Head, in Gemini, the Arms, in Cancer, the Median, in
Sagittarius, the Thigh, in Aquarius, the Legs and Thighs, and in Pisces, the
Feet. The other parts are safe at any time.

If the Moon be in Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn, it is bad to let blood, if in
Cancer, Scorpio, Piscis, indifferent, if in Aries, Libra, Sagittarius or
Aquarius it is good.

Let Drunkards and Gluttons, and those that are filled to loathing, abstain
from Bleeding.

If any want Blood-letting, and neglect it there will be Imposthumes inward and
outward, the great and small Scab, the Ring-worm, Synochus, Meazles, Apoplexy
and Palsy, small Pox and spitting of Blood, Quinzy, Plague, sudden Death and
Leprosy, and generally all sickness of much Blood or corruption of Blood: and
they that are inclinable to such Diseases, let them not neglect phlebotomy.

There are many evils by bleeding unreasonably. From often bleeding come
Obstructions, Dropsies, Age hastneth on, the Appetite decaies and Stomach,
weakness of Heart and Liver, Trembling and Palsy, and weakness of all virtues
both Natural and Animal.

He that is very musculous and fleshy, by accident, and he that is extenuated,
and they which use to diet that breeds much blood, and live in idleness and
pleasure, and dwell in Countries where there is little resolution; and that eat
much flesh roasted, and drink sweet Wines, and use Baths, and no copulation,
and exercise little, are more to bleed than others, and they who fast and eat
melancholic meats are to bleed less.

When Phlebotomy is used to evacuate and in a place near the Disease or the
part where it is, then the first blood ought to be worse than the second, and
the second then the third, and if the contrary happen, there is still need of
bleeding and Physic. But in some bodies that need little bleeding, it often
happens that the first is better than the second, and then you may bleed again
presently.

Before bleeding it is good to exercise, move and watch to make it move better.
The Member to bleed is to be rubbed and heated, and washed with warm Water, to
make the Vein plainer and the blood freer.

The Surgeon must be young, expert, and of quick sight, not trembling or
drunk.

If a weak-hearted Patient, or one very faint is to bleed, let him first eat
Bread and drink astringent Wine.

They whose Blood is thick, immovable, and the Veins hidden, must be bathed
some days before, except the body be very plethorick.

Before bleeding let the Belly and Bladder be free.

In those that have an Imposthume bleed while the color of it changes: but
when there is a simple plenitude without an Imposthume, expect not the change
of blood, for the blood may be all a like, or good.

If the Blood be whitish and thin, lose but little.

In Summer and Spring bleed in the right side in Autumn and Winter in the left.

In a venomous matter, bleed on the same side.

When there is great necessity open the same Vein twice in a day, or when you
have not taken enough.

If after the Vein is opened the blood will not flow, then it is good to cough
and hawk, and clap the Patient upon the Shoulders.

Touch the Blood as it comes forth, if it be cold, stop it presently, and also
if it be very hot and thin, for in both cases, you may fear swounding.

Take a drop of blood upon the Nail, if it flow off, and stand not firm, it is
waterish, and must be presently stopped

Or drop it into water, if it sink, it is too thick, and if it disperse and
swim, it is too watery, if it be in a mean, it is good.

After bleeding, Exercise not that day, but rejoice at home, nor Bath that day,
and use no Venery till the fourth day, nor sleep in the day.

Consider also the substance of the Blood, it is either melancholic,
phlegmatic, sanguine, pure, choleric, or watery.

Melancholy is the dregs of blood, it is black, and in the bottom of the
Poringer, and when there is too much of this, it is no good sign, then we may
judge that the Patient is sad, envious, and curious, covetous, fearful and
poor-spirited, such must use things to cleanse and increase blood.

Phlegm is white, slimy, unsavory, like whites of Eggs, and it is in the blood
next above the Melancholy, this must not be too much, and if there be much of
it, we judge him to be phlegmatic, naturally, sleepy, rude, and dull to action,
and to spit much, but there ought to be more of this than of Melancholy.

Then follows pure blood, it ought to be of a purple color, reddish or ruddy,
of this there ought to be more, if there be much of it the Patient is sanguine,
and and free, amiable and cheerful, laughing and of a red color, bold and
bountiful.

Then follows Choler which is the froath of Blood, of a Saffron-colour, with
glittering red, there ought to be less of this than of blood or phlegm, and more
than of melancholy.

If therefore there be a great quantity of this, we may judge the party
choleric, and by consequence crafty, deceitful, wrathful, bold and prodigal,
apt for action, watchful and subtle.

Moreover you must consider the watery substance that swims at top when the
blood is congealed, as whey when milk is curdled, and it is like Urine, if it
be put into a Glass, and when this water is like the Urine of a sound man whose
blood it is, it is good, otherwise not.

And when this water is separated more perfectly from the blood, the better it
is, and the better is the digestion and decoction in the Liver. And the
contrary.

This water must be in the blood to make it thin, that it may pass more free
through the great Veins and small, and so come to the members.

Therefore it is not good that blood should be without this water.

For it wanted show, dryness and thickness of blood, this is in such us fast
much, and watch, and eat dry and hot meats, and that study and exercise much,
and in some that are well.

Moreover it is not good that too much water be in the blood, for it would show
defect of digestion, either in respect of meat or drink, or in respect of the
parts that cannot convert the meat into blood, and it shows also too much
coldness and moistness of blood, and weakness of body.

Hence it is that they who have cold Stomachs, and Livers, and Veins, and eat
cold and moist Meats, and much, and especially drink much, and exercise little,
and fast not, nor watch, have such blood.

Also in Blood there is a fleshy Substance declining to white, for the Blood
beginning to whiten in the Veins, because the farther digestion to convert it
into Members proceeds in whitning. This digestion begins in the great veins,
and end in the small with the Members of the third digestion, namely at the
outward solid Members of the whole Body.

This Substance is flesh-like, and appears manifestly in Blood after it is
washed, and the fatter, moister, or more watery the Blood is, the less there is
in it of this substance, and the thicker (except it exceed the temper) and less
far, and without water, the more of this fleshy substance is to be seen.

Therefore from a great quantity of this white substance, is signified the good
digestion in the Veins, and the pliableness of the Blood to turn into Members,
especially when you feel it with your hands. And when there are no great things
contained in it, that are not hard, but will crumble with the fingers. For by
such there is signified an inclination to a Leprosy.

Moreover if thou would know the substance of the whole blood, cut it when it
is congealed with a knife or thin stick, and if it resist not but cut easily,
it signifies the subtility of the blood; but if it divide with difficulty, then
it signifies sliminess and grossness of Blood.

And if Blood will not be cut, though it be easily divided as it is in Oil, and
water and other moist things which are easily divided, though not cut, that
blood is too thin, and that thinness argues want of digestion.

And when blood is easily pricked but not cut then it is slimie, and that blood
is commonly phlegmatic.

And when it is cut but with resistance, then the blood is gross, but not
viscous or clammy.

You must consider also of the color of blood for if in one part of the
Poringer it appear of one color, and in another of another color, as in a
Pigeons neck, it signifies diversities of evil humors.

Therefore we must consider the true fixed color of the blood; it is red and
purple, not dark red, and that argues good blood.

If it be a glittering red, it argues predominant choler, and also if it be
like Saffron. If it be froathy, it shows wind. If it be white or livid, or
blew, it signifies cold and predominant phlegm, and especially if the blood be
slimie, and there are other signs of phlegm.

These colors may come from burning, as appears in consumptive and leprous
persons.

Green signifies burning, and specially of choler.

Black and Blew, signifies natural melancholy, or that which is burnt.

You must also consider the taste, for it ought to be sweet, if it be unsavory,
it signifies phlegm predominant, if bitter, choler, if sower or brackish,
melancholy and sour phlegm, if it be salt, it signifies salt phlegm and adustion
of humors.

The scent is also to be considered, if it be sweet and pleasant, it is good if
it stink, it shows great putrefaction in the humors.

Moreover if blood drawn do quickly coagulate or congeal, it is too gross, if
it be long and slow to congeal, it is too thin and undigested.

If it be in a mean, the blood is indifferent.

APHORISMS of Avicen, Rhasis, Aetius, Montagnanus, Savanarola, and Damascen,
and others.
THey that use much Blood-letting in Youth, are cured after sixty sooner than
others, and their natural heat is choked, especially if they are of a cold
complexion.

They who dwell in the fourth or sixth climate, may lose more blood than they
that live in the seventh, first, second or third.

They who have weak Stomachs, and cold weak Hearts and Livers, and Cold, and
have cold Diseases, must not be let blood, nor melancholic persons, except
their veins be swollen. Nor pale, lean, starved, or such as eat melancholic
food, nor such as use too much Venery, nor such as have a Dysentery or Iliack,
or are much bound in Belly, nor such as have not bodies prepared, nor such as
are seventy, except they be strong, and have broadful veins, and used it, and
when there is necessity.

At sixty open not the Cephalic.

At fifty open not the Median.

At seventy take heed of opening the black vein.

It is good for phlegmatic persons to open a Vein when the Moon is in Aries or
Sagittarius

For Melancholic, when she is in Libra or Aquarius.

For Choleric, when she is in Cancer or Pisces.

In the New and Full, abstain from Phlebotomy.

Let Youths from fourteen to twenty five bleed in the first quarter.

From twenty five to thirty five, in the second.

From thirty five to sixty five, in the third quarter of the Moon.

Bleed in the morning when the Sun is risen after an hour, two or more of sleep.

After noon, open the Head, Hand, and Feet veins, and the Arms in the morning.

Let old and sick people eat Broth and drink Wine an hour or two before.

They who sweat easily and often want Blood-letting.

Usual accustomed Bleeding is not to be omitted without danger.

After Bleeding, drink thin and good Wine: avoid Mead, Ale, Fish, and what
breeds bad blood.

Bleeding when there is no necessity does more hurt than good.

After Bleeding, avoid bad Air, eat white Bread, well baked Veal, Hens,
Chickens, Lamb, rear Eggs, and that which breeds good humors and blood, drink
pure Wine clear and thin, abstain from Cheese, Milk, Herbs, Fish, Ale, and
Mead, Anaer, Sadness and Copulation.

FINIS.
OF CUPPING AND SCARIFYING, And diseases cured thereby
The Time and Age of Cupping and Scarifying.
SCarifie not before four years old, nor after sixty.

Cup not nor scarifie in the full or new Moon.

It is good when the Moon is in Cancer, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius and Pisces:
but not in other signs. It is good in the second or third hour of the day, and
after an hour they may eat and drink.

Let the Body or part to be scarified, be washed an hour, or half an hour with
hot water before and rubbed.

It is good to use Cupping-glasses after Evacuation of the Body. For it is not
good in Plethory, or to any part that has a flegmon.

The Use and Profit of Cupping in General.
Cupping without Scarification.
Is good to turn an Imposthume from a a noble part to an ignoble or inferior
part. To draw heat to a Member weakened by cold. Against the Cholick, if applied
below or above the Navel. To take away pain. Against Dislocations. To draw out
that which lies deep to the skin outward. To evacuate wind and humors. To stop
the flux and Haemorrhoids. To heat a Member, and to draw blood and heat it. To
reduce a Member into its place. Against pain of the Matrix, if they be fastened
under the Navel, and the woman sit warm with them upon her. Against
extraordinary flux o^ the Terms, if applied under both Breast an hour or more.
Against Bleeding at the Nose, applied to the Liver, if the right Nostril bleed,
and upon the Spleen, if the left. Against a pestilent Botch to draw venom from
within. Against a Rupture in the Groyn. To divert blood that flows
immoderately from any part or place. To stop the fluxes of the stomach. To stop
blood, applied to the opposite parts. To attract blood, extract poison. Against
a cold Stomach, if applied to it. To remove Wind.

The Use of Cupping-glasses with or without Scarification, according to Places
and Parts.
Cupping-glasses upon the Head; are good.

Against Madness, Diziness, Baldness, Scabs in the Eyes, Bothor, sticking out
of the nap of the Neck, and other Diseases.

They hurt

The Understanding, Memory. Cause astonishment, and hasten madness, in dry
Brains.

Cupping-glasses to the Forehead, are good.

Against pain in the hinder-part of the Nose, Head, heaviness of Head and
swelling, disease of the Brain, madness and doting.

They are good to the Forehead, for the face

In old diseases of it. Impetigo, Ulcers, Leprosy, Scabs, Morphew.

And also diseases of the Eyes and Megrim. But

They hurt

The Reason and Understanding.

Under the Chin, they are good.

Against Pustles and Tumors in the Mouth, Tooth-diseases and Gums. Spots in the
Face, and the like. Against the Infirmities in the skin. Of the Head, Throat,
Jaws, Cheeks.

Applied to the Backbone between the Neck and Shoulders.

Against diseases in the Head, Face, Neck, Teeth, Nostrils, Eyes and Mouth,
Heaviness, Impetigo, Quinsie, and are instead of opening the Cephalic or
Median. But

They hurt

The Memory, and make the Head shake.

Applied between the Shoulders, right against the Heart and Stomach, they are
good.

Against diseases of the Breast, Neck, Shoulders. Against Asthma, Cramp,
Trembling of Heart from blood, and diseases in the Throat, and are instead of
opening the Basilick. But

They hurt

The Stomach and Heart, and make a trembling without blood.

Under the Breast, they are good

Against diseases thereof, and Asthma.

Upon the Liver,

If it be dry or inflamed.

Upon the Back.

Against Diseases there.

Upon the Stomach, they are good

Against Tumor in it, cold and foul humors.

Upon the Hands,

Against all diseases of the Head, Eyes and Ears.

Upon the Kidneys and Reins,

Against Inposthumes of the Hips and Scabs, and Haemorrhoids, Gout, Leprosy,
Itch and Scabs of the back, Wind in the Mother, and other cold Wind in the
bladder, diseases of the Thighs, and all parts beneath.

Under the Navel,

Against diseases of the Matrix, Cholick and Gripings.

To the Hypocondria.

To stop bleeding at the Nose, and Womb.

To the Loins.

They provoke the Hoemorrhoid, take pain from the Back, Mother and Loins, Scabs
from the Thighs, Imposthumes and Tumors, and allay Venery or Lust.

Upon the Buttocks.

They cleanse the Blood of the whole body, and are good for the sides, Loins,
and Breast, and abate Lust.

Before in the Hips.

They are good against Imposthumes in the Stones, and starting forth of the
Ribs and Hips.

To the hinder part of the Head.

They are good against Imposthumes Strains in the Buttocks.

Under the Ham.

Against beating in the Ham from hot humors, against Strains and Ulcers in the
Legs and Feet.

To the Thighs.

They are good for the whole body, against swollen and impostumed Buttocks,
pains in the Kidneys, and Bladder, Fluxes in the Eyes, Diseases in the head.
Against hot burning Imposthumes in the Knees, Evils in the Breast and Back.
Imposthumes in the Cods, applied inward to the Groyn. Against wounds in the
Hip, and Thighs. Against old pain in the Mother, and to purge it from
Superfluities. Against Imposthumes in the Hands and Strains, applied behind. To
provoke Haemorrhoids and the Terms, they cleanse the Blood and take away
Plethory, and are as good as any Blood-letting.

To the Soals of the Feet.

They provoke the Terms, are good against the Sciatica, Gout, Megrim, and
instead of Phlebotomy in the Feet-veins.

A CATALOGUE of the Diseases to be cured by Scarification and Cupping
A
AGainst Anctae apply them between both. Angina or Quinzy, apply them often to
the Shoulders with Scarification, and cup the Thighs. Anus or Arse-hole hot
Imposthume, Cup the Loins and the upper part of the Buttocks. Anus or Fundament
out: Cup the Muscles of the Back. Apoplexy: Cup and Scarifie Neck and
Shoulders, and the Thighs. Apostems and Strains in the Buttocks: Cup the Hips
behind. Asthma: Scarifie between the Shoulders where the Neck and the Back join
together. Aurium or the Ears diseases: Cup in the Wrists and under the hinder
part of the Head on both sides the Neck. For Ears bleeding: Cup upon the
Shoulders.
B.
Basilick vein is as good as opened when the Cupping-glasses are applied
between the Shoulders under the Neck, where it is joined to the Back. Bothor:
Cupping behind in the Head or Pole, or before in the Head about the Crown, or
above the Forehead is good against it.
C.
Canicies or Baldness: Cup behind in the Head, and in the Crown before, or
above the Forehead. Cephalic vein is as good as opened, if you apply
Cupping-glasses upon the top of the Head behind, near the Veins on the sides of
the Neck that ascend to the Head. Capitis or Head-diseases, are cured by
Cupping the Neck and Shoulders with Scarification, and by Cupping upon the top
of the hinder part of the Head near the two Veins in the side of the Neck that
ascend to the Head, or by Cupping with Scarification in the Wrists. The Head is
cleansed by Cupping under the Chin. And upon the Fundament, Cupping draws from
the Head. Trembling of the Head: by Cupping upon the top of the hinder part of
the Head, near the two Veins in the side of the Neck that ascend to the Head.
For pain in the Head behind, Scarifie the Forehead Colic, against its pain,
Cup upon the Navel. Cordis or Heart-trembling, Scarifie between the Shoulders.
Corpus or body is refreshed, by Cupping the Fundament. Coxae or Hips, are cured
of Imposthumes, Scabs and Strains, by Cupping within side, or on the Loins, or
that part that contains five Spondils. For the two internal parts of the Hips,
Cup between the two Anchae. Crurum or Thighs, are cured of Scabs, Ulcers and
Strains by Cupping before in the Hips, and Scarifying under both Knees.
D.
Delirium to cure, Scarifie the Neck and Shoulders. Dentium doloribus, or
Toothache, Cup under the Chin, and upon the top of the hinder part of the Head
near the two Veins on the sides of the Neck that ascend to the Head. Diarrhoea:
to cure, Cup upon the Region of the Spleen. Dyspnoea or difficult Breathing,
Cup the Shoulders. Dolor to allay, Cup upon the part. Dorsi dolores or
Back-pains, upon the Loins and Back. Dolor of the Shoulders: Cup upon the part
between the Shoulder-blades under the Neck, where the Neck is joined to the
Back. Dolor of the Throat: Cup in the same place upon the Throat. Dolor of the
Colic; Cup upon the Navel.
E.
Against Elephantiasis: Cup the Loins or in the part that contains five
Spondils. Also Scarifie the Thighs and Feet. Epilepsie: first Cup the Thighs,
and then the part where the Neck is joined to the Cranium, or Cup the
Shoulder-blades.
F.
Against Face-evils: Cup under the Chin, and upon the top of the hinder part of
the Head near the two Veins in the side of the Neck that ascend to the Head.
Fevers are certainly cured by Scarification upon the Back bone with ten or
twelve Cupping-glasses. Flux and Blood that corrodes beneath: Cup with
Scarification upon the Buttocks at the bottom of the Loins: or use Cupping
without Scarification upon the same parts, and about the Navel, and about the
right and left Hypochondria.
G.
Gums-evils, Scarifie under the Chin. Gibbosity, Cup the Buttocks or the Brawn
of the Thighs. Gullet evil or pain: Cup between the Shoulder-blades under the
Neck where it is joined to the Back. Guttur or Throat: Cup under the Chin.
H.
Haemorrhoids to move: Cup the Loins. Haemorrhoids to stop: Cup between the
Shoulders without Scarification or with, or about the Loins and Reins which is
better. Humerorum dolores or the Shoulder-pain: Cup between the Shoulder-blades
under the Neck where it is joined to the Back.
I.
Jaundies yellow, Cup upon the Liver, under the right Shoulder, or under the
Ribs. Jecoris or Liver-diseases, Scarifie in the Region of the Liver. Liver
Inflamed and the like, Scarifie the right Hypochondrium. Iliack Passion: Cup
the upper part of the Belly. Insanium or Madness: Scarifie Neck and Shoulders,
and before in the Head about the Crown, and above the Forehead. Incontinency:
Scarifie Buttocks and Loins. Intestines evil: Cup the Fundament. Ossis exitum
or Bone out of joint: Cup upon the Ancha.
L.
Against Lactis abundantia, too much Milk, Scarifie the Thighs. Lust, Scarifie
the Loins and Buttocks. Linguae Magnitudinem or Tongue too big: Cup and
Scarifie upon the Shoulders in the Neck. Tongue Impostume: Scarifie behind the
Ears, or Cup under the Chin and Neck. Lippitudo or Blear-eyedness: Scarifie
Neck and Shoulders. Loins diseases: Scarifie the upper part of the Buttocks and
the bottom of the Loins.
M.
Mandibles to mundifie, Cup under the Chin. Against Madness: Scarifie Neck and
Shoulders, or Cup above the Forehead. Mother-diseases: Scarifie the Thighs
below, and cup the Navel and against the Knees. Mother windy: Cup the Loins or
that part that contains five Spondils immediately among the twelve. Mother
fallen and Suffocated: Cup the Groyns, Hips and Pecten. Menstrua or Terms to
provoke, Cup the Thighs and upon the Heels, and the muscles of the Legs,
properly for fat Women, also in the bending of the Ham, or between the Thighs
to the Privities. Menstrua to stop, Cup under the Breasts with and without
Scarification, let the Glasses be great, and they be applied upon both Anchae.
Against Menstrua alba or Whites, Scarifie the Buttocks, it is good also against
corruption of the Menstrua. Mictum sanguinis or pissing of Blood: Cup upon the
Reins, Bowels, Pecten, and Anchae, especially about the Bladder.
N.
Against Nose and Nostrils evils, Cup upon the top of the hinder part of the
Head near the two veins in the side of the Neck ascending to the Head.
Nose-ulcer: Cup in the nape of the Neck with Scarification. Nose-bleeding: Cup
the Shoulders and Buttocks with light Scarification also upon the Liver,
without Scarification, if the right Nostril bleed, and upon the Spleen if the
left, and upon both, if from both: or upon the Sumen which is best. Also upon
the Thighs within: Also upon the Neck and Shoulders with light Scarification.
If the Flux be Arterial: Cup upon the Region of the Heart and the Neck. Natibus
or Buttocks, if in them there be an Imposthume or Pussi, Cup behind in the
Coxae.
O.
Against Oculorum, of Eyes all Diseases, Scarifie the top of the Forehead, the
Crown and Neck, and in both Wrists. Against Scabs about the Eyes, Dullness,
Inflammation, Tears and the like evils: Scarifie Neck and Shoulders, or between
the Shoulder-blades. Against Omnia Vitia Corporis or all evils in the body: Cup
and Scarifie the Buttocks and upon the Fundament. Ophthalmy, Cup the Shoulders.
Against Oris Apostomata or Imposthumes in the mouth, Ulcers, Pustles, Tumors,
Scarifie the extremities of the Ears, and cup under the Chin and Neck. Against
Stink of Mouth, Cup between the Shoulder-blades.
P.
Against Palphebrarum or Eyebrows, Heaviness, Thickness, or Scabs: Cup between
the Shoulders, and upon the Thighs, and in the Spatula's and nape of the Neck.
Pannus: Scarifie the Neck. Against Pectoris vitia or Diseases of the Breast,
Imposthumes, and Bloody Evils: Scarifie under the Breast or between the two
Shoulder-blades where the Neck is Joined to the Back. Against Pedum Scabia or
Scabs in the Feet and Tumors: Cup and Scarifie under both Hams. Against Feet
inwardly pained: Scarifie the Loins. To bleed the Feet, Scarifie under both
Ankles. Peripneumony: Cup and Scarifie the Buttocks. Against Phrenzies:
Scarifie the Neck and Shoulders, and Cup the Shoulders and Buttocks. Pleurisy:
Cup between the Shoulders and the Buttocks and Thighs, and under the part
pained with and without Scarification. Poplitis or Ham-beating from hot humors,
Cup in the Ham. Podagram or Gout: Cup between the two Anchae or under both
Hams, or in the Loins, or in the part that contains the five immediate
Spondils, or upon both the Alchab. Pupilla dilated: Cup the Neck and Shoulders,
or Scarifie the Ear. Purge the whole body, and refresh by Scarification in the
Buttocks and Fundament.
R.
Against Reason confused: Cup the hinderpart of the head, which lies upon the
ground, when a man lies with his Face upwards, or Cup the fore part of the
head, about the Crown, or above the Forehead. Reins Scaby and Imposthumed: Cup
the Reins and Buttocks, and the Shoulder-bones. Rupture in the Groyn, Cup
between the two Anchae.
S
Sanguinem mundificare, to cleanse the Blood: Cup the Thighs. Saphena, its
opening to supply: Cup in the Thighs near the Privities. Against Scabs:
Scarifie Loins and Buttocks. Scabs of the Feet and Legs: Scarifie under both
Hams. Sciatica, Cup upon both Alchabs and Anchaes. Spasm from Blood: Cup
between both Shoulder-Bones, where the Neck and Back join together.
Spleen-diseases: Scarifie the left Hypochondrion or place of the Spleen.
Against Spirandi difficultatem or difficulty of breathing: Cup and Scarifie
between the Shoulder-bones. Spitting of Blood and Matter: Cup upon the
Buttocks, and about the Reins, or between the Shoulder-bones under the Neck,
where it is joined to the Back. Stomach-diseases and weakness: Cup the
Shoulders, if the pain be great, if the matter be thick, Scarifie the Buttocks.
Also apply a great Cupping-glass to the mouth of the Stomach, or between the
Shoulder-blades. Against Stomachs evil complexion with matter, Cup the Thighs,
Buttocks, with Scarification. Stomachs Imosthume, apply to it Cupping-glasses
with Scarification to draw the Flux of the matter to the contrary part.
Supercilliorum or Eyebrows heaviness: Cup upon the Nocra or between the
Shoulder-bones.
T.
Against Testicles imposthumated: Cup before in the Hips. To draw from the
whole body, Cup the Fundament. Against Trembling of the Head or shaking: Cup
the top of the hinder part of the Head near the two Veins in the side of the
Neck ascending to the Head. Trembling of the Heart, apply Cupping-glasses to
the left Shoulder. Tumor of the Gums and Mouth, Cup upon the Chin. Against
Tussim or Cough, Cup between the two Shoulder bones where the Neck is joined to
the Back.
V.
Varices, Cup the buttocks. Vein Median, opening supplied, if you Cup between
the Shoulder-blades. Vein Cephalic supplied, Cup upon the top of the hinder
part of the Head, near the two veins in the side of the Neck ascending to the
Head. Vein basilick supplied, by Cupping between the two Shoulder-blades under
the Neck where it is joined to the Back. Against Venery, Scarifie the Loins and
Buttocks Ventosity of Belly: Cup the Navel. Ventricle-diseases, Scarifie
between the Shoulders. Vertigo, Cup upon the Shoulders, or the hinder part of
the Head, or upon the Crown before on the top of the Forehead. Vesicae or
Bladder-Imposthumes, Scarifie the Fundament. Vesicae or Bladder-wind, Cup the
Reins or that the part that contains the five immediate Spondils and under both
Hams. Against Visus or sight weak, Scarifie the Neck. Ulcers: the Loins and
Reins. Ulcers of Legs and Feet; the Hams. Vomiting: Cup the Shoulders with
Scarification.
FINIS.

