AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations CONTINUED Upon the Fourth, Fifth,
Sixth and Seventh Chapters of the BOOK OF JOB: Being the substance of XXXV.
Lectures, delivered at Magnus near the Bridge, London.

By JOSEPH CARYL, Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincolnes Inn.

JAMES, Chap. 1. Ver. 2, 3, 4. My brethren count it all joy when ye fall into
diverse temptations. Knowing this, that the trying of your faith works
patience.

But let patience her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire wanting
nothing.

LONDON: Printed for L. Fawn, L. Lloyd, and M. Simmons. 1656.

To the Christian READER.
TO Those chiefly of this CITY, who have been the Moovers, and are the
Promoters of this Work.
Sirs,
YOur continued care and labor of love, engages a like degree of both, for the
growth of this Infant work. And therefore (though in the midst of manifold
diversions) these pieces are ventured out. We live in an Age (O that we could
live it) wherein the hand of Providence works gloriously, yea terribly: Having
then, got three or four steps further into this Book of Providence, it will
not be unseasonable, to show you the Prints of them. Especially seeing this
History of Jobs affliction, looks so like a prophecy of ours; and (almost in
every line) gives us some lineament of our present troubles and distempers, of
our hopes and fears.

In the three former Chapters we had a Narrative of the case, and of those
occurrences out of which the Question here debated receives it is state. As also
the bringing together of the Interlocutors, or persons maintaining this
Discourse: As we may always observe in the writings of the Ancients, whether
Natural, Moral or Divine, which are composed into Dialogues or Disputes.

This great Divinity act (one of the greatest surely and most solemn, I think
the first that ever was held out, in such a formality, in the world) is
principally spent, upon that noble problem, How the justice and goodness of
God can be salved, while his providence distributes good to the evil, and
evil to the good. A Question started and touched in many books of the holy
Scriptures; but is here (ex professo) purposely handled: First, in a very long
Disputation, between Job the Respondent, and his three Friends Opponents; Then
in a full determination, first, by Elihu an acute and wise, then by God
himself, the most wise and infallible Moderator.

The Method here observed is after the manner of the Schools (pro and contra)
every one of the four disputants, having his several opinion; and each one
his arguments in favor of his own. Which, yet, are not presented in that
affected plainness of the Schoolmen, with their downright (videtur quod sic,
probatur quodnon) This I affirm, this I prove, this I deny, this disprove. The
penmen of the holy Ghost never discuss Questions so, no, nor any of the old
Philosophers. This Covert carriage of their opinions, and close contexture of
their arguments, Answers, and Replies about them, render the Book somewhat
dark and obscure to the Readers meditation. And therefore, it will be a design
not unprofitable (if that end offered at, may be attained) briefly to draw them
forth, and set them before you in a more open light. And doublesse, what they
hold, and by what mediums they manage their proofs, may (by the blessing of
God upon serious thoughts and frequent reviews) be made out to a very great
plainness.

Toward which, it is observable, that, there are many threeds of the same
color and substance, mixed and interwoven by the Disputants throughout this
whole Discourse. And, that, though the three Opponents with one consent, set up
Job, as their common mark to shoot at; yet they take up very different
standings, if not different levels, varying each from other in some things, as
well as all (upon the main) from him.

The reason of the former is this, because there are some common principles,
wherein they all agree: which, if we abstract, with what is spoken in the
illustration of them, taking in also those conclusions, which springs from them
as their first borne: Then the remainder will show us that proper and
distinctive opinion, which each of them holds about this grand Question of
providence; the events and distributions whereof, seem so cross-handed in
giving trouble and sorrow to godly men, joy and prosperity to the wicked.

There are three principles, wherein Job concurs with his three friends; and a
fourth, wherein they three concur against him. The three, wherein all four
agree, are these:

First, That, all the afflictions and calamities, which befall man, fall within
the eye and certain knowledge of God.

Secondly, That, God is the Author and efficient cause, the orderer and
disposer of all those afflictions and calamities.

Thirdly, That, in regard of his most holy Majesty, and unquestionable
Sovereignty, he neither does, nor can do any wrong or injury to any of his
creatures, whatsoever affliction he lays, or, how long soever he is pleased to
continue it upon them.

These three principles and such conclusions, as are immediately deducible from
them are copiously handled and insisted upon by them all. In persuance whereof,
they all speak very glorious things of the Power, Wisdom, Justice, Holiness and
Sovereignty of the Lord. In proclaiming every of which Attributes, the tongue
of Job like a silver Trumpet, lifts up the name of God so high, that he seems
to drown the sound of the other three, and makes their praise, almost, silent.

But Jobs three friends proceed to a fourth principle; which, He utterly
denies, about which, so much of his answer, as is contradictory to their
objections and rejoynders, wholly consists. That, their fourth principle seems
to be bottomed upon two grounds.

First, That whosoever is good, and does good, shall receive a present good
reward, according to the measure of the good he has done; and, That whosoever
is wicked, and does wickedly, shall be paid with present punishment, according
to the measure of his demerits.

Seondly, That if (at any time) a wicked man flourish in outward prosperity
yet, his flourishing is very momentany, and suddenly (in this life) turns to,
or ends in visible judgments. And, That, if (at any time) a godly man be
withered with adversity yet, his withering is very short, and suddenly (in this
life) turns to, or ends in visible blessings.

Upon these two grounds or suppositions, They raise and build their fourth
principle, from which, They three make continual batteries upon the innocence
of Job. We may conceive the position in this frame.

That, whosoever is greatly afflicted, and is held long under the pressure of
his affliction, that man is to be numbered with the wicked, though; no other
evidence or witness appear or speak a word against him. Hence

The peculiar opinion of Eliphaz rises thus; That, all the outward evils, which
over-take man in the course of this life, are the proseeds of his own sin, and
so from the process of Gods justice. He gives us this sense, for his, in
express terms, Chap. 4. 8. They that plow iniquity and sow wickedness reap
the same; which he applies parsonally to Job (Chap. 22. v. 5, 6.) Is not thy
wickedness great, and thine iniquities infinite, Thou have taken a pledge from
thy brother for naught, and and stripped the naked of their clothing, etc. The
whole scope of his speech bends the same way; and is, as if he had said, to
Job; Though thy carriage has been so plausible among us, that we are not able
to accuse thee of sin, yet these judgments accuse thee, and are sufficient
witnesses against thee; These cry out with a loud voice, that thou have taken a
pledge from thy brother for naught, etc. Though we have not seen thee act these
sins, yet, in these effects we see thou have acted them; The snares which are
round about thee tell us, thou have laid snares for others, and he that runs
may read how terrible, how troublesome thou have been to the poor, in the
terrors which have seaz'd thy spirit, and in the troubles which have spoiled
thee of thy riches.

Bildad the Shuite speaks second; His opinion is not so rigid, as that of
Eliphaz. He grants, that afflictions may fall upon a righteous person, yet so,
that if God send not deliverance speedily, if he restore him not quickly to his
former estate and honor, then (upon the second ground of the fourth princple)
such a man may be censured, cast and condemned as unrighteous. That such was
Bildads judgment, in this case, is clear Chap. 8. 5, 6. If thou were pure and
upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy
righteousness prosperous, Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end
shall greatly increase; And verse. 20, 21. Behold God will not cast away a
perfect man, etc. till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with
rejoicing. As if he had said, I connot assent to my brother Eliphaz, affirming,
That every man afflicted, is afflicted, for his wickedness, I (for my part)
believe and am persuaded, that a godly man may be afflicted for the trial and
exercise of his graces, etc. but, then I am assured, that God never lets him
lie in his afflictions, for, as soon as he cries and calls, the Lord awakes
presently, makes his habitation prosperous again, and increases him more then
ever. I grant the Lord may cast down a perfect man, but, he will not (in this
life) cast him away; no he will speedily fill his mouth with laughing, and his
lips with rejoicing.

Zophar, the third Opponent differs from the two former in this great
controversy, affirming, That, the reason of all those afflictions, which
press the children of men, is to be resolved into the absolute will and
pleasure of God; that, we are not further to enquire about his wisdom, justice
or mercy in dispencing them, his counsels being unsearchable, and his ways
past finding out. Thus he delivers his mind (Chapter 11. 7, 8.) Can thou by
searching find out God? Can thou by searching find him out to perfection? It
is as high as heaven, what can thou do? Deeper then hell, what can thou
know? verse. 12. Vain man would be wise, though man be borne like a wild Asses
colt. In the rest of his speech, he comes nearest the opinion of Bildad, verse.
14, 15, 16. and gives out ^s hard thoughts of Job, as either of his brethren,
numbering him among the wicked, and assigning him the reward of an hypocrite
(Chap. 10. 29.) This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage
appointed unto him by God.

These (I conceive) are the Characteristicall opinions of Jobs three friends,
about his case. All consistent with those four principles, which they hold in
common, all equally closing in the censure and condemnation of Job, though in
some things dissenting and falling off from one another.

But what thinks Job? or how does he acquit or extricate himself from these
difficulties? very well, His sentence is plainly this.

That, The providence of God, dispences outward prosperity and affliction so
indifferently to good and bad, to the righteous and the wicked, that no
unerring judgment can possibly be made up, of any man's spiritual estate, by
the face, and upon the view of his temporal. He declares this, as his opinion,
in clear, resolute and Categoricall terms, (Chapter 9. v. 22, 23.) This is one
thing, therefore I said it, He destroys the perfect and the wicked, if the
scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the innocent. Which
opinion has no quarrel at all with any of those three principles, held by Job
jointly, and in consort, with his three friends, but only with their fourth:
which he throughout refutes as heterodox and unsound in it self, as
uncomfortable to the Spirits, and inconsistent with experiences of the Saints.
In the Strong hold and Fort-royal of this holy truth, Job secures himself
against all the assaults, and scatters all the Objections of his Opponents:
resolving to maintain it to the very death; he will lay his bones by this
position, say his unkind friends, what they can against him, and let the most
wise God, do what he pleases with him.

That, he was a sinner, he readily grants; that, he was an hypocrite, he flatly
denies.

That, the Lord was righteous in all his dealings with him, he readily grants.
That, himself was righteous, because the Lord had dealt so with him, he statly
denies.

How perfect soever he was, he confesses, that, he needed the free grace and
mercies of the Lord to justify him, but withal, asserts, that he was perfect
enough, to justify himself against all the challenges of man.

In these acknowledgements of his sinfullnesse, and denials of insincerity. In
these humblings of himself before God, and acquittings of himself before men:
in these implorings of mercy from the Lord, and complainings of the unkindnesse
of his brethren, the strength of Jobs answer consists, and the specialties of
it may be summed up.

It Is true that through the extremity of his pain, the anguish of his spirit,
and the provocation of his friends, some unwary speeches slipped from him. For
which, Elihu reproved him gravely and sharply, of which, himself repented
sorrowfully and heartily, all which, the most gracious God passed by and
pardoned freely, not imputing sin unto him.

Thus (Christian reader) I have endeavored (as heretofore of the whole Book,
so now) to give a brief account concerning the Argumentative part of it: And to
represent how far in this great Controversy, the Answerer and his Objectors
agree in judgment, and where they part.

If this discovery administer any help, as a Thread to lead your meditations,
through the many secret turnings, and intricacies of this dispute, the labor in
drawing it out is abundantly satisfied. And if any further light, subservient
to this end, shall be given in from the Father of lights, that also in it is
season may be held forth and set upon a Candle-stick.

What, is now received, together with the textuall Expositions upon this first
Undertaking between Eliphaz and Job, I leave in your hands: praying for a
blessing from on high, to convay truth home to every heart; desiring earnest
prayers for the Spirit of grace and illumination to be powered out, according to
the measure of the gift of Christ, upon

April 28 1645. Your very affectionate Friend and Servant in this work of the
Lord Joseph Caryl.

AN EXPOSITION Upon the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Chapters of the Book
of JOB.
JOB Chap. 4. Verse 1. Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said.

2. If we assay to commune with thee will thou be grieved? But who can withhold
himself from speaking?

3. Behold, thou have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak hands.

4. Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou have strengthened
the feeble knees.

5. But now it is come upon thee and thou faintest, it touches thee and thou
art troubled.

6. Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, the uprightness of thy ways and
thy hope.


JOBS complaint ended in the former Chapter: in this a hot dispute begins. Job
having cursed his day, is now chid himself. And he had such a chiding, as was
indeed a wounding, such as almost at every word, drew blood; and was not only
a Red upon his back, but a Sword at his heart. Job was wounded first by Satan,
he was wounded a second time by his Wife, a third time he was wounded (not as
it is spoken in the Prophet, in the house of his friends, but) in his own house
by his friends; Zach. 13. 6.
these last wounds are judged (by good Physicians in soule-afflictions) his
deepest and soarest wounds.

Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said. Eliphaz, being (as is supposed)
the elder and chief of the three, first enters the list of this debate with
Job: concerning whose name, person and pedigree, we have spoken before at the
eleventh Verse of the second Chapter, and therefore referring the Reader
thither, for those circumstantials of the speaker, I shall immediately descend
unto the matter here spoken.

If we assay to commune with thee will thou be grieved? etc. The whole
discourse of Eliphaz may be divided into three general parts.

1. The Preface of his Speech.
2. The Body 3. The Conclusion
The Preface of his speech is contained in the second Verse, If we assay to
commune with thee will thou be grieved? etc.

The Body of his speech is extended through this fourth and to the last Verse
of the fifth Chapter: It consists especially of two members, or two sorts of
matter, in which Eliphaz deals with Job.

The first is reprehensory, by way of conviction and reproof.

The second is exhortatory, by way of counsel and advice.

First Eliphaz reprehends Job. This work of reprehension begins at the third
Verse of this Chapter, and is continued to the end of the fourth Verse of the
fifth Chapter. And to show that he did not reprehend him upon passion, he
grounds this reprehension upon reason, and strengthens his reproof with
Arguments. And there are four reasons or special Arguments, which Eliphaz
takes up to make this reprehension convincing, the naming of them will give
light to the whole, before we come to particulars.

The first Argument is contained in the words I have read to the end of the
sixth Verse. And it is taken from the unsuitablenesse of his present practice,
to his former precepts.

Or from the inequality of the course, he now took under affliction, to the
counsel he had given others under affliction.

His second Argument beginning at the seventh Verse and carried on to the
twelfth, is grounded upon a supposed inequality of Gods present dealing with
him, in reference to his former dealings with godly men.

Eliphaz thought thus, surely Job is an Hypocrite, otherwise God would have
dealt with him, as with an innocent; Remember (says he) I pray thee, who ever
perished being innocent; I will convince thee by all examples, by whatsoever is
upon Record, in the History of all Ages, that thou art an Hypocrite, a wicked
person; for see, if thou can find an instance in any Story, of an innocent
person perishing. That is his second Argument.

His third Argument is continued from the twelfth Verse to the end of this
fourth Chapter; and that he might make the deeper impression upon Jobs spirit,
he brings it in with a dreadful Preamble: a Vision from God, at once
terrifying and instructing him, thus to reason down the pride of man. The
Argument it self is coucht in the seventeenth verse. It is drawn from an
evidence of presumption in all such, as shall dare to implead Gods justice or
plead their own: as if Eliphaz had said, surely thou art a proud and a wicked
person, for there was never any godly man upon the face of the Earth, no nor
any Angel in Heaven that durst be so bold with God as thou have been; Shall
mortal man (says he) be more just than God? shall a man be more pure than his
maker? Behold he put no trust in his servants, and his Angels he charged with
folly.

His fourth Argument begins at the fifth Chapter and ends with the fourth
Verse; and it is taken from the unlikenesse of Jobs carriage under his
afflictions, to that which any of the Saints in any age of the World did ever
show forth under their afflictions. He that caries himself so, as none of the
Saints ever carried themselves, gives an evidence against his Saintship, Call
now to the Saints, either those now living upon the Earth, or search the
Records concerning all the Saints that ever lived, consider, and see whether
thou can observe or read any parallel of thy complaints, and unreasonable
expostulotions. So much for the sum of his convictions.

Then Eliphaz turns himself to admonition and exhortation in the following
part of that fifth Chapter; and there are two Heads of his admonitory
exhortation.

First, he admonishes him, to seek unto God and to call upon him, Verse. 8. I
would seek unto God, and unto God, would I commit my cause. I give thee no
other counsel then I would take my self. If I were in thy case, I would not
stand thus complaining and cursing my day, but this I would do, I would seek
unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause. This admonition is enforced by
diverse Arguments to the seventeenth Verse.

The second head of his exhortation begins at the seventeenth Verse, and it
is to prevail with him, patiently to bear, and quietly to accept his
affliction, or the punishment of his iniquity: in pursuance of this he shows
him many benefits and blessings, attending those who graciously comply with the
correcting hand of God upon them. Behold (says he Verse 17.) happy is the man
whom God corrects, therefore despise not thou the chastning of the Almighty;
he concludes all from his certain knowledge and infallible experience of what
he had said (Verse 27.) Lo, this we have searched it, so it is; Backed with a
warranty, that if he obey, his own experience shall quickly teach him this
truth; Hear it, and know thou it for thy good.

So much concerning the Division or Parts of this first Speech or dispute made
by Eliphaz in answer to the former complaint, powered out by Job against the day
of his birth, and the night of his conception, in the third Chapter.

The six Verses (lately read) contain (as I said before) the first Argument;
we have the Preface in the second Verse, and the Argument it self in the four
following. The point which Eliphaz desires to prove and clear is this; that Job
was guilty of hypocrisy, of close hypocrisy at the least, if not of gross
hypocrisy. The Medium or reason by which he would prove it, is the
unsuitablenesse of his present practice to his former Doctrine. His actions
under sufferings contradict what himself had taught other sufferers. And this
speaks him guilty, The Argument may be thus formed.

That man's religion is but vain and his profession hypocritical, who having
comforted others in, and taught them patience under affliction, is himself
(being afflicted) comfortless and impatient.

But Job, thus it is with thee, thou have been a man very forward to comfort
others and teach them patience, yet now thou art comfortless and impatient.

Therefore thy religion is vain, and thy profession is hypocritical.

Is not this thy fear? Here is a goodly religion indeed, a proper piece of
profession: and such is thine, this is all thou art able to make out. Thus you
have the Logical strength or the Argument contained in the words. We shall now
examine them in the Grammatical sense of every part, as they lie here in
order. And first for the Preface.

If we assay to commune with thee will thou be grieved? but who can withhold
himself from speaking? The words import, as if Eliphaz had said thus unto Job;
we thy friends have all this while stood silent, we have given thee full
liberty and scope to speak out all that was in thine heart, let it not grieve
thee, if we now take liberty to speak our selves: and indeed a necessity lies
upon us to speak. Two things Eliphaz puts into this Preface, whereby he labors
to prepare the mind of Job, readily to hear and receive what he had to say
unto him.

First, he tells him that he speaks out of good will and as a friend to him. If
we assay to commune with thee will thou be grieved? Pray do not take it ill,
we mean you no harm, we would but give you faithful counsel, we speak from
our hearts, not from our spleen, we speak from love to thee, let it not be thy
grief.

Secondly, he shows that he was necessitated to speak, as love provokes, so
necessity constrains, who can withhold himself from speaking? either of these
considerations is enough to unlock both ear and heart to take in wholesome
counsel. What ear, what heart will not the golden key of love, or the iron
key of necessity open to instruction? when a friend speaks, and he speaks as
bound, when kindness and duty mix in conference, how powerful!

If we assay, or try. The word signifies properly to tempt, either (...)
Tentav^t in bonum vel in malum, periculum fecit, expertus est. (...) A ly^um
quasi Graculum vel loquuto^ium dictum, quod Deus inde responsa daret.
for good or evil; and because in temptation, an assay or experiment is made
of a man, how bad or how good he is; Therefore the word is applied to any
assaying or experimenting of things or persons. This very word is winning and
gaining upon Job. We will but try a little if we can do thee any good, or
bring lenitives to thy sorrows, we will not be burdensome or tedious; we will
but assay to commune with thee. The word notes serious speaking. The place
where God communed with his people, in giving answers from Heaven, is expressed
by this word, 1 Kings 6. 19. The Oracle he prepared in the house within, etc.
or the communing-place where God spoke.

Will thou be grieved?] The word signifies to be extremely (...) Fessus corpore
vel animo, insanivit, furiit.
wearled even unto rage or fainting. Here Elipphaz seems to hint at Jobs
former distempered speeches. If we speak, will thou promise us not to fall into
such a fit of passion, as even now thou wast in. And yet whatsoever comes of
it, or howsoever thou take it, I must discharge my duty and my conscience;
therefore he adds, who can withhold himself from speaking? That is, no man
can withhold himself from speaking in such a case as this: to hear thee speak
thus would even make a dumb man speak; Christ says in the Gospel, If these
should hold their peace the stones would cry; there is such a sense in these
words: if we thy friends should hold our peace, when thou speak thus, the
very stones would cry out against thee for speaking, and against us for holding
our peace. The Hebrew word translated withhold, signifies to shut up a thing so
as (...) Clausit co^^cuit 1 Kings 8 35.
that it cannot come out: It is applied to the locking up of the Clouds that
they rain not; to the holding in of fire that it cannot break forth; Jer: 20.
9. where the Prophet very elegantly fits it to the restraining of speech, which
is the very point in hand. His word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up
in my bones, I was weary with forbearing. So it implies that the friends of Job
had as it were a fire in their bosoms, which they could no longer restrain,
they were as Clouds full of water, full of deaw and rain, they were not able
to suspend themselves from dissolving and showring upon Job, both reproof and
counsel, advises and exhortations.

We may observe from this Preamble, That it is wisdom to sweeten reproof with
friendly insinuations. Reproof is a bitter Pill; it is a wholesome yet a
bitter Pill, and there is need to wrap it up in Gold and Sugar, that pleasing
both eye and palate it may be taken down the better. It is the Apostles
counsel to his Galatians, Gal. 6. 1.
Brethren, if a man be overtaken with a fault, ye that are spiritual restore
such an one in the spirit of meekness. The word restore, is an allusion to the
Art of Chirurgerie, in setting a bone out of joint; soft words and a soft hand
fit the Patients mind to endure that painful operation. By falls into sin,
the soul breaks or disjoynts a bone, he that will set such a mind* must
handle it gently. We may observe the holy skill of some of the Saints in
prayer, preparing God for receiving of Petitions, by prefaces and humble
insinuations (as it were) getting within him. Thus did Abraham, Genesis 18. when
he prayed for Sodom, Let not my Lord be angry if I who am but dust and ashes
speak unto thee. There is such a spiritual art in winding a reproof into the
bosom and spirit of a man, Let it not trouble thee that I thus speak, take my
words in good part, If we assay to commune with thee will thou be grieved?

Secondly, observe, That it is no easy thing to bear reproof. To take a
reproof well is as high a point of spiritual wisdom, as to give it well.
When we reprove the sin, we should love the man; but there are few men who
can love their reprovers. You know what is said in the Prophet, They hate him
that reproves in the gate. Reproofs are usually entertained with hatred, and
ill taken by evil persons; reproof is not always taken in good part, by
those who are good. It is but need to have some way made for its due
entertainment, by the best tempered spirits. Will thou be grieved? it may be
wearisome and troublesome unto thee, but I pray let it not.

Thirdly, observe from the Preface, That in some cases it is our duty to speak
and reprove whether men are troubled or no. How should I be pleased if thou
would receive my speech in good part? but I cannot withhold my self from
speaking, though thou art displeased; take it how you will, I must speak, these
reproofs must out. When we see plainly that God is dishonored, and that the
soul of our brother is greatly endangered, we must then speak (as God charge
the Prophet) whether they will hear or whether they will forbear. In such
cases we must adventure to save men by Ep. Jude v. 23
fear, plucking them out of the fire.

Lastly, observe, That when the heart is full it is a very hard thing, not to
give it vent at the lips by speaking. When the heart is full of matter, the
tongue will be full of words; the tongue must bring forth the treasures that
are laid up in the heart: Who (says Eliphaz) can withhold himself from
speaking? The Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 20. 9. thought to stifle the message of
God in his heart, I said I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in
his name, he began to take up a resolution to withhold himself from speaking,
but (says he) his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my
bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay, I could not hold
it any longer. So the Apostles, Acts 4. 19. We cannot but speak that which we
have heard and seen, it is impossible for us, the Lord has spoken who can but
prophecy? Amos 3. 8.
that is, who can withhold himself from prophesying when once the Lord bids
him speak. Words are the conceptions of our minds, and when our thoughts are
formed and organized as it were, and grown to perfection, when those children
come to the birth a little strength will bring them forth. Or rather, great
strength cannot keep them, from being brought forth. It is as possible for her
that is with child to withhold the birth, as it is for those that have
pregnant conceptions or an errand from God, to withhold themselves from
speaking. When David kept silence (it is a strange connection) he roared, Psalm.
32. 3. When he held his peace from good, his sorrow was stirred, Psalm. 39. 2.
Pangs took hold on him as upon a woman in travel, which made him roar. His
heart waxt hot and the fire burned, till he spoke with his tongue. He was then
delivered. Our English phrase of Delivering a man's mind, may hit this sense
well. Their hearts are barren, whose mouths are always shut. Who can withhold
himself from speaking?

But what is it that he could not forbear? He could not forbear to tell him,
that (as he supposed) he acted against his own principles. Behold thou have
instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak hands, etc.

Behold.] This word is sometime used in a way of derision, as Ecce doctorem
egregium! Ecce medicum aliorum qui seipsum curare nesciat.
Genesis 3. 22. where God says concerning Adam, Behold the man is become as one
of us, do you not see what a God he is? how like a God he looks? so, Behold
thou have instructed many, (some make that the sense) see now your great
Teacher, your learned Doctor; he that has been so forward and busy in
teaching others, see in what disorder, how uncomposed he is himself: he would
needs physic his Neighbors, but knows not how to cure his own distempers.

But rather take it by way of asseveration. Behold, as if he should say, this
is a thing clear and certain, all that are about thee, can witness it, that
thou have instructed many, and that thou have strengthened the weak hands. But
how art thou changed? thou art not like the man thou wast.

Here are four special acts of spiritual charity, so we may call and
distinguish them. First, instructing of the ignorant; secondly, encouraging of
the weak and sloathfull; thirdly, supporting of those that are ready to fall;
and fourthly, comforting those that are ready to faint. In these four duties
Job had been very conversant. Indoctos docere.
. Instruction of the ignorant, Behold thou have instructed many. Torpentes
excitare.
. Encouragement of the weak and sloathfull, Thou have strengthened the weak
hands. Labentes erigere.
. Supportation of the weak, Thy words have upholden him that was falling.
Maestos consolari.
. Consolation of those who were ready to faint, Thou have strengthened the
feeble knees.

Here you see the four uses, which Job made in his counsels; First, 2 Timothy 3.
16.
of Instruction; Secondly, of Exhortation; Thirdly, of Admonition; Fourthly, of
Consolation: Job was a perfect Preacher, he applies the word to all the
services and ends of it, respecting the several conditions, tempers, or
distempers, of those with whom he had to do.

Further, some take the three latter to be, but as explications or branches of
the first; Behold thou have instructed many, namely, concerning the nature of
afflictions, and their duty in the bearing afflction; yea, thou have instructed
them so far, that thou have strengthened the weak hands, upholden those that
were falling, and strengthened the feeble knees.

I come now to the opening of the several expressions.

Thou have instructed many.] The word which we translate instructed, (...)
E^udivit, castigavit ut patres and praeceptoris solent pueros. Respondet
Graecoru^ (...) docere verbi. and verberibus.
signifies both to correct and to teach; and the Hebrews give the reason of
it, because usually with instruction, correction is joined; and so the same
Greek word signifies both to teach and to chasten: As there is a voice of the
Rod, instruction in correction, so a Rod sometimes goes with the voice,
correction is helpful to instruction: In either or both the senses, we may
understand it here, thou have instructed many, thou have taught and directed,
thou have (where need was) chastned and corrected many.

Many.] We have heard in the first Chapter, that Job prayed for his Children,
for his Sons and Daughters; but now we see Jobs piety extended further, than
his own children. Yea, the word may well be carried out, beyond his own family.
He prayed for his children, and not only did he pray for them, but also teach
and instruct them, and not only them, but others, he inlarges his School, he
instructs many; it is an indefinite word, a word of number without a number.
Jobs School of holy discipline was a large one, (...) Debilis, laxus, hinc
Rephaim significat mertuos, ex eo quod in illis omne robur and vires naturales
elanguerunt.
he set up his School where ever he came; he was an universal Teacher, an
Apostle of the old World; thou have instructed many.

And thou have strengthened the weak hands.] The word signifies, Remiss hands,
or the hands that hang down, loose and lax. Hence by a Metaphor it notes one,
that is negligent or idle; a man with his hands hanging down and his arms
loose, is the emblem of idleness or of sadness. Thou have strengthened the
Manus l^ssae and dejecta b^ach^a pertinent ad hab^^um aut molliter aut segni^er
ambulantis, aut cur^ere non valenti^. E contra vero adducere brachia, manus
comprimere, fortiter j^ctare cubi^os, strenue currentis est.
weak hands; that is, those that were idle or grieved, negligent or dejected.
Hence the word (Rephaim) is used, to signify those that are dead; and the
reason is, because all strength, natural vigor and activity depart, when life
departs: Giants also are expressed in the Hebrew by this word, because they
are such dreadful persons, that their very aspect or sight terrifies the
spirit, makes the hands hang down and the knees of beholders feeble; they
called those mighty men, weak, from that effect wrought upon others; because
they made others weak and tremble at their approaches. Hence, when Goliath the
Giant challenged and defied the Host of Israel, it is said, that all the men
of Israel when they saw the man, fled from him, or fled from his face (he
overcame them with his looks) and were fore afraid, 1 Samuel 17. 24.

This weakness of hands (as we find instanced in Scripture) arises four ways.

First, from sloth and idleness (as we noted before) some have strong heads,
but they have weak hands, they are sufficiently instructed, but they cannot
act, or they are unactive, and an unactive man is a weak-handed man.

Secondly, weakness of the hands comes from fear, and so that phrase, to
strengthen the hands, notes encouraging of a person, as Zech. 8. 9, 13. Fear
not, let thy hands be strong; that is, let not fear weaken thy hands: and Jer.
38. 4. the Princes came to the King and begged of him that Jeremiah might be
put to death; and they give the reason from this, For (say they) he weakneth
the hands of the men of war that remain in the City, and the hands of all the
people; that is, he discourages them, makes them believe they shall never be
able to stand out against the King of Babylon, but that he shall certainly take
the City; this is called weakening of their hands: So Isa. 35. 3. Strengthen ye
the weak hands and confirm the feeble knees, say to them that are of a
fearful heart, be strong, fear not. So ye see, weakness of the hands is caused
by fear; when the bands of the heart are dissolved (as it were) and loosned by
fear, the hand must needs be dissolved and loosned from labor; the hand is not
able to work at all, when fear works much upon the heart.

Thirdly, weakness of the hands arises from irresolution, when a man is not
resolved what to do, not settled upon a business, then his hands are weak. Hence
it was the counsel of Achitophel to Absalom, that he should go up upon the
house top, in the sight of all Israel, and abuse his fathers Concubines; and he
gives the reason of it, then (says he) shall the hands of all that are with
thee be 2 Samuel 16. 21.
strong; his meaning is, then they will be so resolved to stick to thee, that
they will do their utmost; he grounds his counsel upon the present
irresolution of the people, he doubted whether Absaloms party would adhere
cordially to him or no, therefore (says he) do an act which may render thy
self and all that are with thee irreconcilable to the King; this will unite
them to thee, and their hands will be strong. If once they be out of hope to be
received into the Kings favor, thou may be out of fear, that they will
return to the Kings obedience. In any lawful and good design it is best to
raise up resolution and engage it to the highest. Where the heart is strongly
resolved, the hands will act strongly. The reason why men are slow and dull in
great undertakings, is, because they are off and on, full of neutrality and
indifferency, in what they undertake. Unsettled spirits can never settle
actions. A double minded man is James 1. 8.
unstable (and weak-handed) in all his ways.

Lastly, there is a weakness of the hands (which is I conceive most proper to
this place) arising from sorrow and grief; from the weight and burden of
affliction, or from a sudden surprise of trouble. As it is said of Balteshazar
(Dan. 5. 6.) who seeing the handwriting upon the plaster of the wall,
presently changed countenance, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the
joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another.

Thou have strengthened the weak hands; that is, those whose hands are weak by
reason of manifold trialls and tribulations: thou have spoken words to them,
which have been as sinews to their hands, annd strength unto their joints. In
this sense the Apostle uses both the expressions of the Text, Heb. 12. 6. where
having treated about the nature of afflictions, together with the fruit and
benefit of them, he concludes thus, wherefore lift up the hands which hang down
and the feeble knees; as if he should say, it is probable that affliction has
made your hands hang down, that sorrow and grief have loosned your spirits and
your loins too, therefore now be of good cheer, lift up your hands that hang
down, and the feeble knees. Thie Symptom or effect of sorrow is elegantly
Columbis pr^ cantu gemitus est and inamoenu^ murmur. Sanct. in Ezekiel. cap 7.
described, Ezekiel. 7. 17. where the Prophet having showed that many should
mourn as Doves of the Valleys, adds, all hands shall be feeble and all knees
shall be weak as water.

Thy words have upheld him that was falling.] Some afflictions lie so hard and
heavy upon us, that they do not only weaken, but cast down: Job stood ready
to uphold such as were ready to fall; timely advice may catch a man before he
is quite down, and prevent his fall.

The word which we translate falling, signifies in its first sense, to (...)
from (...) Impingere and quod saepe consequitur ruere, cadere.
stumble or strike the foot against a thing, and so it is put for that which is
the consequent of stumbling, falling: he that strikes his foot or stumbles at a
thing, is in danger of a fall. So Isay 40. 30. The young men shall utterly
fall, it is this word, but doubled, falling they shall fall, that is, they
shall utterly fall. There is a threefold falling mentioned in Scripture.

1. There is a falling into sin, Gal. 6. 1. If a man be overtaken (...)
Praecipue significat peccata actualia, a (...) and (...), ad verbum praeter
cadere, cu^ scil. ultra rectam justitiae lineam cadimus, de erratis etiam
levioribus usurpatur, (...) in compositione minuit sensum.
in a fault: that word (like this Hebrew in the Text) signifies, a fall taken
by stumbling or by tripping upon any thing, that lies in the way. In this sense
we understand the fall of Adam, the fall of Angels, and the falls of the Saints.

2. There is a falling into affliction, a falling into trouble: So Prove: 24.
16. The just man falls seven times a day; that is, he meets affliction at
every turn, he falls into trouble almost at every step. Seven times a day, is
very often in the day, or often every day.

3. There is a falling under trouble. And of persons falling so, we are chiefly
to understand this Text. Many fall into trouble, who yet (through the strength
of Christ) stand firmly under trouble. Others no sooner fall in, but they fall
under it. The shoulders of some are not able to bear a light affliction, and
the afflictions of others are so heavy, that no shoulders are able to bear
them; the back breaks, the spirit sinkes under the load.

To such as these Job lent his hand, his shoulders: his counsel was as a
staff in their hands, as ligaments to their loins and knees. Job was well
skilled in setting props and buttresses of holy advice, to such tottering
souls. Thou have upheld him that was falling. We may take the words in all, or
either of these three interpretations, yet most properly of the latter.

Thou have strengthened the feeble knees. The Hebrew word for a knee signifies
(in the root) to bless or to pray, because in blessing (...) Genu quod flecti
solet in Benedictionibus et salutationibus.
and praying for one, or in saluting, we use to bow the knee. And here, what we
translate the feeble knees, is word for word the bowing knees; because when
knees bow and buckle or double under us, it proceeds from weakness and
feebleness: hence the bowing knee is called the feeble knee. Dan. 6. 5. it is
said of Belshazzar, his knees smote one against the other; he fainted, his
spirits sanke within him, then his knees (as a Symptom of his fear) beat one
against another. The hanging down of hands, notes a kind of despair in regard
of present evils: and feeble quaking knees, seem to refer to some expected
evil. Taking the words with that difference, Jobs work of love appears more
full; he not only upheld in present troubles, but labored to strengthen
against such as were to come. Thou have instructed many, and instructed them
many, even all these ways. We may note.

First, That to teach, instruct, and comfort others, is not only a man's duty
but his praise, for here Eliphaz speaks it in a way of commendation, though
with an intent to ground a reproof upon it. Job himself speaks of what he had
done in that kind, as a defense of his own innocence, Chap. 29. verse. 21. etc.
Unto me men gave ear and waited, and kept silence at my counsel, after my
words they spoke not again, and my speech dropped upon them; and they waited
for me as for the rain, and they opened their mouth wide, as for the latter
rain. This was his practice, and this was the praise of Job. That which the
Apostle speaks as a special qualification or gift of a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3. 2. is
an excellent, a noble qualification (...).
in any person, of what rank or degree soever, to be apt to teach.

Secondly, Consider who Job was; he was a holy man, one that had much
acquaintance and communion with God. Now though his friends mistook what was in
his heart, yet they hit right upon his practice; and we knowing both what his
heart was, by the testimony of God: and what his practice was, from the
testimony of men, may ground a second point upon it. That such as know God in
truth and holiness, are very ready to communicate the knowledge Quae autem est
ce^^^or eleemosyna, quod majus opus miserecordiae, quam docere rudes segnes ad
been agendum extimulare, labentem erigere, maestos cons^lari.
of God unto others. They who know God themselves, are desirous that others
should know God too. David (Psalm 51. 13.) promises and professes, that he
would communicate his experiences of Gods love, in pardoning his sin, when he
had tasted the sweetness of a pardon. Then will I teach transgressors thy
ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee: when my heart has learned
more of God, others shall learn more of God from my mouth. This is spiritual
charity, and it is the most excellent and noblest charity of all. Charity to
the soul is the soul of charity, charity to the better part, is the best
charity. In this sense also Job was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame,
by guiding them to see, Job 29. 15.
and by directing their feet to walk, in the ways of God. To give knowledge is
better then to give Gold. Instruction is the highest alms.

Thirdly, if we consider Job (of whom all this is affirmed) as he was a great
rich man, we may note thus much; That honorable and great men, loose nothing
of their honor and greatness by descending to the instruction of others,
though their inferiors. Some think it belongs only unto Ministers to
instruct; What we instruct? They resent it as a disparagement: they trust out
that work wholly into the hands of others. Where shall we find an Abraham (a
great Prince in his time) of whom God gave this Testimony, I know him that he
will command his children, etc. and they shall keep the way of the Lord: and
because he was willing to teach others, God condescends to teach him: Shall I
hide from Gen 18. 17, 18, 19.
Abraham that thing which I do. They receive most knowledge, who are most
ready to impart it. And we find before this, Abraham so successful in
teaching, that he had an Army of scholars in his house. The Text says, when he
prepared for that expedition to rescue his Nephew Lot, that he armed three
hundred and eighteen (...) Genesis 14. 14. Prove. 22. 6.
of his trained, catechized, or instructed servants. The word signifies, to
train in the Principles of Religion, as well as in the postures of war: being
the same used in the Book of Proverbs, for teaching a child the first elements
of holy knowledge. And that place of Genesis may very well comprehend both.

Fourthly observe, That charity, especially spiritual charity, is very
liberal and open-hearted. Job instructed not only his own, but he instructed
others, he instructed many; he did not confine his doctrine and his advice to
his own walls, but the sound thereof went wheresoever he went; he instructed
many. And if Job who had no special, no direct calling to it, were a teacher of
many: what shall we think of those, whose calling and business it is to teach,
and yet teach not any at all? their trade, their profession is to teach, yet
they are so far from teaching many, that they teach none, and which is worse,
they hinder teaching: they stop the mouth of the teacher, and (if they can) the
ear of the learner, they take away the key of knowledge. They neither open the
door themselves, nor suffer those that would. This is the very spirit of
wickedness. And blessed be God, whose mighty power has so graciously cast out
and dispossessed so many places of the Kingdom of these wicked spirits.

Further, taking those other parts of his instruction, as they respect persons
afflicted, who are here described by weak hands, and feeble knees, ready to
fall, unable to stand.

Observe first, That sore afflictions do exceedingly indispose for duty. Sore
afflictions make weak hands and feeble knees: the weak hand and the feeble
knee are (as I said before) emblems of one unfit for any business; unfit to
work, unfit to walk, when the hand is weak and the knee is feeble, what is a
man fit for? Great sufferings unfit us for action. Hence it is that the Lord
moderates the afflictions of his people, sweetens the bitterness, and takes
off the oppressing weight of them. God promises to come Isa. 57. 16.
with reviving, and that he will not contend for ever with his people. Why? A
principle Reason is, Lest their spirits should fail before me, and the souls
which I have made. Lest the spirits should fail; that is, lest they should
fail in their duties: the spirit cannot fail in the essence of it, the spirit
is of an eternal constitution; but it fails in the duty often. And if
afflictions lie too hard and too long upon a people, their spirits fail, their
faith fails, their courage fails, their labors cannot be laborious, to carry
on and carry out their work. Therefore when Job saw any under afflictions, he
endeavored to put courage into their hearts, and so strength into their hands.

Secondly, In the general we may note further, That the words of the wise have
a mighty power, strength, and prevalence in them. You see how efficatious the
words of Job were; Jobs instructions were strengthuings, thou have strengthened
the weak hands and feeble knees; his words were as stays to hold them up, that
were ready to fall: Eliphaz does not only say, thou did instruct many, and in
instructing thou did intend, it was thy design and aim to strengthen the
weak hands, but he speaks of what Job had effected and wrought; thy words put
sinews into the hands and knees of men that were weak and ready to fall, thy
words were as props to hold and bear up the spirits of those that were sinking.
Words wisely dispensed and followed, with the blessing of God, what can they
not do? God does the greatest things in the World by a word speaking? as at
the first he made the world it self by a word speaking; so he has done the
greatest things, and wrought the greatest changes in the World, by a word
speaking. When a word goes forth clothed with the authority and power of God,
it works wonders. How has it raised up sinking spirits? how has it made the
fearful undaunted, and the weak-hearted courageous? God by his word in the
mouth of a weak man overthrows the strong holds of sin, and by a word brings
every thought of man, into subjection to Jesus 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5
Christ. By a word he stops the mouth of blasphemy, and evil speaking; by a
word speaking, he makes a man deny himself; by a word he opens the eyes of the
blind, and makes the lame to run and leap like a Heart, in the way of holiness.

And I could wish that the word which I now speak, might (through the blessing
of God) have such an effect upon your spirits. O that it might strengthen all
weak hands and feeble knees, O that it might uphold all who are ready to fall;
we are cast upon knee-feebling, hand-weakning, yea, heart-weakning times: the
sight of those things which our eyes do see, and the hearing of those things
which our ears do hear, cause many to fear, and the spirits of some to fall.
Now a word invested with commission from God, to go and comfort, will master
all our sorrows, and dispell all these fears. If the Lord breathe upon a word,
that word will breathe lively activity into a very carcass. Look to those many
and gracious promises, made to those that mourn, and comfort will flow in.
Promises are the treasures of comfort: promises hold the Churches stock, they
are the patrimony of beleivers; it is their privilege and their honor, to be
called heirs of the promise. While Heb. 6. 17.
Christ and the Promise lives, how can Faith dye, or languish, eying a promise.

So much of the first branch of the minor Proposition in the third and fourth
Verses.

The second branch lies in the fifth Verse.

Now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest, it touches thee, and thou art
troubled. Thou have instructed many, thou have strengthened the weak hands, etc.
but now it is come upon thee, etc. That is trouble and affliction (...) Lassus
fuit corpore vel animo, prae lassitudine nescivit quid ageret.
are come upon thee.

And thou faintest.] The word signifies an extraordinary fainting; when a man
is so wearied and spent, that he knows not what he does, when his reason
seems tired, as much as his strength. So that the words, Now it is come upon
thee thou faintest, may import thus much; thou art in such a case, that thou
seem to be besides thy self, thou know not what thou do, thou
speak, thou know not what. The word is translated in the first Verse by
grieved: in other Scriptures by mad and furious. (Prove 26. 18.) As a madman
who casts firebrarnds, etc. And whereas we say (Genesis 47. 13.) the land of
Egypt fainted by reason of the famine, many render it, the land of Egypt was
enraged or mad because of In sanivit terra Egypti, nan propter famem nimiam
insanit homo. Furebat terra, i. e. tumultuabantur anno quinto famis mentem
ill^s adimente sane. Jun. in loc.
the famine; want of bread turns to want of reason, famine distracts. The
Egyptians were so extremely pinched with hunger, that it did even take away
their wits from them, and scarcity of food for their bodies, made a dearth in
their understandings. So there is this force in the word, Thou who have given
such wise and grave instruction unto others, from those higher principles of
grace, now it is come upon thee, thou art even as a mad man, as a man
distracted, not able to act by the common principles of reason.

It touches thee.] It is the same word which we opened before; the Devil
desired that he might but touch Job, now his friend tells him he is touched.

And thou art troubled.] That word also has a great emphasis in (...)
it. It signifies a vehement amazed trouble; as in that place (1 Samuel 28. 21.)
where when the woman, the Witch of Endor had raised up Samuel (in appearance)
as Saul desired, the Text says, that when all was ended, she came unto Saul,
and she saw, he was sore troubled: think what trouble might fall upon a man in
such a condition as Saul was in, after this acquaintance with the visions of
Hell, think what a deep astonishment of spirit seaz'd upon him, such disorder of
mind this word lays upon Job, Now it touches thee, and thou art troubled.

Observe hence first, To commend a man with a But, is a wound instead of a
commendation. Thou have instructed many, But, etc. How many are there who
salute their friends very fair to their faces, or speak them very fair
behind their backs, yet suddenly (as Joab to Amasa) draw out this secret
Dagger, and stab their honor and honesty to the heart. As it is said of
Naaman, 2 Kings 5. 1. He was an honorable man, and a mighty man of valor,
but he was a Leper. So, etc.

Observe secondly, Great afflictions may disturb the very seat of reason, and
leave a Saint in some acts, below a man. Some acts of holiness represent the
Saints as madmen to carnal men. So Paul appeared to Festus, and so to many of
his Corinthians, 2 Ep: cap. 5. v. 13. For whether we be besides our selves it
is to God. Workings of Grace are sometime so far above reason, that they seem
to be without reason. So some acts of infirmity represent the Saints to carnal
men, as madmen. A gracious man works so much below reason sometimes, that he
seems to be without reason.

Thirdly, note, That when we see any one doing ill, it is good to mind him of
the good which he has done. Eliphaz saw Job fainting, enraged as a madman, or
as a man astonished, he tells him of the wise and grave counsel and instruction
he had given before, consider what thou have done. As in the Revelation Christ
speaks to the Church of Ephesus, (Rev: 2. 5.) Remember from whence thou art
fallen, and do thy first works; when the Church did ill, then he tells her,
what she had formerly done well. So the Apostle, Ye did run well, having
begun in the Spirit, will ye end in the flesh: when he saw them run upon
fleshly ceremonies and ordinances, ye began in the spirit (says he) consider
that, and end as ye began. As in dispute and reasoning, a false conclusion
cannot be derived from true premises, so neither can it in practice or in
living. Holy premises conclude in holiness. He never began well, that ends ill.

Fourthly, observe, That the good we have done is a kind of reproach to us
when we do the contrary evil. When a man's latter actions contradict his
former, or when his actions contradict his professions, the former good is a
stain or blemish to him; It had 2 Pet. 2. 21.
been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then after
they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment given unto them.

Further, take this likewise, It is an easier matter to instruct others in
trouble, than to be instructed or take instruction our selves in our own
troubles. Even Job, holy Job could give those counsels of patience, and
meekness, and quietness under the hand of God, which he could not follow to
the full, when it fell upon himself. For though he did not fail to that
height, which Eliphaz implies in this reproof, yet fail he did. He had set
others a Copy, which he could not write by or imitate when his own turn came.
A good man may quickly give counsel, above his own strength to practice.

Observe lastly, It is a shame for us to teach others the right way, and to go
in the wrong our selves. Eliphaz seeks to shame and convince Job upon this
very ground, thou have done thus and thus, thou have taught others patience,
and thou art mad thy self: art thou not ashamed to complain and cry out of thy
afflictions, when thou have bid others be quiet and cheerful under them? It is
an excellent thing when our words are made visible, by our actions: as he said
in the Church story, The faith which is seen, is a great deal better, than
the faith which is heard; so we may say in another kind, the wisdom which is
seen in bearing of affliction, is far better than the wisdom which is heard.
Physician heal thy self. He saved others, himself he cannot save, say the
Jews to Christ. Man may justly be reproved with, thou teach others, thy
self Turpe est doctorem cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
thou can not teach. When the same fault which we reprehend in others, may be
reprehended in our selves, our fault is doubled, and the act not only sinful,
but shameful. The Apostle convinces the Jews mightily by this Argument, Romans
2. 19. Thou art confident that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a
light of them which are in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, etc. Thou
take upon thee all this, Thou therefore (says he) that teach another,
teach thou not thy self? thou that preachest a man should not steal, do
thou steal? He goes on, pressing it upon them, as matter of shame and blushing
that their actions ran so cross and contradictory to their own professions.

Thus we have opened the minor proposition or assumption of the first Argument,
couched in these two Verses; thou have comforted, instructed, and taught many,
yet when trouble comes upon thee, thou know not how to order thy self. Is
not this thy fear, thy confidence, the uprightness of thy ways, and thy
hope? Thus he gathers the conclusion, and from hence inferres Job a hypocrite
in Religion, or irreligious.

Is not this thy fear etc?] As if he had said, thy fear, thy confidence, thy
uprightness, thy hope, thy religion, call it what thou will, is but thus much,
or is but this.

Is not this thy fear?] In the first Verse of the first Chapter 'twas showed
what the fear of God is; part of Jobs character being thus given, A man
fearing God. Now Eliphaz by this first point of his Interrogatories, taxes Job,
in the first part of his character or commendation, Thou art reported to be a
man fearing God, is not this thy fear?

Fear is taken either for the whole compass of Gods worship, or for that
awfulnesse of affection with which we worship God, which we ought to mingle and
mix in all our actions and duties. Therefore (says the Apostle, Heb. 12.) Let
us have grace to serve him with reverence and godly fear. And Psalm the
second, Serve the Lord with fear. God is to be served in love, and yet God
loves no service which has not this ingredient, Holy fear.

Fear is the most proper affection which we creatures, dust and ashes who are
at such an infinite distance from God, can put forth in his worship. God
condescends so far as to be loved by us, yea he calls for our love as a
friend, or as a father, as a familiar, as one in near relation: but considered
in his Majesty, glory, and greatness, fear is the most suitable affection in
our approaches unto God. The name of God in some languages, is derived from
fear, and God is expressly called Fear by Jacob, Genesis 31. in that dispute with
Laban, where he tells him, Except the fear of his father Isaac had been with
him, etc. Verse 42 And Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac, Verse 53.
that is, by that God whom his father Isaac feared: Jacob was a man so holy,
that he would take nothing into his mouth to swear by, but only the holy Name
of God. Religious swearing is one of the highest acts of worshipping, as vain
swearing is one of the highest acts of profaning the name of God.

Thy confidence.] The word which we translate confidence, signifies (...)
Inconstantia, levitas per Antiphrasin, constantia, considen^ia.
also and that most properly, folly, inconstancy, levity; when the Prophet
Jeremy reproves the idolatry of those times, and speaks to worshippers of
Idols, he expresses it by this word, They are altogether brutish and foolish,
Jer. 10. 8. And holy David (Psalm 49. 13.) speaking of wicked men, who make
riches their portion, and who lay out all their endeavors, in the raising of
an outward estate, gives this account of their practice in the 13 Verse, This
their way is their folly: this is the course that worldly men take, and they
think it is a very wise course, but indeed their way is their folly. Some
translators read that text, this their way is their confidence, as here in
Job; and so they make the sense out thus; this way of worldly men in gathering
riches, in heaping up abundance of these outward things, is their confidence,
that is, they have nothing else to trust unto, they have nothing beyond the
world to trust unto this their way is their confidence. So again, Prove. 15.
26. A foolish man or a man of folly despises his mother. And once (...)
more, Psalm. 85. 8. where the Psalmist goes up like Habakkuk to his
Watchtower to hearken for an answer of his prayer, I will hearken what the
Lord will say, for he will speak peace unto his people, but let them not
return again to folly. So some read it in this Text of Job, is not this thy
fear, thy folly? that is, was it not mere folly for thee to brag and boast
of thy fear. sc. That thou did fear God, etc.

But the word is often taken in a contrary sense, as we translate, for
constancy or confidence, and sometimes for hope; and thus Job 31. 24. If I have
said to gold, thou art my hope, or my confidence; and Chap. 8. 14. speaking of
the Hypocrite, whose hope shall be cut off, the same word is used; and Prove. 3.
26. The Lord shall be thy confidence, and he shall keep thy foot from being
taken; and (not to heap many places) Psalm. 78. 7. That they may set their hope
in God. In this sense it is generally understood here, Is not this thy fear and
thy confidence, sc. all the trust thou have placed in thy God.

Fear and confidence are acts of natural worship. Confidence or Trust is the
resting of the soul upon another, here the resting of the soul upon the Word,
or promises of God, upon the power, faithfulness, and truth of God: an act
thus put forth by the soul, is confidence. Now says Eliphaz, is not this thy
confidence? thou have spoken much of resting and trusting upon God and his
Word, upon his power and faithfulness; is not this that which thou have all
this while talked of? See what a goodly confidence it is! Does it look like a
proper piece of grace?

Confidence is an act beyond faith; a soul confiding walks in a higher Region
of grace and comfort than a soul only believing; there may be believing, where
there is not this confiding. As patience is hope lengthned, so confidence is
hope strengthened. Assurance is the highest degree of faith, and confidence is
the highest degree of assurance. It carries with it, first cheerfulness
opposite to sorrow; secondly courage, opposite to fear and despondency of
spirit; thirdly, boldness and adventurousnesse opposite to cowardice.
Confidence having a good cause and a good call, will take a Bear by the tooth,
or a Lion by the beard. Fourthly, it notes boasting, or a kind of spiritual
wise bragging, opposite to sinful modesty or concealment of what God has
done for us. Or take it thus. Confidence is the noblest exercise of faith,
which looking steadily upon God in himself, and in Christ, through the
promises, raises the soul above all fears and discouragements, above all
doubts and disquietments, either about the removing of evil, or the obtaining
of good.

Hence confidence is well called the rest of the soul, therefore such as
attain to confidence are said to be in peace, in perfect peace. Isay 26. 3.
Him will thou establish in perfect peace, whose heart does trust upon thee.
And this act of confidence or trust is proper and peculiar to God, no creature
must share in it. This is worship commanded in the first precept, Thou shall
have no other Gods before me. Whatsoever we confide in unless it be in
subordination unto God, we make it our God. And it is one of the highest acts
of the soul, not only as we respect the taking in, our own comforts, but also
the giving out, glory unto God. This confidence is well coupled with holy
fear, the more we fear God so, the more we trust him; such fear is the
mother and nurse of confidence: But confidence is directly contrary, yea
contradictory to carnal fear; he that trusts God indeed, leaves both soul
and body, temporal and eternal estate with him, without ever sending a
fearful thought, or a jealous look after either. It follows:

And the uprightness of thy ways.] It is the word used in the description of
Job, Cap. 1. 1. There it is in the concrete, perfect, here in the abstract,
uprightness: We may read it, Is not this the perfection of thy ways?
Uprightness is the Saints perfection (...) a (...) Linea regula, sic veteres
He braei deducunt. Videtur Moses non sine magna emphasi hoc verbum usurpasse,
nimirum ad experimendam infinitam verbi Dei potentiam, qui fl^xum illud and
vagum elementum, totam superficiem ^e^rae occupans tanquam ad amussim and
perpendiculum in unum loc^m coegit Paulus Fagius, in prim. eaput Genesis
in this life. Uprightness may have a double notion, First, as it respects the
sincerity of our hearts toward God; Secondly, as it respects the justice and
equity of our actions, toward man. In both senses we may extend it here; Thou
have been reported for a perfect man, now if thou art perfect in thy being thou
would be perfect in thy working; if thou were upright in thy nature, thou
would be upright in thy actions; Now consider thy uprightness or
perfection, is not this the perfection of thy ways? is not this all, even that
lately discovered in thy impatient complainings?

And thy hope.] That word is derived two ways. First from a root which
siguifieth a line, rule or measure; so in Genesis 1. 9. Let the waters under the
Heavens be gathered together into one place, the word signifies a gathering
together by rule, as if God by that act, had measured out the water (that
unruly, turbulent, wandering element) and had brought it into compass, by a
rule or line, which it could not exceed or go beyond, without permission or
commission from himself: thereby giving us a mighty proof of his almighty
power and infinite wisdom. So some translate the word here, taking it to be
derived from that root, Is not this thy rule? Is not this the rule, that thou
have heretofore walked by, whatsoever thou have pretended? is not this the
uprightness of thy ways the course or measure by which thou have directed,
squared thy actions?

But secondly, rather the word is derived from (Kavah) which (...)
signifies to expect, hope or wait: and it notes a very vehement Expectavit.
Significat magna intention and corporis erectione expectare, atque id est quod
Paulus Graeco verbo dicit (...).
intention both of body and of mind, in waiting, expecting or hoping; when a
man waits (as it were) stretching forth his spirit or his mind, putting
himself out exceedingly to hope or wait for a thing Psalm. 37. 9. and Isa. 8.
17. the same word is used with the same emphasis. And that Greek word which
the Apostle Paul has (Romans 8. 19.) comes up fully to it, The earnest
expectation of the creature, etc. So the meaning here may be thus conceived, Is
not this thy hope, or thy earnest expectation? Is it not come to this now? Thou
have boasted much of thy hope, what treasures thou had laid up in that,
beyond all thy present possessions, is not all shrunk up to this, yea changed
into despair? thy desperate speeches give me ground to think so. Is not this
thy hope? So much for the words.

There are four interpretations given of this Verse. First, Some make out the
sense, by a different construction of the first particle in the Hebrew, which,
they translate, not (as we) Is not? but (...)
where is? so the vulgar and diverse others, reading it thus, Where is thy fear
and thy confidence, thy patience and the perfection of thy ways? As if he had
said, what is become of all those graces, of which thou have spoken, and with
which thou have been reported to be most richly endowed? where are they at this
time? in this day of thy trouble, in this day of thy trial? Taking the words
in that sense, they yield us these Observations. First,

That times of trouble are special times for the use of our graces. It is as
if Eliphaz had said, Thou thy self and all that knew thee have spoken much of
thy grace, but now is the time to use it, where is it? show it me now, where is
thy fear and thy confidence? if a man have been reported very skillful at his
weapon, when he comes into danger, then is the time to show his skill: and we
may say to him, where is thy skill now? where is thy art now? so we say to a
man that has had store of Weapons and Arms in his house, when the enemy
approaches, where is your Sword now? where is your Gun? where is your Artillery?
So here, Now, that thou have most need of thy graces, where are they? bring
them forth, are they to seek now? Is thy righteousness as the morning dew, and
as a cloud vanished away? Times of trouble will put every grace to a stresse;
and we had need look to it, that we have not our graces to seek, when we have
most need to use them; that when it shall be said unto us, where is your faith?
where is your hope? we may be able to hold them forth, and answer the question
in our actions, here they are, here is my fear, here is my confidence, here is
my hope, here is my uprightness; I can make proof of them, and render them
visible in my life: I can (through the strength of Christ) act them, and walk
according to the rule of every one of these graces.

Secondly, From the ground of this argument, which is, that true grace holds
out and perseveres unto the end: For hereby (says Eliphaz) I will convince
thee for an hypocrite, and that thy grace is but a shadow of grace, because it
is decayed and gone. This being the ground of conviction by these words, where
is thy fear? Observe,

That false grace, or a show of grace, fails us when we have most need of it.
A hypocrite seems to stand in grace, till he falls into trouble. When good is
in sight, he supposes he has a great stock of faith; He is joyful in
beleiving any thing, when nothing pinehes him: And when he enjoys what he
desired, he hopes as much as is promised: But when outward comforts are
withdrawn and ecclipsed, when he must live upon a word, and relieve himself
upon invisibles, when he has nothing in the creature to support him, and must
trust what he cannot see: then this phancie of faith, this vain hope, and
pretended confidence disappeare, and where are they? how much charity will
some make profession of untlll a real object of charity present it self?
then excuses are made, they have but little for themselves, times are hard they
may be suddenly cast into streights* they know not what a day may bring forth.
False charity, and false hope vanish when they should act their parts, and make
good what they have professed. As Christ speaks of the two houses, Matthew. 7.
One built upon the rock, the other upon the sand: these two houses were alike
skilfully and strongly built in all appearance; while the Sun shone, and the
weather was fair, none could discern, but that the house upon the sand, was
built as well, and might have stood as long as the other upon the rock; but
when the rain fell, and the floods came, when the winds blew and beat upon
the house, then it fell, the foundation failed, and all the fair
superstructions came down into the dust Where is the hypocrite with all his
faith and fear in a wet windy day? is he not like a house founded on the sand?
Or is not he and his goodly outside of holy fear and hope like the Apples of
Sodom (reported in History) which are fair to the eye, but touch them and
they crumble to ashes in your hand, so is the faith and the fear, the hope and
confidence of hypocrites: Where are these? they are no where, for they never
were.

Take the words in a second construction, and so they are thus rendered, Is not
thy fear thy confidence? and the uprightness of thy ways thy hope? So Mr
Broughton, Is not thy Religion thy hope? and thy right ways thy confidence?
and then the sense is, as if Eliphaz had thus spoken unto Job, Does it not now
plainly appear, that Satan charged thee rightly, that thou servest God for
ends of profit and outward comforts, seeing thou art thus impatient and
unquiet, when the hand of God takes away thy profit and outward comforts? Is it
not a clear argument, that thou heretofore did obey God, only to gain by
him, or because thou wast confident he would protect and save thee harmless,
he would bless and prosper thee with increase? Was not the uprightness of thy
ways this hope? that is, did thou not look to thrive by upright dealing
with men, and fair carriage in all thy actions? thou had no love to
Religion, none to Justice, thy love was to thy purse, thy profit; and thou
did believe, at least hope, that profit would come in at the door of the
Sanctuary, or else thou had never gone so often thither. This is the second
sense, praedicating the first term of the second, Is not thy fear thy
confidence? and is not thy uprightness thy hope? surely it is. This is a fair
exposition of the words, and from it we may observe. That,

A hypocrites profession of Religion is grounded on his confidence to gain by
it. Is not thy fear thy confidence? thy Religion was nothing else but a hope
to be rich. It was Satan's objection, and now Eliphaz (resuming and managing
Satan's argument) makes it his conviction. And it is a truth in the general
thesis, that the Religion or the fear of hypocrites, is nothing but their
confidence; they consider the word of promise, which God has given to those
that serve him; they in their thoughts surveigh the land of promise, and taste
the milk and honey of it: they read that God will give both grace and glory,
and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly, therefore
that they may be under the influence of these promises, or upon a confidence
that they shall receive golden showers out of these precious promises, and
dig abundant treasure out of these heavenly mines, they fear and worship
God, they are upright in their ways, and honest in their dealings among men:
Christ found it was love to the loaves, not to his doctrine, which brought so
many after him, Joh. 6. They liked a miracle to feed them, more than a Sermon
to instruct them: And were affected with the meat which endures to everlasting
life, only in subordination to the meat which perishes. How many say, at
least in their hearts, at this day, if I cast my self into such and such
courses of holiness, shall I not have credit and custom, good acquaintance
and profitable correspondence? In many men their wickedness is their
confidence, that is, the very reason why they are so wicked, is, because they
are confident they shall get by their wickedness; So those entisers said to
the young man, (Prove. 1. 11.) Come let us lay wait for blood, Ego furtum
facere volui nulla compuisus ege state sed fastidio justitiae; nec ea re srui
volebam quam furto appetebam, sed ipso furto and peccato. Aug. l. 3. Confess.
c. 1. and paulo post. Eram gratis malus, amavi defectum meum, non illud ad quod
deficiebam.
there was their wickedness; now at the twefth verse, you shall find, that
the rise of their wickedness was this confidence, we shall find all precious
treasure, we shall fill our houses with spoil. Some (I confess) have such a
spirit of wickedness, that they are wicked for wickedness sake: and they love
the very sin it self, more than the ends of profit or pleasure, which may
possibly follow the sin; but others act the sin, out of confidence they
shalll advance themselves by it: And so there are many, so refined in their
aims and hightned in the ways of holiness, that they are holy for holiness
sake, and religious for religions sake; yet there is a generation, whose
Religion is nothing but this confidence; I will cast in my lot with the godly,
I will take their way, shall I not fill my house with treasure, and raise an
estate by it? The Apostle speaks of such, (1 Timothy 6. 5.) Men supposing that
gain is godliness, and they are godly only that they may gain by it. Whereas
they whose hearts are perfect with God, love godliness, for Gods sake; and
they are holy, not out of confidence of gaining by it, but out of a delight in
acting of it; there is a beauty, an excellency in holiness which takes their
hearts; And they are above, not only this poor confidence, to be enriched by
it; but also above that rich, that heavenly confidence, to be saved by it, to
get Heaven by it. The fear of some, who are above the former, is yet but
equal to this confidence; they see there is no other way to be saved, to go
to Heaven but this. Now I say, holiness in the height and purity of it, keeps
under the respect of Heaven it self; it is so much above these things below,
that it is above those things above: That is a second sense.

Thirdly, The words are understood by diverse of the Hebrew writers, for a
direct and simple assertion, and they give it thus. Will not, or would not thy
fear be thy confidence? and the uprightness of thy ways thy hope? As if
Eliphaz had thus said unto him; Job thou have pretended much holiness and
Religion, fear and uprightness: why art thou so disquieted, now, that the
hand of God is upon thee? why art thou so amazed under these sufferings? would
not that fear be thy confidence? and would not that uprightness of thy ways
be thy hope? surely it would, if thou had any such fear as thou pretendest:
this fear would be thy confidence, and this uprightness thy hope; thou
would be very bold, and by hope cast Anchor upon the goodness and
faithfulness of God, in the midst of all this storm: thy heart would be
poised, settled and established, notwithstanding all these shakings. Would not
thy fear be thy confidence? It would. Hence observe;

First, That they who fear most in times of peace, have most reason Timidum
esse ad ^ala patrand^ genus est fortitudinis and fiduciae.
to be confident in times of trouble. They who fear most (in one sense) fear
least, they who fear God most, fear creatures least, and creature-troubles
least. We have this point in so many words, (Prove. 14. 26.) In the fear of the
Lord is strong confidence. The fear of the Lord is the cure of all other
fears. They who are most fearful of the evil of sin, are most courageous
among the evils of suffering. To be fearful thus, raises the highest acts
of confidence, Psalm. 112. 7, 8. We read of one that will not be afraid for any
evil tidings, his heart is fixed; Who is this confident man? this fearelesse
man? It is this divine coward (as we may call him,) you shall find him so
expressed, verse. 1. Blessed is the man that fears God, he shall not be afraid
for any evil tidings. Exodus 20. 20. When the people of Israel were much amazed
and astonished at the giving of the Law, Moses comes to cure them of that
fear; but what is the medicine? Fear not, for God is come to prove you, and
that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not. As if he had said,
when God has put his fear into your hearts, such fears as these will be
removed and vanish: when your hearts are filled with this fear of God, you
will have confidence to hear, and see the thunder and lightning of Mount
Sinai, you shall not fear, no not this terrible tempest, in which the Law it
self is given. So when the people were in a fear another time, Samuel thus
bespeaks them in that shaking fit, 1 Samuel 12. 20. Fear not, only fear the
Lord. If you will be confident in such a time as this (for by prayer he
procured thunder and rain in that time of wheate-harvest) fear the Lord. The
fear of the Lord will be our confidence in the wettest day, in the most
tempestuous and stormy night that ever fell upon the secure, sinful world. A
man fearing God is the only dread-nought.

Secondly, We may observe from the other branch, (for the sense is the same)
And would not thy uprightness be thy hope? The uprightness of a man's ways in
good times, does mightily strengthen his hope in evil times. When a man can
look back, and approve his heart to God, that he has been upright in peace
and plenty, how full of hope will he be in trouble and in wants? It was that
which Hezekiah pleaded before God, in the day of his trouble and trial, 2
King. 20. 3. I beseech thee O Lord, remember how I have walked before thee in
truth and with an upright and perfect heart. This was it, when he lay upon his
sickbed, and as he thought, upon his deathbed, that put life into him, and
bare up his spirit.

A fourth interpretatian is taken from our reading: Is not this thy fear, thy
confidence, the uprightness of thy ways, and thy hope? So the words contain
four distinct affrming Questions, Is not this thy fear? Is not this thy
confidence? Is not this the uprightness of thy ways? and is not this thy
hope? This is thy fear, etc. As if Eliphaz had said, Job, without doubt thou
have showed all thy goodness at once; or, Is not this all that thou art able
to make out and show? Is not this all that thou can say for, all the
testimony thou can give of, thy religion and holiness? Have thou not showed
all? Surely thy great boast of Religion is nothing but this. Eliphaz seems to
call Job to make a further or cleerer proof of his grace; Is not this thy
fear? or if this be not, show me somewhat else: Thou art a man very famous in
the world, much talked of, and highly commended, for fear and for confidence,
for uprightness and for hope; what have thou more to answer that report, and
save thy own credit, with the credit of thy friends, who have been so large in
their commendations of, and testimonies concerning thee? Note hence;

First, Afflictions discover that unto us, which before we knew not. Is not
this thy fear? thou did not know of what make or constitution thy fear
was, until now: That Is Eliphaz his supposition; and it is a truth; That some
hypocrites know not, that their graces are false, till they are brought to such
trials. They carry false, counterfeit coin about them, and suppose it current
money, till they come to the balance, or a touchstone. Some are active
hypocrites, who go about, intentionally to deceive and put a fair mask over a
filthy face Others are passive hypocrites, who are miserably deceived by the
collusions of Satan, and the base treachery of their own spirits. Many a man is
brought to see (which before he could not, by reason of those mists of
hypocrisy) what his fear is, what his faith, by those changes which
affliction works in him.

Secondly thus. We ought to make our graces visible in our actions. Is not this
thy fear? Show me what thy fear is, if this be not, make proof of it; The
Apostle bids Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 5. Make full proof of his Ministry. It may be
said to some Ministers, is not this your Ministry, if it be not, make full
proof of it; Or as the Apostle James, in a case near this, James 2. 14. 18.
Show me thy faith by thy works, so we may say, Show me thy fear by thy
works. Is not this it? if it be not, make it appear what it is; The tree is
known by the fruits; do men gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of thistles?
or, do men gather crabs from vines, or sloes from figg-trees? As an evil tree
cannot bring forth good fruit, so neither does a good tree bring forth evil
fruit. If thou say thou art a vine, make proof of it, by the fruit thou
bear, or else I must conclude, thou art but a thorn or a thistle. We may
question many for this grace, and for the other grace they pretend unto: For
their actions have not the least print or impression of such graces upon them;
If any one should hold forth much faith and confidence in God, and this man
should run or take unlawful courses, to help himself, might we not say, Is
this thy confidence? Or if one speaking much of confidence in God, for the
accomplishing of a business should yet sit still, and do nothing himself,
might we not say, Is this thy confidence? this is to tempt God, not to trust in
him. Once more if a man should profess much confidence in God, and yet be
taken up altogether about the creature, swallowed up with creature-thoughts, or
swallowing in creature-delights, seeking to, and engaging this creature, and
that creature, with neglect of God, may we not say, Is this thy confidence?
Hope is an anchor of the soul, but thou art driven with every blast, in this
thy hope? Hope makes Heb. 6. 1^.
not ashamed, but thou, either art, or ought to be ashamed, is this thy
hope? The fear of the Lord is clean, but thou art defiled, Romans 5. 5.
is this thy fear?

Then again consider this, when Job carries himself thus in his trouble,
Eliphaz tells him, what is not this thy fear? thou art surely but an
hypocrite, for if thy fear were true, it would have preserved thee from these
impatient complainings and distempers. Hence observe;

That true fear, holy fear, preserves the soul, and keeps it holy. Holy
fear, is as a golden bridle to the soul, when it would run out to any
evil: It is like the banks to the sea, which keeps in the raging waves of
corruption, when they would overflow all. If thou had fear indeed thou
would never thus break the bounds of patience. The fear of the Lord is to
depart from evil, that is the definition of it; therefore if thou had any
fear of God indeed, thou would never have done this evil, Curse thy day.
Prove. 14. 27. The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the
snares of death; that is, either from sin, which is spiritual death, or from
damnation, which is prepetuall death; the fear of the Lord is a fountain of
life, to depart from both these snares of death; where this fear is not, we
are ready to join with every evil, and so to fall into the jaws of every
death. Abraham (Genesis 20. 11.) argues so, The fear of the Lord is not in this
place, therefore they will kill me; when we perceive a bent of spirit, to
devise evil, and a readiness of the hand to practice it, (we may conclude)
the fear of the Lord is not lodged in that heart.

Fourthly, observe, That trust, or confidence in God, settles the heart in all
conditions. Is not this thy confidence? Thy confidence certainly is but a
shadow, for if it had been real, thou have been established and upheld,
notwithstanding all that weight of affliction that lies upon thee. When there
was an unquietness upon the soul of David, he first questions his soul about
it, Why art thou disquieted O my soul; and then directs, trust in God, Psalm.
42. 11. So the Prophet promises, (Isa. 26. 3.) Him will thou establish in
perfect peace, whose heart does trust upon thee. They that trust in the Lord
shall be as mount Zion, Psalm. 125. 1. He that is carried and tossed thus about,
with every wind of trouble and gust of sorrow, shows he has not cast out
this anchor of hope, upon the Rock Jesus Christ.

But here a question must be answered, for the clearing of all, and likewise
for discovering the strength or weakness of this argument brought by Eliphaz,
in this particular case of Job. Eliphaz taxed Job with hypocrisy; because his
graces did not act, or they did not act like themselves, like graces; he gave
not proof of them at that time. Hence the doubt is, Do a man's fallings or
declinings from what he was before, or what he did before, argue him insincere?
Is there sufficient strength in this Argument for Eliphaz to say, Job thou have
been a comforter of others, thou have professed much holiness heretofore, and
now thou art come to the trial, thou can not make it out thy self;
therefore thou have no grace, therefore all thy religion is vain.

For the resolving of that, I answer first, that the proposition is not simply
true, that every one who fails or declineth or falls off from what formerly
he was, or held forth, is therefore an Hypocrite, or that his graces are false,
and but pretenses; there may be many declinings and failings, many breaches and
backslidings, and yet the spirit upright. Indeed falling away and quite falling
off, are an argument of insincerity and hypocrisy; for true grace is
everlasting grace, true holiness endures for ever. Therefore we are here to
consider, whence these failings were occasioned in Job, and how a failing may
be expressed, and continue, so, as to conclude insincerity or hypocrisy.

First, it was from a sudden perturbation, not from a settled resolution. Job
was not resolvedly thus impatient and unruly: an unexpected storm hurried his
spirit so violently, that he was not master of his own actions; Job had not his
affections at command, they got the bridle (as it were) on their necks, and
away they carried him with such force, that he was not able to stop or stay
them.

Secondly, it came from the smart and sense of pain in his flesh, not from the
perverseness of his spirit. If the taint had been in his spirit, then Eliphaz
had a ground, a certain ground to have argued thus against him.

Thirdly, Jobs graces were hid and obscured, they were not lost or dead; the
acts were suspended, the habits were not removed; when the grace which has
been showed, is quite lost, that grace was nothing but a show of grace, painted
fear, and painted confidence: but in Jobs case there was only a hiding of his
graces, or a veil cast over them.

Lastly, We must not say he falls from grace who falls into sin; nor must it
be concluded that he has no grace who falls into a great sin: It follows
not, that grace is false, or none, because it does not work like it self, or
because it does not sometimes work at all True grace works not always
uniformly; though it be always the same in it self, yet it is not always the
same in its effects; true grace is always alive, yet it does not always act,
it retains life, when motion is undiscerned. Wherefore they who do not work
like themselves, or do not work at all (for a time) in gracious ways, are not
to be concluded as having no grace, or nothing but a show of grace.

And so much be spoken concerning this first Argument contained in these six
Verses, the conviction of Job, from his failing in the actings of his grace,
the putting forth of that fruit which formerly he had born and showed to the
world.

JOB. Chap. 4. Verse. 7, 8. Remember I pray thee, who ever perished being
innocent? or where were the righteous cut off?

Even as I have seen, they that plough iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the
same.


IN these two Verses and the three following, Eliphaz coucheth and confirms
his second Argument wherein he further bespatters the innocence of Job, and
hopes to convince him of hypocrisy. The Argument is taken from the constant
experience of Gods dealings in the world, Remember, I pray thee, who ever
perished being innocent? We may give it in this form.

Innocent persons perish not, righteous men are not cut off.

But Job, thou perishest, and thou art cut off. Therefore thou art no innocent
or righteous person.

The major proposition is plain in the seventh Verse; for that question, Who
ever perished being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off? is to be
resolved into this Negation, No innocent person ever perished, nor were the
righteous ever cut off. And Eliphaz conceives this to be so clear a truth,
that he challenges Job to give one instance to the contrary, out of his own
experience; he appeals to experience (which is a strong way of arguing)
Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished being innocent? show me the man, and
withal he professes, that he could give many instances or examples out of his
own experience, that wicked men have perished and were cut off, this he does in
the eighth Verse, Even as I have seen, they that plough iniquity, and sow
wickedness, reap the same; which he inlarges in the three following Verses, by
the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they
consumed, etc. This in general for the sum and substance of the Argument.

We will now consider the words, and examine the strength of it in particulars.

Remember I pray thee.] He handles Job tenderly in words, he speaks gently and
winningly to him, Remember I pray thee. To remember notes often in Scripture a
serious consideration of things present, and before us, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember
now thy Creator in the days of thy youth; that is, seriously bethink thy self
at the present, of God and his ways, and how thou ought to walk holily
before him. But properly to remember, is the calling to mind of things which
are past: and so Eliphaz in this place directs Job to search the Records; Go
and inquire into all the Monuments of Antiquity, look the Registers and
Histories of the Ages past, and see if thou can find any such thing as this,
A righteous man perishing.

Memory is the souls storehouse, there we lay up Observations, and from
thence fetch them out, as occasions invite. Hence Christ Matthew. 12. 57.
compares every Scribe which is instructed for the kingdom of Heaven to a
house-holder which brings forth out of his treasury things both new and old.
This treasury is the memory, there holy truths and profitable examples are
stored and reserved. Remember I pray thee.

In that Eliphaz sends Job back to former experiences, we may note, That it
is our duty to lay up and record the dealings of God, whether public or
personal, whether with the godly or with the wicked. It is our duty to observe
what God does, Psalm. 111. 4. He has made his wonderful works to be remembered;
as if the Psalmist had said, God has not wrought such great things in the
world, whether respecting persons or Nations, that we should write them upon
the water, or in the sand, which the next puff of wind defaces and blows
out; but he has made his wonderful works to be remembered; he will have them
written in brass, with a pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, that
all ages may hear the judgments and loving kindnesses of the Lord; he has
made his wonderful works to be remembered, or he has made them so, as that
they are most worthy to be remembered. David was a great observer of experiences
(Psalm. 31. 35.) he tells us, that he had (as it were) collected notes
concerning Gods dealings all his days; and it is to the very point in hand, I
have been young and now am old, yet never saw I the righteous forsaken;
himself carefully observed the dealing of God in this Psalm: and in the next
(Psalm. 37, 35, 36.) he gives the like direction to others; thus I have done,
do you take the same course too, I have seen the wicked in great power, and
spreading himself like a green Baytree; then he goes on, Mark the perfect man,
and behold the upright; I have considered the estate of wicked men, let all
observe the estate of the godly; Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright.
The works of God expound his Word in his works his Word is often made visible.
That Is an excellent expression, Psalm. 111. 7. The works of his hands are verity
and judgment; The acts of God are verity, that is, God acts his own truths? As
the works of our hands ought to be the verity and judgments of God, (every
action of a Christian should be one of Christ's truths) so it is exactly with
God himself, the works of his hands are his own verity and judgments. When
we cannot find the meaning of God in his Word, we may find it out in his
works: his works are a Comment, an infallible Comment upon his Word.

Yet we must take this Caution; the dealings of God in the surface and outward
part of them, appear sometimes contrary to his Word, contrary unto his promise,
but they only appear so, they are never so. When a man reads a promise and
finds much good stored up in it for the righteous, and then looks upon the
state of the righteous, and sees it full of evil; here is a seeming
contrariety between the Word and the Works of God, but it is only a seeming
contrariety, as we shall see somewhat further anon. Therefore in that Psalm
111. 2. where he says, The works of God are verity and judgment, he adds,
The works of God are sought out: if you will have the verity or judgment that
is in the works of God, you must not only look upon the outside of them, but
you must seek them out, study them, study them as you study the Scriptures,
and then you will find out the meaning of them, and see how exactly they
square with every part of the Word. Why does Eliphaz send Job to experience?
the ground is this; the works of God are like the Word of God; therefore if
thou can not make it out by experience from his works, thou can hardly make
it out, as a Position from his Word, that righteous persons are cut off.

Remember now I pray thee, who ever perished being innocent? or where were the
righteous cut off? Here are four terms to be opened, perished, cut off,
innocent, righteous. We will consider first what we are to understand by
perishing, and by cutting off. Secondly, whom we are to understand by innocent
and righteus persons. And then apply the whole sentence, by showing wherein the
truth of this proposition stands, that a righteous man or an innocent person
cannot perish or be cut off.

The word which we translate perished, has diverse significations. (...)
First, a returning to nothing, an utter consumption, which is to perish as a
beast, Psalm. 49. 20. the Holy Ghost describing a man who is not acquainted with
God in his great estate, compares him thus; Man being in honor, and not
understanding (sc. the things of God) becomes like the beasts that perish;
not that he perishes as a beast does, but he is like a perishing beast; the
similitude is not in perishing, but in his qualities who perishes, he has but
such qualities, he is (upon the matter) even of as gross a temper as a
perishing beast.

Secondly to perish signifies to dye. The dissolution of man, or the disunion
of soul and body, Isay 57. 1. is thus expressed, the righteous perish, that is,
they dye, as it is explained afterward, they are taken away from the evil to
come, they rest in their beds, sc. in their graves: so Matthew. 8. 25. Master
save us we perish, say the Disciples, when they thought they should all be
drowned. Lord help us, or else we all dye presently: and so we translate Job
34. 15. where Elihu speaking of the power of God, thus describes it; If he
should but show himself, all flesh (says he) shall perish together, that is,
all flesh shall dye, they are not able to stand before Gods power and
greatness: the word which he uses there, strictly taken, (...)
signifies to expire or give up the ghost, yet we translate it, all flesh shall
perish together; that is, they shall all give up the ghost and dye, if God
should appear in his power and greatness.

Thirdly, by perishing we may understand outward afflictions and troubles
falling upon, either godly or wicked: these are called a perishing (Josh. 23.
13.) Joshua tells the people, If you will not obey and walk according to the
Commandments of God, ye shall quickly perish from off this good Land; that is,
ye shall be removed by outward afflictions from your Land, you shall go into
captivity And so, if I perish, I perish, says Esther, Chap. 4. 17. that is, if
I bring trouble and affliction upon my self, let it be so, I will venture it;
A Syrian ready to perish was my father, Deuteronomy. 26. It is meant of Jacob a man
much verst in trouble, as he himself acknowledges, Few and evil have been
the days of my pilgrimage.

Fourthly, to perish, notes eternal misery; as it is put for the miseries of
this life, so for the life of misery, for that life which is an everlasting
death. John 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave Omnimodam rei
perditionem significat, o^p^^ni^u^ enim generationi.
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life: perishing is opposed to everlasting life, and
therefore implies everlasting death.

Fifthly, to perish, notes utter desolation, and total ruin. A cutting off,
or a destroying the very name and remembrance of a person, or of a people. He
that speaks lies shall perish, Pro. 19. 9. that is, he shall be utterly
destroyed. In this sense the word is used for the Devil, because he is a
destroyer to the utmost, as Christ is a Savior to the utmost. He is called
Abaddon from Abad (the word here used) Rev. 9. 12. and Apollyon, his business
is to destroy totally and eternally. Thus also Antichrist, The firstborn of
the Devil (2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.) is called the son of perdition: take it actively,
he is a destroying son, one that destroys bodies and souls, as in
Scripture a bloody man is called Ish dammim, a man of blood; and passively, he
is a son of perdition; that is, a man to be destroyed both body and soul.

These two latter senses, namely, eternal destruction in Hell and utter
destruction in this life, are joined together. Prove. 15. 11. Hell and
destruction (or Hell and perishing) are before the Lord: and Chap. 27. 20. we
have the same words again, Hell and perdition or Hell and destruction are
never full. So that to perish (in a strict sense) notes even in this life an
utter extirpation; so some render (...) Abscondit, ne amplius auditur vel
videatur, per metonymiam sublatu^, doletus succisus. Sublata enim e medio non
apparent amplius sed absconduntu^. (...)
it here, Who ever saw the righteous plucked up by the roots, so as there
should be no remembrance, no remainder of them. The other word which is joined
in the Text, cut off, carries the same sense; though it signifies properly to
hide a thing, yet it is so to hide it as it appears no more, or so to hide
it, that it can neither be heard of, nor seen any more. Hence by a Metonymie it
signifies to take away or to cut off, because things that are taken away and
cut off, are as things hidden and seen no more. Here then is the height of the
sense, either to take it, for perishing in Hell, or for such a perishing in
this life, as is joined with total desolation and desertion.

Then for the terms, innocent and righteous. The word we translate innocent,
signifies empty. And it is therefore applied to an innocent person, because
innocent persons are emptied of malice and wickedness, their hearts are swept
and cleansed, purged and washed; there is in some sense a vacuum, a holy vacuum
in the hearts of holy persons: they are freed from that fullness of evil which
lies in their hearts by nature, that filth is cast out. Every man's heart by
nature is brim full, top full of wickedness, as the Apostle describes the
Gentiles, Romans 1. 29. being filled with all unrighteousness; and it is a truth
of every man's heart, it is a Cage full of unclean Birds, a stable full of
filthy dung, he has in him a throng of sinful thoughts, a multitude of
profane ghests lodging in him. Now a person converted, is emptied of these,
these ghests are turned out of their lodgings, the rooms are swept and
emptied, therefore an holy person is called an empty person: Emptied; not
absolutely emptied of all sin, but comparatively, there is abundance cast
out; so that considering how full of sin he was, he may be said to be emptied
of sin, and that his malice is cast out. In the fourth of Amos, the Prophet
threatens cleanness of (...)
teeth it is a suitable judgment, that unclean hearts and lives should be
punished with clean teeth) or innocence of teeth; for it is the word of the
Text. Famine is elegantly so called. Want of bread makes empty or clean teeth.

And where were the righteous (that is the other term) cut off? One may put the
question, where were the righteous? surely Job had very good eyes, if he could
find any righteous man upon the earth, he might seem to have clearer eyes then
the Lord himself, if he could find any righteous; God looked down from
heaven, and he saw none righteous, no not one, Psalm. 53. 3, 4. Yet here Eliphaz
bids Job enquire about the righteous, where they were cut off. To clear that.

By righteous here, we are to understand not righteous persons in a strict and
legal sense, but in a Gospel mollified sense: righteous with an allay,
righteous by way of interpretation, and not in the strictness of the letter.
And so men are called righteous, first in reference to the work of
regeneration. There are none righteous in the root or original, in their first
setting and plantation in the soil of the world; but there are righteous
persons as regenerate, and transplanted into the body of Christ, as wrought and
fashioned by the Spirit of Christ.

Secondly, there are none righteous, that is, none exactly, perfectly,
completely righteous, but inchoatly, and intentionally, so many are righteous
and are called righteous in the language of the Scripture.

Thirdly, there are none righteous, that is, none righteous by way of merit or
desert, none are so righteous as that they can challenge any thing at Gods
hand, of right, the most righteous person is an unprofitable servant; he has
nothing to plead before God but free grace. Nothing to show unto God but
Christ's fullness, and his own emptiness, the riches of Christ, and his own
poverty. Yet there are righteous in Gods acceptance, he accounts and
accepts them for righteous, and honors them to be called righteous.

Lastly, we may answer it thus, there are none righteous in themselves, or from
themselves, none have any righteousness of their own making: but the Scripture
shows us those who have righteousness, and are righaeous in another and from
another; we have the righteousness of justification in Christ, and the
righteousness of sanctification from Christ: righteousness is both imputed
to, and flows into the soul by virtue of the union which is promised in the
covenant of grace with Christ the righteous, with the Lord our righteousness.
In these respects there are righteous persons, and of such we may understand
this enquiry, where were ever the righteous cut off? The righteous by
regeneration, the righteous by inchoation, the righteous by acception, or the
righteous by imputation; where were any such righteous in all the world of whom
thou can say, they have ever perished, or have been cut off?

Having opened the sense of the single terms, we will look to the sense of the
proposition, and consider wherein we may clear the truth of it, that innocent
persons do not perish, or that the righteous are not cut off.

Take perishing or cutting off in the first sense, namely, for annihilation and
returning to nothing; and so, neither righteous nor unrighteous, guilty nor
innocent can perish; no man shall perish so, man is of an everlasting make.

Then take perishing in the second sense, as perishing is put for dying and
going out of the land of the living, thus all righteous and innocent persons
perish and are cut off, namely, by the sword and sith of death: we may say
all, God indeed has made some few exceptions out of the general rule, but the
Statute is plain, It is appointed unto all men once to dye; Enoch was
translated, and so was Elijah, and many shall be found alive when Christ
comes to judgment, who shall not die; they shall be but changed, and have a
metaphorical, not a proper death; This makes some small abatement from, but
does not cross the general rule, that all must die.

Take perishing in the third sense, for some temporal outward suffering in the
world, either from the hand of God immediately, or mediately from the hand of
man. Thus righteous and innocent persons may perish too, that is, they may fall
under fore and great afflictions: thus righteous Abel perished, and thus Jacob
was a Syrian ready to perish, and thus the godly party among the Jews, in the
time of the captivity perished, thoy perished from off the Land, as it was
threatened, Josh. 23.) with the rest of the wicked; of which the two baskets of
figgs, one bad, and the other good, were a famous type, Jer. 24. 3.

And in regard of this outward, present, temporal perishing, we find it
often, that the righteous perish, while the unrighteous flourish; Psalm. 73. 12.
Behold (says David) these are the ungodly, that prosper in the world; and at
the fourth verse, All the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every
morning. As sure, or as soon as I rise, I have a whipping, and my breakfast
is bread of sorrow, and the water of adversity; these prosper, and I perish:
And the Prophet (Jer. 12. 1, 2.) expostulates with holy submission about this
flourishing estate of the wicked, and perishing estate of the godly: Wherefore
does the way of the wicked prosper, etc. And in the next verse, Thou have
planted them, yea they have taken root, they grow, yea they bring forth fruit:
What a gradation is here of the flourishing prosperity of wicked men, while the
righteous seem to wither? Thou have planted them; but every tree that is
planted, does not take root, but these take root,; Every tree that takes
root, does not grow up to any strength, but these take root, and they grow:
there are trees that grow, yet they bring not forth fruit, but these bring
forth fruit also; Yea (says he) they bring forth fruit; these were flourishing
trees indeed, yet in the mean time, thousands of righteous persons perished in
and by outward troubles.

Sometime (we find on the other hand) that the wicked perish in outward
troubles, while the righteous are delivered, and have Arkes provided to save
them in a common deluge. God makes that difference sometime, even in this life;
he pulled Lot out of Sodom, while Sodom perished by fire: And righteous Noah
was saved in the Arc, while the world of the ungodly perished by water.

And lastly, Both the righteous and the wicked, may be wrapped up in the very
same outward perishing condition, yet always with a difference; though both
alike perish, yet their perishing is not alike. As it is with the righteous and
wicked in regard of sin, so of sufferings: they may both commit the same
sin for the matter, as it is a transgression of the Law, but a righteous man
can never sin as the wicked; he sins not, with such formalities of sinning,
he has not such a heart, such a temper and bent of spirit, as a wicked man
has in sinning: to sin so, is utterly inconsistent with the new nature. Thus
also it is with the perishings, afflictions, and troubles which they fall into;
God sometimes sends the very same affliction for the matter, as suppose
poverty, want, imprisonment, captivity, and the like, upon the one, as upon the
other: But are the righteous smitten, as God smites those that smite them?
Surely no, in measure he debateth with them. Isa. 27. 7, 8. They sin not
against God with the same heart, or at the same rate as the wicked do: and God
never strikes them with the same heart, or at the same rate as he does the
wicked; he cannot do it, the strength of his love to them, makes this
imposition for him. Therefore, though as the Preacher resolves the case,
Eccles. 9. 1. No man knows either love or hatred, by all that is before him:
In the matter of events, love or hatred are not visible; yet in the manner of
events there is much love and hatred visible: and the spirits of such as are
under those events, may discern love or hatred, when no eye can: One sees
hatred, and another sees love, abundance of love mixed in his cup of sorrow.
God never gives his own, a cup of pure wrath to drink; there are always some
ingredients of comfort and sweetness put into it. This is the third sense, how
righteous ones may, or may not perish.

Take perishing, in the fourth sense, as perishing is an eternal destruction;
and so the proposition of Eliphaz is true throughout, strictly true; That no
righteous, ever perished, or were cut off; an innocent person is, in that
sense, past perishing; a righteous man is past cutting off. Joh. 10. 28. I do
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish. Rejoice in this, ye
righteous, ye are beyond perishing, ye are past perishing, while ye live in a
perishing world.

Lastly, Take it in the fifth sense, and so you may have a further truth, which
I conceive, is that which Eliphaz purposely aims at; take perishing, for
outward present destruction, joined with a total desertion; and in that sense
the proposition of Eliphaz is true also; No righteous man, no innocent man ever
perished, or was so cut off with any temporal judgment: The Apostle is direct
for it, (2 Cor. 4. 8, 9.) We are in trouble on every side, (we see trouble
which way soever we turn) but we are not distressed, we are perplexed (we are
in the briars as well as ungodly men) but not in despair, (we are in hope
still, and if there be hope for us, God is for us:) We are persecuted, but not
forsaken, (God is near us, though all the world stand aloof,) we are cast
down, but not destroyed, we shall up again. So that while he admits of
perishing in the former sense, respecting outward afflictor, yet he denies it
constantly in this latter sense, so as to be cut off quite from the comforts
and supports of God. That observation of David, may be thus understood, (Psalm.
37. 25.) I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, (he does not say, in my experience I never saw the righteous
afflicted, but, I never saw him left or forsaken in his afflictions) and I
never saw his seed begging their bread: he puts in that, because begging of
bread, especially in the Commonwealth of Israel, and in the state of the
Jews, was a note of utter dereliction; for though God had told them, that they
should have the poor always with them, yet he had given an express Law, that
there should be no beggar among them; therefore, says he, I have not seen the
righteous so forsaken, that they should be forced to live by begging.

If any say, that David himself begged, he asked bread of Abimelech Casus
transitorii non reddunt mendicum.
and of Nabal. I answer. It is a good rule, and it resolves the case;
Transitory cases, and sudden accidents, make no beggars: we must not say,
David was a beggar, or begged his bread, because once he was in a strait, and
asked bread of Abimelech; and in a second strait, sent to Nabal; In such
sudden cases, the richest man in the world, may be put to ask a piece of
bread. A good man may fall into such wants, but good men are rarely, if ever or
at all left in them.

Now to apply it particularly to the intent of Eliphaz in this place. We have
given three interpretations, in which we have showed, how righteous men may
perish; and two, wherein the righteous cannot possibly perish; in both which,
the words here spoken by Eliphaz, are a truth. And concerning the fifth and
last, I conceive, Eliphaz is particularly to be understood: For he speaks not
here of the eternal estate of Job (though that be involved) when he concludes
him a wicked man; but he speaks of the dealings of God in temporals: He looked
upon Job as a lost man, a man utterly forsaken of his God; as a man of a
forlorn hope, cut down, and plucked up, root and branch; when he saw his
stock consumed, his children slain, his body diseased, and his spirit so
distempered. And so the minor, or the assumption only is false, the
proposition true; Righteous men do not perish thus, innocent persons are not
thus cut off; but thou Job perishest and art cut off: Hold there, that is false;
Job in the sense Eliphaz intended, perished not, was not cut off; for in the
sequel, God gave him both comfort and deliverance: Love was mingled with the
affliction, strength was ministered to bear the affliction: and at last a
gracious way was made out of the affliction. The blessing of God, caused him to
spring out again: though his goodly branches were broken, and his fruit plucked
off, yet his roots were not plucked up.

It will not be unnecessary, for the clearing of this Scripture, to subjoyne a
reason, why in the Old Testament, or under the old Covenant, there was so much
stumbling at the afflictions and troubles of the righteous; for it put even a
David, a Jeremiah, and a Habakuk Psalm. 73. Jer. 12. 1.
hard to it, for an answer, when they saw such under sufferings; the reason was
this, because God in those times, made more special temporal promises to his
people, in case of obedience, than he has done in the time of the Gospel.
Read Deuteronomy. 28. Levit. 27. and other places, where you shall find, how all the
promises run upon things, that concern the outward man; they shall be
blessed in their basket and in their store, they shall have this and that, and
all outward things abundantly; and the curse threatened, was the loss and
deprivation of those outward blessings in case of disobedience: For God did
win and carry them on, in that nonage of the Church, by outward and
temporal promises; hence they were much troubled and offended, when they saw
righteous men under heavy pressures and breaking afflictions. Now since the
coming of Christ in the flesh, and the pouring out of those special
spiritual blessings upon his people, by the Holy Ghost, he does not feed us so
much with these outward hopes, or enjoyments. Therefore in the Gospel, we read
what hard meat he gives his people: foretelling them plainly, If any will
follow me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross: There is scarce such
a word in all the old Testament as that: he which will follow me, shall find a
cross, and be sure of persecution; They were but children, such words and
sights might terrify them; therefore they were (as it were) dandled on the
knee, and allured by sensible comforts, a land flowing with milk and honey, if
they did obey; and they heard of rods and stripes in case of stubbornness and
disobedience; Say to the righteous, it shall be well with him, for they shall
eat the fruit of their doings: Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with him,
etc. Isa. 3. 10, 11. David says (indeed) many are the troubles of the
righteous, but (it is not put among the terms of their state or service) It is
not said, if ye will be righteous, ye shall have trouble. Moses never told
them, If any will be my disciple, let him taka up his cross, etc. So then,
Gods dealings and dispensations being most in outward things at that time, they
were very apt to stumble at the cross. And there is greater reason why they
should stumble at a molehill, then we at a mountain of trouble: God having
told us, that seeing he has given us such excellent things in Christ, such
glorious mercies, and transcendent privileges in the Gospel, we may well take
afflictions and troubles into the bargain, and never shrink or strain at
them, but rather take them well. So much for that verse, The righteous are not
cut off, neither do innocent persons perish.

Eliphaz having given Job his turn to search his experiences, brings forth his
own, in the next words: Even as I have seen, Verse. 8.
they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same; As if he should
say, Job, I know you are not able to give me one instance of a righteous man's
perishing, but I could give you many and many instances, I could write whole
books concerning wicked men perishing, and of the ungodly cut off; This he
carries under a metaphor, and by continued metaphors, makes up an elegant
allegory, in those terms of plowing, sowing, reaping.

Even as I have seen.] That word notes, a curious observation; (...)
Significat non simpliciter videre, sed curiese inspicere.
not a light transitory glance of the eye, but a critical consideration of any
thing. As it is said, Genesis 1. 4. God saw the light that he had made, God saw it
discerningly, for he found it was very good: And so it is said, Genesis 34. 1, 2.
that Dinah went forth to see the daughters of the land, that is, curiously
(though vainly) to observe the manners and fashions of the people; and in the
fame verse, Hamor the son of Sechem saw her, he saw her so exactly, as to be
taken with her beauty, his eye entangled his heart, and both entangled his
life. So here, Even as I have seen, that is, by a diligent inspection, and
judicious consideration of what I saw. And what was that? Mystical Husbandry.

They that plow iniquity and sow wickedness, reap the same. They that plow
iniquity.] The word which we translate to (...) F^dit fundam, ^ravit. Pe^
metaphoram fodit cogitatione, vel intentus fuit rei ali^ui conficiendae sicut
arator praeparat terram ante semina^orem*
plow, signifies the use of any kind of art or manufacture; as the work of a
Smith, or of a Carpenter, in Iron, wood or timber; And as the art, so the
Artist or handicrafts-man (Isa. 44. 12.) is expressed by this word: The Smith
with his tongs, works in the coals. And Zech. 1. 20. It is put for a
Carpenter, The Lord showed me four Carpenters: Now here it is applied to the
Plowman, and to his plowing. So Hose. 10. 13. Ye have plowed wickedness, ye
have reaped iniquity, ye have eaten the fruit of lies*

And this plowing of iniquity, or plowing of wickedness, takes in both the
outward act of sin (to plow iniquity, is to commit and practice iniquity) and
the inward act of sin, to plow iniquity, is as much as to devise and meditate
iniquity. Prove. 3. 29. Devise not (Heb. plow not) evil against thy neighbor.
So Prove. 6. 18. A heart that devises, or ploweth, wicked imaginations. And
Prove. 21. 4. The plowing of the wicked is sin; That is, whatsoever they
devise, or whatsoever they do, inside and outside, the cloth and linings of
their garments are all sin.

Likewise this word denotes, not only speculative evils, but also secrecy of
practice; or a plot carried and acted secretly. Thus (2 Samuel 23. 9.) it is
said, David knew that Saul secretly practiced evil against him; The Hebrew is,
he knew that Saul plowed evil against him. So that it may be taken, either for
the meditating of evil, or for a politic close way of effecting any evil or
wicked design.

And the Scripture elegantly calls the musing or meditating of sin, plowing,
because a man in meditation, (when he would accomplish any wickedness) turns
up (as it were) all the corruptions that are in his heart, and all the
conveniences that are in the world, to attain his end. As a man that
meditates upon any holy thing, upon Christ, or Free Grace, etc. turns up all
the graces and abilities, that are in his spirit, he plowes up his heart, that
he may fetch up the strength, and enjoy the sweetness of them.

So then this ploughing notes two things chiefly; First, the pains and labor
which wicked men take in sinful courses, every one that sins does not plough
sin, or is not a worker (which is an equivalent phrase) of iniquity.
Secondly, it implies the black Art and hellish skill of wicked men in sinning.
To plough is a skill, and so is some kind of sinning (though to sin in
general, be as natural as to see, and needs as little teaching as the ear to
hear (some men (^s we may say) are bunglers in sinning, others are their
crafts-masters at this plough, and can lay a furrow of iniquity so strait, do
an act of filthiness so cleanly, that you can hardly see any thing amiss in
it; Those words in the New Testament, To commit sin, to work iniquity, an
abomination, or a lie, Rev. 21. 27. etc. are answerable to this in the Old
Testament, a plougher of iniquity.

And some translate this Text so; the vulgar reads it thus, They Qui operantur
iniquitatem.
who work iniquity; all which expressions set forth and elegantly describe
such, who sin resolvedly, industriously, cunningly, curiously, such as have
the art (and will spare no pains) to do wickedly. These have served an
apprentiship to their lusts, and are now as Freemen of Hell, yet still Satan's
Drudges, and active Engineers to plot and execute what God abhorres.

Note this further, that ploughing in Scripture referres both to good actions
and to bad; there is a plowing for good, the Metaphor is so applied, Prove. 4.
27. Do not they err that devise evil? (that plough evil) but mercy and
truth shall be to them that devise good, (to them that plough good) the same
word is used in both; and it intimates (as before) both the pains and the
skill which a godly man bestows and shows about holy things: the great work
of repentance is often allegorized by ploughing, Break up the follow ground:
and our obedience to the Gospel, whether in the profession or preaching of it,
is called ploughing, Luke 9. 62. He that puts his hand to the plough and
looks back, is not fit for the kingdom of God. Grace is as active and as
accurate as Lust can be.

It follows, And sow wickedness, reap the same. Eliphaz goes on with the
Metaphor, after plowing comes sowing, and after seed time, reaping time or
harvest. Sowing in Scripture is diverse ways applied unto the actions of men.

First, there is a sowing which is the work of charity, when we dispense and
drstribute to the help of the poor, especially to the Saints; so 2 Cor. 9. 6.
He that sows sparingly; that is, he that gives unto the poor sparingly.

Secondly, sowing is applied to the preaching of the Gospel, to the scattering
of the Word in at the ears, and into the hearts of men, Luke 8. 5. A sower
went out to sow.

Thirdly, sowing is applied unto the burial of the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 42. that
which is sown in weakness, the bodies of men are as seed in the earth, they
shall spring up again.

Fourthly, sowing is applied to repenting tears, they that sow Psalm. 126. 5.
in tears; that is, they that go on repenting and mourning, shall reap in
joy; they shall have sheaves of comfort.

And fifthly, it is applied generally unto any action good or bad, Gal. 6. 8.
He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption, and he that
sows to the spirit, etc. Sowing (as ploughing) is used in regard of doing
good and evil, sow to your selves in righteousness, says the Prophet; and
here on the other side, They that plough iniquity and sow wickedness. Here is
the progress of sin: sin goes on gradually, there is not only a
ploughing but a sowing; sin is the seed, and there is a seminall virtue in
every sin, it will spring up again and bring forth an hundred fold more in
misery, to the whole man, flesh and spirit, then ever it gave in delights unto
the flesh.

The word which we translate [wickednesse] signifies weariness, (...) Seminant
dolo res. Vulg.
labor, perverseness; because wicked persons weary and toil themselves in
serving and satisfying their lusts. Numb. 23. 21. I have seen no perverseness
in Israel. God did not find them laboriously and industriously wicked at that
time. To do wickedly is a wearisome employment, a hard labor. The vulgar
Latin renders it by sorrow; and sow sorrows.

Reap the same.] The Apostle 1 Cor. 15. 37. tells us, That the Husbandman
sows not the same body, that shall be, how then is it said, they sow
wickedness and reap the same? when they come to the harvest, what shall they
have? The same says Eliphaz. It is true, A man that sows, does not reap the
same, individually, or numerically; that is, the very same particular seed; but
he reaps the same specifically, the same in kind; that is the meaning here,
their crop or harvest shall be like their seed time, Gal. 6. 7 Whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap, the same in kind, not the same in number.
Prove. 22. 8. He that sows iniquity shall reap vanity. It is not the sin it
self, which is reaped, but the fruit, the product of that sin; that, they
shall reap; the punishment of sin is the fruit of sin, and it is called the
same: Punishment is a visible sin. Thy way and thy doings have procured these
things unto thee, this is thy wickedness, Jer. 4. 18. The bitter things
procured by wickedness, are called wickedness. As the sweet fruits of our
good works, are called our works. Rev. 14. 14. Blessed are the dead that dye
in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them:
their works follow them, how? Not their works in kind, the very same
individual works, which they have done here follow them not (for they are
transient acts and have no subsistency) but the fruits of those works, and the
blessings, which lie in the promise for such as do those works, these fruits,
these blessings follow them: the blessings annexed to faith, obedience, and
holiness, these follow them. So now, when it is said of a wicked man, what he
ploweth and sows, he reapeth the same, it is to be understood of the same
thing in the issue and consequents of it, those curses, those treasures, that
harvest of wrath, which lie in the threatenings against him, these are rained
down upon him* and are made the portion of his cup.

Again [the same] that is, the same in degree; if he have sown much, he shall
reap much, if he have sown but little, he shall reap but little, he shall
have his due proportion. The justice of God does neither commute nor compound
penalties with wicked men: as it will not wrong or overcharge, so neither will
it favor or spare them in their sins. God spared not his Son, when he was
in the place of sinners, Romans 8. 32. much less will he spare any sinner, who
is not in his Son. So much for the opening of these words. We shall now
observe some things from them.

Even as I have seen, they that plough iniquity. Hence we learn, first, That
to be a wicked man is no easy task; he must go to plough for it: It is
plowing, and you know plowing is laborious, Beli^l, de luci potest a (...) q. e
Non and (...) q. e. lugam, ut significatur impatien^ia Jug^. Hie^on.
yea it is hard labor. Wicked men in Scripture are called Sons of Belial,
that is, such as will not endure the yoke; they will not endure Gods yoke, or
the yoke of Christ, though it be an easy yoke: but they are content slavishly
to yield their (otherwise) proud and delicate necks to Satan's yoke, to tugge
and sweat at his plough all their days. There is a promise in the Prophet of a
time, when Swords shall be turned into plough-shares, and spears into
pruninghooks; that is, men shall leave fighting and go to working, they shall
have peace: and it is but too too discernable, that many would break their
swords, into these mystical plough-shares, and their spears into
sinning-hooks; they would have peace, why? that they might leave fighting and
go to sinning, that they might work wickedness more quietly, and keep close
to their trade, the plowing of iniquity without disturbance.

Secondly observe, That there is an art in wickedness; it is Plowing, or as
the word imports an artificial working. Some are curious and exact in shaping,
polishing, and setting off their sin: so the Holy Ghost intimates, Rev. 21. 27.
Whosoever works abomination (...)
and makes a lie; there is but one Verb in the Greek, and so we may read it
fully enough in our language, Whosoever works abomination and a lie; to work
an abomination or a lie, is more then to do an abomination or tell a lie. As
when we say such a man is a Clockmaker, it notes art, as well as action. So to
say such a man is an Abomination-worker, or a Lye-maker, notes him not only
industrious, but crafty, or (as the Prophet speaks) wise to do evil.

Thirdly, note from these metaphors of plowing and sowing, That wicked men
expect benefit in ways of sin, and look to be gainers, by being evil doers.
They make iniquity their plough; and a man's plough is so much his profit, that
it is grown into a Proverb, to call that (whatsoever it is) by which a man
makes his living or his profit, His plough. And when we say, there are many
candles burning and never a plough going. It is to tax unthriftinesse or
careless spending, without honest care of getting. Every man tils in
expectation of a crop; who would put his plough into the ground to receive
nothing? The Apostle argues from this as a dictate of nature, (Cor. 9. 10.) He
that ploweth, ploweth in hope. And James 5. 7. The husbandman waits for the
precious fruit of the earth, having bestowed his labor, he does not count it
labor lost. It is even so with wicked men, when they are sinning, they think
themselves thriving, or laying up that in the earth a while which will grow and
increase to a plentiful harvest. What strange fancies have many to be rich, to
be great, by ways of wickedness. Thus they plow in hope, but they shall never
be partakers of their hope: yea, they shall be ashamed of their hope, their sin
will deceive them. And that which will make their poverty most burdensome, is
their hope of riches, the expectation they had to gain, will make their loss,
their breaking, and their undoing intolerable.

Fourthly, observe from these Metaphors, That every sinful act persisted in,
shall have a certain sorrowful reward, it shall assuredly be answered with
judgment, tribulation, and anguish. Assuredly it shall. Are not plowing and
seed-time an assurance of the harvest? They that go forth vainly rejocing,
bearing that poisonous seed, shall doubtless come again, and bring their
sheaves of sorrow with them. That which God promised (Genesis 8. 22.) in regard of
natural husbandry, he has threatened in regard of this mystical husbandry:
after the flood he promised, that while the Earth remained, Summer and Winter,
Seed-time and Harvest should not cease. So it is here, only with this
difference, the Lord uses all means to dissuade and prevent the seed-time of
sin. But when notwithstanding all those threatenings, men will be sowing
iniquity, he has made an everlasting Decree (as firm in its kind, as that
about the waters of Noah) that Harvest shall follow, and every such soul shall
both reap and eat, the fruit of his plowings and sowings.

Fifthly, observe, That the punishment of sin may come long after the
committing of sin; the one is the seed-time, and the other a reaping-time;
there is a great distance of time between sowing and reaping. The seeds of sin
may lie many years under the furrows. A man may commit a sin in his youth,
and not find the harvest of it, till his old age. How many (as Job complains,
but in a worse sense then he) in their old age, are made to possess the sins
of their youth, and feel that which they have forgot. The Husbandman (in that
place before mentioned, James 5. 7.) waits for the precious fruit of the
earth, and has long patience for it: and through the long patience of God,
some wicked men (though they thought their sins not sowed, but buried for ever,
and never desire to see or hear of them, yet) in a sense some wicked men (I
say) wait long for the noxious fruit of their own hearts.

Sometimes indeed the seed-time and harvest of sin, are found in the same
hour: and while a man has scarce ended his sin, his punishment begins. The
Prophet describing the plenty and prosperity of the Church in the latter days,
tells us, That the ploughman Amos 9. 13.
shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes, him that sows the
seed. The returns of sin are to some as quick and plentiful, judgment
rides post after them, the reaper overtakes the sower, or the man reapes, as
soon as he has sowed: wrath arrests him in the very act of sinning. And we may
say as Elisha in another case, is 2 King. 6. 32.
not the sound of his Masters feet behind him? The sound of punishment is at
the very heels of sin. That black Ox comes as swift as a Leopard, treading
upon his heels: And though sometimes it comes slowly as an Ox, yet always it
treads hardest, when it comes slowest. A wicked man may commit evil an hundred
times, Eccles. 8.
and his days (of peace) be prolonged, for his harvest of wrath (like
Habbakuks vision of mercy) is for an appointed time, but in the end it will not
lie, (though he would tarry for it) it will not tarry. The natural harvest
belies (sc. fails) some men's hopes, but Spem menitia seges.
this mystical harvest, shall not belly his fears (if he have any,) it shall
belly his presumption, how much soever he has.

Sixthly, observe, That the punishment of sin shall be proportionable to the
degrees of sin. He shall reap, the same, says the Text, the same in degree.
So the Scripture speaks, and so experience teaches concerning natural
sowing; a man's harvest is gradually such, as is his seed-time, if he have sown
much (in an ordinary course) he shall reap much; The Apostle alludes to this,
where he speaks of the seed of charity, If ye sow sparingly, ye shall reap 2
Cor. 9. 6.
sparingly; on the other side, if ye sow plentifully, ye shall reap
plentifully. Sometimes through the judgment of God, (which can easily break
through the principles of nature) it comes to pass* as it is, Hag. 1. 6. Ye
sow much, and reap little; God makes the harvest thin and lean, when the
seed-time was thick and plentiful; but in regard of sinning (I speak of such
as go on impenitently in their sins, and have not Christ to take off their
sin from them) such persons as sow much, shall be sure to reap much; They
shall be beaten with many stripes, who impenitently multiply their
transgressions.

Seventhly, observe, Punishment shall not exceed the desert of sin. They
reap the same; The same, equal in degree or quantity, not beyond the degree
of sinning. In nature, the corn ^eap't, is more then the corn sown;
sometimes a hundred fold, sometimes sixty, sometimes thirty; as Christ speaks,
in the Parable of the Sower, Math. 13. But the punishment of sin reaped, is
not a grain more then the sin committed. All the punishments of this life, are
less then sin, as Ezra confesses, After all that is come upon us for our evil
deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us
less then our iniquity, etc. Chap. 9. 13. And in the life to come, the damned
shall not be punished more then sin deserves; yea I may say (with reverence to
his Almighty power) God cannot punish a sin, beyond that proportion which it
deserves; and the reason is this, Infinite power, cannot inflict a punishment,
beyond that which infinite Justice does require; Infinite Justice is offended,
and must be satisfied (if not satisfied by Christ) then by the person himself
offending: therefore infinite power, cannot lay upon a man, more then his sin
does deserve, though it may easily lay more upon him then his nature can
endure. So then, all that wicked men bear in this life, is less, and all they
shall bear in hell, will not be more, then the deserts of sin, or the demands
of Justice.

An objection may seem to lie against this, from that award of judgment
against Babylon: Double to her double, according to her works, it may seem
that her harvest of punishment must exceed in Rev. 18. 6.
double proportion, her seed time of sinning; The Psalmist speaks yet higher,
Render unto our neighbors sevenfold into their bosom, their reproach,
wherewith they have reproached thee O Lord. Render Psalm. 79. 12.
sevenfold, that is, manifold: That number in Scripture, multiplies the sense
into any number; To render sevenfold, may be rendered the greatest number.

I answer, Babylons punishment shall be double, respecting what Babylon shall
have acted, but not double, respecting what Babylon shall have deserved; Give
to her double; if it be possible, let her have as much blood more to drink, as
she has spilt, for she deserves to drink an hundred times more. The blood of
Saints, is precious blood; one drop of the blood of Sion, is more worth than a
whole ocean of the blood of Babylon, therefore give her double; though it be
more in quantity, it is not so much in value. And so, reward our neighbors
that have reproached thee sevenfold, it is not sevenfold beyond their deserts;
for one scorn that a wicked man powers upon a child of God (and so upon God,
for that is the meaning of the Psalm) cannot be recompensed with ten thousand
reproaches, powered upon wicked men: Reproach is the due of ungodly men here,
and everlasting reproach, shall be their portion hereafter. But the least
reproach cast upon God, is an infinite wrong; and the reproach of his people is
so much his, that he reckons it as his own: And will therefore take away all
reproach from his people, and render to their unkind neighbors, their
reproach sevenfold (and that is but equal) into their bosoms.

Lastly, When it is said, They shall reap the same: We are taught, That the
punishment of sin, shall be like the sin in kind; It shall be the same,
not only in degree, but also in likeness. Punishment often bears the image
and superscription of sin upon it. You may see the fathers face and feature in
the child. Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap, says the
Apostle, Gal. 6. 7. If a man sow wheat, he shall reap wheat; the harvest
tells you what kind of grain was sowed in every field: if a man sowes wheat
he, shall not reap tares, and if a man sow tares, he shall not reap wheat.
Thus God often returns the sin of man upon him; sin comes to him in its own
likeness, and he may read the name of it, stamped upon the affliction; or by
the judgment inflicted, interpret the wickedness committed; This was openly
confessed by Adonibezek, (Judge. 1. 7.) As I have done, so God has requited me,
just so; and what was that? He speaks out in the former words: Threescore and
ten Kings, having their thumbes and their great tooes cut off, gathered their
meat under my Table; there was his sowing, his reaping was the same, They
caught him (says the Text) and cut off his thumbes, and his great toes. The
very first Law that was formally made and published after the fall, was a Law
of retaliation, or of counterpassion, Genesis 6. 9. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood,
(what shall he reap?) by man shall his blood be shed; he must reap the same:
The Judicials of Moses are plain for this, Exodus 21. 24. Eye for eye, and
tooth for tooth, etc. They have moved me to jealousy, says the Lord, by that
Deuteronomy. 32. 21.
which is not God, and I will move them to jealousy, by those who are not a
people. Like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange Gods in your Land, so
shall ye serve strangers in a Land which is not yours, Jer. 5. 19. God pays
them in their own coin. Who so stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he
also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard, Prove. 21. 13. And so
concerning the preaching of the word, contemned, (Zech. 7. 13.) Therefore it is
come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear, so they cried, and I
would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts: They reap as they sowed, they would
not hear, that was their sin; they shall not be heard, that is the punishment;
they shall see how good it is, to be wilfully deaf, when God commands, by his
being judicially deaf, when they complain. The Sodomites, had a fire of
unnatural lust among them, and God sent a shower of fire unnature) to destroy
them. The Egyptians killed the Israelitish children, that was the seed they
sowed, they reap the same; God slew their children, even all their firstborn
in one night. Nadab and Abihu, offered strange fire, there was their
wickedness, they reaped the same, God by fire from Heaven, in a strange
manner, slew them in a moment.

Yea, we find the Lord sometimes dealing thus with his own dear servants, he
will cause them to reap that, which they have sown, in kind; David had
defiled his neighbors wife, therefore, says the Lord, I will take thy wives
from before thine eyes, 2 Samuel 12. 11.
and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives, in the sight
of this Sun. Again, The Lord tells him, Thou have slain Vriah with the
sword of the children of Ammon, therefore the sword shall never depart from
thine house. You see, here was sword for sword, and defilement for defilement;
even holy David reaped the same, which he had sowed. It is very remarkable,
which is reported in the history of the Church, by Socrates, concerning Valens
the Emperor, who was a great persecuter Socrat Histor. Eccl. l. 4. c. 3.
of the orthodox Christians, and a maintainer of Arianisme; The story tells us,
that in his wars against the Goths, he was overthrown, and hiding himself
in a little cottage, the enemy came by, burnt it, and him together; Now see,
how God in this, gave him to reap, what he had sown: for when fourscore of
the orthodox sailed from Constantinople to Nicomedia, to treat with him, about
the points of Arrianisme, and to settle the matter by way of dispute; the
Emperor hearing of their approach, while they were in the haven, and before
they could come on shore, caused the Ships to be fired wherein they were, and
so consumed them all; here was burntng for burning. And it is observed (in the
French History) that Charles the ninth of France, who was the Anno 15 72.
contriver of that great Massachre in Paris, wherein so many thousand
Protestants were forced through a Red sea, a sea of blood, to their rest in
Canaan: this bloody King, at last dyed himself, by a strange eruption of blood
from all the passages of his body; thus he also reaped what he had sown, he
had powered out blood, and his blood was powered out. It were easy to give you
plenty of instances, bearing witness of this accurate justice of God. Examples
were frequent in Jobs time, you see Eliphaz had store of these in his
note-booke, Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity and sow wickedness,
reap the same.

JOB. Chap. 4. Verse. 9, 10, 11. By the blast of God they perish, and by the
breath of his nostrils are they consumed.

The roaring of the Lion, and the voice of the fierce Lion, and the teeth of
the young Lions are broken.

The old Lion perishes for lack of prey, and the stout Lions whelps are
scattered abroad.


ELiphaz having given an account of his observation, in general, that he had
often seen wicked men perish, ver. 8. In these three verses, he illustrates
his observation, by an elegant description of the manner how, or the power by
which wicked men perish and are cut off; namely, by the blast of God, ver. 9.
By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they
consumed; and least any should think, that this blast of God carries away only
strawes and feathers, light and weak persons into perdition; he adds the
weightiest and the strongest; The roaring of the Lion, the teeth of the young
Lions are broken: God by his blast can take away or break, the strongest, the
mightiest; Lion-like men, men fierce like Lions, and stout like the Lions
whelpe. Under the shadow of which allusions, he closely strikes at Job, who was
once a great man, the greatest of all the men in the East; a fierce spoiling
Lion (in the apprehension of his friends) and yet God brought him down. This
in brief, is the illustration of the argument, in these three verses, By the
blast of God they perish, etc.

Eliphaz (having in the former verse, by the metaphor of plowing, sowing, and
reaping, set forth the actings and expectations, the issues and successes of
wicked men) here (as some conceive) continues the metaphor or the Allegory by
this expression of blahing, which (we know) is often used in reference to the
seed sown; As if Eliphaz had said, when these men have plowed and sowed, when
they are in expectation of a fruitfully and plentiful harvest, then God
blasteth the seed and the seeds-man too; he sends forth his rough wind,
which dries up and withers stalk and ear, the counsel and the
counselors: And though blasting spoil or prevent reaping in an ordinary
sense, yet blasting may be reaping (as here) in a figurative sense: They who
sow iniquity, are often punished by reaping disappointments, which is the
blasting of their hopes, and the consumption of their confidences.

Blasting of corn and fruits, is often spoken of in the old Testament (as 1
King. 8. 37.) If there be in the Land blasting and mildew. Amos 4. 9 I have
smitten you with blasting and mildew: And a people spoiled by the sword, and
consumed by war, are compared, to corn blasted before it be grown up, Isa.
37. 27. (...) Herba percussa uredine est percussio sementis vento orientali
ingrediente spicas. Adeo ut non perficiant ma^u^ita^em suam, Rab David. in lib.
rad. from (...)
But the word in the Original, for blasting corn, is different from this in
the Text: The root of that, signifies to dry up or cause to wither: This to
breathe, as a man breathes with his nostrils: By the breath of his nostrils, or
(as we translate) by the blast of his nostrils; So in the description of man's
creation, Genesis 2. 7. Moses says, God breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life, or, the blast of life.

This blasting, or blast of God, is sometime put for a storm or mighty
tempest, suddenly raised up, by the power of God. Thus (Exodus 15. 8.) Moses
relating the sudden destruction of the Egyptians in the Red Sea, says, With
the blast of thy nostrils, the waters were gathered together, the sloods stood
upright as an heap, etc. That is, with the wind, which God sent out, as his
instrument, he gathered Anhelavit.
the waters to swallow up the Egyptians, and save his own people. And we find
the word, (Isa. 25. 4.) used to denote the furious blasting violence of wicked
men, in the day of their rage and madness against the Church. When the blast
of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall, thou shall bring down
the noise of strangers, as the heat in a dry place, etc.

By the blast of God.] God in this act of vengance against the plowers of
wickedness, is presented to us in his Name, Eloah; which signifies, the mighty
or puissant God; So Mr Broughton translates it, By the breath of the puissant
they perish. The strong God, or God in his strength, comes armed against strong
transgressors. The effect shows the strength of this blast, For

By his blast they perish, says the Text, it is the word used before, they are
not only a little withered or scorched, but they are utterly consumed, they
are destroyed, root and branch, head and tail as in one day.

The next words in the Text, by the breath of his nostrils they are (...)
consumed, are but the repeating of the same thing; yet there is a considerable
difference in the expressions. By the breath of his nostrils.] The word (Ruach)
which we there translate breath, signifies generally, spirit, ghost, breath or
wind; sometime the Holy Ghost, who is breathed from the Father and Son; The
breath of God put alone, notes the wrath of God, Isa. 30. 33. Tophet is
prepared of old, etc. The breath of the Lord, (sc. the wrath of the Lord) like
a stream of brimstone, does kindle it. This phrase also, The breath of Gods
nostrils, signifies the anger and wrath of God. And the anger of God, is called
the breath of his Animalia commota spirant vehementius, and narium flatu iram
indicant.
nostrils, after the manner of men and other creatures; because anger breathes
out at their nostrils: The naturalists observe that anger inflaming the
spirits, and heating the heart, frequent breathing follows (as it were) to
cool the fire, and to ease that inflammation; an angry man breathes quick and
short: When Saul was enraged and mad with malice against the Saints, he is
said, To breath out threatenings and slaughter, Act. 9. 1. therefore also, anger
is called, the breath of Gods nostrils.

Further, it is considerable, that the word nostrill, is put alone, for the
wrath of God: Psalm. 95. 11. He swear in his nostrill, that In naso enim i^ra
apparet* ex vehementiore spiratione, and potissimum ex remissione aut
dila^atione narium ira conspicitur.
is (as we translate it) he swear in his wrath, that they should not enter into
his rest. Likewise Psalm. 2. 12. If his wrath be kindled but a little; the
Hebrew is, if his nose or nostrill be kindled but a little; the nostrill, being
an organ of the body, in which wrath shows it self, is put for wrath it
self. Palenesse and snuffing of the nose, are symptoms of anger. In our
broverbials, to take a thing in snuff, is to take it in anger. Again, in
Scripture we find, that slownesse to anger, and hastiness to be angry, are
expressed by the different frame of the nostrils; as namely, when the Lord is
said to be slow to anger, the Hebrew is long of nostrils: (Psalm. (...)
103. 8.) The Lord is slow to anger, or, (Exodus 34. 6.) Long-suffering. In both
places, the Original is, long of nostrils, that is, of anger, or long ere he
be angry. On the other side, a passionate, choleric man, a man ready to
conceive anger, is said to have a strait or a short nostrill; He that is soon
angry, deals foolishly, Prove. 14. 17. The Hebrew is, he that has a short or
a narrow nostrill, (...) Brevis narium. i. e. praeceps ad iram. (...). Sept.
Spiritu furoris ejus deficiunt.
deals foolishly, because such men are most apt to conceive anger; So then,
while Eliphaz says, by the breath of his nostrils they are consumed, it is, as
if he had said, by the wrath and displeasure of God they are consumed; and the
Septuagint translate it, directly by anger, They are consumed by the breath, or
spirit of his anger; so others in the Latin, They are consumed by the spirit
of his fury. And both these words, breath and blast, are found together in one
place, 2 Samuel 22. 16. At the blast of the breath of his nostrils; the whole
verse runs thus, The channels of the sea appeared, the foundations of the
earth were discovered, at the rebuking of the Lord, at the blast of the breath
of his nostrils, that is, at the great displeasure of the Lord.

So, we see, what we are here to understand, by the breath and by the blast of
the Lord. And in this passage, Eliphaz seems to hint at the manner of the death
of Jobs children, who were destroyed by the strength of a mighty wind, smiting
the four corners of the house so, that it fell upon them: that wind may well
be called the breath and the blast of God, both in regard of the wonder and
strangeness of it, as also because (though Satan was the instrument) he had
the ordering and disposing of it. Satan's breath, all the wind he can raise,
cannot blow away a feather, unless the Lord give and continue leave and
strength, to do it.

Observe first, God can easily destroy wicked men. He does it by a blast, or by
a breath. Though, to themselves and others, they appear as great Mountains,
yet before God they are but as dust, or chafe of the Mountains; by a blast or
by a breath he scatters and consumes them: So David compares them (Psalm. 1. 4.)
The ungodly are not so, (not so, how? they are not as a tree planted by the
waters side, that is the portion of the righteous; how are the ungodly then?)
they are as the chafe, that the wind scatters or drives away, the best of
them, the most solid of them are no better. And (Isa. 17. 13.) The Nations
shall be chased, as the chafe of the mountains before the wind, and as a
rolling thing before the whirlwinde. Though Nations, mighty strong powerful
Nations, come out against God, and his people, Fear them not: For if God set
himself against them, they are no more before him, then a little chafe, he
scatters them by the breath of his displeasure.

You know it is no trouble for a man to breath, or to make a blast with his
mouth; and this phrase is used, to show with what ease and facility God
destroys all the plots and counsels of wicked men; it puts him to no pain,
no sweating, no travel or labor to do it; men are put to much expense of
pains, and run many hazzards, to oppose the wickedness of men; but God does it
with a breath. (2 King. 19. 7.) When God sent to Hezekiah, to assure him that
he would deliver him from Senacherib, he not only promises to do it, but
shows him how he will do it, even as in this Text, Behold I will send a blast
upon him: that is all, I will do, I will not trouble my self much about the
business; you must gather armies and make great preparations against the
enemy, but I will do it with a blast.

And which is yet more speedy. Some understand this blast to note only the will
and pleasure, the intent or purpose of God, by the blast of God they perish;
that is, if he do but will it, it is done, it is no more for him to act it
then intend it. The Septuagint translate (...).
near this sense, by the command of God they perish; as if Eliphaz had said, it
is as easy for God to do it, as to say it shall, or to command it to be done.
Men can command great things, and talk much, what they will do; and all
proves but talking and commanding: one man may command more in an hour, then a
Million can do in a year, but with God it is all one, to command and
accomplish. It is noted for a high speech, that of Caesar to Metellus, who
opposing him, when he came into the Roman Treasury, to take the money there
heaped together. Caesar (whose great spirit could not bear opposition) says to
him, Let me alone, or I will lay thee dead upon the ground. And presently, at
once to quallifie that threat and magnify his own power, adds, Young man it
is harder for me to speak this, then to do it. It is most certainly so with
God, he can as easily do any thing as speak it. Yet further, we find the
easiness of Gods destroying his enemies set forth a degree higher, He does it
by a look; as by a blast of his nostrils, so by a cast of his eye; that is a
small trouble, and that is all, that it needs cost God to destroy the strongest,
the vilest and violentest foe in the world: thus he consumed the Host of
Pharaoh, even with a look, (Exodus 14. 24.) It came to pass that in the morning
watch, the Lord looked unto the host of the Egyptians, through the pillar of
fire, and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians. If God hide
his face from his people they are troubled, and if he look upon his enemies
they are troubled. He darts out both beams of life, and beams of death from his
eyes. When a godly man is afflicted, if he can but get the Lord to look upon
his trouble, he is delivered. And when wicked men prosper, if God do but look
upon their glory they are withered. With such ease does the Scripture express
the destruction of wicked ones, it is by a breath, by a word, by a command, by
a look; An intimation from the eye of God, is execution.

Secondly note; God can suddenly destroy the counsels and the plottings, the
ploughings and the sowings of wicked men. In proverbial speaking, to do a
thing suddenly, and to do a thing with a breath, are the same: God can as soon
destroy his enemies, as a man can breath; Psalm. 73. 10. How are they brought
into desolation in a moment! A blast, you know, is gone in a moment: Isaiah 42.
9. These two things shall come upon thee in a moment, loss of children and
widow-hood. God can with one breath, blow away both the husband and the
children. So (Jer. 4. 20.) the Church of the Jews speaks thus, Destruction
upon destruction is cried, for the whole land is spoiled, suddenly are my tents
spoiled, and my curtains in a moment: God does but blow upon the Tents, and
presently the coards break, and the stakes thereof are loosened. If man be
angry, he must sit down and consult, he must lay his plot and contrive a way
of revenge; but no sooner is God angry but he can revenge; That wrath cannot
want an instrument, which can make one. Infinite wisdom sees all means at
once, and infinite power can use them at once. As the grace of God knows not
long delays, it comes swiftly, as a sweet blast or holy breath, Nescit tarda
molimina Spiritus sancti gratia.
Grace is speedy and upon the wing; so likewise the wrath of God knows no
tedious long delays: They who do wickedly and stand out impenitently, shall
perish suddenly. And though the Lord be slow to anger before he strikes, yet
when he strikes, he can do it at once, it is but a blast of his wrath, and a
breath of his displeasure, and the stoutest of the sons of men are dried like a
leaf.

Thirdly note, That God destroys wicked men secretly and invisibly. To
destroy by a breath, is a close way of destroying. So (Hag. 1. 9.) his anger is
expressed against his own people, for neglecting his Ordinances and Temple, Ye
looked for much, but lo it came to little, and when ye brought it home, I did
blow upon it, that is I sent an invisible and secret curse upon it.

Lastly, we may observe from the manner of this destruction, That the
destruction of wicked men, the plowers of iniquity, is unavoydable; it is done
by a breath, now the wind blows where it lists, no man can countercommand
or stop the wind. The wind is swift, as well as strong, no man can outrun
the strome of Gods displeasure. He that flees of them, shall not flee away
(for it is a Amos 9. 1, 2.
wind that follows them) and he that escapes of them, shall not be
delivered, it is a blast that is gone out after them: they cannot deliver
themselves by art or cunning, by wit or policy; they cannot deceive or cozen
the wind: they cannot deliver themselves by power or strength, they cannot
conquer or overcome this wind: It comes suddenly, invisibly, irresistibly; who
can stand before God when he is angry, yea, who knows the power of his wrath
or blast.

This Eliphaz goes on to show, in the tenth and eleventh Verses, and therefore
takes his instance, from those creatures which are mightiest, which are
strongest* The roaring of the Lion, and the voice of the fierce Lion, and the
teeth of the young Lion are broken; the old Lion perishes for lack of prey,
and the stout Lions whelps are scattered abroad.

The expressions are very various. Here are five words in these Leonum nomina
plura sun^, and secundum ae^atis gr^dus distinguuntur. Buxt. lex 1 Arieh, 2
Shacal, 3 Cephir, 4 Laish, 5 Labi.
two verses signifying the Lion, yet with a difference and special reference to
the several ages, and conditions of the Lion. 1 The Lion, 2 the fierce Lion, 3
the young Lion, 4 the old Lion, 5 and the stout Lion: we have these five
several words in our translation, and we give Epithites to four of them;
whereas in the Hebrew they are all single terms, as we shall see in a brief
touch upon them.

First, the Lion (Arieh) which name is given the Lion, to note (...) from (...)
ca^psit decerpsit, alii deducunt ab (...) Leo and (...) vid^t, quasi Leo
videns, quia semper est oculis intentue ad praedam.
his power in renting and tearing: and Master Broughton renders it so, the
roaring of the renting Lion, putting the etymology or notation of the word
into the translation. Others derive it, from Arie, a Lion, and Raah which
signifies to see, and then it is as much as the Lion-seer; and the reason of
this derivation is given, from the Lions watchfullnesse, he is ever intent upon
his prey, and as some Naturalists observe, sleeps with his eyes open. So that
this word entitles him, either from his watchfulness, The Lion-seer, or from
his strength, The Lion-renter.

The second is a primitive, signifying sometime a Leopard, and (...) Leo ferox
vel immanis mediae aetatis.
sometime a Lioness, or shee-lion. We render it a fierce Lion: which may well
refer to the former, because a shee-lion, especially when she has young ones,
is exceeding fierce.

The third word it is (Cephir) a young Lion, and it is sometime used as an
epithet (Cephir Arieth) a young Lion roared on Sampson, Judge. 14. 5.

The fourth word is (Laish) signifying a Lion, that is grown in years, which
perishes for hunger, not being able to hunt and get prey. So the Text, the old
Lion perishes for lack of prey.

And the fifth word is (Laby) which signifies a Lion in greatest strength and
fierceness. And the Critticks tells us, it is derived from Quasi leonem
cordatum and animosum dicas Buxt.
(Leb) which signifies the heart, as noting a strong hearted and a courageous
Lion; and so Master Broughton translates, for stout Lion, the heart-strong
Laby. Judah being compared to this Lion by dying Jacob, is set forth by his
majestic stoutnesse; Judah is a Lions whelp, etc. and as an old Lion, who
shall rouse him up? Gen 49. 9.

These several sorts of Lions shadow out unto us, mighty, strong and powerful
wicked men, or plowers of wickedness, with all related to them; they, and
their families, they, and their wives, they, and their children, all theirs are
usually full of Lionlike qualities, and all these shall be destroyed and
perish, by the blast, by the breath of God.

For, as the Apostle puts the question in another case, about Oxen, Does God
take care for Oxen? So if any should question here, is God angry with Lions?
does he oppose himself against Lions, that he says here, the Lion shall
perish, the young and the old Lions shall be destroyed?

No, there is a further meaning in it, somewhat else is shadowed under the name
or notion of Lions. First, in Scripture the Lion signifies any one in
authority, especially in kingly authority, (Genesis 49. 10.) the tribe of Judah
(which was to have the Scepter and the rule, the Magistracy or government being
settled in that Tribe) is compared to a Lion, Judah is a Lions whelpe, from the
prey my son thou art gone up, he stooped down, he couched as a Lion, and as an
old Lion, who shall rouse him up? As Lions are chief, the most eminent among
the beasts of the field, so Kings and Magistrates are chief, the most eminent
among the sons of men. Christ is called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, from
the prerogative of his power and the excellency of his Kingly condition above
all others, his name being King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Secondly, the
Devil is compared to a Lion, he is called a roaring Lion, because of his
cruelty and devouring nature, He goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom
he may devour. And the Lions here in the Text how old soever they be (are
whelps of this old Lion) the Devil: not great men in general, but wicked great
men, men mighty in power, and mighty in sin, mighty sinners. It is frequent in
Scripture to shadow out powerful, wicked, tyrannical men by the name of
Lions, and the reason is, because they imitate the qualities and conditions of
the Lion. A man acts by reason, and a beast acts by sense or passion: reason is
the difference between a man and a beast: therefore when man either acts
against reason or without reason, the name of a beast is justly put upon him:
and the name of that beast most fitly, whose qualities and passions he most
resembles: man in regard of his headstrong unrulinesse, is compared unto a
Horse and to a Mule, Psalm. 32. 9. Be not as the Horse or as the Mule which have
no understanding, whose mouth must be held in wit with bit and bridle. Be not
unruly. For subtilty, man is called a Fox; for flattery or filthiness, a Dog
or a Swine; and here for rapine and cruelty a Lion. Thus the Prophet Nahum
elegantly, Chap. 2. 11, 12. Where is the dwelling place of the Lions, and the
feeding place of the young Lions? that is, where is the dwelling place of
oppressors and cruel tyrants? And Ezekiel. 19. 1, 2. Take up a lamentation for
the Princes of Israel, and say, what is thy mother? a Lioness, she lay down
among Lions, she nourished her whelps among young Lions; the tyrannical
Princes in Israel, were thus described. And so is tyrannical Pharaoh (Ezekiel.
32. 2.) Take up a lamentation for Pharaoh King of Egypt, and say unto him, thou
art like a young Lion of the Nations. In general Solomon (Prove. 28. 15.)
tells us, That as a roaring Lion and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler
over the poor people. And the Apostle Paul speaking of his escape from the
jaws of that persecuting Emperor, says (2 Timothy 4. 17.) I was delivered out
of the mouth of the Lion; that is, out of the mouth of Nero, who was ready with
open mouth to devour and destroy me: or as some (taking it for a proverbiall
speech noting any eminent danger) I was delivered from the extremest hazard of
death: even as a man rescued out of a Lions mouth, and pulled from between his
teeth.

And it will not be amiss, for the clearing of this a little further, to give
you some special things, wherein the resemblance may be taken, between the
Tyrant, the oppressing Ruler, or any oppressing great one, and the Lion; we may
draw the picture of a Tyrant by a Lions face in these respects.

1. In regard of his pride, stateliness, and distance which he affects to
hold, toward others. The Lion is a proud and stately creature.

2. Tyrants resemble Lions in regard of courage and animosity. Couragiousnesse
in any noble or good way (in which sense Prove. 28. 1. the righteous are bold as
a Lion) is the courage of Saints. But to be valient and courageous in doing
mischief, in wronging and oppressing the weak or innocent, is the courage of a
Beast. Courage out of the way of truth and justice, is Lionlike cruelty.

3. They are Lions in regard of their strength. Lions are the strongest of
creatures: what is stronger then a Lion, say they, in resolving Sampsons
Riddle: and Prove. 30. 30. a Lion which is strongest among beasts: tyranny must
have strength to back it. Hence they who mean to oppress, fortify themselves
with titles and privileges, with honors and relations. Solomon considering
the oppressions that were under the Sun, observes tears on the one side, and
strength on the other; On the side of the oppressors there was power, Eccles.
4. 1.

4. They are Lions too, in regard of their subtilty; The Lion is a subtle
creature, as well as a strong creature, he has a great stock of policy, as
well as power: though we usually oppose the Lions skin, and the Foxes skin, yet
many times they both meet in one; Some are double skinned as well as double
clothed: Hence we have that phrase, Psalm. 10. 9. (comparing a wicked man to a
Lion) he lies in wait secretly, as a Lion in his den; which teaches us, that
the Lion waits and watches for his prey; And so do these wicked men, (Psalm.
17. 12.) Like as a Lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young
Lion, lurking in secret places.

5. They are like Lions especially in their cruelty, in blood-sucking cruelty;
the Lion is a devouring beast, therefore when the Devil is called a Lion, it
is said, he goes about to devour. And God himself (when he would be expressed
in his resolutions of judgment, so as he will not have mercy upon a man, or
upon a nation) is pleased to take upon him this name too, Hos. 5. 14. I will be
unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the house of Judah, I, even I,
will tear and go away, and none shall rescue him; that is, I am resolved to
execute judgment, to the uttermost upon him; So Chap. 6. 1. The Lord has
torn, which is (properly) the act of a Lion: And Job (Chap. 10. 16.)
complains thus to God, Thoa huntest me like a fierce Lion: And (Isa. 38. 13.)
Hezekiah fearing, that God would not show him that mercy, to raise him from
sickness, cries out, as a Lion, so will he break all my bones. So that when
the Lord would express himself in ways of judgment, and resolvednesse to go
on in judgment, he takes upon him the name of a Lion; But such is the very
nature of wicked men: Such the Prophet Micha bespeaks (Chap. 3. 2.) Hear this
O heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the house of Israel, it is not for you to
know judgment? who hate the good and love the evil, who pluck off their skins
from off them, and their flesh from off their bones; noting Lion-like cruelty
in those, who should have been as sheapheards to feed and protect the people.

6. They are compared to Lions, in regard of their terrible roaring, the Lion
roareth terribly; so terribly, that when the Lion Animalia fortia vocem edunt
gravem ut Leo and Taurus. Arist. Tanta illi v^cis eliciendae natura praestitit
instrumenta ut animalia lon ge ipso celeriora solo saepe rugitu capiantur
Basil. Hexam. Homil. 9. Leo aliquid nubu habet circa super cilia, sc. aspectum
minime serenum. Arist.
roareth, the beasts of the forest tremble. The Naturalists observe, that
though many creatures are swifter of foot, then the Lion, yet when he roareth,
they fall down, and he overtakes them with his astonishing voice; so
tyrannical men, with their roaring words, their loud threatenings, often
affright and daunt the poor.

7. They resemble Lions, in the sowrenesse and sternenesse of their
countenance, and cloudinesse of their brows. Much of man's heart is seen in
his face; frowns are as blows; hence we call it, brow-beating: The love of
God, is expressed by the pleasantness of his face, and the light of his
countenance; So also is the love of man; and we may see what the intent of
another is, in his very looks: Many are in this respect, Lion-like men, they
have (as Aristotle says of the natural Lion) clouds and storms hanging about
their eyebrows. It was a threatening against the Jews, in case of
disobedience, that God would send against them, a Nation of a fierce
countenance, which should not regard the person of the old, etc. Deuteronomy. 28. 50.

Lastly, they are like Lions, in regard of their greediness after prey; They
have set their eyes bowing down to the earth, like as a Lion that is greedy of
his prey, Psalm. 17. 11, 12.

Thus you see, both who are here meant by Lions, and likewise, how the
resemblance or picture of a wicked man, may be taken from a Lion.

Now when it is said, that, the teeth of the Lions are broken, that the old
Lions perish, and the young Lions are scattered abroad: By all these
expressions of scattering, perishing and being broken to pieces, the Holy Ghost
shows us, the utter, full and final consumption of wicked men; they are not
only touched, troubled and roused up out of their dens; but these Lions, old
and young, are scattered and consumed, They perish.

There is an opinion current among the Jewish writers, that this verse is to be
understood, as a description of the means or instruments by which God destroys
wicked men, and not (as we) of wicked men themselves, whom God will destroy:
Junius agrees with this interpretation of the Jews, translating the two verses
in this sense; By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his
nostrils they are consumed; by the roariag of the Lion; and by the voice of the
fierce Lion, and by the teeth of young Lions they are consumed; As if when
wicked men (so he gives the gloss) are not destroyed immediately by the
breath, and by the blast of God, then God stirs up the creatures against
them, and will destroy them by Lions: We know it was a special judgment
threatened in the Law, against the disobedient, (Levit. 26. 22.) that God would
send evil beasts among them: The Prophet numbers this, among Gods sore
judgments: Sword, famine, pestilence and evil beasts are put together. In the
history of the Kings, we have a famous 2 King. 17. ^^
record, how the Lord sent Lions, who slew some of those Idolaters, whom the
King of Bahylon had transplanted into the Cities of Samaria.

But I rather conceive the former exposition of the words, to be the truth, and
most suitable to the context; and there is this reason to be given, because it
agrees best with the purpose of Eliphaz, whose work was, so to describe the
destruction of wicked men in general, that he might particularly intimate the
destruction, fallen upon Job and his family, with the reason of it. Job was a
great man in his time; he was among men, as the Lion among beasts, a chief.
His friends thought him a cruel Lion too, and so he is told to his face
afterward, by one of them, that he (like a greedy Lion) had taken away the
pledge, and the garment from the poor; This Eliphaz would hint at least to
Job, and that God had found him out in his Lion-like qualities; that he being a
Magistrate, and a man in authority, having dealt hardly and cruelly with
others, now the Lord had measured to him, the same measure he had given others;
He, the Lion; and she, the fierce Lion or Lioness his wife; they, the young
Lions, his children, were all broken, and either perished or perishing. So much
for the clearing of the words; I shall now add some observations from them.

First, Wicked men, how powerful, how strong soever, shall fall before the
wrath and indignation of God. The day of the Lord shall be against every one
that is high, and that is lifted up. God desires in a special manner, to be
dealing with these, for they, in the pride of their spirits, think themselves a
match for God; though indeed, their strength be but weakness, and their
wisdom foolishness; yet in their own conceits they are stronger, and wiser
then God himself. Hence (like Pharaoh) they send defiance to Heaven, and say,
Who is the Lord, Exodus 5. 1. When God sees the hearts of men swollen to this
height, of insolent madness, he delights to show himself, and graple with
them, that the pride of man may be abased, and every one that is exalted may be
laid low: that he only may be exalted, and his Name set up in that day; David
was much troubled, at that murder of Abner, yet he could not take vengeance
presently, upon the fierce Lion, that had sucked his blood. Why? his power did
not reach it, ye sons of Zerviah (says he) are too hard for me, (2 Samuel 23.
3.) But there are no sons of Zerviah too hard for God, no Lions so strong,
but he can tear them, with infinitely more ease, then a Lion can the tender
kid.

This should comfort us, when we see great and potent enemies rising up against
the Church, what are these before the great Lion, the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah. If the Lord do but roar, if the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, come
against these Lions, they will run like a heard of fearful dear: The Kings of
the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and
the mighty men, are described, trembling at the presence of Christ, when he
appeared but as a Lamb, Rev. 6. 15, 16. They cry to the mountains and the
rocks, to fall upon them, and to hide them from his face; If when Christ
appears like an angry Lamb, the greatest in the world fall before him; what
then will these do, when Christ shall appear as a roaring Lion.

Secondly observe, how gradually the Holy Ghost expresses the destruction of
wicked tyrants; All is not done at once; First the roaring of the Lion does
perish, then their voice, then their teeth are pulled out, next, their prey is
taken away, lastly, their whelps are scattered. Note hence, That usually God
destroys wicked men by degrees.

Here are five steps or degrees of Gods justice, against these Lions.

First, He stops the roaring of the Lions, they shall not be able to make such
a dreadful noise as heretofore; their roaring may be stopped, when their voice
is not, though they can speak, yet they shall not yell.

In the second place, He breaks the very voice of the Lions; they shall not
only not roar, but they shall not so much as speak, either against the
lambs, or against the sheep, or for themselves, the voice of the fierce Lion
shall be taken away. God is able to silence Lions, and stop their mouths, not
only from devouring and roaring, but from speaking.

Thirdly, When their voice is taken away and their roaring, yet their teeth may
remain: and there will be biting and tearing still, though they have done
roaring and yelling; therefore with a third stroke God breaks out their
teeth, the teeth of the young Lions are broken. So the Psalmist prays, Psalm.
58. 6. Break their teeth in their mouths, break out the great teeth of the
young Lions O Lord: that is, take away the instruments, by which they oppress,
the means by which they tear and rend, as Lions with their cruel teeth.

Fourthly, Christ deals further with these Lions, he not only breaks their
teeth, by which they used to hurt others, but he takes away their prey and
their meat, they shall not have wherewith to live themselves; they were wont
to suck the blood of the slain, and to eat the flesh of the poor; but now
the Lord will pluck away their prey, they themselves shall be starved or pincht
with hunger.

Lastly, Not only shall their meat be taken away, but they themselves shall be
scattered and dispersed, that is the last step of their calamity. Their dens
shall be broken up, and their lurking places shall be opened; they shall run
from place to place* from Nation to Nation. This is the judgment of the Lord
upon Lions, and the portion of the cruel enemies from our God.

Who has not seen the truth of all this in our days; we have had Lions,
roaring Lions, rending, tearing Lions amongst us: It was usual among the
Heathens in their persecutions, to cry out, Away with the Christians to the
Lions: This we have often Christianos ad Leones.
seen, in the figure, poor Christians sent to the Lions, put under the power
of men, as cruel, as bloody, as insatiable as Lions: Many a one might say (as
David, Psalm. 57. 4.) My soul is among Lions: When the watchman (in the
Prophet) was asked, Watchman what of the night? he answered. A Lion my Lord
(Isa. 21. 7.) Our sorrowful watchmen, standing upon their Towers,
(considering those sad times) being asked, what of the day? have answered, We
see a Lion, a company of Lions. tearing and rending in many parts of the
Nation; not bodies and estates only, but souls and consciences. God has
wonderfully delivered his darling from the Lions, his Daniels from the Lions
den: He has already delivered us so far, that the Lions dare not roar, as
they were wont, the teeth of many of the young Lions are broken, many of the
old Lions are ready to perish for want of prey, and not a few of their whelps
are scattered abroad; God has raised up Sampsons to tear these Lions, which
roared upon us; he has stirred up David's to smite these Lions, and rescue the
prey out of their teeth: And though many Lions are amongst us, yet they dare
not roar, much less, tear as they have done; though the beasts be alive, yet
(for the most part) the Lions are dead: they are beasts still, as base, and
vile, and bloody in their natures as ever, but their powerful Lion-like
strength is abated: That glorious prophecy, is in some sense, and in some
part, fulfilled at this day; The wholfe dwells with the lamb, the leopard lies
down with the kid, and the calfe and the young lion, and the fatling together,
and a little child may lead them; they cannot, they dare not, hurt nor
destroy in all our mountain, Isa. 11. 6, 8. I am sure, we may set our seal to
this truth of Eliphaz, we have seen Lions, and fierce Lions, old Lions, and
young Lions, even the stout Lions whelps, some scattered abroad, some
destroyed, some consumed by the mighty power of God.

Further, It is here said in the text, That the old Lion shall perish for want
of prey: It is a strange expression, Lions have the greatest power to get
provision, to satisfy their hunger, yea their appetites and humor, yet these
shall want; these Lions, who have all their life time, preyed upon the estates
of other men, even these shall want. Note hence the justice of God; Such as
have made others want, shall at last come to want themselves, they shall perish
for want of prey, they shall have nothing to eat: when thou ceasest to spoil,
thou shall be spoiled, says the Prophet; and when Isa 33. 1.
thou shall make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously
with thee: We must not understand it, as if wicked men do ever give over
sinning, sin, and their desire of sinning, is in a kind infinite: they never
say, now we have done, and will sin no more; but the meaning is, when thou
can sin no more, nor deal treacherously any more, when thou have done thy
utmost, and spent thy strength in spoiling others, or taken all their spoil,
so that thou have done spoiling, because there is no more to spoil, then
others shall spoil thee; And thou Lion, who have preyed upon others a long
time, shall not have a bit thy self, but shall perish for want of prey.

It is the promise of God unto his own people (Psalm. 34. 10. That the Lions
shall lack and suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord, shall not want any
good thing: He expresses it by Lions, to note, that certainly they that fear
him shall not want, for if any creatures in the world can preserve themselves
from hunger, Lions can; if they do but roar, the very beasts will fall down
as a prey before them, but yet (says God) these even these shall rather perish
for hunger, than any one that fears me shall want. God provides for his
lambs, for innocent persons, for those who fear him, though they have no
strength to provide for themselves; but the wicked who have greatest power, and
have been most active to provide for themselves, shall pine with want; they who
have caused so many to be bitten with hunger, shall at last be hunger-bitten,
and for want of meat, gnaw their tongues.

Lastly, Where it is said, that the Lions whelps are scattered abroad, Observe,
God will not only destroy the persons of wicked men, but their families and
posterities, they and their whelps shall all be scattered; he will not leave
them so much, as a name or a remembrance, (Psalm. 36. 6.) I sought his place
(says the Prophet) and he could not be found; there was no print of him, no
man could remember, that there was such a man in the world, unless to curse
his memory.

I shall only give one caution respecting this, and so conclude the point. That
which is here affirmed in the general by Eliphaz, concerning the destruction
of wicked men, Lions and fierce Lions, is not to be taken as a truth in the
universal experience of it; we are not to understand it thus, as if all
persons, all Lion-like persons at all times, perish, and are destroyed, and
scattered abroad: But Eliphaz speaks of what is usually done: or he speaks of
what God can easily do at any time, and of what God may justly do at all
times. Lions, fierce Lions, tyrants, oppressors, he both may and can scatter
when he pleases. Yet we find, that God has permitted some Lions, to live
fully, and to die quietly; they spend all their days in roaring and rending,
in tearing and devouring, and yet themselves are not devoured: God often
suspends this Justice, but it is for weighty reasons; for, in a word,

First, If God should destroy all Lion-like men, the joints of the world would
be unloosed, and the bands of humane society broken asunder. God forbad the
children of Israel, to destroy all the Canaanites, least the beasts of the
field should multiply, etc.

Secondly, If God should hunt all these Lions out of the world, his own people
would live by sense, rather then by faith; and seem to be terrified by the
visible actings of wrath, rather then allured by the promises of mercy, or
tenders of free grace.

Thirdly, He deferres them, until they have sucked blood enough, rent enough,
and done evil enough, even filled up the measure of their sin, and fulfilled
the righteous purpose of God, by their unrighteousness. As these Lions fill
their own bellies, so they fulfill Gods counsels, therefore he lets them alone,
that they may do his work, though they little think of it, and less intend
it.

Lastly, Eliphaz speaks of what God did frequently, in those times of the
world, wherein they lived; for then God dealt more by outward judgments, then
in these Gospel times. As his mercies are now more spiritual, so usually are
his judgments.

JOB. Chap. 4. Verse. 9, 10, 11. Now a thing was secretly brought unto me, and
mine ear received a little thereof.

In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sieepe falls on men,
etc.


THis part of the Chapter, from the twelfth Verse unto the end, contains the
third Argument, by which Eliphaz labors to convince and reprove Job of his
impatient complainings. In the whole context we may observe two general parts.

1. The Argument it self by which he reproves him. 2. The confirmation or the
proof of that Argument.
The matter of the Argument, is contained in the seventeenth Verse. Shall
mortal man be more just the God? shall a man be more pure than his Maker? The
Argument may be formed thus.

That man carries himself rashly, and sinfully, who would seem more just and
pure then God, his Maker.

But thou Job carriest thy self as if thou were more just, then God thy Maker.

Therefore thou carriest thy self very sinfully and rashly.

He confirms this Argument two ways.

1. By an Argument taken from Divine authority. 2. By an Argument taken from
reason.
His Argument taken from Divine authority lies in the former five Verses of
this context, (sc. 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16.) I may give it thus.

That is to be received as a truth, which God from heaven immediately declares
to his servant, in a vision.

But God has declared and revealed this to me, in a vision, that he who
contends with God, carries himself very sinfully.

Therefore it is to be received as a truth.

The first part of the Argument is unquestionable; that it is a truth which God
reveals from Heaven in a Vision. And that God had revealed this unto Eliphaz,
from Heaven in a Vision, he himself at large declares in those five Verses,
describing both the manner how, and the time when this truth was revealed to
him.

His second Argument from reason, is grounded upon the common logical rule, of
arguing from the greater to the less, (Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21.) The sum of it
may be thus conceived.

That which would be folly and sinful boldness in Angels, if they should
aspire and take upon them to do, is much more sinful in a mortal man.

But if Angels should go about to justify themselves, or stand upon terms
with God, it would be sin and folly in them.

Therefore it is much more sin and folly in mortal man, to justify himself
before God, etc.

The Major or the first proposition is undeniable. The second proposition is
proved and illustrated to the end of the Chapter. Wherein is showed in what
condition man now stands: how weak and how poor a thing a man is compared
unto an Angel; therefore if it would be sin and folly in Angels to compare
with God, it must much more be sin and folly in man. So we see how Eliphaz
confirms the major proposition of the first Syllogism.

The second proposition or assumption which he inferres upon Job, But thou Job
carriest thy self so as if thou were more just than God: he proves by that sad
expostulation, Chap. 3. And takes that for granted. We may form it thus.

He that complains of God, as if he had done him wrong, makes himself more
just then God.

But thou Job, have made such a complaint, Chap. 3. as if God had done thee
wrong in afflicting thee, or in giving and in continuing thy life under such
afflictions.

Therefore, thou seem to make thy self more just, then God, or to say that
God has dealt unjustly or injuriously with thee.

This I take to be the Logic of the remaining part of this Chapter.

And having cleared his manner of reasoning in general, I shall descend to
open particulars.

Now a thing was secretly brought unto me, and mine ear received a little
thereof. I must yet resolve a question before I explain the terms; the
question is this. Whether this were a true vision sent from God, or whether it
were only feined by Eliphaz, thereby to gain authority to what he spoke?

There are many Expositors of great name, who are very confident that this
vision was a fiction or holy fraud; a vision of Eliphaz his own brain, not a
vision from Heaven. Some have gone further, maintaining that it was a vision
sent from Hell, an illusion of the Devil, thereby to strengthen the hands of
Eliphaz, in vexing and troubling Job.

It cannot be denied, but that many have pretended visions from God, when they
have received none; they have belyed the Almighty with their Dreams and
Revelations, when they have seen nothing. Thus (1 Kings 22. 11.) Zedekiah the
false Prophet takes upon him, to have had a vision from God, by which he would
confirm Ahab in his counsel to go up to Ramoth Gilead. And Zedekiah the
son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron, and he said, thus says the Lord,
with these shall thou push the Syrians till thou have consumed them. And in the
prophecy of Jeremiah you have Hananiah the false Prophet, not only speaking
the language, but dressing himself in all the formalities of a vision; he
comes forth with a yoke upon his neck, and breaks it before the people, and
tells them, thus will God break the yoke of your captivity, and at such a
time.

The true Prophets complain often of the false, for crying up their
deceivings, under the warrant of visions and dreams, when all was but a dream
indeed, a mere fancy, or studied imposture to mislead the people, and gain
credit to their lies. While a man has nothing but ordinary humane authority,
for things extraordinary, he is easily rejected.

Man is subject to error, he may deceive and be deceived; therefore when they
would put a new nothing upon the world, as an infallible truth, and have it
swallowed without chewing, received without disputing, then usually they
pretended that it was (quid Divinum) a doctrine or message received immediately
from God. And it is well observed, that this course of pretending to Divine
revelation, was very frequent amongst the Heathen: when their Wise men had a
mind to fasten, some unwonted opinion upon the vulgar. Among the Romans, Numa,
(to the intent they might be received with greater authority) stamped his laws,
with a kind of divinity, and told the people that he had received them from
the Goddess Aegeria. As if he had said, these laws, are not such as I have
coined and fashioned by my own policy, drawn up or enacted by my own power, I
had them from the Goddess. So Plato informs us of another lawmakers (Minos
the Cretian) that he used to enter into Caves and solitary places, where (he
told the people) he received laws and immediate dictates from Jupiter their
God, to govern them by. This drew a great estimation and reverence upon him.
Valerius Maximus and Herodotus tells us of those Valor. lib. 1. Herod. lib. 1.
other Lawmakers, Licurgus and Seuleucus, using the like Statestratagems to
overruled the people. Licurgus said, he received his laws from Apollo:
Zaleucus and Pisistratus avouch, Minerva for the Directresse or Doctresse of
Theirs. So that both among the people of God, and among Heathens, it has been
very frequent to pretend Divine authority; that they might with the more
estimation put off either such points of doctrine, or such rules of policy, as
themselves had invented.

For this of Eliphaz, howsoever some charge him directly, and Rem in dubio
relinquimus videtur tamen potius vera fuisse visio, e^s^ ea abata^ur. Merc.
others leave the matter in doubt, only turning the scale with a probability,
(it seems rather that it was a true vision.) Yet I shall adventure to resolve
directly, that his was a true vision, as well as a vision of truth sent from
God. And the reasons which sway with me are these three.

First, if we consider the manner of this vision, the description here made,
holds exact proportion with those, of which there is no question, but they were
the Oracles of Heaven. When a thing is done as God does it, it is some argument
that God has done it. I grant, this reason is not demonstrative or infallible,
because Satan and our own hearts are very apt to make imitations of holy
things, for sinful ends. Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light,
and the heart can disguise or shape its own dark conceptions, by the light of
divine revelations.

Take then a second reason, Eliphaz was a godly man. It Is granted on all hands,
that Eliphaz and his friends were right in their affections, though they failed
in this action. God was angry with them indeed, and told them in the close of
this dispute (Chap 42. 7.) That they had not spoken of him the thing that was
right, as Job his servant had, yet he bids Job pray and offer sacrifice for
them, which he would not have done, unless they had been upon good terms with
him in general, and in a present capacity, for mercy and acceptance. Now it
being supposed that Eliphaz was a godly man, it is a sin not to be supposed
of him, that he would make boast of a false revelation, and with such
deliberate gravity put a lie upon God.

Thirdly, the matter which he professes to have received in this vision, is a
great and a holy truth of God. Man never belyes God to confirm the truth of
God. When any boast vainly of revelations, it is to confirm their own phancies
and delusions. It Is rare when men are so zealous for truth, as to improve all
that God has spoken in the maintenance of it; I have not read of any that have
fained a word from God, to maintain that which is really the Word of God. We
find all along in Scripture, that when visions from God were falsely
pretended, they ever tended to secure the heart in false opinions, or
unwarrantable practices.

The Apostle Paul found many who falsified the stamp of the Spirit, and forged
his hand and seal to establish error (2 Thessalonians. 2. 2.) I beseech you brethren,
that you be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled either by spirit, or by
word, or by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. That
gross error was scattered in the Church of Thessalonica, that the day of
Christ was at hand, that in those beginnings of the Gospel, there should be an
end of all things. To confirm this, false teachers boasted of the Spirit, an
immediate revelation from God: or a word immediately from the mouth, or a
Letter under the hand of Paul. How active is error to find patronage? It cares
not whom it belyes, so it self may pass for truth. Thousands love errors,
but none will own them by that name. And therefore (because children bear their
fathers name) they would father them upon the God of truth, or upon men, most
eminent for truth. Montanus the Heretic, said he had the Holy Ghost his
Paracl^te, dictating those erroneous doctrines to him, beside Histor. Eccl. l.
5 c. 14, 16.
his Prophetesses, Prisca and Mavinilla. Mahomet, that Grand hellish Impostor
often pretended visions from Heaven. And the story assures us that he cunningly
made use of the disease of his body, to persuade his Disciples of the
soundness of his doctrine. For being afflicted with the falling sickness,
when at any time a fit was upon him he made the people believe that he was in
an ecstasy or ravishment of spirit, at the appearance of the Angel Gabriel, who
revealed many mysteries to him. And having by long use and familiarity taught a
Pigeon to seed at his ear, he by art prevailed with the people, to feed at his
poisonous mouth: as if his words had been the inspirations of the Holy Ghost,
who (as he affirmed) came then to him, in the form of a Dove, and taught him
those secrets.

So then, this of Eliphaz was a true vision, because it was the confirmation of
a truth. Invented visions are in use only to gain credit to the inventions of
man, or the visions of the Devil. Now for the matter and words themselves.

Now a thing was secretly brought unto me. We translate [thing,] the Hebrew is
[word,] A word was secretly (...). Factum esse verbum alicut nihil aliud
significat quam factam esse revelationem in a^iquo, and Deum cognitione
futurorum, instar lumini^ mentem illustrasse. Cyril. in 1 cap. Hos. v 1. (...)
brought unto me, but it is usual both in Hebrew and Greek to call A thing, A
word. Luke 2. 15. The Shepherds said, Let us go to Bethlem to see this thing,
the Greek is, to see this word which is done. Though here, it is proper enough,
to say, A word was brought unto me.

Now a thing, or a word, was brought unto me, it was brought unto me secretly.
The language of the Prophets was, The word of the Lord came unto me. There are
two words in our translation, (secretly brought,) but the Hebrew is one; and
that word signifies to steal, or to do a thing by stealth; so it may be
translated, A thing was brought unto me by stealth, or was stole into me: M
Broughton near this, A speech came by stealth upon me; we translate fully to
the sense, A thing was secretly brought to me, as if it were whispered into the
ear, and sent in closely to the spirit. And it is thus expressed, by way of
opposition to another way, in which God reveals his mind unto his people. He
sometimes comes openly and speaks aloud, that all may take notice, or because
all ought. Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet. Things are
brought openly to the people, secretly to the Prophets; what the Lord speaks in
the ear, or to the heart of a Prophet, that he by the Prophet speaks on the
house top, to all his people. A thing was secretly brought, or a thing was
whispered unto Eliphaz. But he speaks it aloud to Job. This word or this thing,
is said to be stolen into him, or to be brought unto him by stealth, for three
reasons, which I shall but name and proceed.

First, a thing done by stealth, is done suddenly. The Thief hastens to do
mischief, he makes no delays. Then secondly, a thing done by stealth is done
secretly: a Thief comes closely in the dark; stealth is committed with
greatest privacy; and to say a thing is brought by stealth, is as much as to
say, it is brought privately. Thirdly, a thing done by stealth, is done
unexpectedly. A man seldom looks for the Thief, he is upon him in the way,
upon him in his house, before he is aware. A Thief is usually as unexpected,
as he is a^ unwelcome guest So this word came or was brought in by stealth,
because it came, suddely, it came silently, and it came unexpectedly to
Eliphaz. And in these three respects, Christ himself is said to come as a
Thief, Behold I come as a thief in Rev. 16. 15.
the night. As the word of Christ comes to many of his people now, so the
person of Christ will come at the last unto all, He will come by stealth, or as
a thief, suddenly, secretly, unexpectedly, when the world shall little dream
of him, and his Church scarce be awake for him.

Note from this, first, That divine truths are infused into us, not borne in
us, or borne with us; every thing which is of Heaven, comes unto us from
Heaven; it is either stolen in secretly, or thundered in loudly: sometimes the
Prophets and Ministers of Christ, speaking aloud, carry truth into the soul:
sometimes God whispers it into the soul; one way or other, truth must be
brought in, for it grows not in us: our hearts by nature are not only like
white paper, having no inscription, not a letter of Gods will written in them,
but they are like paper blotted or blurred, written all over with the corrupt
principles, and positions of our own wills. God by his Spirit first crosses or
wipes out those, and then writes down his own golden rules, of holy truth and
heavenly wisdom. This he does, first in conversion from sin to grace and
holiness, and afterward in all the increases of grace, and growths of
holiness, There is not a syllable of the law of God in any man's heart, till
the finger of God writes it there; I will put my law in their mind, and write
it in their hearts, which is an allusion unto the two Tables of the Law. They
were first written by the finger of God, and then put into the Ark: So God
first writes the Law in our hearts, and then puts it into our minds; he lays
it up in the Ark of our understanding and memory.

Secondly observe, That God steals truths into the hearts of his people
unawares. As they often expect and wait long for knowledge, so they sometimes
know before they expect. A truth either in whole or part, in the matter or
clearer light of it, comes like a Thief into the heart, suddenly, secretly,
unlooked for: in which case it is ever true, that truth unexpected is doubly
welcomed. The way of the Spirit of God is always undiscernable to flesh and
blood. The soul receives a thing, and the man knows not how; he can (scarce
possibly, not at all) tell where, by whom, or which way it came to him; it was
brought, secretly brought; and with a most blessed, gracious slight of hand,
conveyed into his heart. Yet sometime truth enters in State, and may be said to
make its passage visibly, into the heart of a man. The word comes, not as a
company of Thieves, but as a band of Soldiers, with weapons drawn, and
terrible shouts, tearing open the soul, and breaking open the iron gate of the
heart, locked and barred with unbelief, to secure that cursed crew of lusts,
garrisoned within it. The weapons of our warfare (says the Apostle) are
mighty, through God, 2 Cor. 10. 4. The word is mighty, wonderful in strength,
it comes upon the soul as an armed man, to spoil it of all sinful treasures,
yea of the very life of sin. Sometimes the Lord proclaims war, as by a
Herald of Arms against a man and openly prepares for his siege and battery. He
surprises another, and steals him into a happy captivity to himself.

A thing was secretly brought unto me, and mine ear received a little thereof.
Mine ear caught somewhat of it, so Mr. Broughton. The word (...) Pa^^c^la,
pars, medicum.
signifies a part or a portion. Mine ear received a little: yet we are not to
understand this, as if Eliphaz had taken in, only some fragments or imperfect
notes, of what God delivered, or had heard to halves. For doubtless Eliphaz
received all that was brought, he turned nothing back; he said not a little is
enough, I need not the rest; that he received but a little, was not from
neglect of the rest, but from inability to receive more, or to receive it more
perfectly. And though he had not all of every part, yet he had a part of all;
it was not a little of this, and none of that: little respects somewhat of
every truth, not some one truth. He received, though not all, yet a perfect
model of all, that was brought.

Further, this speech may have reference unto our present condition, concerning
which the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13.) We know but in part: now when he says, we
know but in part; it is not as if we had but a part of Gods will, made known
unto us. The Word of God and the works of God are perfect. And the Apostle
assures the Church of Ephesus, That he had not shunned to declare unto them the
whole counsel of God, Acts 20. 27. The whole (which concerns man) is
declared, but we know that whole but in part. Such is our weakness and
infirmity, that we cannot take in All of All, no nor any part of all in the
full latitude and extent of it; Thus we know but in part; so says Eliphaz,
when this was brought to me, mine ear received but little of it; my narrow
ear could drink in, but some drops of that ocean, which was poured out upon
me. All that man apprehends, is but little, in respect of what Modeste
loqui^ur, qu^si n^n plene acceper^t, quod sciend^m esset de hac ^e. Quod
optimum est and eximiam comprehendere non potest mortalis homo. Mercer.
God offers now, or of what hereafter he shall apprehend. Eliphaz speaks
modestly and humbly of himself; God brought a thing unto me, and I am such a
poor straightened vessel, that I could receive but a little of it; yet
somewhat I caught hold of, which I am about to make known unto thee.

We may note from this. First, Holy truths, are very pleasant to the ear of a
holy person. A thing was brought unto me, and mine ear caught a little of it;
As when meats pleasant to the taste, are brought to a man, he puts forth his
hand and takes them; or when pleasant music sounds, the ear catches it, or
we drink it in greedily at the ear; so when holy truths are revealed, a holy
heart catches them: The ear is not more affected with pleasant music, or the
palate with pleasant meats, then the understanding spiritualized, is affected
with spiritual truths; The ear of a holy man takes in holy things with
pleasure, and therefore he is said to catch them, or drink them in, as, with
much desire and ravishing delight: David sound more sweetness in the truths of
God, then in the honey or honey comb. The spirit of a regenerate man, does so
much catch heavenly Doctrine, that in the Hebrew, the word which signifies such
doctrine, signifies also catching or receiving; and a word from the same root,
signifies the palate Vide Buxtorf. Lex. in verto (...)
of the mouth; which may hint us thus much, that heavenly doctrine, pleases the
palate or taste of a heavenly mind; And the reason of it is, because there is
a suitableness in the heart of every godly man, with every truth of God; All
delight arises from proportion and suitableness, between the object and the
organ, in sensitives: between the object and the understanding, will,
affections, in spirituals; That, which makes delight to the eye, is the
sutablenesse of visibles to the eye: and that which makes delight the taste, is
the sutablenesse of edibles to the palate: and so that which makes delight to
the soul, is the sutablenesse of intelligibles to the understanding: Hence the
reason is clear, why wicked men will not receive the things of God, but
instead of catching them, catch at them, snarle and murmr at them, speak,
yea rail and fight against them; their hearts are unsuitable to those truths,
therefore they distaste them, therefore they relish them no more, then the white
of an egg, or a dry stick. Nay, not only have they no pleasant taste, but they
have a bitter taste in their mouths, they are as gall and wormwood to them,
they are a vexation and torment to them: The truth which the two Witnesses
publish, torments Revel. 11.
them that dwell on the earth; and then no marvel if instead of catching
those truths, to embrace them, they caught the Witnesses and kill them.

Observe secondly; That the ear and heart of man in this state of corruption,
are vessels too narrow, to take in or hold all the truths of God. I have many
things to say, (says Christ to his Disciples) but ye cannot bear them now,
Joh. 16. 12. Nor could they ever fully bear, so much as Christ had to say. We
have line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little, and there a little,
Isa. 28. 10. because it is but here and there a little, some few lines or
precepts, which we are able to learn, and digest into our spirits; whole
showers of divine truths, are often rained upon us (Heb. 6.) yet we drink in
but a drop or two; we swim, as it were, in a whole ocean, a sea of holy
revelations, but we are narrow-necked-bottles, and how little is it which
bubbleth in? mine ear received a little thereof. The truth of God, is like God
himself, infinite; Truth is nothing else but the mind of God, and that is
infinite; therefore we who are not only finite, but straightened, cannot
possibly comprehend it.

Thirdly, Mine ear received a little thereof; it was but a little he received,
yet he received a little, all did not fall beside his ear, all did not slip
away, he caught somewhat: Note from hence, That the ear and heart of a godly
man, ever receive somewhat, when the truths of God are revealed. I cannot get
in all, my heart will not receive all, my memory will not retain all, but a
little it will hold, somewhat it takes in at every Sermon, and from every
vision of God; (Sermons are the visions of God, and somewhat of Gods mind is
brought to you in every holy Sermon.) Natural men are like sieves, like
vessels without a bottom, or full of holes, into which these truths being put,
run out every drop: the best, in this life, are leaking vessels, much drops
out; Eliphaz received a little; How many hear much and receive nothing? They
come empty to the Ordinances, and they return empty: their ea^es have been
filled with a sound, but their hearts have not caught a syllable, not a word of
truth is written in their hearts, not a letter laid up in their minds: And
that is the reason, why not a word is to be seen in their lives; How can they
hold out the word in a pure conversation, who have not received it into a pure
conscience?

In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falls on men.
The former Verse, showed us the manner how, that thing was brought to Eliphaz,
a thing was secretly brought to me; this shows the time when it was brought,
it was (says he) in thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep
falls on men.

In thoughts from the visions of the night.] Some read it, in the Vel post
visio nes noctis, sicut dicimus a coena a ^randio, sic Hos. 6. 2. vel ^n
cogitationibu^ vis^^num noctis, ut Mem, Genitivum ind^cet. (...)
thoughts which I had, after the visions of the night. So Hos. 6. 2. From two
days, Heb. After two days; or, in thoughts which I had in the visions of the
night, or, in thoughts of the visions of the night; The Original bears any of
these readings.

In thoughts.] The Hebrew word, signifies properly the boughs of a tree; and
so some translate; In the bougbes, sprigs or branches of the visions of the
night: but we render it well, in the thoughts: And thoughts are called boughs
or branches; First, because thoughts grow from the mind, sprout and shoot up
from the mind, as branches from the stock of a tree; From the root or stock of
a man's understanding, a branch of thoughts grows up, sometimes like a tall
Cedar of Libanus, as high as Heaven. Secondly, the boughs and branches of a
tree, are many, thick, interwoven, and crossing one another; such are the
thoughts of a man, he has many, even multitudes of them; In the multitude of
my thoughts, says David? The mind puts forth many branches and twiggs, they
sprout and shoot forth every way; thousands of various thoughts are moving,
upon various objects, and to various ends; some are earthly, some heavenly. The
branches of some minds, are but briars and thorns; others bear the Lilly and
the Rose, their root is in Heaven, and they grow heavenward. Thirdly, thoughts
are called branches, because the branch or the bough, brings forth and bears
the fruit; the stock or the body of a tree, brings forth fruit, at the
branches: So all the fruit of our souls, is borne upon, or from our thoughts;
our actions are the fruits of our thinkings: Thoughts are possible actions;
look what a man thinks, that he does, or would do: And such as our thoughts
are, such our actions are, or would be: Thoughts are the firstborne, the
blossoms and bloomes of the soul, the beginnings of our strength, whether for
good or evil; therefore the Hebrew word, is elegantly translated from a bough
or a beanch, to a thought.

The Hebrew word for speech, prayer and meditation, springs (...) Stirps,
f^u^ex. quia Sermo e cord, ut arbor e terra nascitur. Shind. Elegans metaph^^a
sumpta a super eminentibus arbo^um ramusculis (and est p^imogenta hujus vo^is
significatio) ad phantasmatum extremitates ac velut teneras cogitationum
summitates notionem suam extendit. Bold. Quousque claudicatis inter duas
prominentias. Merc. Quasi Elias audueret populum, quod duas eminentias sibi
constituerent, Deum and Baalem quasi aequales, inter quas nulla est comparatio.
2 Cor. 6. 15. Bold.
from a root of the same signification; because speech, prayer and meditation,
spring up from the Spirit as a stalk, or branches from the stock of a tree.

There is one thing further to be observed from this word (for it is a very
elegant word, and therefore I spend a little the more time upon it) In thoughts
from the visions of the night; The word signifies, not only a bough, but the
highest bough, the topbough of a tree: A tree has some under-boughs, and some
topboughes, as the Prophet speaks (Isa. 17. 6.) Two or three berries in the
top of the uppermost bough: it is the same word, which here in the text, we
translate thoughts; as if Eliphaz should say, in my very uppermost, or highest
thoughts, in those very top-branches of my budding phancie, which I had from
the visions of the night. The highest, the top-branches which grow from the
soul of a godly man, are for, or about the highest mercies, top-mercies, for
Heaven and heavenly things. A wicked man's highest and uppermost thoughts are
for the earth, his thoughts for the earth, outgrow all his other thoughts: But
a godly man's thoughts, for Heaven and spirituals* outgrow all his other
thoughts, his thoughts for Heaven, are the highest and uppermost branches of
his soul. We have this word used, in the 1 Kings 18. 21. How long (says
Elijah) will you halt between two opinions? That word which we there translate
opinions, is here translated thoughts; hence some render that in the Kings
thus, How long do ye halt between two top-thoughts, or high thoughts? As if
this were the thing, which Elijah reproved in that people, that they had high
thoughts, both of God and of Baal, top-thoughts of both: and they (as it were)
set Baal, a dumb Idol, as high in their thoughts, estimations and opinions, as
they did the living God. Why do ye halt between two uppermost opinions, highest
thoughts, or thoughts of equal height, concerning God and Baal? Your thoughts
of your Idol, are as high as of God himself. What! will you make an Idol,
equal with God? An Idol is a base thing, a low thing, a thing below upon the
dunghill (therefore called a dunghill god) The true God, is on high, he is in
the highest Heavens, he is higher than the Heaven of Heavens, and do you
debase him thus, by halting between two thoughts of equal height, concerning
Him and Baal? They who set up an Idol, make it equal unto God. All false
worship is a setting of our posts by Gods posts, and of our threshold by his
threshold, a making both, of equal height and worth.

And to clear it yet further; (Psalm. 119. 13.) the same word is used by David,
when he professes, I hate vain thoughts, or as some read it, I hate vain
things; He calls Idolatrous thoughts vain thoughts, because they are wavering,
inconstant or unsettled thoughts, in further allusion to the boughs of a tree:
as the top-most and highest boughs of a tree, are shaken with every puff of
wind, and waver too and fro with every blast, so are the thoughts Quasi dicat
Idolatriam odio habui, quae plura eminentia supremo cultu reveretur, cum sit
unum.
of Idolaters: or because (as before) Idolatry sets up Too high Thoughts,
adoring an Idol as much, or in competition and rivality with the everliving
God. The higher our thoughts are of God, the more excellent they are; but the
higher our thoughts are of false worship, the vainer they are; and to have as
high thoughts of an Idol, as of the living and true God, are the vainest
thoughts of all; those high thoughts are low thoughts, the lowest thoughts,
thoughts most hateful, I hate vain thoughts.

From the visions of the night.] As I have opened that word about the thoughts
somewhat largely, so this of the visions, requires more enlargement, yet I
shall do it as briefly as I may.

Visions were a special way of divine revelation: Heb. 1. 1. God who at sundry
times, and in diverse manners, spoke to our Fathers (...).
by the Prophets, says the Apostle. God spoke at sundry times, and he spoke in
diverse manners. Now amongst those diverse manners of speaking, speaking by or in
visions was one. The Jewish Doctors, observe four degrees of divine
revelation. The first they Paulus Fagius, in Exodus 28.
called Prophecy, which included vision, and any apparition whereby the will
of God was made known. They had a second way of Goodw. Hebr. Antiq.
divine revelation, which they called, The inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
whereby the party was enabled, without vision or apparition, to prophecy:
either as prophesying is taken for the foretelling of things to come, or for
the resolving of things in doubt: The Rabbis give us the difference between
these two, prophecy and inspiration: In prophecy (though it was from the Holy
Ghost) a man was cast into a trance, or brought into an ecstasy, his senses
being taken away; but speaking by inspiration of the Holy Ghost, was without
any such change in, or impressions upon the body; So David, and other Penmen
of the Scriptures, wrote by the immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost, yet
without visible apparitions to them, or visible change upon them. Thirdly, God
revealed himself, by Vrim and Thummim, which was an answer given by the Ephod,
or by the stones that were on the breast plate of the high Priest. These three
ways of divine revelation (as they observe) ceased in the second Temple. The
Jewish writers having this tradition, That after the latter Prophets, Haggai,
Zechariah and Malachy, the Holy Ghost departed from Israel; meaning, the Holy
Ghost (not in the ordinary work of sanctification, but) in those extraordinary
ways of prophecy, inspiration, and of Vrim and Thummim, went up and departed
from them. There was yet a fourth way of divine revelation, which they call
Bathcoll, the daughter of a voice, or echo, declaring the will of God
immediately from Heaven: such some conceive to be, the voice heard from Heaven,
Math. 3. 1. proclaiming the testimony of God concerning Christ, a voice was
heard from Heaven, saying, this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

But to pass from these traditions of the Jews, we shall give you the
doctrine of divine revelations, more distinctly from the Scriptures. We find
(Numb. 12. 6, 7, 8.) three distinct ways, in which the Lord revealed himself
of old unto his people. If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make
my self known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream; My
servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house, with him will I
speak mouth to mouth, even apparently; and not in dark speeches, and the
similitude of the Lord shall he behold. This is an illustrious text, describing
three distinct ways or degrees of holy revelation. First, by vision which we
have here in Job. Secondly, by a Dream, which was when God presented somewhat
to them sleeping: This kind of revelation God vouchsafed, not only to his own
people and Prophets, but to Heathens also and strangers from his Covenant.
Pharaoh had a revelation by a dream (Genesis 41.) concerning the seven years of
famine; and Nebuchadnezzar had a wonderful revelation by a dream (Dan. 2.)
concerning the state of the four Monarchies. The wise men of the East, were
warned in a dream, to return into their Country another way, Math. 2. But
with the Saints, these revelations by dreams, were very frequent; Jacob (Genesis
28.) in a dream, as he slept upon a stone, saw a ladder, etc. Joseph, Jacobs
son, had so many dreams, that his brethren jeered him with it, and called him,
the Captaine-dreamer, The dreamer, a Master of dreams, Genesis 37. 19. Joseph
(...)
the husband of Mary, was twice warned in a dream, first that he should not
forsake his wife, Mat. 1. and then that he should go into Egypt, Mat. 3. Many
other the like revelations by dreams, might be instanced in, but I forbear.
There is a third way spoken of in this text, and that is, speaking mouth to
mouth; my servant Moses is not so, with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even
apparently. This is a more eminent way of heavenly manifestations than the
former; Moses had a privilege above the ordinary Prophets. For to speak mouth
to mouth, is expounded (by Apparently) I will speak plainly or apparently,
not in a vision or in a dream; When a man speaks mouth to mouth to his
friend, or (as the Scripture phrases our communion with God, in Heaven) face to
face; This is opposed to a more remote or obscure communion. As our seeing God
face to face in Heaven, so his speaking to us, mouth to mouth on earth, notes
the clearest and fullest revelation: It is to give us his mind, nakedly,
without any figure or shadow; or (as Christ is said once in the Gospel) to
speak plainly, and not in Parables. And these speakings mouth to mouth, were
of two sorts: Either immediate, as himself did unto Moses, or as to others, by
the ministry of Angels; God often employed Angels in this service, to declare
his mind, and bring messages to his people; This was a kind of speaking mouth
to mouth: but Moses had an honor beyond this, with him will I speak mouth to
mouth, I by my self, not I, by a created Angel.

Visions (to keep to the term in hand) were (you see) a principal means, by
which God broke his mind, and unlockt the secrets of his counsels. If there be
a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him in a vision.
And to clear this point about visions yet more fully; We may distinguish of
diverse sorts of visions. First, A vision is sometime put for any ordinary
dispensation of the will of God, to his Prophets or Ministers, who as from God,
dispense it to his people, (Prove. 29. 18.) Where vision fails, the people
perish, that is, where there are none to publish and declare the mind of God
(no not in an ordinary way) to a people, that people are in the ready way to
perdition. Without the visions of grace, there is no ordinary way to the
visions of glory. Secondly, By a vision, we understand an extraordinary work of
God, manifesting his mind to his Prophets, either to assure future successes,
or to resolve doubtful Quaeries: And these were called Visio est omnis
doct^ina d^vini^us revelata; quia Deus quibuscunque vsum est revelare, res
ipsas quodam^do videndas and spectandas oculis servorum suo um exhibet ad
obsignandam earum certitudinem. Jun. in 1 cap. Isa.
visions, because by them things were made so manifest, as if they had been
seen before their eyes: and in some of these revelations, a visible
representation was made to the eye: visions were often attended with
apparitions; In reference to both these sorts of visions, that is appliable, 1 Samuel 9. 9. Before time in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God, thus he
spoke; Come let us go to the Seer, for he that is now called a Prophet, was
before time called a Seer: Prophets were called Seers, because in visions, they
had either an ocular, or an intellectual sight of the mind of God.

Secondly, Visions may undergo this division: There was an open vision, and
there was a private vision: In the 1 Samuel 3. 1. we have the ground of the
distinction, In those days there was no open vision: Open, is opposed to
private or secret; the word imports, a vision appearing in public, and the
meaning of the text is this; there were no Prophets sent openly, and (as it
were) In State, invested with commission, and furnished with messages
Fuerantquidem singulares and privatae, visiones cum pijs communicatae, ut cum
Manoah. Judic. 13 Sed publi^e Prophetarum o^ne munus jacebat. Jun. in loc.
from Heaven unto the people; there was no open vision: yet at that time there
were private visions, as to Manoah, Judge. 13. God revealed himself in those
dark times, to some of his special servants: And so he has and will at all
times. While he has a Church upon the earth, he never shuts himself quite in
Heaven. Open vision may fail, but all visions shall not fail. So open
profession may fail in the reign of Antichrist, in his hour, and in the
power of darkness; as it did in the time of Eliah, yet all profession of the
truth shall never fail: The Lord has always his thousands in secret, who
never bowed their knee to Baal. In many places, since Christ came in the flesh,
there has been no open vision, no holding forth of the truth of Christ, and
yet even in those places, there have been private visions; and a remnant
reserved, to whom God has made known the mysteries, of the Kingdom of Christ:
When darkness covers all in appearance, there may be light which appears not:
and candles under a bushel, when there are none in the Candlesticks. A Goshen
has light, while Egypt is plagued with darkness; and when the Prophets are
benighted, it may be day, with many of the people.

Thirdly, Some visions were without any trance or ravishment, (Genesis 15. 1.) The
word of God came in a vision to Abraham, speaking to his ear, and bidding him
look up to Heaven with his eyes, ver. 5. But often we find, that visions were
accompanied with trances: 'Twas so with Balaam the false Prophet, (Number. 24.
16.) He has said, which saw the visions rf the Almighty, falling into a
trance, but having his eyes open: And it was so with some of the true Prophets,
Daniel saw a vision, and when he heard the voice, Then (says he) was I in a
deep sleep upon my face, (Dan. 10. 9.) Peter was in a trance, when he had the
vision of a sheet let down from Heaven, Act. 10. And the Apostle says, (2
Cor. 12. 1.) I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord, whether in the
body I cannot tell, or whether out of the body I cannot tell, God knows. His
soul had so much acquaintance with God, that he became a stranger to his own
body; his soul was so busied in receiving knowledge from God, that he was
feign to put off the knowledge and care of his body, wholly to God: What the
state of my body was, I know not, God knows.

Fourthly, Some visions were presented only in bare naked words, others were
clothed in types and figures, in the shapes of beasts of the earth, and souls
of the air, of trees, and stones, etc. As to Ezekiel, and Daniel in their
Prophesies, and to John in the book of Revelations: These figures, were as an
Alphabet of sacred Letters, which put together and spel'd, made the mind of
God legible to his servants.

Lastly, The Scripture in hand, hints us a fifth difference about visions. In
thoughts from the visions of the night, that is considerable. There were visions
of the day, and visions of the night; thus it is said (Dan. 2. 19.) when Daniel
expounded Nebuchadnezzars dream, that God made it known to him in visions of
the night, opposing it to visions of the day. Usually the night was the time
for visions; hence (Numb. 22. 18, 19.) Balaam the false Prophet (when the
messengers of Balack came to him) says, Tarry this night, and I will show you
in the morning, he thought to have a vision in the night: So it is observable,
that when Saul and his servant, came to Samuel (1 Samuel 9. 19.) to enquire about
the straid Asses, he tells him, ye shall eat bread with me to day, and to
morrow I will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart; he
desired a night, intimating, that God used to reveal secrets unto him in the
night.

So much concerning visions, with the kinds and differences of them.

From this doctrine of visions, we may take notice of our privilege under the
Gospel. The Apostle says at sundry times and in diverse manners, God spoke unto
our fathers by the Prophets, but he has spoken unto us one way, which exceeds
them all, Even by his Son who is the brightness of his glory, and the
express image of his person, Heb. 1. 2, 3. We have a vision which outshines
all the visions that ever the Prophets or Patriarchs had, from the beginning of
the world. Their light was darkness, at most but a shadow, their visions were
obscurities, and their revelations, concealments, compared with ours. Our
vision is Christ, God manifested in the flesh; Mine eyes have seen thy
salvation, says old Simeon, he had a vision of Christ in person. The land of
Judah was called the valley of vision, because God revealed himself to that
people, more frequently and clearly, than to all the world beside. Where ever
the Gospel is preached, that Land is a valley of vision, a valley of vision
far more lightsome and glorious, than the land of Judah was; the very
darkness of the Gospel, is clearer than the light of the Law. That which was
made glorious had no glory, by reason of that glory which excels, 1 Cor. 3.
10. Only remember, that as our privilege is greater than theirs, so is our
duty; A clear light should be answered with a holier life. And we who have
more evidence of what God would have done, should make more conscience to do
it. Now we are not taught by dreams and visions of the night, We ought to walk
as children of the day. Not only is darkness gone, but the shadows are fled
away. The true light now shines; even he who enlightens every one that comes
into the world. We need not dreams or visions now. Why should we call for
Candles when the Sun is up? We need not Starre-light when we have daylight,
or when the promised Day Star is risen in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19.

Here is one circumstance more in the Text about this vision very Sopor est
somnus profundior, somnus est plus quam do mi^a^io, and sopor plus quam somnus.
(...) Significat gravem somnum, imo plus qu^m somnu^ profundum somnu^ and quasi
lethargu^^
remarkable; it was not only in the night, but in the night when deep sleep
falls on men, or on sorrowful man, man wearied with labor and travel. This
is a more distinct description of the time than the former. It was in the
night, and in that part of the night, when deep sleep falls on men; that
is, in the former part or beginning of the night for the first sleep is the
deep sleep; and we use to say that a man, especially a weary hard-wrought
man, is in a dead sleep, when he is in his first sleep. The word signifies
an extraordinary sleep. It is used (Genesis 2. 21.) where it is said, that God
caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, when he took out his rib and formed
the woman. The Seventy translate it, ecstasy. (...).
Some compare it to a Lethargy; a man in a Lethargy can hardly be awakened.
Such a sleep as Saul was in, 1 Samuel 26. 12 when David came into the trench,
and took away the Spear and the Cruse of water from his bolster. Such an one
as Jonas was in, while the ship was almost sunk with the tempest, Jonah 1. 5.
In both places we have this original word. At the time when such sleep sals
on wearied man, Eliphaz had this vision. And be speaks very Tempus erat quo
prima quies mor^alibus aegris. Incipi^ and dono Divum gratissima se^p^t. In
somnis ecce ante occulos maestissimus Hector. Visus adesse mihi. V^^g. 20.
Aeniad.
elegantly, that this deep sleep falls on men; because such sleep seems to
oppress the spirits, as a heavy weight the body; it falls as heavy as Lead
upon all a man's senses, and overcomes them: we say ordinarily, a man falls
asleep, and it is as true of sleep, that it falls upon a man, and falls with
such a weight, that man is not able to stand under it. We say also, a men is
heavy to sleep, for sleep like a heavy thing, comes down upon him, and then
down comes he. Heathen Poets tell us, that at this time they had visions, or
delusions rather. Satan imitates God in what he can, that he may deceive with
better success.

We may abserve from hence. First, Seeing Eliphaz had this vision when deep
sleep falls upon men, that the power of Gods Spirit works through all
natural impediments: when tired nature is willing to fall, or cannot stay it
self from falling into a deep sleep, then God can awaken us, with his visions,
and make us see, when we cannot hold open our eyes. When God will reveal his
mind to the soul, he overcomes the imperfections of the body. Sleepiness is
an imperfection; if a man be sleepy he is unfit to hear. While the eye is thus
shut, the ear cannot be open. That sleeper in the Acts fell down dead, while
Paul was preaching. Yet when God comes by his mighty power and Spirit, though a
man's ear be shut, he can break through, and get into his heart. The Word has
taken some napping and nodding. Yea, God breaks in by his Almighty power in the
revelations of his will, not only when men are in a dead natural sleep, but
when they are in a sleep of spiritual death. The Word breaks open the bars
of the grave, and loosens John 5. 25.
the bands of death.

Secondly, for as much as Eliphaz had this vision when deep sleep falls on
men, himself being kept awake, or waking. Observe, That, when we are most
retired from the world, then we are most fit to have, and usually have most
communion with God. If a man would but abridge himself of sleep, and wake,
with holy thoughts, when deep sleep falls upon sorrowful laboring men, he
might be entertained with visions from God, though not such visions as Eliphaz
and others of the Saints have had, yet visions he might have. Every time God
communicates himself to the soul, there is a vision of love, or mercy, or
power, somewhat of God in his nature, or in his will, is showed unto us. David
shows us divine work when we go to rest. The bed is not all for sleep;
Commune with your own heart upon your bed and be still, Psalm. 4. Be still or
quiet, and then commune with your hearts; and if you will commune with your
hearts, God will come and commune with your hearts too, his Spirit will give
you a loving visit, and visions of his love. When Jacob fearing the rage of
his brother, had put himself into the best posture of defense he could, and
had sent his wives, and children, his servants and his flocks over the River,
the Text says (Genesis 32. 24.) that Jacob was left alone: which is not to be
understood, as if his company had left or deserted him: Jacobs solitariness
was not passive, but elective. He having disposed of all his family, withdrew
himself, and stayed alone: and what then? then he had a vision indeed; Then
there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day; he spent not the
night in carking and caring what should become of him the morrow: No, he
retires to pray for a blessing upon his former cares, and a blessing he
obtains. It is observable also concerning Isaac, Genesis 24. 36. that he went out
into the fields to meditate (or as others read it) to pray. Some foolishly
gloss upon it, that Isaac being delighted in Astronomy, went out to
contemplate on the Stars. But I believe the walk of Isaac's spirit was above
the Stars. It is a sweet O sancta anima sola esto, ut soli omnium serves
reipsam, quem ex omnibus tibi el^gisti. An nescis ^e verecunduni h^^ere
spo^^um, etc. Bernard.
expression of Bernard, If thou would meet Christ in special communion, do
thou of tentimes retire thy self. Oh chaste and lovely soul, do thou not
know thou have a modest Spouse, that will not come to thee in the throng of
worldly company and employment. Come my beloved (says the Spouse, Cant. 7.
11.) let us go forth into the fields, and lodge in the villages. Let us get
from the tumult of the Creature. He loves to find his Spouse alone, retired
into a Chamber, or into a Closet, or in the fields and Groves, in the Gardens
and shady walks, or in thoughts upon thy bed, having ihe Curtains drawn, and
all the world shut out. Some have visions in the night when deep sleep falls
upon men, but what are their visions? surely they are visions of darkness, not
of light, visions of Hell, rather then visions of Heaven. The Proplet complains
of such, who devise evil upon their beds; they plot and contrive mischief upon
their beds; or they have visions of uncleanness, visions of covetousness,
visions of oppression, black infernal visions. How much better is it to be
blind, then to have such visions? to be asleep, then have such waking thoughts?
But to lie awake in our beds with thoughts of Christ, is far more sweet then
the sweetest sleep. And in the day, could we make more vacations from the
world, we should have more business in Heaven. Most men are mudding in the
earth all day, and if they wake in the night, earthly care keeps them awake.
There are many thousands whom love unto the world keeps awake; but how few are
there, whom love to Christ keeps awake?

It was an harsh, and (in one sense) an ignorant speech of a wise man amongst
the Heathens, who said, There is no man who may not more holily be in any
company, than with himself alone: And Nemo est cui non sanctius sit ^^m
quolibet esse quam secum. Sen.
yet there is a truth in it: For if a man be by himself alone, and deal only
with his own heart, probably, he might be as profitably with any company, as
with himself: One man's heart in it self, is as bad as another, and usually it
is worst, when it is by it self. Some, like Nebuchadnezzar, being secluded
from men, converse only with beasts, those most beastly beasts, lusts in their
own bosoms. Dan. 4. 3.
But, to be alone from men, to converse with God, to be alone from men, to
converse with Christ, is infinitely better then all the society of men. The
reason why many receive but little of Christ, little of Heaven, is, because
they are so much in the crowd of the Pietas periclitatur in nego^iis.
world, so long upon the Rack of earthly care; they seldom let their hearts
settle. The Balances must stand at an even poize, before you can weigh aright.
If you desire to know, which bears most weight in your hearts, Earth or
Heaven, Christ or the Creature, let your hearts stand still. That in Psalm 4.
4. reaches this sense fully, Commune with your own hearts upon your beds, and
be still. Our hearts will not be spoken with, unless we be quiet. And as the
Picture-drawer cannot take the features of the face, to the life; so neither
can we of our hearts, or lives, unless we have the patience to sit for it.

JOB. Chap. 4. Verse. 14, 15, 16. Fear came upon me and trembling, which made
all my bones to shake.

Then a Spirit passed before my face, the hair of my flesh stood up.

It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof, an Image was before
mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voice, saying,


WE have already given the Logical dependence of this whole Context, from the
12 Verse, unto the end of the Chapter, and therein showed how Eliphaz confirms
the principal Proposition (lying in the 17 Verse) by Divine Authority, a
Vision received from Heaven. A thing (says he) was secretly brought to me, and
mine ear received a little thereof, in thoughts from visions of the night,
when deep sleep falls on men. Thus the manner of the vision is described in
general. The effects of the vision upon Eliphaz, and the particular manner how
the vision appeared, are now further described and set forth. This 14 Verse
contains one eminent effect of the vision, with the consequents of it; as soon
(says he) as I was in that heavenly rapture and ecstasy, Fear came upon me,
and trembling, which made all my bones to shake.

It was very usual, for Prophets and Holy men, to be surprised with fear, at
the appearance of Jehovah in his messages, by Angels or other visions. It is
natural unto man to fear, at the sight of an Angel: and it is a received
opinion among the Jews, that whether God or an Angel did appear, it was present
death, which they collect from diverse Scriptures (Ex. 33. 20.) when Moses
desired to see the face of God, the Lord answered, there is no man can see my
face and live. Those words of Gideon import as much (Judge 6. 22.) When Gideon
perceived that he was an Angel of the Lord, he said, Alas, O Lord God, for
because I have seen an Angel of the Lord, face to face; as if he had said,
alas, woe is me, I shall certainly dye: And Judge. 13. 21. Manoah concludes it,
We shall surely dye, because we have seen God, when an Angel appeared to them.
Hence also Jacob (Genesis 32. 30.) after his wrestling with the Angel (which was
Christ) called the name of the place Penuel, which is, The face of God, for
says he, I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved; as noting,
that it was a wonderful privilege not to dye at such a sight; the very
appearance of God, is death to the Creature. And that which Hagar spoke (Genesis
16 13.) may well be interpreted to this sense: when flying from her Mistress,
God came to her in the Wilderness, she called the name of the Lord that spoke
unto her, Thou God see me; the reason is added, by way of admiration, for she
said, Have I also here looked after him that sees me? Which words may well be
translated, Do I live after him (sc. God) that sees me; for here one act of
life is put for the whole, looking or seeing, for living; Have I seen, or Ex
Habrae^ ita reddi potest. Etiamne jam ^^deo s^u lucem han^ espicio and vivo,
post videntem me. Parens.
have I beheld the light, after God has seen me; that is, Am I alive after God
has seen me. How wonderful!

The effect of this vision upon Eliphaz, was not death. but fear, yet no
ordinary fear, but fear which looked almost as pale as death; it was fear
joined with trembling, and no ordinary trembling, but such a fit of trembling
as shook his very bones. We have often spoken of fear, both in this and in the
former Chapters; but such a fear as met Eliphaz, we have not met with before.

That before was the grace of fear, spiritual fear, but this is the passion of
fear, natural fear. And it is natural to man (as some of Est homini natural
conspecto angelo etiam bono timere. Bold. ex Beda, Origin, and Chrysostom.
the Ancients have observed) to fear thus at the appearance of God by Angels.
Fear is caused by the apprehension of some evil imminent or at hand, that is the
definition of natural fear. Now when God manifests himself, though the
greatest good be at hand, yet the soul has some misgivings and apprehensions
of evil; and hence comes fear: the foundation of this fear is laid in guilt,
sin is in the soul, and guilt may be upon the soul; thence natural fear works,
when God, who is all holy, manifests himself. And in special, there is much
unbelief remaining in the heart, this fear is strengthened by unbelief,
Wherefore do ye fear, says Christ, O ye of little faith? Where there is little
faith, there is much fear; and as unbelief prevails, so fear prevails too.
Thirdly, this fear arises from the suddenness and unexpectedness of the
thing. God (as you may observe in all those Revelations of himself) comes
suddenly: that which comes before we see it, causes fear when we see it:
sudden motions without us, work strange commotions within. And fourthly, the
over-powring Majesty and super-excelling excellency of God, in any such
revelation, causes astonishments of spirit: a little appearance of God, makes
the creature disappear. One drop of the Divine Ocean, swallows up all man, and
one ray of that Eternal Light, dazles bim. From any or all these
considerations, (...) Sept. Occurrit obviam factus est mihi.
it may be, that fear and trembling took hold upon Eliphaz, like an armed man,
as soon as the vision appeared: fear met him (says the Original) or (as the
Septuagint) fear came out, and (as it were) stood in the way to surprise and
apprehend him.

Neither was this bare fear, but fear heightened, fear accompanied with
trembling. Trembling of the body is a symptom or sign of great fear; when fear
works outwardly, manifesting it self by sad effects upon the body, then fear is
in its reign and greatness. There are four special effects which fear works
upon the body, and we have three of them here in this Text. The first is, the
quaking or the shaking of the members of the body; the second is the shaking of
the bones; the third is the standing up of the hair; and the fourth is the
palenesse and wanness of the countenance. All except the last appeared upon
Eliphaz at the appearance of this vision.

First, he trembled in this 14 Verse, Fear came upon me and trembling: these
two go often together in Scripture; you shall find trembling coupled with godly
fear, as well as with natural fear, Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with fear
(with reverentiall filial fear) and rejoice before him with trembling; that
is, let your fear be an exceeding great fear, even such, as fills you with an
awful trembling at the presence of the Lord. The Apostle Paul (Phil. 2. 12.)
puts them together again, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling.

The second effect is shaking of the bones, It made all my bones Quasi dicat
tremor non fait supersicialis, sed vehemens and intimus, qui etiam ossa
conc^^eret. Aquin. Gel^dusque perima cucur^it, Ossa tremor. Virg. 2. Aeneid.
to shake; as if he had said, this fear stayed not in the flesh, but descended,
and entered into my bones. I was deeply affected with it. We translate; Which
made all my bones to shake; the word in the Hebrew is, it made the multitude of
my bones, or, my bones how many soever they are, to shake. The Hebrews have
this rule, that the major part is usually taken for the whole, therefore the
multude of his bones, or many of his bones, is well translated, all his bones.
And the Verb which we render shake, is of the same root with fear, fear came
upon me; so that according to the letter we may read it thus, Fear came upon
me, and trembling, which made all my bones to fear. A bone is in it self
senseless, and therefore fearlesse; but to show how extreme and deep this fear
was, he says, it made fear enter into that, which is without fear, and has of
it self no feeling; it made my very bones to fear, as well as my heart to fear,
or my flesh to tremble. Habakkuk in the third of his Prophecy, being before
God in his prayer-visions, describes the rapture of his spirit, by this and
other symptoms upon his body, When I heard, my belly trembled, my lips
quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones, v. 16.

The third effect follows; Then a spirit passed before my face, and the hair
of my head stood up. A Spirit rushed upon me, so the Seventy. Some translate
it, A wind passd before me; a gale or breath of wind, as (1 Kings 19. 11.) when
God appeared to Elijah, it is said, first there came a mighty wind, which rent
the mountains, and brake the roots, and some conceive that a wind passed
before Eliphaz; but the context will not bear it; those words which follow are
not competible with a wind; v. 16. It stood before me, it stood still, this
cannot be understood of the wind, for wind is always in motion: and then it is
said, I had an Image before my face, now there is no form or Image of the wind;
the wind has no shape or likeness, therefore it was a Spirit or Angel, not an
Aeriall wind. And if you say, how has a Spirit a form or an Image, or how can
that be seen? I answer it was not a Spirit abstracted and naked in it self, but
a Spirit joined with a form and shape, as is generally agreed: so Angels or
Spirits did usually appear to the Ancients, taking a body or some from upon
them: and those apparitions, when a body was assumed, were called spirits.
(Luke 24. 37.) it is said, that the Disciples were afraid at the appearing of
Christ, thinking they had seen a spirit: The Apostles were not so absurd, as to
believe, that a spirit in it self, a spirit abstracted, could be seen; but they
called it a spirit, because they thought it only the representation of Christ's
body, and not the true body: and therefore though an outward shape appeared,
they called it a spirit. So here, A spirit passed before me, which yet might
have some outward shape, in which it was clothed to the eye. (...) N^n
significat proprie matum progressivum qualis est animalum, sed motum levem^ and
slaxum, qualis est caelorum vel venti vel crescentis arboris.


A spirit passd before me,] forward, backward, up and down, which is opposed to
the words in the 16 Verse, It stood still: here it was transient or in motion.
The word used for passing, signifies rather such a motion as is of the Heavens,
or of the winds, than that which is properly progressive or the motion of the
living creatures. And thence some observe, that the motion of spirits clothed
with bodies in their apparitions, is not like the motion of men, who move,
lifting up their feet oue after another; but it is a passing as a ship moves
with a gale of wind, rather a gliding, than a going: Among the Heathen, this
was made the chief difference, to distinguish a Numen, or spirit coming in any
Numina venientia ad nos in homines and esse transfo^mant; Ex oculu aute ^^^ari
p^ssunt, cum (...) oblutu ^n^ueanter ^^ palpebras nun^ua^ concladan^. Et magis
ex incessu, qui non ex ^^mo^^one pedum neque transpositione existit. Sed quodam
impetu^e^^o and vi expedita, sindentium magis auras quam transeuntiam.
Qua^obrem statuas quoque Deorum Egyptij ponunt, conjungentes illis pedes and
quasi unientes Helioder in Aeth^op^cis. l. 3. Pedes vestis defluxit ad imos. Et
vero incess^ pa^u^^ Dea. Vi^g. l. 1. Aeniad. de Venere.
shape, from a natural body. The steadiness of their eyes was one, the not
transposing their feet was another, and a clearer evidence.

This Spirit passing thus before him, produces the third effect.

The hair of my head stood up] Shaking of the bones went before, and now
standing up of the hair. A spirit passed before me, and the hair of my head
stood up. The Original is, The hair of my flesh, or the hair of my body;
flesh is put for the body, as in Genesis 2. 24. They two shall be one flesh. That
is (as it were) one body, speaking of man and wife; and Psalm. 119. 120. My
flesh trembles for fear of thee, says David, it is the same word; as if
Eliphaz had said, I am so much affected with thoughts of God, that the very
hair of my flesh (as in extraordinary fear it uses to do) stood up. The
natural reason why the hair stands up in time of fear is this; when sudden
fear falls upon us, the blood goes, or ^astens rather to the heart, and so
the outward members wax cold; and the skin, in which the hair is rooted, is
pressed more together, which causes the hair to stand up, though of it self it
be a weak and unstable excrement.

So we see the general effect of the vision, which was fear, and those three
concomitants or symptoms of fear, The trembling of his flesh, The shaking of
his bones, And the standing up of the hair of his flesh. From all, take these
Observations.

First, Forasmuch as Eliphaz falls into such a fit of fear and amazement, at
this manifestation of God to him, we learn, That man is not able to bear the
presence of God. Weak and frail man, falls before the greatness, power and
majesty of God. Dust and ashes crumbleth away, if the glory of the great God
do but shine forth, even in those lesser manifestations of himself. Hence it
was, that Job seems to capitulate with God, that he would speak with him, upon
two Articles or conditions granted, Chap. 13. 21, 22 First, Withdraw thy hand
far from me. Secondly, Let not thy dread make me afraid: Then call thou, and I
will answer; or let me speak, and answer thou me. As if he had said, so
dreadful is thy presence, that unless thou be pleased to sweeten it to me,
fear will presently seize upon me, and disable me to speak. Moses who was a
favorite of heaven, and one who shortly after had communion with God, above
all that ever lived: yet when Jehovah appeared in that flaming Bush, the text
says, Exodus 3. 6. That Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look upen
God; holy Moses could not bear that glory. Daniel a man greatly beloved of God,
and honored with glorious visions, was yet greatly astonished at those
visions, Chap. 10. 8. There remained no strength in me, for my comeliness was
turned into corruption, and I retained no strength: and verse. 16. O my lord, by
the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have retained no strength:
Verse. 17. Neither is there any breath left in me. I am ready to dye, I am not
able to bear thy majesty, in these mysteries of thy will, made known to me. How
does Habakkuk cry out in the place before quoted, of his trembling belly,
quivering lips, and of rottenness entering into his bones We find in the New
Testament, the Saints swallowed up with the like amazements. Zechariah of whom
the Holy Ghost had given such an excellent testimony a little before, for a man
that had walked blameless in all the Ordinances of God, yet as soon as the
Angel appeared, the Text says, He was ^^ubled, and fear fell upon him, Luke 1.
12. Yea the blessed Virgin (v. 29. of that Chap.) when she saw him (that is the
Angel) she was troubled in her mind. Lastly, John the beloved Disciple, seeing
Christ walking in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, etc. Fell at his
feet as dead, Rev. 1. 17.

How should this humble and abase us in our selves! we that are not able to
stand before the gracious manifestations of God, when he comes to reveal
himself to us in mercy, how shall we be able to stand before the wrathful
manifestations of God? The Apostle tells us (1 Cor. 15. 50.) Flesh and blood
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; by flesh and blood, we are not to
understand, the sinful nature of man (as flesh and blood often signify in
Scripture, being opposed to spirit) but the constitution of nature or that
estate wherein we stand, as men; this flesh and blood is not able to enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, it cannot bear the majesty, glory and
excellency of Heaven, where God clearly manifests himself unto his Saints; and
where we shall see God face to face; and therefore the Apostle argues all
along, as by diverse other Arguments, so by this; to prove the necessity of a
resurrection, a raising and a new moulding of the body, into a spiritual
condition: Why, because our natural bodies are not able to stand under such a
weight of glory, as is prepared for the Saints in that Kingdom: Corruption
(nature subject to corruption) cannot inherit incorruption; hence it was, that
when but a little of God broke forth, the holiest and best of men in the world,
fell a shaking and trembling, as not being able to bear, that transcendent
majesty, shiningout in those weaker refracted beams of glory.

Secondly, Seeing God coming at this time to instruct Eliphaz, and reveal a
great truth to him, was pleased to deal thus with him, to make him shake and
tremble, we may note, That God usually humbles a man, and lays him very low,
before he exalts him in the manifestations of his truth or power. Humiliations
prepare and posture the heart for revelations. The reason is, because God
delights to have a man humbled, before he be instructed. Paul (though as humble
a soul as lived) was in danger to be exalted above measure, through the
abundance of revelations, (2 Gor 12.) Even divine knowledge (through our
corruption) is apt to puff up, and therefore we had need to have the bladder
pricked, and our spirits laid flat, for the receiving of know ledge: Only
humble ones are fit to be Gods scholars; he will teach none else, he resists
a proud man, then surely he will never teach a proud man; The mee^e will he
teach his way; Ye breaks Psalm. 25. 9.
our will, before he trusts us with the secrets of his will: When the spirits
of men lie in the ^ust, when they tremble and shake, when all their bones are
afraid, and rottenness enters into them, then they are prepared vessels, to
receive and take in the dew and influences of divine revelation. When ^od made
that most memorable manifestation of himself, to the ancient Church, in giving
the Law; we read how he terrified them, how he humbled and abased them: How
dreadful was the preparation to the giving of the Law? The Apostle describes
it, (Heb. 12. 18, 20, 21.) by blackness, and darkness, and tempest, so that
they could not endure that which was commanded; and so terrible was the sight,
that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake; I confess the Law in it self,
was a terrible, a killing letter, and that, which might well make the world
shake, and men to tremble: If (as Luther says) but one precept or sentence of
the Law should be left in its full power and strength (man's sin) it would
destroy mankind, and make all the world (because guilty) tremble and fall
before it; yet it was not barely the matter of the Law revealed, which caused
this trembling: that was written in the heart o^ man before, and was now
published to the Jews, with gracious with Gospel intentions; but it was the
manner and circumstances wherein the Law was revealed, which were so terrible.
And this terror had this great use, even the humbling of their souls to a
willing subjection and obedience to the will of God. When God revealed the
Gospel to Paul (as well as when he revealed the Law to Moses,) he made Paul
tremble (Act. 9.) Paul was smitten down to the ground, God laid him along,
unhors'd him, when he came to manifest his Christ to, or (as himself speaks,
(Gal. 1. 16.) to reveal his Son in him: And this was to abase him, to break
his heart, that he might be made up a chosen vessel, to carry the Name of God
unto the Gentiles. And howsoever such Acts 9. 15.
humiliations are not of absolute necessity, yet they have been very usual,
and very useful. When the Lord has laid the will and wisdom of man in the
dust, when he has made the strongest and stoutest to become as a child or a
babe, to quake before him; then he takes him into his School of Instruction,
and shows him such things, as none of the wise men, or Princes of this world
ever knew, even such things, as eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither
have they entered into the heart of man. This made our Lord Jesus break out into
that mixed rapture of gratulation and admiration, Mat. 11. 25. I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes. Be as babes before God, and
he will give you the wisdom of men, yea of Angels. They who are high built,
and p^^acl'd in their own conceits, seldom have the foundation or first
principles of saving knowledge laid in them savingly.

Thirdly, From this effect of the vision, observe, That fear, is a strong and
powerful passion. Fear comes upon a man like a Giant, Fear (says Eliphaz)
came upon me, it came upon me violently. A man were as good meet a bear robbed
of her whelps, as this fear: The strongest man in the world, cannot shake your
bones, as fear alone will, if that take hold of you. Some of the Greeks, had
such amazing thoughts of Fear, it was so terrible to them, that to appease it,
they worshipped it for a god, as some worshipped sorrow among the Romans for a
goddess, under the name of Dea Angerona. The true God is called fear in
Scripture: And Aug de Civ. Dei. l. 5. c. 8.
fear was made an Idol God among the Heathens: And if we consider these
effects in the Text, trembling of the flesh, shaking of the bones, standing up
of the hair, all which this sudden surprise of fear wrought upon Eliphaz,
we must needs acknowledge and conclude it to be, a very potent passion. In the
first of Proverbs, the Lord threatens those who would not fear him, thus, I
will Prove. 1. 27.
laugh when your fear comes: Then he shows the manner how such fear
comes, When your fear comes as desolation. We cannot well take fear in
this place, for the object of fear, for that is desolation it self, and
therefore cannot be said, to come as desolation. Then, taking it properly, for
the passion of fear: We see, that the fear of trouble, is like the trouble we
fear. Fear is even as bad as desolation; Fear pulls all down within, and
makes a man like a desolate place, before his place is made desolate. And
therefore in these times, we had need take care, that we put not strength to
our fears. These are fearing times, we should pray much, that the power of
natural fear may be subdued, especially that our natural fear, may be
turned into godly fear; godly fear, is the proper cure of natural fear:
Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and make him your fear, or else the
fear of man will quickly Lord it over your hearts. Such a fear, is more
dangerous, then all our dangers: Our enemies shall need no weapons to fight
against us, with, but our own fears. Trembling joints, and shaking bones, will
make small resistance; and while natural fear is strong, natural strength
is, but weak or useless; When from the onset or assault of this fear, a man's
hair stands, himself will run.

Fourthly, Consider this by way of consequence, That if a time when God comes
to reveal his will to man, be so dreadful, what will that time be (and that
time is coming) when God comes to reckon with man, for the disobeying of
that will? Here a truth was but showed Eliphaz, in an extraordinary manner, and
behold him shaking, fearing, trembling; Now when God shall come to require an
account of man, for resisting or imprisoning the truth; when he shall come (2
These. 1. 8.) to take vengeance on all those that have not obeyed the Gospel of
truth, what terror, fear and trembling will fall upon the stoutest of sinful
men? There must be an appearing of all, but there can be no standing for such,
before the dreadful throne of Christ: The ungodly (of what sort of size
soever) shall not stand in judgment, Psalm. 1. 5. impenitent unbeleevers, shall
not be able to hold up their heads in that day. Captains and mighty men, who
have often conversed with dangers, and knew not what it was to be afraid; Men
who (like the Horse, described, Job 39. 22.) used to mock at fear, and would
not turn back for drawn swords, or the glittering of shield or spear, shall
at that day shake with fear, and hide themselves like little children. So much
for the effects of the vision. Now follows a further description of the vision.

Verse 16. It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof, an image
was before mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voice, saying. This
verse contains a second gesture of this spirits appearing in the vision to
Eliphaz. The spirit was passing before, here standing, as if he would present
himself more fully to his view and observation. It stood still, an image was
before mine eyes; but though the spirit gave Eliphaz this fair advantage, yet
he made little use of it, for he says, I could not discern the form of it,
that is, I could make nothing of it directly; But when his eye gave him no
help, his ear did: though he could not discern or distinguish the form of
the spirit appearing, yet he could distinguish the voice of the spirit
speaking, there was silence, and I heard a voice saying.

It stood still.] To stand, in Scripture, imports not always a settled posture
of the body: but it is taken sometime in a larger sense, to note our presence
in any place, whether it be sitting, standing or walking, as Mat. 16. 28.
Christ says, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till
they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom. Yet here the posture is
conceived to be, an erect, settled, fixed posture; to the intent, Eliphaz might
have his eye more settled and fixed upon it, and likewise that his heart might
be better prepared and fitted, for the receiving of that message, which should
be delivered unto him by it; when a man speaks, he usually makes a stand; An
ambulatory speech, a speech in motion, is not so audible, nor so comely. In
apparitions, this posture is frequently mentioned. When our Lord appeared to
the Disciples after the resurrection, Luke says, He stood amengst them, cap.
24. 36. Zachary, saw the Angel standing on the right side of the Altar, Luke
1. 11. And while the Apostles were looking up steadfastly to Heaven, at the
ascension of Christ, Behold two men stood by them in white apparel, which also
said, etc. Acts 1. 10. therefore also this spirit being to speak, stood still.

I could not discern the form of it. The face of it, so some read, (...).
The countenance or aspect of it, so others. They who rise from the dead, are
not easily known by those, who knew them living. When Christ arise (John 20.)
it is said that Mary, who was very well acquainted with him in his life (though
he stood by her) knew not that it was Jesus, but thought it had been the
Gardner. When Christ walked with the Disciples to Emaus, they knew him not, and
there a reason is given, their eyes were held that they should not know him; a
special act of Gods providence suspended their eyesight, and took away
(though not the power of seeing, yet) the power of discerning. God has every
sense so exactly in his own hand, that he can let it out, or call it back in
any degree as himself pleases; he can give a man so much power, as to see
another, and not so much power as to discern him; which (by the way) is an
argument of the wonderful exactness of Gods providence over us, he holds our
senses in his hand, (...) ^ell as our reason or our wills* and says, thus far
you shall (...) hear, and no further; therefore it is said, Verse 31. that
their eyes were opened: they were opened before to see him, but now they were
opened to know him. And at other times when Christ appeared after his
resurrection, his Disciples were at a stand, whether it was he or no: Thomas,
though he saw Christ before him, yet he would not believe it was he, until he
had put his finger into the hole of the Nayls, and into the hole which the
Spear made in his side: until he had assurance from another sense, he would
not believe his eyes. Ethnicis semper absurdum fuit, ut faciem deoru^
agnoscerent h^mines quam deo^u^ (...) poste^io^es poe^ae ab Homero, Homerus ab
Egyptiis vel po^ius ex sacris s^n^ti Moysis l^bris sumpsit. B^ld. (...)
Sign^ficat speciem vel sensibilem vel mentalem.
If then a body arising from the grave, though it be seen, yet can hardly be
distinguished by mortal eyes; how much less is the eye of man able to discern
Angels or Spirits, clothed in humane forms. The impressions of glory and
immortality, which appear upon bodies assumed by spirits, especially in sudden
apparitions, do exceedingly master, if not astonish sense. The Heathens
thought it absurd to say, that their Gods could be known by face: For though
they were so gross, as to satisfy rhemselves with bodily Gods, yet they
believed those bodies were so refined, had such a kind of majestic Divinity
stamped upon them, that a mere mortal could not comprehend them. Their doctrine
shines a little into this Text. A spirit passed before Eliphaz, he had a sight
of it, for it stood still, yet he could not make out what it was, or who it
was, he could not discern the form thereof.

An Image was before mine eyes.] The word Themounah, which we translate Image,
is taken either for a visible or intellectual Image. Sometime it is taken for
the form of a thing, which is apprehended visibly by the eye; so in Deuteronomy. 4.
15, 16. Take ye therefore good heed to your selves (for ye saw no manner of
similitude, in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the
midst of the fire) lest ye corrupt your selves, and make the similitude of
any figure, that is, least you make a visible Image of the invisible God.

Secondly, the same word signifies an Image in the mind. Thus God himself who
said in Deuteronomy, that they saw no similitude, and thereupon bad them take
heed of making any similitude, says of Moses, that the similitude of the Lord
he shall behold, Number. 21. 8. The word similitude in Numbers is the same for
Image in the Text, an intellectual image, a representation to the
understanding. Moses had this privilege, The similitude of God revealed to his
Spectru^ and visu^ vocant latini quicquid corpore apparet forma licet corpus
non sit.
understanding; but (...) he says in Deuteronomy: ye had no similitude, the meaning
is, no (...) ^all, no visible similitude, no object of sense. This Image in the
^ext was not intellectual, for it was before his eyes. Nor was it the Image of
a spirit gross*d into a body, but it was a spirit in or with the imaginary form
of a body.

There was silence, and I heard a voice, saying.] That is the last thing which
the Text holds forth about this vision.

There was silence.] The Hebrew thus, Silence, and I heard a (...) Silentium
and vocem, per hyppallagen, vocem silentii, id est, vocem tacitam and submissam
audiebam. Mercer. Et vocem quasi curae levis audivi. Vulg. (...). Sept. Silens
murmur. Ar. Mont.
voice, we supply, there was. The readings are various, yet the sense one. I
heard the voice, as it were, of a gentle gale, I heard a gale and a voice, I
heard a silent murmr. Our Translators put in the margin, I heard a still
voice, which comes near to that, I heard a silent voice (by a usual figure)
silence and a voice, for a voice of silence. If any should say, these two are
so opposite, that they cannot be predicated or affirmed one of another. Silence
is the direct contrary to a voice, therefore to say, there was a silent voice,
seems to be a contradiction in the adjunct. I answer it is frequent to affirm
contraries one of another, in an inferior and remiss degree. Though we cannot
say light is dark, yet we may say, this is a dark light; that is, a
glimmering, imperfect, obscure light, (Zech. 14. 6.) The day shall be neither
clear nor dark, it shall be, as it were, a dark light. So a low voice, may well
be called a silent voice; I heard a silent voice, that is* I heard a low or a
still voice speaking to me. Thus it suits well with what he said, at the 12
Verse; Now a thing was secretly brought unto me. And we may further clear it by
that 1 Kings 19. 12. where the expression is of the same importance; (...) Vox
sabtilis silentii dulce susurrum, vox sine sono.
here we have silence and a voice, there, after the noise of a great wind and
of an Earthquake, it is said that Elijah heard (as some render it) the voice of
a subtle, fine, slender, attenuated silence, or as we translate, a still small
voice, a sweet ravishing whisper, a voice without a sound. Hence we have a
kind of music, which in our common language we call still music.

A twofold reason may be given why the Lord spoke (as it were) in silence.
First, that the secret manner of speaking might be an Argument that the matter
spoken was a secret, a mystery, not common or ordinary. Secondly, to dispose
the hearer to receive it with more care, reverence, and attention. A man must
set himself to hear with diligence, while another speaks with silence. A loud
voice finds us out, comes to us: but we must come to a low voice, and find
that out. When the Speaker takes least pains with his tongue, the hearer must
take most pains with his ear.

And this manner of speaking, was used by the ancient Heathen in their
mysterious Oracles and Revelations. As when God revealed a secret, he spoke
secretly, and as it were whispered those truths in the ear; whispering is
speaking within one degree of silence) so the Devil (who imitates God in what
he can, that he may draw credit unto his own deceivings) is described in his
instruments to speak thus. Isa. 8. 19. When they shall say unto you, seek unto
them that have familiar spirits, and unto Wizards, that peep and that mutter;
they speak as it were silently, they only whisper their diabolical
incantations, and lying impostures. And (Isa. 29.) Thou shall be brought down
and shall speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust,
and thy voice shall be as of one that has a familiar Spirit out of the ground,
and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust. The Prophet in this alludes to
the manner of Witches and Inchanters, who had familiar Spirits, which he here
applies in a threat unto the people: the time shall come that you shall be
brought down by your enemies, that you shall speak out of the ground, you shall
lie at their feet like poor captives, that cry submissively and pitifully for
quarter, O mercy, mercy, spare my life; that is the thing aimed at by the
Prophet, that God would abase them so, before their enemies, that they should
whisper out of the ground to their enemies for pity, as a Witch whispers from
the ground to her miserable Clients who come for counsel. Tertullian in his
Apologetick describes the heathen Magitians thus, they speak belohing and
gasping, humming and hawing, rather then speaking. The old Poet calls this
Poppisme, by which -- sorts ducent, frontemque ma numque Praebebit vati
crebrum poppisma petenti. Juvenal. Aurusp^^es de circo ex or^s pressi sono,
quod poppisma dicitur fu^u a colligebant. (...)
word he shows, how their Idol Prophets, answered the deluded people, their
miserable Clients, when they came for counsel. To which the Hebrew word
T^sipht saph used by Isaiah in the eighth Chapter before cited, is very like
both in sound and sense.

There yet another interpretation of these words more proper, and answerable to
our translation. There was silence and I heard a voice, saying,] This referres
the silence to Eliphaz, as a preparation to his hearing the voice; there was
silence* that is, I stood still and spoke never a word, but waited to hear
what should be spoken, I was silent, and all things about me were hushed and
silent too: Then I heard a voice; and so Junius g^osses, Being (says he)
composed and strengthened a little after my former fear, I attended Me
^ontineba^ tacitus expectans revelationem.
silently to the Spirit, that I might hear what should be spoken unto me.

We read, Rev. 8. 1. that there was silence in Heaven for half an hour; and
Verse 5, we read of voices and thunderings; before those great voices there
was great silence: usually before great speaking there is great silence; I was
silent, and all were hushed, then I heard a voice: silence prepares for
audience. In Congregations before the Preacher begins, all hold their peace; In
Courts of justice when the Judge is to speak, the Crier calls for silence: It
was a usual word amongst the rites of the Heathen, Favor your tongues, or
spare your speech, when the mysteries of their superstition were Favete linguis.
revealed: we may take the present Text in this sense: that Eliphaz set
himself in a silent posture to attend the message which was to be revealed
unto him. There was silence and I heard a voice, saying.

If we take the former interpretation, then, for as much as Eliphaz after those
terrors and tremblings, the shaking of his bones, and standing up of his
hair, the confused form of a spirit, and an amazing Image before his eyes: for
as much (I say) as after all these, he hears a still silent voice. We may
observe,

That God after terrors usually sends in comfort and refreshings. God having
terrified Elijah by a mighty rushing wind (in the vision before noted) by an
Earthquake which brake the Rocks, and by a fire: then comes (as here in the
Text) a still small voice, a voice of silence, and God was in that voice. It is
put as a principal distinction amongst the Ancients, to know, whether a
revelation were from a good Angel or from a bad Angel. When a revelation was
made by a good Angel, though he filled the heart with fear, at the beginning of
his speech, yet he gave comfort in the end, and closed with in consolation. We
may observe in those revelations such heartning, chearing language as this, Be
not afraid, be of good cheer; so to Daniel, so to John, so to Zechariah, so to
Mary, so to Gideon. But when a revelation was made by an evil Angel, or by a
Witch, as it filled the hearers with fear, so it left them full of fear, it
wounded them with terrors, and it applied no cure, no plaster, nothing
medicinable to heal those terrors. We find, indeed, (1 Samuel 28) that when
Saul consulted with the Witch of Endor, as soon as the Spirit appeared, it is
said, that the Witch her self was afraid, and there is no mention made of
Saul's being afraid, at the first; so that Saul falls a comforting the Witch, and
said to her, be not afraid: She was afraid, not of the Spirit that appeared,
but of Saul, because he had made a law against Witches; and hence Saul comforts
her, in assurance of impunity, notwithstanding that sin, both against the law
of God, and his own. But you shall find in how sad a condition Saul himself
was, before the Devil had done with him; for, as soon as Saul heard the
tidings delivered by that personated Samuel, he fell into a shaking fit, and
was as one astonished and dead: hanging upon the rack of these torments, the
Devil left him; there was no word of comfort, no sweet still musical voice to
revive and fetch him again, but away packs the wicked Spirit, and leaves him
overwhelmed with sorrow. And then (instead of a better, surely he could not
have a worse) the poor Witch comes to comfort and counsel him. They who refuse
counsel from the Prophets of God may at last be forced to receive all their
comfort from a Witch, a Prophet or Prophetess of the Devil. But to the point
in hand, we see when the Devil and wicked Angels speak terror, they leave
terror: Whereas if God, by good Angels speaks terror, or affrights his people
with the tokens of his presence, he with a sweet and still voice refreshes and
comforts them, before he departs.

And we may in that general apply it to our selves. That when God astonishes
and terrifies us, when he makes our bones to shake, and rottenness to enter
into them, we may expect comfort and refreshing are at hand; and we may build
upon it, that the more we tremble, the more we shall be refreshed; Habakkuk in
the place before cited, is express in this faith, I trembled, that I might
have rest in the day of trouble; to which he adds, when he comes up to the
people (he will invade or cut them to pieces) with his troops. As intimating,
that they who will not tremble, shall be made to tremble; but when we actively
labor to make our hearts tremble, or when God makes us tremble in such a way
as this, we may build upon it, that, we shall rest in the day of trouble, at
least we shall rest in the end of that day: God never leaves his people under a
Cloud: he takes off trouble, and brings in a succession of comfort, or conquers
the trouble by mingling a prevailing portion of comfort with it.

If we take the Text in the latter sense, we may note, That silence becomes man
when God speaks. Speak Lord (says Samuel) for thy servant hears. Hear O
servant, for thy Lord speaks.

Silence prepares the heart to learn: Pythagoras commanded his Scholars to
keep silence five years. And the Papists impose silence, as a part of
discipline upon their Novices. Let superstition be avoided, and then Silence is
fittest for learners, unless their voice be an enquiry after learning. That
which the Apostle speaks respecting women in the Church, is true of all in the
sense I now speak of, 1 Timothy 2. 12. Let the woman learn in silence, so let the
man learn in silence. There were many among us, not long since, who made many
teachers silent. Silence is good as it is a preparative to learning, but woe to
that, which is a hinderance to instructing. They enjoined silence on Teachers,
by which knowledge was suppressed: we advice silence upon learners, that
knowledge may be increased.

JOB. Chap. 4. Verse. 17. Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man
be more pure than his Maker?
IN this verse we have the argument it self, or the matter revealed in the
former vision; There was silence, and I heard a voice saying: What that voice
said, we have in these words; Shall mortal man be more just than God? This is
the theme or subject, upon which Eliphas argues; and it is the maine
proposition of the whole context. The proof of this proposition, was given
from Divine authority, in the foregoing words; and we have a proof Numquid
homo Dei comparatione justificabitur. Vulg. (...) Sept. Clamabat and dicebat
fierme potest ut homo quam Deus ^urior sit. Chald. (...) Miser aerumnis and
peccatis obnoxious. (...) quasi (...) in quo sensus despe randi Eusebius a (...)
deducit, quod ^blivisci significat and (...) interpreta^ur, quasi animal
obliviosum dicas. Drus. (...) Min est comparandi particula: comparatio
exprimitur per praepositienem ultimi casus, justificatus ab illo ie prae illo.
Luke 18. 14. (...) Vir, quasi validus, ut and latin a viribus dictus.
from reason, in the following part of this Chapter.

Shall mortal man be more just than God? or, Shall man be justified in
comparison of God? or, Shall man be just before God? The Chaldee Paraphrase is
yet more quick: The Spirit cried out and said, Can it possibly be, that man
should be more pure than God?

The words are propounded by way of question, we may resolve them into this
negative proposition, Mortal man is not more just than God, man is not more
pure than his Maker.

We translate Mortal man, the Hebrew is but one word, yet in the propriety of
that language, it contains both, noting man with an addition (such as it is) of
weakness and frailty, the meanest and lowest estate of man: Enosh, a poor,
sick, weak, dying creature, a creature of so little hope, that some derive this
name in the Hebrew, from desperation; a creature so unworthy to be remembered by
God, or so ready to forget God, that others derive it from a word, which
signifies forgetfulness, or to forget.

Shall man, this mortal man, this weak creature, be more just, or be
justified rather than God? Such a sense the words carry. When man and God are
compared together, shall God be esteemed less just, or less pure than man?
(Luke 18. 14.) it is said of the Publican, that he went down justified, rather
than the other; put the Pharisee and the Publican in the balance together, and
the Publican was the weightier in righteousness, or the more just of the two:
That in Luke, is an Hebraisme, and it is the same with this. Put weak man and
the mighty God (the word Eloha, which is here used for God, notes the strong
God, or the mighty God) put him in the balance of consideration with weak
man, will he not be infinitely more weighty in justice, more shining in purity,
more glorious in holiness?

Yea, not only if you take man in his obscurest notion, or in this term of
extenuation, Enosh, for a weak man, a poor creepled creeping creature; but
take him in his best estate, as he is (Geber) a strong man, a powerful man, a
holy man: yet as it follows in the text, shall man be more pure than his
Maker? that is, shall such a mighty man, a wise man, a learned man, a gracious
man, a man accomplished in all natural, in all acquired endowments, the
chiefest and choicest, the cream and flower of all the men upon the face of
the earth; A Worthy of the first three, the First of all the Worthies; A man of
the first magnitude, of the highest elevation, both in parts, gifts and graces,
shall he be more pure than his Maker? Christ (as incarnate or made man) is
called, the Mighty God, (Isa. 9. 6.) God made a Mighty man, or man becoming
the Mighty God. The Chaldee calls all Giants, Gibbaraja; and Nimrod the first
of the Giants, was called by this name, a Mighty hunter before the Lord, Genesis
10. 8. So then, Let man be never so excellent, his excellency is baseness; let
him be never so strong, so wise, so holy, he is but weak, foolish, filthy,
compared with him who made him. Leave your Enosh, your weakeling, your poor
sick creatures: bring forth your Gibers, your best, they are as nothing, yea
less than nothing before the Lord. Shall mortal man be more just than God?
shall man (the best of men) be more pure than his Maker?

We are to mark the double opposition of the Text. Here is first, mortal,
weak, sick man, set in opposition to the strong, the mighty, the all-powerfull
God. And then in the second place, the opposition is between the strongest, the
best, the holiest, the wisest of men, and the maker of all men. Shall mortal
man, or shall the best of men be more just, more pure than God their Maker?
There is a threefold sense, which we may give of the words jointly.

First, They are a denial of all comparison between God and man. No man may
compare himself with God. Shall mortal man? that is, mortal man ought not to
be so bold, and daring as to venture upon such a thing as this, to stand upon
terms of equality with the mighty, the great, the glorious God, the Maker of
all, as the Apostle resolves in his own case, (1 Cor. 4. 4.) Though I know
nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified at all, much less though a
man know nothing by himself, will this justify him in this comparison, that
he is just, as God is just.

But secondly, Shall mortal man be more just than God? It is as if he had
said, God who is infinite in justice, would never do that which a just man
will not do; God who is infinite in power, would never do that, which a weak
man would not do, shall weak man be more just than God? And so we may form
the argument thus;

No man, no Judge, is more just or incorrupt than God, who is the supreme and
Lord chief Justice of all men. But there is no just Judge amongst men, who
will punish an innocent man: therefore God does not punish any one that is
innocent. The consequence or inference is plain and clear, for God himself
should either be unjust, or he should be less just, than man is, if he should
do that, which a just man upon true grounds would refuse to do. Therefore in
Genesis 18. Abraham pleades with God, under that title of a just Judge, shall not
the Judge of all the world do right? As if he should say, faithful Judges
upon the earth, will do right, therefore surely he that is the Judge of all
the earth will do right; so Eliphaz here to Job, Never complain as if God had
done thee wrong, for certainly, the just God will not do that which a just man
would not do: The word, whereby God is expressed (Eloha) Eloha denotot judicem,
and ^quissimum rerum arbit^um.
does well comply with, and answer this sense, it being properly attributed to
God as a Judge, the great arbitrator and determiner, of all the causes and
cases of all men in the world. Shall mortal man be more just than God?

Thirdly, The sense may be taken thus, If any man should come to impleade God,
or to plead with God, if any should dare to tax the Justice of God, or be so
hardy to put in a bill of complaint against him; shall this man, this weak man
be found more just in his complaining, than God has been in sentencing? shall
his bill of complaint be better grounded, than the Lords award of Judgment? It
is an allusion to those, who supposing they have wrong, complain against the
Judge, and say, that he has erred in or perverted Judgment; That word
(Justified) here used, shall man be justified before God? is a Judiciarie word,
a Court or Law term; (...) Ve^bum forense spectans ad innocentis absolutionem.
The same word, which the Holy Ghost uses, in that great work of Free Grace,
the justification of a sinner before God; And that imports the declaring and
setting forth of a man, to be righteous, and his cause good in Jesus Christ,
whereupon he is cleared and acquitted. When Satan accuses or pleads against us,
laying such and such sins to our charge; thus and thus this man has
offended, then God is said to justify a man, that is, to declare him to be
just, his sins being covered, and himself accepted in Jesus Christ. Hence
that divine challenge to all accusers. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods elect, it is God that justifies, Romans 8. 33.

So now, if man should accuse and complain against God, he has done thus and
thus in the world, afflicted a Job, troubled a righteous person; shall mortal
man be more just than God? Shall this man in his complaint be justified? shall
not God rather be justified against whom he complains? Certainly he shall. God
shall be declared just, yea, he shall be declared just by man. A man un-ingaged
and rightly principled, Such a man shall say, verily there is a God that
judges the earth. In the judgment of man, that judgment shall speak a God;
and all shall be forced to Daniels mourning acknowledgement, O Lord
righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face. Dan. 97. 9
We may enlighten it further by that of David (Ps. 51. 4.) where he professes
thus, I will confess my sins, etc. that thou may be justified when thou
speak, and be clear when thou judge: as if he should say, if hereafter
thou shall afflict me, and lay thy rod upon me, I know many will be ready to
complain and say, why does God thus, why does he afflict David, David a holy
man, a man after his own heart: a man of whom he has given such large
testimony, of whom he has said, I have found a man after my own heart. Now to
the intent all these may be cast in their suits, and answered in their
complainings, I here acknowledge before all the world, that I have sinned
greatly; and therefore, though thou have pardoned my sin, and so wilt never
charge it upon me to condemnation, nor punish me for it in a way of
satisfaction; yet hereafter thou may in thy fatherly wisdom, see it
needful to chastise me, to prevent and purge out sin, or to help me against
the weakness of my nature, and the strength of temptation for the time to
come. So here in the Text, Shall man be justified before God? If Job or any of
his friends for him, should complain against God, why he being one commended
and approved from the mouth of God, for a man perfect and upright, should be
thus afflicted; what? Shall weak Job be justified before God? Yea, though Job
be considered in his greenest flourishings of grace, and highest pitch of his
prosperity, as he was Geber indeed, the greatest, the mightiest man in the
Eastern world; yet shall he be more pure than his Maker? No, cease your
complainings, God is just, and his honor must be vindicated, in what he does,
or in what he shall do against the weakest, or against the mightiest, against
the meanest or against the best of men. God will be found just, and man a liar.

Either of these three senses are fair from the construction of the Text, and
may be profitable for us; I shall therefore draw them down into five or six
conclusions, which will be at least a portion of that marrow and fatness which
this Scripture yields us to feed upon.

First, we may observe, That man naturally prefers himself not only above
other men, but even before God himself. A principle of pride dwells in our
hearts by nature, which at some times, and in some cases breeds better thoughts
in us of our selves, than of God himself. And it is this height of spirit,
which the heavenly vision here would level to the ground. We know it was the
first sin of man, that man desired to be like God Genesis 3. The first temptation
was baited with a parity to the Divine powers, Ye shall be as Gods knowing good
and evil. This also was the language of Lucifers heart; Thou have said in thy
heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of
God, I will ascend above the heights of the Clouds, I will be like the most
high, I say ^4. 13, 14. And the practice of the man of sin, is thus
prophesied That he shall exalt himself, above all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 4. But the heart of man is yet more mad, and has out-growne those sinful
principles. For in troubles and temptations, when things go not according to
his mind, he sometimes has thoughts not only that he is like God: but that he
is more just than God, and if he had the ordering of things, he would order
them better than God: he sometime thinks himself juster than God, and if he
had the punishing of offenders, justice should proceed more freely and
impartially than it does: which is upon the matter, not only to exalt himself
(as the Man of Sin does) above Nuncupative Gods, or all that is called God, but
to exalt himself above him who is God by nature, above the only one-most God.
Even to speak in this Dialect of highest blasphemy, that he is more just than
God, more pure than his Maker.

Secondly, Take this conclusion, That it is a most high presumption, not only
for low weak man, but for the best, the highest of men, to compare themselves
with God, or to have any thoughts concerning his ways, as if they could mend
them. When God calls us to amend our ways, for us to presume we could amend
Gods ways, is the very top branch, the highest tower, yea, the most towering
Pinnacle of presumption. We say amongst men, that comparisons are odious; but
this is the most odious comparison of all, for a man to compare himself with
God, his thoughts with Gods thoughts, what he has done or would do, with what
God does.

If you consider the terms of opposition that are in the Text, this conclusion
will be more clear unto you. Consider how Enosh, weak mortal man is opposite
to Elohah, the mighty, the strong God; it is presumption for a weak man to
compare with a strong man; what presumption is it then, for a weak man to
compare with the mighty God? for a reed to compare in strength with a rock? for
darkness to compare with light? for a cloud to compare with the Sun? for
death to compare with life? for folly to compare with wisdom? for
uncleanenesse to compare with holiness? for nothing to compare with All, how
presuptuous? Will ye provoke the Lord: (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.) are ye
stronger than he? It implies, that some such thoughts lodge in man, as if he
could make his party good, with God, or might be stronger than he. And it is
equal folly in us, and provocation against the Lord, to think our selves
juster, as to think our selves stronger than he.

And then mark the other terms of opposition; Man and his Maker: Shall the
great man, compare with, or be more pure than his Maker? as if he should say,
How great and excellent soever this man is, he was made, and made by God, with
whom he thus compares, than whom he thinks himself more pure. And shall the
thing formed, stand upon terms with him that formed it? shall the potsheard or
the pot, contend with the Potter? what though it be an excellent vessel; a
vessel determined for the most excellent ends and uses? yet whatsoever it is,
it was made to be, and made to be by God, both in its constitution and uses.
Shall it then boast it self against its maker? The Lord made Geber as well as
Enosh, the strong man, as well as the weak, the wise and learned man, as well
as the foolish and ignorant, the Noble as well as the base, the holy and
righteous, as well as the wicked and profane; In a word, the vessels of honor
are as much, yea more of his making than the vessels of dishonor, shall they
then be more pure than their Maker? has the Lord given more to others, than he
has in himself? has he made a creature his superior, or his Peer? has his
bounty impaired his own stock, or has he made man, more than God? That God
has made the best out of the dust, is enough to lay all our pride and boasting
as low as the dust. That, what we are, we are from another, should ever keep us
humble in our selves.

Thirdly, Take this Conclusion, That God in himself is most just and pure.
Shall mortal man be more just than God? The question has this position in it,
that God is infinitely just, infinitely pure, therefore he is perfectly pure,
perfectly just. God is essential Justice, essential purity; Justice and
purity are not qualities in God, but they are his very nature; A man, may be a
man and yet be unjust, but God cannot be God and be unjust; A man, may be a man
and yet impure, but God cannot be God and be impure, so that Justice and purity
are not qualities or accidents in God, but his very essence and being; destroy
or deny the purity and Justice of God, and you put God out of the world, as
much as in you lies: for he cannot be God, unless he be both just to others,
and pure in himself.

Fourthly, Take this conclusion, The best men compared with God are evil, and
the holiest are impure. Not only is it presumption but a lie, for men to
compare with God; shall mortal man be more just than God? It is as if he
should say, man has no Justice at all compared with God, shall man be more
pure than his Maker? Man compared with his Maker, has no purity at all, not so
much as a name or a shadow of Justice, and purity, compared with God: though it
be somewhat in it self, yet it is nothing before him: In thy sight, or before
thee, shall no flesh living be justified, or be just. All that righteousness
and purity, which God has put into the creature, is but as the light of a
candle, to the light Humana justitic divinae comparata injuhitia est; qu^a et
lu^e^^a in tenebr^^ (...) cerni^u^, (...) in solis radio posita tenebratur.
Greg.
of the Sun, the candle has no light in it, compared to the Sun; the
candle enlightens the night, but a thousand candles cannot a day, or make the
day lighter then it is; Sun-light overcomes and swallows up candlelight: The
Stars help us to see in the dark, but in the bright day time, the Stars
themselves cannot be seen: so all creature purity disappeares and vanishes,
when once we look upon the purity of God, who is light, and in whom there
is no darkness at all. The Apostle Paul has a parallel expression (2 Cor. 3.
10.) speaking of the administration of the Jewish ceremonial, earthly
shadows, and the administration of light in Gospel heavenly ordinances; Even
that which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason of the
glory that excels: I do not deny (says he) but there was great glory in
the Jewish Church; Gods institution stamped excellency upon the worship of the
Jews; Their Ceremonies were made glorious; but if you will compare Jewish
worship to Christian worship, it has no glory in it at all; that which was
made glorious, had no glory by reason of the glory that excels, that is,
Gospel glory. So we may say, man who was made glorious, man who was made
gracious and just, has no grace, no justice, no glory in him, in comparison of
that glory which does excel; namely that justice and purity, which is in God.
God is so true, that all men are liars, Romans 3. 4. So righteous, that all man's
righteousnesses are a filthy Cajus participatione justi sunt, ejus comparatione
nec justi sunt. Aug. lib. ad Orosium. c. 20.
ragge. Isa. 64. 6. Man, who is just by participation from God is not just in
comparison of God.

The fifth Conclusion is this, and it is the principal point which we are to
receive and attend from this Text. God is so just, so pure in himself, that he
nether does, nor can do wrong to any creature: In this truth, Eliphaz aims to
instruct Job chiefly; for he supposed, that Job had complained of God, as if
he had done him wrong, wherefore he speaks reprovingly and chidingly, shall
mortal man be more just than God? as if he should say, art thou so gross as
to charge God with doing thee an injury? It is impossible that God should do
any man wrong? (de Facto) he does no man wrong, and, (de Posse) he cannot wrong
any man. The power of God is seen most in this, that he cannot do any evil;
This impotencie (if we may so call it) is the strength of God; yea the
omnipotency of God consists in this, that he can do no wrong. We have a Maxim
of state amongst us, (and it is the glory of the Kings of this Nation) we say,
The King can do no wrong; but it is not to be understood as this, God can do
no wrong; we know Kings are men, and that is enough to prove they may do wrong:
As to say, the Lord is God, is enough to prove, that he cannot. Princes have a
natural power to do evil, but (which is his glory) God has not. The meaning
then is, the King has not any civil power to do wrong; the Law has so
bounded, ordered and directed him; The constitution of the Kingdom has given
him the advice of Parliaments and Counselors, the assistance of Judges and
Officers, he acts by others: so that The failings of his Ministers do the
subject wrong, the regal power does it not. But when we speak thus of God, we
mean it of his natural power, which being essentially and infinitely just and
good, as well as sovereign and supreme, there is not the least imaginable seed
in him, which should be procreative of the least injustice: Therefore the
Scripture describes the Lord, just and holy, not only in his nature, but in all
his works and ways, Psalm. 145. 17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works. And this implies, not only that all the ways, wherein
the Lord walks, are righteous, and the works he does, holy: but that he can go
in no way but a righteous way, nor do any work in the creature, but a work
of holiness. Not only is that just and holy, which the Lord does, but let the
Lord do what he will, that will be just and holy.

And here give me leave, somewhat to enlarge this, and plead for God against
some objections, which are made by the men of the world, and some temptations
which Satan will urge strongly upon the hearts of those, who fear God; by
which (possibly) they may be so entangled and gravel'd, that they know not how
to extricate themselves, or make out the justice of God, in his administrations
toward men.

For first it will be objected, Is God so just, that he neither does nor can
do injustice to the creature? How comes it to pass, that both the righteous
and the wicked, fall under the same judgment: if the judgment be right upon a
wicked man, surely it cannot be right upon the righteous man; Is God righteous
and just, when they who differ as much as Heaven and Hell, as light and
darkness, do yet meet (as it were) under the same act of God, and are wrapped
together in the same sentence? If it be Justice upon the wicked, if it be their
portion, how can it be the portion of the righteous, or an award of Justice
upon them? As Abraham pleaded with God, (Genesis 18. 25.) Shall the righteous be
slain or perish with the wicked? that be far from thee to do in this
manner, shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? as if he should say, if
thou do involve a just man, and a wicked man in one and the same judgment,
this is not to do as a righteous Judge, far be it from thee to do such a
thing. Yet we see in frequent experiences, that the same judgment falls upon
the righteous and the wicked; By sword, famine, pestilence, by storms at Sea
and enemies at Land, both are overtaken and fall together. Is this unerring
Justice?

Justiee is to give every one his portion, his due. And God has Justitia est
suum cuique ^^^buere.
given this exact distribution in charge, to the Prophet, he must say so, and
will not the Lord do so? (Isa. 3. 10, 11.) Say ye to the righteous, it shall
be well with him, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings; woe unto the
wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him; But how do the dispensations of God, answer this direction to man, when
his providence seems to huddle up all together, to make the same portion
serve, both the righteous and the wicked?

I answer it first in the general, and then in some particulars. In the
general, the troubles of the righteous are good for them, and therefore they
have that which is promised; God says, say to the righteous it shall be well
with him: when a righteous man is troubled, it is well with him; therefore he
has that, which God promises him; and when a wicked man prospers, it is ill
with him, therefore he has that, which God thratneth against him. Outward
mercy is judgment to wicked men, and their prosperity is their undoing:
therefore, do not think that God varies a tittle from the tenor of his word,
when he says, it shall be ill with wicked men, and yet you see them prosper;
for it is never worse with them, then when they prosper, then when they think
it is best, and when the world thinks so too; the prosperity of fools shall
destroy Prove. 1.
them; and what prosperity is there in destruction? The meat in their mouths,
is as a sword in their bowels. If you saw the Lord formally sending a Sword to
devour wicked men, you would think it justice: the prosperity of wicked men is
as sharp as a Sword, that can but destroy, and so does this; It is their
judgment, that they are without judgments, and not to be smitten is their
scourge.

Now more particularly to answer this objection about the justice of God. And
it will be but needful, considering the times we live in, threaten us with a
common deluge, or an overflowing scourge, which may sweep away both good and
bad together.

First, in reference to the godly. Are they in a sad estate outwardly? are they
in great afflictions? I answer, though they are afflicted, yet they prosper.
When they are impoverished, they are enriched, when they are as having nothing,
they possess all things. What is there? what can there be, even in their
saddest estate, which does not conduce to their good, which will not be a
benefit unto them?

For first, their troubles are but trials; now is there any hurt in a trial,
or perturbation in a probation? Troubles try their graces, and their
corruptions too. Trouble tryes grace that it may be honored, and corruption
that it may be mortified; there is no hurt in all this: rather it is a most
happy condition, which makes grace conspicuous: whereby a man's best side, his
inside (wherein his glory lies, The Kings Daughter is glorious within) is
turned outward. That Scripture (Dan. 11. 33, 34, 35.) is very pregnant to the
point in hand; where the Prophet foretelling troublesome times, says, They
that understand amongst the people shall instrust many, yet they shall fall by
the sword, and by flame, by captivity and by spoil many days: They that
understand, that is, godly men shall fall by these judgments, some of them by
the sword, they shall utterly be cut off; some by flame, they shall be burnt to
ashes: others by captivity and by spoil, their estates shall be plundered,
their persons imprisoned. How does this answer the justice of God (will carnal
reason object) that it shall be thus ill, with the righteous, to whom the Lord
promises it shall be well? Yes, well enough. For it follows, Now when they
shall fall, they shall be helped with a little help, and some of them of
understanding shall fall, (that is, by captivity, and by spoil) to try them,
and to purge them, and to make them white. Here are two remarkable ends, why
They of understanding, fall into these evils. First, for probation, to try
them. Secondly, for cleansing and purgation, to purge them and make them white.
Gold is never wronged, by being tried. A spotted garment, a distempered body,
are not damnified by washing, or by purging. To be freed from filth without,
and bad humors within the body, is more then a common favor. How high an act
of favor then is it, to have ill humors and filthy spots washed, purged out
of the soul? Such base humors a good man may have, as call for these strong
working pills, Spoiling and Captivity, to cast them out. Now those men of
understanding have no more hurt intended them by God, when they fall into
spoilers hands, then when a diseased body falls into a Physicians hand, or when
a defiled garment falls into a Fullers hand; sc. to purge and make them white.
Affliction is a cleanser. Christ is the only lavatory, and his blood the only
Fountain to wash away the guilt of sin; yet God has other Fountains and
Lavatories, to wash away the pollution of sin: That blood cleanses in this
sense also, principally; and all the waters or fires of affliction have no
efficacy at all, to refine or cleanse, but in virtue of that blood. A Cross
without a Christ never made any man better: But with Christ, all are made
better by the Cross. We may then say at least, that it is well with the
righteous in affliction, forasmuch as (through the blessing of God) they are
bettered by affliction. When you see a godly man cast out in the open air, and
having the waters of sorrow powered continually upon him, know that he is only
laid out a whitening, and will appear shortly more resplendant then ever.

Secondly, afflictions are sent to humble. Pride is such a weed, as often
grows in the best soil: Now that which humbles us cannot hurt us; we lose
nothing by the abatements of our pride: no, the more pride loses, the more we
gain. And we seldom or never lose any thing, but by pride. Now says God,
Deuteronomy. 8. 1. If you would have an account, why I brought my people about in the
wilderness, through so many difficulties; know, this was my design, it was
to humble them. God resists pride wheresoever he finds it (they in whom pride
totally prevails, are Gods enemies and he resists them) they in whom pride
has some, yea great prevalency, may be Gods friends, and God will resist pride
in them: the difference is observable betvveen resisting of pride, and
resisting the proud; the resisting of the person, and the resisting of the sin.
The great resistance, which God makes against the pride of man's heart, is by
the rods of affliction; he whips them into humility, and by taking away
carnal comforts, takes them off from carnal confidence. And O blessed
affliction which makes us less to our selves, and all creatures less to us.
We are never so much in Gods eye, as when we are least in our own: nor have
we ever so much of God, as when we expect little, or least from man; say
therefore it is well with the righteous, when they are in the deeps of
affliction; for it is but to bring them off their Mountains of pride, that
they may be exalted in the strength and love of God, even upon the Mountain of
his Holiness and their glory for ever.

Thirdly, Afflictions bring the Saints nearer to God. Troubles abroad cause the
soul to look inwards and homewards. Is there any hurt in being brought nearer
to God? It is good for me to draw near unto God, says David; and it is good for
us to be drawn near unto God, if we will not come of our selves: It is a
desirable violence, which compels us heavenward. Heaven is but our nearest
being unto God; and by how much we are nearer God on earth, so much the more
we have of Heaven, upon earth. Afflictions (as in the Prodigals example) put
us upon thoughts of returing to God, and the more we return, the nearer we
are unto him; returning thoughts will not rest, but under our fathers roof:
yea, returning thoughts will not rest, till we are got into our fathers
arms, or under the shadow of his wing, and this a happy condition indeed. As
it was with Noah's Dove (Genesis 8. 9.) when she was sent forth of the Ark, she
could find no place for the soal of her foot to rest on; she knew not whether
to go, for the waters were on the face of the whole earth; therefore she
returns back, and comes hovering about the Ark, as desiring to be taken in:
but after the waters were assuaged, he sent out a Dove, which returned to
him no more. So when it is fair weather in the world, calm and serene; even
Doves keep off from God; and though they go not quite away from him, yet they
are not so desirous of coming to him: but when we find a deluge in the world,
such storms and tempests of trouble, that we know not where to fix our souls
for a day, then we come as the Dove fluttering about the Ark, and cry to our
Eternal Noah, that we may be near him, yea, within, with him. Wicked men (like
the Raven, which Noah sent out first, Verse 7. and returned not again) care
not for the Ark of Gods presence in the greatest troubles: to be near God is
more troublesome to them, then all their troubles. But Believers, like the
Dove, will look home (at least) in foul weather. God is their chief friend at
all times, and their only friend in sad times. Is there any harm in this?
Christ sends a storm, but to draw his back to the Ark; That, at the last,
where he is, there they may be also.

Lastly, we may say it is well with the righteous in their worst condition of
outward trouble, because, God is with them; It can never be ill with that man,
with whom God is. It is infinitely more to say, I will be with thee, then to
say, peace is with thee, health is with thee, credit is with thee, honor is
with thee. To say, God is with thee, is all these, and infinitely more. For in
these you have but a particular good, in God you have all good: when God says,
I will be with you, you may make what you will out of it; sit down and imagine
with your selves whatsoever good you can desire, and it is all comprehended in
this one word, I will be with thee. Now God who is with the righteous at all
times, is most with them in worst times; then he says in a special sense, I
will be with thee. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee.
When thou walk thhough the fire, thou shall not be burnt, etc. Isa. 43. 2.
When a mighty wind passed before Eliah, it is said, That God was 1 Kings 19.
not in the wind: and when the Earthquake shook the Hills, and a consuming fire
appeared, it is said, God was not in the Earthquake, not in the fire. God
joins not with outward troubles, for the terror of his people, but he joins
with outward troubles, for the comfort of his people. So he is in the fire, and
in the wind, and in the Earthquake, and his presence makes the fire but as a
warm Sun; the stormy wind, a refreshing gale; and the Earthquake, hut a
pleasant dance.

So much for the removing of this objection, and clearing up the justice of
God, respecting the afflictions of the righteous.

If any shall look on the other hand upon wicked men, as if God came not home
in his justice, while he suffers them to prosper.

First I answer, their prosperity serves the providence of God, and therefore
it does not cross his justice. That, was Nebuchadnezars case, (Isa. 10. 6.) I
will send him (says God) against an hypocritical nation: so then, he must
prosper while he goes upon Gods errand: but mark what follows (Verse 12.) It
shall come to pass, that when the Lord has performed his whole work upon
Mount Zion, sc. by Nebuchadnezars power, who was but doing the just work of
God, while he thought ambitiously of doing his own, (now it is no injustice
for God, to give an instrument power to do his work) and when his bloody lust
has performed the holy work of God, you shall see the Lord will take an order
with him speedily, For) then says the Lord, I will punish the fruit of the
stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks; God let
him alone to do the work, he had set him about; and it was a righteous work of
God upon his people, though Nebuchadnezzar went about it, wlth a proud and
malicious spirit against his people.

Secondly, the prosperity of wicked men serves them, but as an opportunity, to
show how wicked and vile they are; to act and publish the seven abominations of
their own hearts. Now as it is one of the greatest mercies under Heaven, for a
man to have his lusts quite mortified; so it is a very great mercy, for a man
to have his lusts, but, restrained: It is a mercy for a man, to have that fuel
taken away from his corruptions, upon which they feed: therefore it must needs
be wrath and judgment upon wicked men, when God in stead of restraining their
lusts, gives them opportunity to enlarge their lusts, and lays the reins on
their neck, to run whether and which way they please, without stop or
control. This is wrath, and high wrath, a sore judgment, the sorest
judgment that can fall upon them: wherefore when we think they are in a most
prosperous condition they are in the most dreadful condition, they are but
filling themselves with sin, and fitting themselves for destruction. Many a
man's lusts are altogether unmortified, which yet are chilled and overawed by
judgments. And there is more judgment in having liberty to commit one sin,
then in being shut up under the iron bars and adamantine necessities of a
thousand judgments: He that is Satan's treasury for sin, shall be Gods treasury
for wrath.

Thirdly, Their prosperity is the judiciary hardening of their hearts, and a
hard heart, is the greatest judgment on this side Hell; As there is a naturally
inbred and sinfully acquired hard heart, so there is a judicially hardened, or a
divinely inflicted hard heart: When to a natural hard heart, and an acquired
hard heart, which men get by many repeated acts of sin, the Lord adds a
judicially hardened, or inflicted hard heart, then wrath is heated to the
hottest, and judgment is within one step of Hell. Especially if we consider,
that every hour of such prosperous impenitence, and hardness of heart
increases punishment, and adds to the treasury of that wrath, which is stored
up against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of
God. Who thinks that man happy, who is let alone only to gather a mighty pile
of wood, and other fuel of flames to burn himself? while ungodly men saem to
the world to be gathering riches, honor and pleasure, hey are but gathering a
heap of wrath, and a pile of fire; which at the last will flame so bright, that
it will make a revelation, of the (formerly secret, but) ever righteous
judgment of God.

Lastly, To show that God is just in all his dealings, both the righteous and
the wicked, learn, from the end of both. That we may fully discover the
Justice of God, we must look upon all his works together; while we look only
upon some particular piece of Gods dealings with a godly man, he may seem to
deal very hardly with him: or if we look but upon some particular piece of
his dealings with a wicked man, God may seem very gentle and kind toward him:
but take all together, and the result is exact justice. It was a good speech of
a modern writer, We must Non est judicandum de operibus Dei ante quintum
actum. Per. Mart.
not judge of the works of God, before the fifth act, that is, the last act or
conclusion of all. This, and that part may seem dissonant and confused, but
lay them all together, and they are most harmonious and methodicall: Hence
David (Psalm. 37.) after he had a great dispute with himself, about the
troubles of the righteous and the prosperity of the wicked, and was put hard to
it, how to make out the Justice of God, resolves all in the close with this
advice (ver. 37.) Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of
that man is peace. Though a righteous man die in war, yet, his end is peace,
whereas though a wicked man die in peace, yet his end is war. It is said
(Deuteronomy. 8. 16.) that all which God did to his people in the wilderness, was,
that he might do them good at the latter end. Come to the end therefore, and
there you shall find justice visible: We often loose the sight of justice, in
our travailes and passage through the world, mountains and hills interpose,
which we cannot see over or through; but when we come home, and arrive at the
end of our travailes, Justice will appear in all her state and glory, rendering
to every man according to his deeds; To them who hy patient continuance in
well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life; but
unto them that are contentious and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath.

Joshua concludes the story of the people of Israel, in their passage to
Canaan, with the highest testimonies of Gods justice and faithfulness; though
God dealt with them so variously in the wilderness that they often murmured in
their tents, as if he had done them wrong, yet in the close you shall find, how
exact and punctual the Lord was with them, (Josh. 21. 45.) There failed not
ought of any good thing which the Lord had spoken to the house of Israel, all
came to pass: And in that other text, Josh. 23. 14 Behold this day I am going
the way of all the earth, and you know in all your hearts, and in all your
souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good things, which the Lord
your God spoke concerning you, all are come to pass unto you, and not one
thing has failed thereof. How admirably just was God in his word? If a man
promise many things, we take it well if he perform some of the chief, and
them in the chief, though some what may fail. God promised many things, and
performed all, and which is more, all of every one, of those many things
promised. The texts compared, make this out, the one saying, That not one thing
failed of all the good things, which God spoke concerning them. And the other,
That not ought of any good thing failed. So then, they had every good thing in
kind, with each particular part and degree of every good thing: And for the
truth of all this, Joshua makes his appeal to themselves, and to that in
themselves, which was best able to determine it, All their hearts, and all
their souls; which words do not only refer to every person, as if the
meaning were, The hearts and souls of you all; but rather to all that is in
every person, All their hearts, and all their souls, that is, understandings,
memories, consciences. affections, yea senses, their eyes and ears, their
hands and mouths, could bring in witness from their several operations, to
this great truth. And surely God in the end will deal as well with every
Israelite, as he did with all Israel: A time will come, it will come shortly,
when every Saint shall say, in all their hearts and in all their souls, that
not one thing nor ought of any one good thing, which the Lord has said
concerning them, has failed. I shut up this, in the words of Christ to his
Disciples, when they were amused about that act of his, the washing of their
feet, (John 13. 7.) What I do, ye know not now, but ye shall know hereafter.
Stay but a while, and all those mysteries and riddles of providence shall be
unfolded. Though clouds and darkness are round about him, yet Judgment and
Justice are the habitation of his Throne, Psalm. 97. Mortal man never had, and
at last shall see he had no reason, to complain of God; mortal man shall not
be more just than God; nor shall man be more pure than his maker. And so much
for the fifth Conclusion, That God neither does nor can do any injustice to
the creature, he is just in his nature, just and holy in all his ways.

The sixth or last Conclusion is this, That to complain of Gods Iustior sit
oportet qui immeri^o affligitur qua qui immerio affligit.
dealing with us, is to make our selves more just and pure than Gods or, when
any person or people complain of Gods dispensations toward them, they (though
not formally, yet by way of interpretation) make themselves more just and pure
than God. This was the point wherein Eliphaz labors much, to convince Job,
supposing that he had thus exalted himself against God, by these grievous
complainings of his present state, in the foregoing Chapter; There is a truth
in the proposition, though not in the application, as has often been hinted.
Jobs complaints were bitter, from the sense of his pains, not from any
prejudice in his understanding. Quisq^is de persec^tione murmurat* quid aliud
quam judicium fe^ientis a^^usat, purior^m ergo se vir factore suo existimat si
contra flagellum qurelam parat, camque sibi proculdubio post ponit, c^jus
judicium de sua afflictione r^d^^gui^. G^eg.
He ever preserved high and holy thoughts of God, The least suspicion of whose
righteous dealings, is to make our selves, by so much more righteous, then he.
The reason is clear, for, he that complains thus, thinks some wrong is done
him; Now he that complains of wrong, would be thought more just, than he of
whose wronging him, he complains: Whosoever murmurs or repines at what God
does secretly says (this voice is in it) that he could do better, or that God
ought: He that speaks against the rod, speaks against him that smites with the
rod, He that swears by Heaven, swears by the Throne of God, and by him that
sits thereon, says Christ; And so, he that accuses the rod of God, accuses
the work of God, and God that wrought it: He thinks himself more pure then his
Maker, who is displeased with God, as a correcter: To disapprove any thing
which God does, is to approve our selves before God. It is seasonable for us to
look to our hearts in such a time as this; it is a time of temptation, let us
not by our murmurings, make it a time of provocation: Possibly we may often see
cause to complain of men, but we can never have cause to complain of God.
There is but little good got by complaining of creatures but how much guilt and
misery gets he, who complains of his Creator? For a man to complain to man,
is in some cases necessary, but it is best in all cases, to complain to God,
and the worst of any case, to complain (though silently) of God. So then,
complain of man to God, rather then of man, to men; complain often to God,
but never of God: Complain before God, and tell him, that, such have dealt
negligently, such falsely, such unjustly, such cruelly; But always say, Lord
thou have done justly, even by those who are unjust; Lord thou have done
graciously, even by those who are wicked; Lord thou have done holily, even by
the hand of those who are unholy; and thou have dealt faithfully, though these
have been treacherous. Thus let us complain to God, but not of God. Every
complaint of God will be interpreted, a secret justification of our selves, and
a condemnation of the righteous God. Man is then worse then a Devil, when he
would make himself better then God: Nothing pollutes man, so much as this
thought, that there is unrighteousness in God: Nothing debases the creature so
much, as that thought, desire or act, wherein he prefers and exalts himself
above the Creator.

Thus we have opened the general proposition: The probation of it, from the
vast difference between men and Angels, is prosecuted at large, in the latter
part of the Chapter.

JOB. Chap. 4. Verse. 18. Behold he put no trust in his servants, and his Angels
he charged with folly.
ELiphaz having laid the dignity of man (comparing with God) in the dust, by
those humbling questions, in the former verse, what is man that he should be
just? and shall man be more pure than his Maker? He now strengthens it further,
that there is no comparison between God and mortal man, by a direct assertion,
that there is no comparison between God, and immortal Angels. Behold he put
no trust in his servants, and his Angels he charged with folly. As if he had
said, If Angels are not able to stand before God, and justify themselves upon
his inquiry; then certainly man, the best of men, who dwell but in houses of
clay cannot: But Angels cannot justify themselves before God, therefore much
less can the best of men. That Angels are not able to justify themselves
before God, he proves in these words: Behold he put no trust in his servants,
and his Angels he charged with folly: They that cannot be trusted by God,
cannot be justified by God: And they that are chargeable with folly, are not
able to stand in judgment before the most wise, the only wise and holy God.
Angels are excellent creatures, yet because creatures, they are in, and of
themselves, frail and weak: they have no strength to stand longer then
upheld, no steadfastness to obey, longer than confirmed, no faithfulness to
be loyal, longer than overruled, no wisdom to discern, further than they
are enlightened; what then will become of man, if he stand alone, or stand in
competition with God his Maker? This is the sum and general sense of the
words as they are an argument. We will now consider them as they lie here in
order.

Behold he put no trust in his servants. The particle [Behold] in the
Original, as it often notes wonder in other texts, so it may, much more in
this, Behold a wonder, Angels are foolish, Angels are not to be trusted; yet in
this place, Behold, is put by way of affirmation, rather then of admiration.
Behold he put no trust in his servants, is as much as verily and indeed,
certainly and without controversy, he put no trust in his servants; So (Deuteronomy.
13 14.) Thou shall inquire and search, and ask diligently, and behold if it be
true; in the Hebrew thus, and behold true, or behold truth; that is, if upon
inquiry it appear, that sucb and such things are certainly so, then, they
must proceed according to the Law provided in that case. Again (Deuteronomy. 19. 18.)
The Judges shall make diligent inquisition, and behold, if the witness be a
false witness, so we translate; but the letter is, Behold the witness, a
false witness, that is, if it be affirmed, and do appear that it is a false
witness or testimony which is brought, then the Judges shall proceed so and
so, etc. Thus here, Behold he put no trust in his servants, is a vehement
affirmation, that God searching into those his servants, finds them such as are
not to be trusted

But who are these untrusty servants? First, The Chaldee paraphrast understands
by servants, the holy Prophets; Prophets (I grant) sometimes have, and oftener
would have proved unfaithful; some of them, discovered much, and others would
have discovered more unfaithfulness, if God had not mightily supported them.
Secondly, One of the Rabbis, understands it in general of any, or of all the
faithful, Behold he put no trust in his servants; that is, not in any of the
holiest and faithfullest of the children of men.

But the connection of the text carries it clearly, that by servants, we are to
understand the Angels, who are called ministering spirits, Heb. 1. 14. Are they
not all ministering spirits (or servants) sent out for the good of those that
are the heirs of salvation? And so the words in the close of this verse, are
exigeticall, expounding who are intended by those servants; Behold he put no
trust in his servants, and his Angels he charged with folly; that is, he
trusted not those servants the Angels, but charged them with folly. But there
is a further reason, more fully evidencing that it must be understood of
Angels, in the 19 verse, where the persons standing in equal opposition to
these servants and Angels, are men H^w much less (says he) on them that dwell
in houses of clay: Now a dwelling in a house of clay, is the periphrasis, or
description of mankind in general, good or bad, one or other, high or low,
all mankind dwells in a house of clay. Seeing then the term of opposition is
mankind in general, we must take somewhat which being (...) Nutrivit in
Hiphil credid^t fisus est A fide quae in nutr^endo requiritur, (...)
a raionall creature is not man, for the other term, which cannot be any
except Angels; we cannot set any sort of men in opposition to others upon this
ground, because they dwell in houses of clay, for the Saints on earth dwell in
houses of clay, as well as men of the earth; therefore to make the opposition
clear, it necessarily follows, that by Servants in the first clause of the
verse, Angels are employed, as well as in the latter, where Angels are expressed.
nutriius d^ctus est cujus fidei pue^ est commissus, quasi fidum aut fidetem
dicas, saepe etiam accommodatur ad aeconomum and dispensatorem, proper
fidelitatem eorum,


But if these servants be Angels, how is it, that he put no trust in, or that
(as we may render it word for word out of the Hebrew) he did not believe in
these his servants? I shall answer that, when I have a little opened the wopd
here translated To put trust. We find it used two ways in Scripture, sometime
passively, and sometime actively. It is taken passively to be faithful,
trusty, and true in word or promise. From this root the Hebrew takes the name
of a Guardian or Foster-father or Steward, because such to whose care children
or families are committed, ought to be most faithful in the discharge of so
great a trust.

The Apostle (1 Cor. 4. 1, 2.) speaking of that heavenly Stewardship, the
ministry of the Gospel, expresses it thus, Let a man so account of us as of
the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God, moreover (says
he) it is required in a Steward that a man be found faithful. And (Numb. 12.
7.) where Moses is spoken of, as a servant, he is thus described, My servant
Moses is not so, who is faithful in all my house; he is a man whom I may trust
or give credit to, for he is trusty and faithful. (Heb. 3. 2, 5.) the Apostle
comparing Christ and Moses, says of Christ, That he was faithful to him that
appointed him, as Moses was faithful in all his house. So that here is an
elegant Antithesis, His servants, who according to their duty and office, ought
to be constant, faithful, trusty; he found unconstant unfaithful, not to be
trusted.

Yet the word being in Hyphil, is of an active signification, and (...) A verbi
preprietate non recedamus, qua sign^ficat cum (...) credere and fidere alicui
Merc Verbum de verbo in servos suos credidit.
when it is in construction with Beth (as Grammarians observe) it imports to
give credit unto, or confide in a person; and so here, he put no trust; that
is, he did not credit or condfie in those servants, or he did not believe on
them. He saw somewhat in them, which might betray them to disloyalty, if
himself withdrawing his assistance should make an experiment, or try what was
in their hearts. And this sense is most suitable to the state and office of a
servant: trusting or not trusting, faithfulness, or unfaithfulness, are acts
proper to that relation, Lord and Servant. So then the Lord put no trust, or he
could not confide in his servants, they being such as he found not perfectly
sure and loyal unto him. We say commonly of a man whom we cannot rrust, We
will not give our word for him, and we will not take his. Our Lord Christ is
therefore called a faithful High Priest, because his Father trusted him with
the whole business of our salvation, without the least misgiving thought of
his faithfulness, or the miscarriage of the work. Thus Solomon describes a
faithful Wife and a confiding Husband, Prove. 31, 10, 11. A rare couple indeed,
and as rarely found. Therefore he makes proclamation for such a woman; who can
find a virtuous Woman? for her price is far above Rubies, the heart of her
Husband does safely trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil:
there is confidence to the height, the heart of her Husband does safely trust in
her. A Husband that has such a Jewel to his Wife, knows, she will order the
family with discretion at home, when he is abroad: he knows she is faithful to
him body and goods. Her chastity or her frugality never came in question before
his thoughts; therefore (says he) I shall have no need of spoil, which some
interpret thus: her care and wisdom in providing for the family, will make it
like an Army, which has overcome the Tam circum. fluit bonis omnibus familia
ejus quam milites spolijs ex pugnata urbe, out host supera^o.
Enemy in the field, or won a wealthy City, where the Soldiers have spoil
or pillage enough, they need no spoil. Or as others, He shall have no need of
spoil, that is, he shall have no need to spoil or oppress others, to help
his family. All things shall be so ordered by his wives prudence, that he shall
not need to take any unjust way, to provide for, or supply his household. Thus
the heart of her husband does safely trust in her. Such trust the heart of God
could not put in those servants, his Angels, he knew they might come short in
their accounts. Such trust Christ could not give some, who seemed to trust or
believe on him, (John 2. 23.) Many seeing Christ's miracles believed on him, yet
Christ would not believe on them; we translate, he would not commit himself to
them; the Greek is, he did not believe or trust himself (...).
unto them, Christ believes in, or may trust them all the world over, who truly
believe in him: But these believed so falsely upon him that he could not
believe fully upon them; and the text gives the reason, For he himself knew
all men, he knew, they were not metal of a due temper, and therefore not to be
trusted. So God knew all Angels, the uttermost perfection, power, and virtue
that was in Angels, therefore he would not commit all to them, he would not
believe upon them. We find the word belief thus used, (Exodus 14. 31.) when the
children of Israel saw the great work, that the Lord had wrought in destroying
the Egyptians, it is said, The people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord,
and his servant Moses; he puts God and Moses as the joint object of their
faith: as they had formerly been of their unbelief* Except the servants of the
Lord be believed, the Lord himself is not. And when they are believed, the
Lord is. Believe in the Lord your God, believe his Prophets, says good
Jehosaphat to his people, 2 Chronicles. 20 20. Moses had told them enough of the
power of God before, he had undertaken they should be delivered, but they would
not trust Moses upon his word, nor would they trust the Word of God: yet now
when they saw this great deliverance, present sight wrought faith for the time
to come: they perceived by this miracle, that the Lord and Moses were to be
credited, and they doubted not, to credit them another time. Though that faith
which comes in at the eyes only, seldom goes down so low, as the heart, or
sees further and longer then the eye. Thus we may understand the first part of
the Verse, He put no trust, no belief in his servants, he gave no credit to
them, as knowing perfectly what their nature and power was, what both could do:
that if left by God, they would quickly leave God, and prove unfaithful.

I shall observe one point, before I come to the latter part of the Verse (for
there the suspicion of disloyalty upon the Angels comes more fully to be
considered) from the title here given to the Angels, His servants, he put no
trust in his servants, Angels are the servants of God. They are his servants,
as being altogether at his command, and they are his servants, as being fully
conformable to his commands. These great and glorious Spirits, come under the
same title and denomination with men, who dwell in houses of clay, servants of
God. To serve God, is not only the duty, but it is the honor of the highest
creatures. It is more honor to serve God, then to rule the world. The style of
the good Angels, is, Ministering Spirits, Heb. 1. but the style and title of the
evil Angel, is, Prince of the power of the air, God of this word: you would
think these were weighty titles, Prince of the air, God of the world, but the
additions diminish their weight, yea, make them lighter then vanity, or rather,
heavy only with misery: There is more glory in being a servant of God, than in
being a god of the world, or a Prince of the power of the air.

I might here enlarge my enquiry into the services of Angels, in what they are
servants, and what their offices and duties are, but I shall only touch. Their
service may be considered either in respect of the Church, or the enemies of
the Church. Respecting the Church and people of God, they have such services as
these.

First, they are as messengers to carry and reveal the mind of God. They are
as Tutors and instructors of the Churches, Dan. 8. 9. God sent his Angel to
teach Daniel the mystery of those visions. And Rev. 1. 11. an Angel was sent
to instruct John, Chap. 22. 16. I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify these
things in the Churches.

Secondly, they are sent as guardians and protectors of the people of God, to
take their part, and to be on their side, Psalm. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear him. Psalm. 91. 11. He gives his Angels a
charge over them, lest at any time they should dash their feet against a stone.
Genesis 32. 2. When Jacob journied, it is said, the Angels of God met him; an army
of Angels was his Convoy, Gods Host coming out for his protection and
safeguard, and therefore he called the name of that place Nahanaim, that is,
two Hosts or Camps; either because the Angels appeared in two bands, and so
made as it were a guard for Jacob to pass between them. Or, because the great
Angelical Royal Army, quartered and marched with Jacobs little Army; and so
two confederate Armies appeared in the field together. Angels are called
Chariots, Psalm. 68. 17. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands
of Angels. That is, God uses Angels for defense of his people, as Chariots in
War. The ancient Prophets were called the Chariots of Israel, (2 King. 3. 13.)
and the Angels are the Chariots of God. Our strongest Militia is of Spirits, or
of men spiritualized.

Thirdly, Angels suggest good things, holy thoughts to us. If the Devil, who
is an evil Angel, a wicked spirit, can suggest evil, sinful filthy thoughts,
and help on the heart in wickedness; then doubtless a good Angel can help on
the heart in holiness, in heavenly thoughts and meditations. Christ speaks of
Judas, that Satan had put it into his heart to betray him, John 13. and Peter
to Ananias (Acts 5.) Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy
Ghost? The nature of a good Angel is as fit, his power given as great, to deal
with our spirits, as either the nature or the power of an evil Angel. That of
the Apostle (2 Cor. 11. 14.) gives a hint, if not a proof of it, where he tells
the Corinthians, That deceitful workers transform themselves into the
Apostles of Christ, and no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an
Angel of light, and when is Satan in this change from an Angel of darkness to
an Angel of light? even when He suggests good for evil ends, or evil for good
ends. And if he is called an Angel of light for this reason, then Angels of
light, good Angels suggest good, for good ends; otherwise, Satan could not be
said to imitate them, in suggesting good for ill ends, and under specious
pretenses of bringing glory to God, tempting to transgress the will of God.

Fourthly, good Angels comfort, strengthen and support, in times of distress,
anguish and trouble: an Angel comforted Hagar Genesis 21 and (Matthew. 4. 10.) after
Christ had finished his terrible combat with that wicked Angel, the good Angels
came and ministered unto him. Again, when he was in that most bitter Agony in
the garden (Luke 22. 43.) an Angel appeared to him from Heaven, strengthening
him. That which they do to Christ the Head, they do to his members in their
proportion.

Their fifth service, is to conveigh and carry the souls of departed Saints to
Heaven: they are Heavenly Porters (Luke. 16. 22.) Lazarus dyed, and was carried
by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.

Lastly, they shall convocate and gather all the Elect together at the last
day, Matthew. 24. 31. Their services against the wicked and all enemies of the
Church have been many and great. Angels assist Saints, and oppose the opposers
of Sion. Two Angels were sent upon a message of destruction to Sodom; an Angel
defeated the Host of Senacherib; an Angel smote bloody persecuting Herod;
Angels (by name, if not by nature) power out the seven vials of Gods wrath in
the Revelation. And at the last day Angels shall hurry the wicked to Christ's
Tribunal; they are heavenly Pursivants; and they shall bundle the Tares up
together, as fuel to be thrown into everlasting burnings, Matthew. 13. 41, 42.

And it may be a great comfort to us, that God has such servants. When visible
dangers are round about us, we should remember, God has invisible servants
round about us. There are more with us, then against us, as Elisha told his
fearful servant, 2 Kings 6. And in that low estate of the Church, Zech. 1. 8.
the Prophet is showed Christ in a vision standing among the Myrtle trees in the
bottom, (the Myrtle trees in the bortome, noted the Church in a low estate)
and behind him there were red Horses, speckled and white; that is, horsemen
speckled and white. These diverse colored Horses were Angels appointed for
several offices, as the learned Junius (with others) interprets it; The red
horses being appointed for judgment, the white for mercy, and the speckled,
(as he conjectures) for mixed actions, being sent out, at once to protect and
help the people of God, and to execute wrath and judgment upon the adversary.
Thus we see the services of the Angels; they are servants, yet such as the most
wise God put no trust in; therefore we have an Angel better then Angels, even
the Angel of the Covenant the Lord Jesus, into whose hands our safety is
committed, to whose care the Church is left, in whom God puts the whole trust,
knowing that this great Angel, is, and for ever will be faithful, in and over
his house, to his highest delight, and the Churches compleatest welfare.

And his Angels he charged with folly. Nec in Angelis suis ponet lumen Tagn.
Nec in Angelis suis posuit lucem exactissimam- Vatab. Angelis suis posuit
vesaniam, Tygur. In Angelis suis ponet glorationem. Bibl. Reg. In Angelis suis
reperit vanitatem Sym. (...) Sept. (...) aradice (...) Splenduit, luxit,
claruit Metaphorice in piel, spiendidum, illustrem, cla^u^ reddidit laudavit,
praedicavit. Per Antiph rasin. inglorius, insanus furore actus fuit, insanivit.
There are very different readings of this part of the Verse. Some (as M. Beza)
read it thus, He trusted not in his servants, though he had put light into
those his messengers. Others read it with a negation in both parts, He put no
trust in his servants, neither has he put light in his Angels. Another thus,
neither has he put perfect light in his Angels. Mr. Broughton differs from all
these, Behold he holds not perfection to be in his own servants, and in his
Angels he judged no clear light to be. Another sort read it to these senses, He
charged, or put madness in or upon his Angels, he put or charged vain
boasting in, or upon his Angels, he found vanity in or amongst his Angels, he
observed some evil amongst his Angels.

Now that which has given occasion to this variety of translatings, is the
different senses which the Original yields us. The Hebrew word is very
fruitful of significations, and has (as the Oracle told Rebecca concerning
two contrary Nations) two contrary meanings in the womb of it, and that makes
the struggling amongst Interpreters. The word in its proper sense signifies to
shine forth with a resplendent brightness, so Chap. 29. 3. Job wishes, O that
I were as in months past, when the candle of God shined upon my head; it is a
Verb of which the word folly in this text of Job is a derivative. And (Isay
14. 12.) Hielel signifies the Morning star, whose shining brightness has
obtained the name Lucifer, Light-bringer, or Light-bearer. How art thou fallen
from Heaven O Lucifer, son of the Morning? How art thou fallen from Heaven,
Hielel, thou shining day star? Thus, the word properly signifies shining or
brightness, or to shine and be bright: and hence by a Metaphor to be Famous,
or renowned, or to make one renowned or famous, or to paint out a man with
praises; because a man is (as it were) decked with light, and has rays of
brightness cast upon him, when he is honored and adorned with praises. Due
commendations are to a man as a robe or vesture of light, which makes him shine
to all about him. And hence the word Halelujah is derived, praise ye Jah, or
the Lord; used frequently both in the beginning and end of the Psalms: in the
beginning of the Psalms by way of exhortation, and in the end by way of
acclamation, crying up the honor and glory of God. And (to note that in
passage) it is well observed, that this word Hallelujah is first used in the
old Testament, Psalm. 104. 35. where the utter consumption of sinners is
mentioned; and in the New Testament it is first used, Rev. 19. 3 6. where the
utter consumption of Antichrist is prophesied. Judgment on the wicked, is
matter of high praise to God. Thirdly, the word signifies (by the figure
Antiphrasis or contrary speaking) to boast and brag vainly, foolishly; or vain
foolish boasting. To commend or extol our selves is pride running mad, and
arrogance distracted. It is the highest dotage to be in love with our own
wisdom and folly, to publish our own works. There may be wisdom (though
oftentimes there is a great deal of folly) in commending others, but in
commending our selves, there can be nothing but folly: therefore the very same
word which signifies to boast and commend our selves; signifies both the
concrete, to be mad, vain, or foolish; and the abstract, madness and folly:
thus in Eccles. 2. 2, 12. the word is used, I said of laughter thou art mad. I
turned my self to behold wisdom, and folly, and madness: and Psalm. 75. 4. I
said unto the fools, deal not foolishly, or to the madmen, do not play the
madmen, that is, do not exalt your selves, for so he clears his meaning in the
fifth Verse, Lift not up your horns on high, speak not with a stiff neck,
that is, a neck stifned with pride, and a horn lifted up with vainglory or
self-confidence.

From this variety of significations, the variety of translations before
touched, arises. First they who read it, He put light into those his
messengers, take the word in a proper strict sense, making out the meaning
thus; that God having put the light of excellent knowledge into the Angels,
could not yet trust them: all their speculative knowledge, and high raised
illuminations, were not enough to make them steadily and steadfastly holy: that
is the intent of Mr. Beza's interpretation, He trusted not to his servants,
though he had put light into those his messengers. For those who retaining the
word light translate negatively, neither has he put light in his Angels, or
neither has he put perfect light into his Angels; or as Mr. Broughton, In his
Angels he judges no clear light to be, putting a negative particle in both
branches of the Verse, whereas in the Hebrew there is no express negation in
the latter. These, I say, are led by this reason or rule. It is frequent in
Scripture, when there is a negative in the former clause of a Verse, then to
understand a negative also in the latter clause, though none be expressed. For
instance (Psalm. 9. 18.) The needy shall not always be forgotten, the expectation
of the poor shall not perish for ever; so we read, but in the Hebrew the
latter clause is, the expectation of the poor shall perish for ever: there is
no Negative in the Original; but our Transtators, and not only they, but all
that I have seen upon the place, render it so, supplying the Negative particle
of the former, in the latter clause of that sentence. And without that
negative, the sentence is not only imperfect, but untrue. Thus, The needy shall
not always be forgotten the expectation of the poor shall perish for ever,
this were a contradiction: but reading it, the expectation of the poor shall
not perish for ever, makes the whole a truth, and congruous in it self. Again
(Pro. 17. 26.) To punish the just is not good, to strike Princes for equity, so
the letter of the Hebrew; but we read it thus, To punish the just is not good,
nor to stricke Princes for equity. I might give ynu other examples, but a taste
may suffice Thus in the Text before us, when it is said in the first clause, he
put no trust in his servants, we take up the negative, and say in the second,
neither has he put light into his Angels, or he did not put light in his
Angels, or he put no perfect light in his Angels, or he judged not clear light
to be in his Angels.

Secondly, they, who (according to our Translation) render it madness or
solly, vain boasting or vanity, these take the Original in that figurative
sense before given. When a man from a reflection upon his own worth, boasts out
his own praises, which, because it is a point of extreme vanity and folly,
therefore the word is elegantly applied to signify folly, etc. He charged his
Angels with folly. He put or laid folly upon, or to his Angels; He put, for so
the Hebrew word bears. Not, that the vanity which is in Angels is of Gods
putting, but the folly that is in them, he puts to them, or char^eth it upon
them, or lays it to their charge. As we say, (...)
Such a one put it home upon him; that is, he charged him soundly, or fully,
with such a crime or offense. To charge, is a judicial or Law-term, implying,
that the Lord sitting in judgment, to examine the state of Angels, charged
them by way of accusation, and upon trial found them (in a sense) guilty of
that, which, though they had not formed into any one sin, yet might be formed
and shaped into any sin, Folly or vainglory.

Having given some account of those terms, Charging and Folly, He charged his
Angels with folly, it grows to a great doubt what Angels we are here to
understand: what Angels did God thus charge with folly? The quere or doubt
lies, whether we shall lay this charge at the door of the good Angels, or of
the bad, or of both.

Many of the Ancients restrain it to the evil Angels to the Apostate Angels;
God put no trust in them, he saw folly in them; taking it for confessed, that
the Angels which stood, the good Angels are trusty servants, discreet and wise,
far from, either unfaithfulness or folly; such, as God has put trust in,
and they never deceived his trust; such whose obedience is made the pattern of
ours, by Christ himself in his pattern of prayer, Thy will be done on Earth as
it is in Heaven. And would the Lord regulare us by them who are themselves
irregular? or make them our copy in doing his will, whose folly renders them
unfit to be trusted with the doing of his will? Therefore (say these) such a
charge suits not the state and condition of the good Angels.

Others cast it upon the good Angels, that God put no trust, no, not in them. I
conceive, from either there may be a good sense, though I incline to the
latter. For in the Apostate Angels (take it in the broadest sense) God saw no
light, no goodness, no faithfulness at all; they have plainly discovered
themselves, and showed, not only weakness and unfaithfulness, but wickedness
and utmost folly. But to confine it to the evil Angels, or to understand it
chiefly of them, is too narrow for the Text; especially, seeing Angeli boni
exse nihil habent nisi insantam negative, i. e. nullam exse sap^entiam, nullam
veritatem, bonitatem nullam.
this is but a light, a too easy charge for those Apostate Spirits to say onle
thus that God found unfaithfulness in them, and charged them with folly: for
in them rebellion was found, and they stand charged to this day with High
Treason, against the Crown and dignity of the King of Heaven: and are
therefore committed to prison, and reserved in chains of darkness to the
judgment of the great day. As for the good Angels, God may be said to charge
them with folly without any wrong, either to the holiness of their nature, or
the stedfastnes of their obedience. For upon examination (or intuition rather)
he finds, they have no wisdom, or stability, but by Divine bounty and
establishment. As the apostate Angels were positively full of folly and
unfaithfulnes so the good Angels might be charged with folly, negatively,
namely, that they had no faithfulness, but as assisted and propt up.

But, we may take the Angels in a third or middle consideration neither for the
fallen or apostate Angels, nor for the good and confirmed Angels as distinct,
or since this distinction: But by Angels we may understand the Angelical
nature; the whole complex nature of Angels in their creation and constitution
was such, as God could not trust fully unto, such as he saw folly in. We may
demonstrate this plainly, because a great part of the Angels (and it is
questioned whether or no the geater part) but it is clear, that a great part of
the Angels, a whole Regiment at least, proved disloyal, and fell together:
therefore the Angelical nature (in that abstracted notion) is subject to folly
and unfaithfulnes, as well as man, although they are of a more excellent make
and constitution then man. God looking upon Angels in general, saw they were
not to be trusted; the event also showing many of them (who were as good by
nature as they who stand) falling from him discovering their folly and
nakedness to all the world.

But it may be questioned yet, how there could be folly in the Angelical
nature, for as much as God viewing and reviewing all the works, which he had
made, saw every thing which he had made, and behold it was very good.

I answer, first God charged them with folly comparatively, respecting himself.
As (1 Timothy 6. 16.) the Apostle says of God, that he only has immortality;
that speech is exclusive, shutting out all other creatures from a participation
of Gods immortality. Yet we know Angels are immortal, Angels dye not,
therefore also they are opposed to men (in the next Verse to the Text) who live
in houses of clay, whose foundations are in the dust, and are crushed before
the moth; Angels are not crushed, they dye not, yet God only is immortal;
because the immortality of Angels compared with the immortality of God, is but
mortality. And the reason is this, because Angels are not immortal in
themselves, or of themselves, they have not original or absolute immortality,
their immortality is dependent and derivative; God only is independently In
comparatione justitiae Dei sinec sancti in coelis Angeli justi essedicantur,
non mihi videtur importuna sententia, non quia ut hoc essenta justitia lapsi
sunt, sed quia facti sunt and Deus non sunt. August. cont. Prisc.
and originally immortal, and hence he only is said to have immortality. As it
is in the point of life, so also of righteousness, wisdom, and faithfulness.
God only is faithful, he only is wise, that is the Apostles phrase, To God only
wise: Men, yea Angels, are unfaithful, unwise, foolish, compared with God. He
is wise of himself, and in himself, in his own compass creatures have only
what they borrow or receive from him. To this sense on of the Ancients speaks
fully, In comparison of the justice of God, if the holy Angels in heaven be
called unjust, I see no hurt in the assertion not because they have fallen from
justice, but because they are creatures, and not God. All is resolved into
this, they are creatures, that is enough to prove their folly, and
unfaithfulness And, if a man that has not only some smattering of learning
and knowledge but is a professed Scholar, be looked upon as ignorant, compared
with the Ben-clerks and great Scholars of the world; is it any wonder that
Angels should be called fools, in reference to the infinite wisdom of God? The
foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger
then men. And it is as true of Angels, the foolishness of God is wiser then
Angels, and the weakness of God is stronger then Angels. Angels are called
Principalities and powers, but yet, it is only because they act in the power of
God; and go forth in his strength, that is the first answer. The whole nature of
Angels is unfaithful and foolish, weighed with God.

Secondly, I answer, although in the Angels there is no actual unfaithfulness
or folly, yet there is possible folly and unfaithfulness in Angels; and, this
potentiality is the thing here meant or aimed at. Cuicunque c^eaturae hoc
convenit, ut peccare non possit hoc habet ex dono gratiae, non ex condition
naturae. Aqin. p 1 ques^. 63. Art. 1.
The Holy Angels that now stand are wise and faithful altogether, yet
considered in themselves (not as confirmed by Christ) they may fall; their
condition is altered, but their constitution is the same. It is otherwise with
man (which makes a wide difference between Angels and men.) Man not only has a
potentiality to be foolish and unfaithful, but man is actual foolish and
unfaithful; yea man in himself is nothing else, but a bundle of folly and
unfaithfulness. Whereas Angels in themselves, or considered in their natural
constitution, have no folly actually in them at all. The nature of man is
nothing but sin, and Angels have no sin at all in their nature; they only
have a potentiality, a possibility in their nature to sin. So then, we must
understand this charge of folly with two cautions concerning Angels. First,
there was not any folly concreated with them, their nature is purely pure.
Secondly, they have not contracted any folly into their nature. The folly of
the good Angels is but like the folly of man in the state of innocence, when he
had only a power to sin: which possibility of Angels to sin is by the mediation
of Christ (wherein these Angels have a share though not to redeem or raise them
from their Fall (as man) yet to confirm and keep them from falling) I say, by
the mediation of Christ that possibility is removed. Christ has changed their
possibility to sin, into an impossibility of sinning. This is a glorious
privilege indeed, and that which all the Saints shall have in glory.
Redemption has not only bettered the condition of man, but the condition of
Angels. Now they all excel in strength, doing the commandments of God, and
harkning to the voice of his word for ever. Psalm. 103. 20.

We may hence learn, first, What the sin of Angels was, God charged his Angels
with folly; The possible sin, which God saw and still sees, in the nature of
Angels, was the actual sin of Angels. Pride and self confidence were the sins
of Angels, and these are the most proper sins of Angels; Angels cannot fall
into every sin. The Schooleman questions, Whether the first sin of Angels was
pride? He argues and concludes that howsoever in regard of guilt, the Devils,
Aquin pa^. 1. q. 63. art. 1.
or fallen Angels, have all sins upon them, because they tempt man to every sin
(For he that tempts another to a sin which himself commits not, or is
incapeable to commit is as guilty, as if he had committed it) yet in regard of
the act it self, evil angels can only commit those sins, which are suitable to
a spiritual nature.

Now a spiritual nature, is not affected with those sins, which belong to a
corporal or sensitive nature; Devils are not adulterers, they are not
drunkards; theirs are spiritual sins, and their chief spiritual sin, was
pride; Their first sin consisted in not submitting themselves to that
condition, wherein God placed them, and whereunto they were appointed. All
agree it was pride, though there be different opinions about what this pride
showed if self; whether in affecting a higher degree, then God created them in
refusing the work and office God set them about, (which some conceive, was the
ministration to, or the guardianship of man, which trust they deserted or
scorned) or whether it were in affecting a further condition upon their own
strength, not looking to the strength and grace of God, whatsoever the
particular was, the general is plain, they abode not in the truth, they kept
not their station: Pride and ambition swelled them, till they brake and fell.

Secondly observe, Angels (as creatures) are mutable creatures, A^geli f^erum a
Deo creati beati ^eatitudine n^tura^, non au^em beatitu^i^^ (...), quae in (...)
though they are the best of creatures, yet they are changeable creatures;
though they are the most perfect creatures, yet there is somewhat in them of
imperfection. Look upon Angels in their creation, they were created blessed;
Blessed (as the Schools determine) with a natural blessedness, not with a
supernatural which consists in the vision of God; for, if they had been
created in a supernatural blessedness, then they had never fallen; they were
created only in a natural blessedness, and from that they might fall and did.
Now, indeed the good Angels have obtained by Christ a supernatural
blessedness, from* which they cannot fall; and so by grace are become
immutable, which by creation they were not. Though Christ be not a Redeemer (as
was touched before) yet he is a confirmer, a supporter of the holy Angels. In
reference whereunto, Christ is called the head of all things (Ephesians. 1. 22.) And
of him the whole family in Heaven, and in earth is named, Ephesians. 3. 15. And by
him (Col. 1. 20.) God has reconciled all things unto himself, by him I say,
whether they be things in earth, or things in Heaven. Some understand that
place in the Colossians of men only, because of the word reconciling, yet we
may well take in Angels also, because, that place takes in all things, both in
Heaven and earth. And howsoever Angels needed not such a reconciliation, as
supposes a breach of peace, or a falling out, before: yet they needed such a
reconciliation, as consists in the continuance and strengthening of that peace
which was before.

Further, We learn by way of Corollary from the former point, That there is no
stability in any estate out of Christ; The Angels themselves could not be
trusted out of Christ; folly is in them not considered in Christ, how much more
in man? When Adam fell, if God should have repaired him again, and set him up
(in statu quo) in the same condition wherein he was, yea in a better (if a
better could be had) without a Mediator; and so have tried his obedience once
more; or should every particular man have stood for himself, and not one for
all; certainly, as we fell at first in a lump all together, so we should have
all fallen single (as it were) by retaile, one after another: There is no
assurance in any estate on this side Christ: Nor man, nor Angel can hold out
without a Surety: Christ is called the Surety of the Covenant, Heb. 7. 22.
because he undertakes for us that we shall do our parts, that we shall be
faithful and believing, that we shall be holy and humble, that we shall do
what God expects from those, whom free grace shall save: Christ undertakes for
all the grace, and holiness, and faithfulness which is required in
believers; He gives no command, but what himself helps us to fulfill, nor
calls he for any duty, but what himself works in us and for us.

Fourthly observe, That God sees imperfection in creatures whose natures are
most perfect. Man looking upon the Angelical nature, or upon man's nature in
innocence, could see no fault or folly in either, but God saw both possibly
faulty, though not actually faulty. And, as it is with the nature of men and
Angels, so with their works: when we can see nothing amiss in a work, God can:
as the Apostle acknowledges (1 Cor. 4. 4.) I know nothing by my self: I
profess, when I look into the course of my ministry (for he speaks to that
particular) when I look, how I have discharged my Apostleship, my conscience
bears me witness, I know of no unfaithfulness or neglect, but yet, though I
know nothing by my self, I am not hereby justified, but he that judges me is
the Lord: as if he should say, wheu God comes to look over my work, he may
find faults, many faults in it; there is no standing for creatures before God
in any creature-purity: Angelical perfection is imperfect in his sight. Angels
have not the least spot or tincture of sin in their nature, yet the nature of
Angels is potentially sinful. The best creature (in regard of pure naturalls)
may be wrought to evil, one God cannot. And the reason is, because every one
may err, who has not the rule of righteousness within him: and therefore it
is impossible God should err, because his own will is the rule of his own
actions: He is every way a law unto himself. The Apostle speaking of the
Gentiles (Romans 2. 14.) says, These having not the law, are a law unto
themselves. Not that their nature is a law, (which is the transcendent
privilege of God) but, that they have the law of nature, or the law printed in
their nature, though not published to their ear; They have the law written in
their hearts, but the heart of God is his law, both written and unwritten.
Creatures how perfect soever in their nature, have the will of God for their
rule and law: which though it be within them, yet it is not Them, and so they
may act beside it. The hand of the Artificer often fails in cutting or
fashioning the work he is about, because his hand is not the rule by which he
works: his hand works by a rule or line, his hand is not that rule or line,
therefore he sometimes strikes right; and sometimes he strikes wrong; but if
the hand of a man were the rule by which he works, then it were impossible that
ever he should work amiss. Thus it is with God, the very will of God which
acts, is the rule by which he acts, hence Solum illum actum a rectitudine
declina re non contingit, cujus regula est ipsa virtus agentis. Aquin. par. 1.
q. ^3. art. 1.
it is impossible for God to fail; Angels and men act by a rule prescribed,
their will is one thing, and the rule is another; the power by which they work
is one thing, and the direction by which they work is another; and therefore
(to shut up this point) the most perfect creature may possibly swerve and err
in acting; Only he cannot err in any thing he does, whose will is the perfect
rule of all be does.

Fifthly, Forasmuch as God beholding Angels, sees folly in them, learn, That
God has no need of any creature, no not of Aagels. The reason is clearly
this, because Angels themselves in themselves are unfaithful, Angels
themselves in themselves are foolish, therefore what need has God of such as
these? As King. Achish said (1 King. 21. 15.) when David changed his behavior
before him (studiously acting the fool and mad man) scrabling on the doors of
the gate, and letting his spittle fall down upon his beard: What, says Achish
unto his servants, have I need of madmen, that you have brought this fellow to
play the madman in my presence? So, God may say, when he looks upon the best
of creatures, Angels or men, have I any need of madmen, any need of fools or
of their folly? Forasmuch then, as there is nothing in any creature, barely as
a crearure, but what may be reduced to folly and unfaithfullnesse, and would
certainly end there, therefore God has no need at all of any creature. Men
will say, we need not the help of disloyal or untrusty men, we need not the
help of fools, to counsel us, or of unfaithful ones, to act for us.

Besides, Creatures are no help to God: For the truth is, God and the
creature, are no more than God alone; I say, God and the utmost perfection of
all creatures put together, are no more than God alone: The reason of it is,
because, if there be any perfection in creatures, it is but what God himself
has put into them. What a man gives to another, is no addition to himself,
much less is that which God gives man or Angel, any addition to God. God is
infinite, and no addition can be made to infinite: When the creature does most
for us, the creature (of it self) does nothing for us, God does all in all and
by all. The creature does you no more good at one time than at another, all the
good which is done at any time, God does it: So then, every way God has no
need of creatures. And it is our comfort, I am sure it ought to be, that he
has not. He says to wisemen I have no need of your counsels; to rich men I
have no need of your purses; and to great men, I have no deed of your power;
he sees all is vanity.

Lastly, If God trust not Angels, let not us trust in man; if he charges his
Angels with folly, let not us adore the wisdom of man. This discovery of
imperfection in Angels, should lay all creatures low before us, and take us off
from confidence or boasting in any arm of flesh. To this sense, Eliphaz
prosecutes the argument in the following words to the end of the Chapter. If
Angels, the chiefest and choicest of creatures be thus weak, what then is man,
who dwells in a house of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, and who are
crushed before the moth?

JOB. Chap. 4. Verse. 19, 20, 21. How much less on them that dwell in houses of
clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the moth?

They are destroyed from morning to evening: they perish for ever without any
regarding it.

Does not their excellency which is in them, go away? they die, even without
wisdom.


THese three verses, contain a description of man in opposition to the Angels.
The form of the argument was given before to this effect; That if Angels,
those excellent creatures, cannot stand before God, or be justified in his
sight; then much less man, a weak creature, man who dwells in a house of clay,
and whose foundation is in the dust.

Two things this Context holds forth to us, concerning the weakness of man, in
opposition to Angels.

First, It shows that man is a material substance, so are not Angels, Angels
are spirits, spiritual substances.

Secondly, It shows us, that man is a mortal substance, so are not Angels,
spirits die not.

That, man is a material substance, is proved in the beginning of the 19.
verse, from those words, He dwells in a house of clay, whose foundation is in
the dust.

That, man is a mortal substance, is implied in the former; That which is made
of clay and dust, must needs be brittle ware. But besides that his mortality
is implied in those words, it is proved expressly and in terms in the words
following to the end of the Chapter. And this mortality of man is set forth, by
diverse adjuncts or circumstances.

1. By a similitude, shadowing the quickness or the suddenness of man's death,
They are crushed before the moth.

2. By the shortness of life; They are destroyed from morning to evening.

3. By the everlasting power, which death has upon us (respecting this world)
They perish for ever.

4. By the common and general insensiblenesse and inconsideration of this
frail life, of this long lasting death; Man (says he) is destroyed from
morning to evening, he dies quickly, perishes for ever, he lies, as long as
the world lasts, in his grave, yet such is the stupidity of man, that none
regard all this, he dies without any regarding.

5. And least any should say, surely, man is not such a pitiful creature, as
this sad description represents him; man was the most excellent part of the
inferior creation, God planted many noble endowments upon man: and is there no
more to be said of him but this? he is crushed like a moth, and dies, no man
regarding? That objection is taken away in the last verse; as if the Holy Ghost
had said, I grant that man, besides dust and clay (which are his materials)
has many heavenly, yea divine endowments, he has the impressions of Gods
Image in reason and understanding stamped upon him; but, though he be thus
qualified, yet all his excellency (all that which may be accounted the choicest
and the best in him) will not keep him sweet, or protect him from death and
rottenness: Does not (says he) their excellency which is in them go away? as
if he had said, If you allege, that man is more than dust and clay, then
weakness and corruption; it is granted: but what then? Does not their excellency
that is in them, go away? does it not vanish, and where is it? and where is
he? All natural perfections (whatsoever man has under the notion of a
reasonable creature) be they never so high and raised, quickly pass wither and
decay: They have no abiding excellency in them, Does not their excelleny that
is in them, go away? They have wisdom, but they die without wisdom, even as
bruit beasts, either their wisdom decays, while they live; or, it is not able
to keep them alive: wisdom, parts, and learning stand them in no stead to
prevent death. Now if their excellency go away, they must go too; if wisdom
cannot keep them alive, die they must; as we shall see further in opening the
several parts, having thus given the sense in general.

These things considered, we may see the strength of the Argument in the 19.
verse, How much less on them who dwell in houses of clay, etc. as if he should
say; Forasmuch, as Angels cannot stand in competition with God, or approve
themselves in his sight, certainly much less can man, how great thoughts
soever he has of himself; much less can man be justified in his sight, who
comes so many degrees short of Angelical perfections; For, his soul which is
within him, though it be a noble and a spiritual substance, and that wherein
he is most like to Angels, yet this soul of his, sojournes, dwells and acts, in
a body composed of corruptible clay, and has no better a foundation (in a
natural capacity) than the very dust; And, so subject is this man to
mortality, thus composed of dust and clay, as, what through the inward
distempers of his body, what through outward accidents and casualties, he is as
transitory and as subject to death, as the meanest worm, as the poorest
creature in the world, he is crushed before the moth.

How much less on them that dwell in houses of clay. The Hebrew bears a
double rendering, either how much less, (as we) or how much more: If it be
rendered how much less, then it referres to the first clause of the former
verse; Thus, if he Patricula (...) pro qua est simpliciter (...) hoc loco
^^rumque desig not, sc. vel quanto minus vel quanto magis, Drus.
puts no trust in his Angels, then much less does he put trust in men, who
dwell in houses of clay. If it be rendered, how much more, then it referres to
the latter clause of that verse; Thus, If he charged his Angels with folly,
then how much more may he charge them with folly, who dwell in houses of clay?
Which words, are a description of man, either in his civil condition, or in
his natural constitution. Some take these words in the very letter, The house,
for that which we ordinarily call a house, the house wherein man ordinarily
inhabits; as if Eliphaz had thus said, Angels dwell in Heaven, they have
everlasting mansions, but man, dwells in a house of clay, the best and goodliest
houses are but clay and dust, a little refined and sublimated by art or nature,
brick and stone, all these materials, or but dirt concocted by the heat of
fire and Sun; so that, if the allusion were to the very houses in which
mankind dwells, in oppsition to the habitation of Angels, these set them far
inferior to, and below the Angels. As, these take it for the house wherein man
lives, so some understand it, of the house, where man lies being dead, namely
the grave: The Chaldee is express paraphrasing thus, How much more the wicked,
who dwell in a sepulcher of clay? That, the grave is called a house, the
Prophet helps us. Isa. 14. 18, 19. All the Kings of the Nations, even all of
them, lie in glory, every one in his own house, that is, in the grave, as the
next words prove, But thou art cast out of thy grave, etc. But I rather take it
(as was before intimated) to be an expression of man's natural constitution, He
dwells in a house of clay, whose foundation is in the dust. And so the Apostle
is express (2 Cor. 5. 1.) If our earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved; the earthly house is the body; and (2 Cor. 4. 7.) the body is called
an earthen vessel, We have this treasure* (namely the precious Promises (...)
Turbidus, lututentus, mixtus, ut cum aquae turbantur and in eis lutum itae
commevetur, ut confundantur and luto miscentur, ut in cementum degenerent.
and truths of God in the dispensation of the Gospel) in earthen vessels: We
dying men, preach eternal life; we have death in our faces, while the word of
life is in our mouths. The word here used, signifies clay, either wrought or
unwrought, either natural slimy dirt, or dirt made up for use, by art: So Genesis
11. 3. when they attempted the building of that Tower, it is said, They had
slime for mortar; it is the word of the Text, which is used for both slime and
mortar; they had slime (which is natural) for mortar; that is (by Art and
industry) they made mortar of slime: The body of man is a house of clay, but
not of rude natural clay; the power, and (if I may so speak) the art of God
has wrought it beyond it self, and refined it for this goodly building, the
body of man.

The body of man is called a house or building in two respects. First, because
of the comely fabric: it is set up by line or by rule, there is admirable
architecture, admirable skill in building and raising up of the body of man,
story after story, room after room, and contrivance after contrivance, in all
so compact and set together, that the most curious piles in the world are but
rude heaps compared to it; so then in respect of the frame and structure, it is
fitly called a house.

Secondly, Hoc corpus luteum domus animae dicitur, quia anima humana quantum ad
aliquid est in corpore sicut homo in domo, vel sicut nanta in navi, in qua^tum
scilicet est motor corporis; anima a utem non unitur corpori accidentaliter sed
formaliter, ut forma materiae, dicitur enim materia fundamentum formae, eo quod
est prima pars in generatione, sunt fundamen^um in constitutione domus. Aquin.
the frame of the body is called a house, in respect of the soul; the soul
dwells in or inhabits the body, as the whole man inhabits or dwells in a house;
the soul guides and orders the body, as the inhabitant orders the affairs of
the house, or as the Mariner and Pilot steer and direct the motions of the
ship: Not that the soul is in the body accidentally (we must not strain the
similitude so far) as a man is in a house, or a Mariner is in a ship: there is
a formal union between the body and the soul; only the soul is said to dwell
in the body, and the body or the matter is after called a foundation, because
there is the beginning. Man was begun at his body, as the house is at the
foundation: first God formed man (that is the body) out of the dust of the
earth, and then he breathed into him the breath of life, and man became a
living soul.

Thus the body is a house, and it is a house of clay, or a house of Co^pus
humanum lutum digitur, quod ex te^ra and aqua gravioribus clementis*
abundantius constat. Aquin.
earth, so called, chiefly in two respects.

First, because of the matter of it, it is made of earth. Though all Elements
(as Naturalists teach) meet in mixed bodies, yet earth is predominant in gross
or heavy bodies.

Secondly, because of the continuance of it, or the means by which it is
supported: for, as it was at the first framed out of the earth, so it is still
supported and maintained by earth; earthly creatures, meat and drink with such
like accomodations, continue and repair this house from day to day, until at
last it be laid down in the dust, and return to earth again. So then, it is
called an earthly house, not only from the matter of which it is made, but also
from the means by which it is kept in repair, earth and earthy all.

Whose foundation is in the dust. These words aggravate the weakness of man's
condition. Suppose man were formed out of the dust and were but clay, yet, had
he a strong foundation, that would support and strengthen him. The strength of
a building is in the foundation, and that building whose walls are but weak may
stand long, being firmly founded. The Church of Christ is weak of it self; but
because the Church has (...) Pulvis prop^ie rarior and tenuinat, qualis in
superfi^ie terrae, Me^. in Genesis Significa^ non simplici^ur pulverem, sed
pulve^e^ canosum ^^ l^mosum Fapius in Genesis 2. 7 Pulvis levissimus ex quo nihil
firmum aut diuturnum ompingi potest.
such a mighty foundation, CHRIST the Rock, a living and an unmovable Rock:
(That confession of Peter, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, is the
Churches foundation Rock) therefore the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it. But when the building is weak, and the foundation weak too, in how
tottering a condition is such a building? Man's foundation is but sand or dust:
and the word signifies flying, light, unstable, moveable dust, such as lies on
the surface of the earth, and is played about with every puff of wind, though
some (I confess) take the word not strictly, for this flying dust, but for
slimy dust, or dust moistened, which is slime. This was the matter out of which
God created man (Genesis 2. 7.) dust out of the earth, or out of the dust of the
earth. That dust which can hardly be collected or kept together to make a
subsistence, that is laid together as the foundation of man, His foundation is
in the dust.

Hence we may observe first, what the pedigree and original of man is what
treasure soever he carries about him, yet he is an earthen vessel, or as the
Apostle speaks of the first man, 1. Cor. 15. 47. he is of the earth earthy,
Earth is the Original of man, and man himself is no better, Earthy; yea, the
Earth is called his earth, as if he had propriety in nothing but earth, Psalm.
1^. 6. 4. speaking of the greatest Princes, Trust ye not in Princes, nor in the
son of man, his breath goes forth, and he returns to his earth. Our bodies
can challenge no alliance with, or propriety in any thing but earth, it is our
earth. The wise man (Eccles. 12. 7.) calls the body, not only an Allie to the
dust, or akin to dust, but plain dust, Then (speaking of Death) shall the dust
return to the earth as it was? it came from the earth, and in death it
returns to the same point from whence it set out.

A second thing we may take notice of from man's original, which exceedingly
advances the infinite wisdom, and the Almighty power of God. Dust and Earth
are the matter out of which we are formed. But does the countenance of man
represent dust and earth? Could any one say, who had nothing to judge by, but
the eye, that man was made of such mean materials? What characters of Beauty
and Majesty sit in his visage? how unlike is he to his own parent, the Earth?
Man has received from God, not only an excellent fabric or composure of body,
but if you consider it, the very matter of which the body is composed, is far
more excellent then earth or dust. Take a piece of earth, or a handful of
dust, and compare them with the flesh of man, that flesh is earth indeed, but
that flesh is far better then mere earth. This shows the power of the
Creator, infinitely exceeding the power of a creature. A Goldsmith can make you
a goodly Jewel, but then you must give him gold and precious stones of which to
make it; he can put the matter into a hetter form, but he cannot make the
matter better. The Engraver can make a curious Statue, exactly limbed, and
proportioned to the life, out of a ruff piece, but the matter must be the same
you put into his hands; if you give him Marble, it will be a Marble Statue, but
he cannot mend the matter. Man's work Materiam superabat opus.
often exceeds his matter, but man's work cannot make the matter exceed it self.
Now God took up a rude lump of earth, or subtle dust, and he not only put
that into an excellent form, but he mended the matter also. Man is earth, but
he is earth sublimated and refined; Not only does the form exceed the matter,
but the matter formed exceeds the matter unformed.

Thirdly, as this lifts up the wisdom and power of God, so it should humble
and lay man low. Eliphaz improves this principle as an Argument to take down
the spirit of Job from his supposed heights and self-conceits. Surely thou art
great in thy own thoughts, when thou presumest to enter a contest with God:
But, look to thy Original; such towering, lofty, and ascending thoughts would
quickly be abated, if thou would remember tha thou art but a clod of earth,
a little refined clay, moving slime, enlivened dust, breathing ashes; did we
spiritually look upon the matter of our bodies, it would take down the swelling
of our spirits; when our spirits are like Jordan in the time of harvest,
overflowing all the banks of humility and moderation, this thought
spiritualized will bring us into our channels again, and recall us to our own
bounds and banks. Some Naturalists observe of the Bees, that when they are up
and angry, do but throw a little dust upon them, they are quiet and hive again.
Certainly, when our imaginations are buzzing and humming in the air, when thy
are flying and mounting up to Heaven, not in holy aspirings to God (which we
ever ought) but in bold aspirings against God, which we should never dare, in
such a distemper of our spirits, if we could but cast this dust upon them, it
would quiet and bring them in again.

Has not man cause to lie as low in his thoughts, as that from whence he was
extracted? should not he be humbled to the dust, who is dust? Especially, this
earth should be abased in all addresses to Heaven, in all our approaches unto
God, as Abraham, Genesis 18. 27. I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord,
who am but dust and ashes. We should never be so low in our own thoughts, as
when we make use of our highest privileges; and the nearer we are admitted to
come to Heaven, the more should we (for the magnifying of Free Grace, which
makes this admission) remember that we are but Earth.

Fourthly, if the body be but clay, and has but a foundation of dust, then do
not bestow too much care and cost upon your clay, upon your dust. How many are
there who bestow much pains to trim up a vile body, and neglect a precious
soul? Most usually they who bestow most pains upon this mortal house of
clay, bestow least about that immortal inhabitant. In an over cared for body,
there ever dwells a neglected soul. You shall have a body cleanly washed, and a
soul all filth; a body neatly clothed and dressed, with a soul all naked and
unready; a body fed, and a soul starved; a body full of the creature, and a
soul empty of Christ; these are poor souls indeed. That complaint of the
Moralist against Heathens, may be renewed against some Christians, they are
busied most between the comb and the glass, and troubled more at a disorder
in their hair, then at a disorder in the Commonwealth Inter' pectinem and
speculum occupari. Sen.
(he said, I say) then at a disorder in the Church, or in their own hearts. It
is a sad thing, that any who bear the name of a Christian, should spend much
time between the comb and the glass, and but little between Ordinance and
Ordinance, between the Bible and the Pulpit, between reading and hearing,
between both, and holy meditation; the body is but a house of clay, it is but
dust, therefore be not so industrious for it. We usually laugh at children when
they are making Houses of Clay, and Pies of Dirt. They whose care is thus over
active for the body, are but children of a greater stature, and show, they have
so much more folly in their hearts then they, by how much they have more years
over their heads, and are foolish about more serious matters then they. There
is no child to the old child.

Fifthly, seeing this house of clay is founded also in dust, observe, that man
is a very frail, an unsteady, and an unstable creature, every puff must needs
subject him to ruin. Look upon his foundation, it is nothing but dust. When
CHRIST (Math. 7. ult.) had finished his Sermon upon the Mount, he compares his
hearers to such as build either upon the Rock, or upon the Sand, they that
hear and do not, are like a house built upon the sand; and what becomes of
that house? when the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew,
that house fell, and the fall thereof was great. A foundation of dust or sand
cannot stand out one storm. The house of man's body is walled and roofed with
clay, and bottomed upon no better then dust; the strength of the Church (as was
touched before) is described by the matter of its foundation A Rock, Matthew. 16.
And the new Jerusalem (which as it is conceived to be the most pure state of
the Church here on earth, so it must be the strongest) is set forth having
twelve foundations, and they all of stone, and all those stones most precious,
and therefore most durable, Rev. 21. 19. The strength and stability of that
estate which the Saints shall inherit, when these houses of earth are by death
levelled to the earth (the stability (I say) of that estate) is described under
the notion of a City which has foundations (Heb. 11. 10.) He (namely Abraham)
looked for a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. When
the Holy Ghost says foundations, who can tell how many they may be? we can
easily tell the fewest they can be; two is the lowest number; so that at least
this City has a foundation upon a foundation. The foundation of Christ's
perfect righteousness is laid upon the foundation of Gods eternal free love:
here is foundation upon foundation. The City above has these foundations, and
therefore we receive a City that cannot be shaken. I note these things, to show
by consent of Scripture, that the stability of any condition in allusion to a
building is expressed by the strength of its foundation Now, all our outward
glory and excellency, our life, and all the pomp of it, has scarce so much as
deserves to be called a foundation; a foundation of dust has only the name of
a foundation. That Image in Daniel which typed out all the descents of worldly
greatness, had a head of gold, the breast and arms of Silver, the thighs of
Brass, and the legs of Iron, but the feet were part of Iron and part of Clay.
The feet are the foundation, and the feet of this Image speak thus much to all
the world, that all worldly pomp and greatness, all worldly power and majesty
must fall, for the image stands upon clay; and though it have a mixture of iron
in the feet which is strong, yet it shall not stand by the iron which is
strong, but fall and be broken by the clay which is weak. As it was in those
great Monarchies, into which the outward power of Nations and Kingdoms was
contracted: so if you look upon any particular man, though you may conceive him
to have a head of gold, arms and breast of silver, thighs of brass, and legs
of iron, yet when you come to the feet, the foundation of the whole body, it is
but dust, which a small storm will dissipate and blow away, The body of man
has so weak a foundation, that it is sometime compared to that which has no
foundation, a Tabernacle, (1 Cor. 5.) If the earthly house of this Tabernacle
were dissolved, says the Apostle. Now a Tabernacle has a roof or a covering,
but no foundation: The Tabernacle of Tectum habet, fundamentum non habet.
the body has a covering, but hardly any foundation, only a foundation in the
dust.

Lastly, Consider the form of speaking in this Scripture, How much less on
them, who dwell in houses of clay? He speaks of the whole man, as dwelling in
a house of clay; Now we know that a body cannot properly be said to dwell in
abody, the house does not dwell in a house; yet he speaks, as of a complete
person dwelling in a house of clay, which yet is to be understood of one part
of the person, The soul; that dwells in a house of clay, that is, it acts and
officiates in a body composed of clay. Hence observe, seeing the whole man
comes under the notion of the soul;

That the soul of man is The man, The soul goes away with the Non qued anima
si^ bono ut quidam posuerunt, dicentes hominem nihil aliud esse quam animam
indutam corpore, sed quia anima est principatior pars hominis, unum quodque
autem consuevit appellari id, qu^d est in eo principalius. Aquin. in loc.
name of the whole person: The soul is not the man in a natural
consideration, (as some have philosophiz'd, asserting that man is nothing but a
soul clothed with a body) for, man is man by the union of soul and body, and
the perfection of man as man, consists in that union; but the soul is the man
in a moral consideration, because it is the more noble and excellent part of
man: and it is usual to denominate the whole from that part which is more
excellent. The body is but as the Cabinet, the soul is the Jewel; the body is
but as the sheath or the scabbard, the soul is as the knife or the sword; You
know when a man buyeth a sword, he buys a scabbard too, or when he buys a
knife, he buys the sheath too, yet he says, this knife cost me so much, or I
gave so much for this sword he makes no mention of the scabbard or of the
sheath; now the body is the sheath or scabbard of the soul (Dan. 7. 15.) you
have it expressed so, I was grieved (says the Prophet) in my spirit in the
midst of my body, so we translate it, but the Chaldee is (and so we have it
in some Margents) in the midst of my sheath; The soul is the blade, a blade
of admirable mettle and temper; the body how beautiful soever by nature, or
gay by art is but a velvet, or an embossed sheath and scabbard: therefore at
first, when God formed man out of the dust of the earth, and had breathed into
him the breath of life, the result of all is, and man became a living soul; it
is not said, man became a living body, though life was breathed into the body,
and the body stood up and lived, yet the best part is named for all, the dust
and the clay are (as it were) quite forgotten in the story, man became a living
soul. And that may be a reason, why the fear of God and keeping (...)
his Commandments (Eccles. 12. ult) is called all man, because these things
chiefly concern that part of man, which (upon the matter) is all man. The
fear of God and keeping his Commandments, are soul work, and tend to the
eternal welfare of the soul; and though the body shares in all the blessings,
and assists in most labors of the soul, yet the soul labors most for, and
is the chiefest seat of blessedness. How strangely have some departed from
this point of truth, which the Scripture every where writes as with a
Sun-beame: who instead of making the soul to be the chief part of man, deny
that man has any such part And whereas some (touched at before) erred on the
right hand, saying, that Man was nothing but a soul: These go astray more,
and more dangerously on the left hand, saying that Man has no soul at all: An
opinion, howsoever lately dressed in some finenesse of wit, and subtilties of
Philosophy, yet in it self so gross, so dishonorable to man, so contrary to
this Text, and the whole tenor of the word of God, that I hope it is very
mortal, and will shortly find a grave in every heart, but theirs, who have more
reason to wish it, then to maintain it. I intend no dispute about it, beyond
the Argument before me, which if it be not demonstrative (as many others from
Scripture are) yet it carries (at least) a fair probability, and an ingenuous
ground; for how can man be said to dwell in a house of clay, if he himself be
nothing else but a house of clay? or how can the inhabitant and the house be in
all, but one and the same?

But I shall dwell too long upon these houses of clay, in which man cannot
dwell long: for it follows:

Which are crushed before the moth. What strength is there in houses which are
crushed before the moth? or as others read it Which shall be consumed after the
manner of a moth? Master Broughton thus, Beaten to powder as a (...) Ad facies
tineae, (...), in medum tineae. Sept. Velut a tinea. Vulg. Pagnine.
moth be they: That is, They are crushed as soon, or as speedily as a moth.
Another, They are consumed as it were with a moth. A fifth translates
differently from all these, Which are crushed and consumed before Arcturus.
Arcturus is a Constellation in Heaven about the North Pole; we read of it in
the 9th of this Book of Job, verse 9. Which makes Arcturus, Orion, and the
Pleiades, etc. The same word here, signifies a moth, and sometimes a
Constellation, a knot or company of Stars: The sense of this reading is made
out thus, They are crushed before the face of Arcturus. That is, they are
crushed as long, or whilst Arcturus does continue; in plain English, as long as
there is a Star in Heaven, man will be a mortal man; or man will never change
this condition of mortality, while the world stands. We may thus expound it, by
that (Psalm. 72. 17.) where the Prophet describing the Kingdom of Christ in the
extent both of place and time, says, His name shall be continued as long as
the Sun; the Hebrew is, (...) Ad facies solu.
His name shall continue before the face of the Sun; to continue before the
face of the Sun, is to run in a line of equal continuance with the Sun; so
here, They are crushed before the fate of those Stars, that is, they shall be
in such a crushing perishing condition as long as those Stars continue, which
is, as long as the course of this world continues. Our own translation which
comes clear to the letter of the Original, is further to be looked into. They
are crushed before the moth. It may have a threefold interpretation, First,
before the moth, that is, before in time, or sooner then the moth. How quickly
is a moth crushed? man may be crushed before it, sooner then it is crushed.
Secondly, Before the moth, may be as much, as, in the presence of the moth; as
if he should say, man thinks he is able to stand it out against a potent
Adversary, yea against God himself; but alas poor creature, he is not able
to stand before a moth, or contend with a fly, if God arm any of them against
him. Thirdly, They are crushed before the moth, that is, man is crushed and
torn, vexed and worn out by a thousand miseries and troubles which attend his
life, before ever the moth has to do with him, before ever he lies down in
the bed of death, before the moth, that is, for the moth to fret on, or as a
companion for the worms.

All these renderings, though they differ in words, come near and meet in the
same general sense, namely, An illustration of man's frailty. Take them first
by way of similitude, Man is crushed as it were with a moth, it notes thus much
to us, That death consumes us without noise, secretly and silently: To do a
thing as a moth, is to do it silently and without noise. Hos. 5. 12. God
himself says, that he will be as a moth unto Ephraim, and as a Lion, ver. 14.
when he says he will be as a Lion, it implies open judgments, which come
violently and visibly, which come in, like thunder, roaring as a Lion upon
them; But when he says, I will be as a moth unto Ephraim, the meaning is, I
will send silent and secret judgments upon you, which shall eat out your
strength, corrode your power, and blemish the beauty of your garments, and you
shall not perceive it; Ye shall be undone, consumed, and (as we speak
Proverbially) ye shall never know who hurt you. The open enemies of the Church
are threatened with secret judgments, under this notion of a moth, Isa. 50. 9.
Lo they shall wax old as does a garment, the moth shall consume them. Again,
Chap. 51. 6, 7. Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their
revilings. For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall
eat them like wool: that is, whereas, your enemies have made a great noise and
clamor with their revilings against you; I will come against them without
noise, they shall perish with as little clamor as a garment does, that is
eaten with moths. And thus the life of man is ordinarily consumed (as it were)
by a moth; sicknesses and diseases enter secretly, into his house of clay, they
lie in the frame and between the rafters of this house, sucking up the spirits,
and wasting the strength, spending the heat, and drinking up the natural
moisture of the body; we know not how we consume, but we consume; we know not
how we decline, but we decline; we dye, we know not how, but we dye: Is it not
then as with a moth, creeping upon us, yea feeding upon us without noise?

Again, Take it by way of similitude, not as before actively or
instrumentally, they are crushed as by a moth, or as a moth crushes; but
passively or subjectively; They are crushed as a moth, that is, they are
crushed as a moth is crushed, alluding to the easiness of crushing a moth; A
moth is dust as soon as you crush it the least touch kills it; Man in his
house of clay is so weak, that if God do but touch him, he dies and falls to
dust; the Lord needs not bring his great Artillery, and make batteries against
the body of man: the body of man is no such strong Fort or Bulwark to stand
out a long siege, or endure much assaulting and opposition; he is crushed as a
moth between your fingers; Hence David most humbly deprecates the stroke of
God, which he saw coming, or felt as come, because he was not able to bear
it; Psalm. 39. 10. Remove thy stroke away from me, I am consumed by the blow of
thine hand, (Lord if thou strike me thus I shall quickly consume) And least you
should think that David's flesh (he being a King) was tender and delicate, and
so less able to bear any hardship, therefore in the following words, he puts
the case in general concerning man or mankind, Take the man whose strength is
as the strength of stones, and his flesh as brass; yet this man breaks and
vanishes under the hand of God, so he affirms, ver. 11. under this passive
consideration of a moth, When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity,
thou makes his beauty to consume away like a moth (And then closes with that
common axiom of man's mortality) surely every man is vanity, Selah.

Further, Man may well be said to be crushed or die even as a moth, for as the
garment breeds the moth, and then the moth eats the garment; so (besides that
power of God, or the outward stroke of his hand, of which David spoke) man's
own distempered body breeds ill humors they diseases, and these breed death:
As it was with Jonas gourd, so it is with us, we give life and suck to a worm
in our own roots, which sucks out our life, causing our leaves to fall, and our
goodly branches suddenly to wither.

Thirdly, From that sense, he is crushed before Arcturus, or as long as the
Stars continue, Observe;

That, as man's state is frail and weak, so it will be, the for ever of this
world. Do not look that ever there shall rise up a generation of men, that
shall have better houses then houses of clay, or houses stronger built then our
present buildings. As we are risen up in our fathers stead, a generation of
sinful men; so we are risen up in our fathers stead, a generation of weak
mortal men: and our children will arise in the stead of us their fathers, a
generation of men, as mortal as we their fathers. Till the whole compages and
course of nature be changed, man shall not exchange the infirmity of his
nature, He shall never be without crushing sicknesses, till he is above them.

The sad story of man holds on still, and grows yet more sad, before it was
crushing, now it is destroying.

Verse 20. They are destroyed from morning to evening, they perish for ever
without any regarding it. We may understand the former verse of natural death,
and this of casual and violent death. Destuction and perishing, import
violence; Though I conceive natural death be here also intended. They are
destroyed from morning to evening, they perish for ever without any regarding
it, or as Mr. Broughton reads it between a morning and evening, they are wasted
without any regarding, or without any thinking upon it.

They are destroyed, that is, they are subject or liable to destruction: A mane
ad vesperam, i. e. per torum diem, qu^ppe mane and vespera sunt pa^tes diei
Drus.
That phrase from morning to evening, notes the whole day; it is as much as to
say, they are destroyed continually or all the day long, as the Apostle speaks
out of the Psalm, Romans 8. 36. For thy sake are we killed all the day long: The
morning and the evening are the parts of a natural day, Genesis 1. 5. or the two
terms of a civil day, and these include and take in the full compass of the
day.

This sense teaches us, That man is destroyable every moment. He wastes in one
sense, while he grows, and dies from the morning of his birth and coming into
the world, to the evening of his return and going out of the world: And not
only so, but he is obnoxious to the violent assaults of death every day, and
all hours of every day: From the morning when he rises, to the evening when he
goes to bed, he walks among armies of dangers, and within the Gunshot of
destruction. The Apostles catalogue of perils is true to this day. 2 Cor. 11.
26. In perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils of mine own
countrymen, in perils by the Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren: Every place
is a peril, and every person a peril. Where can we go, with whom can we meet,
and not go among or meet with perils? And do not all these perils speak
destruction from morning to evening? Paul's experiences, both in regard of a
natural, but especially of violent death, brought forth these conclusions,
which come full up to the point. I die daily, (1 Cor. 15 31.) in deaths often
(2 Cor. 11. 23.) we are killed all the day long, (Romans 8. 36.)

Secondly, Take the words as a proverbiall speech, by which the shortest time
is signified. As (Isa. 38. 12.) Hezekiah complaining, sets forth his mortal
sickness, threatening present death and cutting off, thus; Mine age is departed
and removed from me as a sheapheards tent; I have cut off like a weaver my
life, he will cut me off with pining sickness, from day even to night will thou make an end of me, that is, either continually or suddenly: from day even
to night will thou make an end of me, I am wasting perpetually: or before
night, within the compass of this day thou will destroy and make an end of me;
these were the thoughts of my heart, when I was in the hands of that acute
dispatching disease. The Psalmist, (Psalm. 90. 5, 6,) describes man as grass,
in the morning it flourishes and grows up, in the evening it is cut down
and withers; that is, man continues but a very short time. His life is but a
spanne long, or but a day long. Jonahs Gourd came up in a night, and perished
in a night; and man comes up in the morning, and perishes in the evening.
The Naturalists speak of a Fly they call Ephemeron, a creature of one day,
which comes forth in the morning, is very active about noone* but when the
Sun declineth, it declines too, and sets, with the setting of the Sun. Man
is an Ephemeron, a creature of one day; for howsoever his life consists of
many days, and is often lengthened out to many years, yet between morning
and evening, or from morning to evening he is destroyed. The first step he sets
upon the stage of the world, is a going out of the world; his ascending to the
height of his natural perfection, has in it a decent. One part of his life
compared with another, is an increase, but the whole in reference to his end,
is a decrease: his life is but a breathing death, life shortning as fast as it
lengthns, his life is death hastening upon him continually. A hand breadth is
quickly measured: Behold (says David Psalm. 29. 5.) thou have made my days an
hand breadth; nothing needs no time to pass it in; man's age in it self is but
little, and comparatively it is nothing; it falls under no calculation before
the face of Eternity. Mine age is nothing before thee.

But though the life of man be thus short, and himself be destroyed between a
morning and an evening, yet death lasts long, they perish for ever without any
regarding.

They perish for ever] Death it seems is everlasting. They perish the word is
often used in this book for the dissolution of soul and body, not for the
annihilation of either, as perishing properly imports: to perish, is here but
to dye, for thus even the righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart. Isay
57. 1.

But does man perish thus, dies he for ever? shall there not be a (...).
return, a resurrection, shall not soul and body be reunited? how is it said
then, they perish or dye for ever?

For ever, is some time put for an infinite time, and some time for an
indefinite time, 1 Chronicles. 23. 25 The Lord God of Israel has given rest unto
his people, that they may dwell in Jerusalem for ever. And yet the Jews are
now so far from dwelling in Jerusalem, that they have scarce rest or dwelling
among any people. The like sense of for ever, read 1 Kings 2. 33. Psalm. 132.
12, 14. Yet further, for ever is put for the finite time of one man's life, 1 Samuel 27. 12. He shall be my servant for ever, that is, as long as he lives.
Psalm. 23. 6. I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever, that is, as long
as I live. In the text before us, for ever, is as long as this world lasts; it
notes the utmost term of time, not (which is without term) eternity. They
perish for ever, that is, they shall not live in this world any more; as (Job
14. 14.) If a man dye shall he live again? As if he had said, man can dye but
once; he cannot live again, that is, in this world; shall he any more return
to his house, to his wife and children to his riches or honors, and, shall he
here again enjoy such an estate as he had before? That (Psalm. 103. 16.)
explains it so, As for man his days are as grass, as a flower of the field so
he flourishes, for the wind passes over it and it is gone, and the place
thereof shall know it no more, that is, he shall never return to that local
place, or civil place in which he lived; he shall not return to that place of
magistracy or ministrey, to that place of merchandising or trading, of
husbandry or handicraft, where he conversed before. Thus his place will know
him no more. Man dies but once, and therefore when he dies, he is said to dye
for ever. There is a second death, but it is only a second condition of life.
Some shall so live for ever, that they shall be dying for ever. The misery of
all men here, is, that they are dying while they live; the misery of the damned
hereafter, will be, that they are living while they dye. We see then, that as
life is a continual going out of the world, so from death there is no
returning to the world, they perish for ever: when once you die, you are dead
for good and all (as we say) there is an end, in respect of any work proper to
this world, whether natural, civil, or spiritual. A dying man perishes for
ever from eating and drinking, from any outward content or pleasure. When
Barzillai was (as it were but) upon the borders of death and confines of the
grave (2 Samuel 19. 25.) he bespeaks David thus, who had invited him to Court,
Can I taste what I eat and what I drink? (and it follows) Can I any more hear
the voice of singing-men and singing-women? Can I any more? as if he had said,
I am now nigh unto death, these delights are gone they are perished for ever, I
can hardly taste any thing I eat or drink; the pleasant Voice or musical
Instrument can I any more hear? much more then in death it self are all these
outward comforts perished, and will perish for ever.

Again, in respect of civil works, he that dies, perishes for ever; no more
buying, or selling, or trading, or de aling, all these things are past, and
past for ever. Yea, death puts an end to all spiritual works, such as were
the Saints exercise and duty upon the earth, at the grave, there is an end of
them also; a dying man perishes for ever, in respect of repenting or believing,
in respect of praying or hearing the word. These are heavenly works, but the
time for these is, while you are upon the earth, none of these labors are in
Heaven or Hell, no nor in the grave whether thou go, as the Preacher
concludes (Ecclesiastes 9. 10.) Therefore (Isay 38. 18.) Hezekiah in his
sickness makes it one part of his suit to God, that he might be spared, for
(says he) the grave cannot praise thee, they that go down into the pit cannot
hope for thy truth, the living, the living he shall praise thee, as I do this
day. To praise God shall be the work of Saints for ever; and yet the Saints
dying are truly said perish for ever, from praising God. All that praise shall
cease in death, which belong to the ways of grace; and then such praise begins
as suits with glory, which is our end. That Hezekiah means it of such praise,
and not of all praise, is clear from his own words, Verse 20. We will sing my
song to the stringed instruments, all the days of my life in the house of the
Lord, that is, in the ordinances of thy public worship. They that are in the
house of the grave, cannot praise the Lord in his house. And though the praises
of the Lord in Heaven, are transcendent, and more perfect then those in his
house on Earth; yet it is a higher act of grace to desire to live to praise
God, then to be willing to dye that we may praise him; because in this we deny
our selves most; Praising God on earth is a work as well as a reward, but
praising God in Heaven is a reward rather then a work. And we put forth the
most spiritual acts of grace, when we cheerfully go on with a work, which we
know stands between us and the best part of our reward. But I return to the
Text.

They perish for ever without any regarding,] or without any laying it to
heart. The word heart is not in the mouth, but, it is in the heart of this
Scripture. For the sense is parallel with that, Esaias (...) Absque apponente.
Pereunt eoquod nemo opponat eis medicinam.
57. The righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart, The Chaldee gives a
strange gloss, They perish or dye because no man gives them medicine; as if
he had said, there is no Physician can give an Antidote against death, or by
any medicines prolong man's life. It is a truth, that the decays and ruins of
Nature, will at last exceed the repairs of Art; but this gloss has little
regard to the text, which we translate well, They perish without any regarding
it, that is, none or very few regarding it. The negative is not absolutely
universal, excluding all, as if there were none in the world who take notice
of the shortness and frailty of man's life, or of his for ever perishing
condition. So in that place of Isaiah, the righteous perish and no man lays it
to heart; that is, there are very few, scarce any to be found who lay to heart
(in comparison of the number which neglect) the death of righteous men.

Observe hence, Few of the living regard how suddenly others do, or themselves
may dye. Till we see a friend gasping and dying, till we see him bedewed with
cold sweats, and rackt with Convulsions, till our eye thus affects our hearts,
our hearts are seldom affected with the sense of our mortality. It is one
reason why Solomon advises to go to the house of mourning, Eccles. 7. It is
better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of mirth, for (says
he) that is the way of all men (all must dye) and the living will lay it to
heart, or the living will regard it. As if he had said, the living seldom lay
death to heart, till they come to the house of death: He seems to promise for
the living, that then they will: yet his undertaking is not so strict, as if
every man that goes to the house of mourning did certainly lay it to heart: but
he speaks probably, that if living man will at any time lay death to heart,
then surely he will when he goes to the house of mourning. When will a man
think of death, if not when he sees death? and looks into that dark chamber of
the grave? There are many who lay it to heart only then: for a fit at a
Funeral, they have a passion of the heart about mortality. And very many have
gone so often to the house of mourning, that they are grown familiar with
death, and the frequency of those meetings take off all impressions of
mortality from their hearts. As we say of those Birds that build and roost in
steeples, being used to the continual ringing of the bells, the sound disquiets
them not: or as those that dwell near the fall of the river Nylus, the noise of
the water deafens them so, that they mind it not. Many have been so often at
the grave, that now the grave is worn out of their hearts; they look upon it as
a matter of custom and formality for men to dye and be buried, and when the
solemnity of death is over, the thoughts of death are over: as soon as the
grave is out of their sight, preparations for the grave are out of mind. It is
storied (2 Samuel 20. 12.) that when Amasa was slain by Joab, and lay wallowing
in his blood in the midst of the high way, every one that came by him stood
still, but anon Amasa is removed out of the high way into the field, and a
cloth cast upon him, and then (the text says) all the people went on after
Joab. It is so still, we make a stop at one that lies gasping and groaning, at
one that lies bleeding and dying, but let a cloth be thrown over him and he
draw aside, put into the grave, and covered with earth, then we go to our
business, to trading and dealing, yea to coveting and sinning, as if the last
man (that ever should be) were buried. Thus, men perish for ever, without any
regarding. If this kind of perishing were more regarded, or regarded by more,
fewer would perish. Thoughts of death spiritualliz'd have life in them:
thoughts of death laid to the heart, are a good medicine for an evil heart. It
follows,

Verse 21. Does not their excellency which is in them go away? they dye, even
without wisdom. This Verse (as I noted in the beginning) prevents an objection
which might be made, as if man had wrong done him: and that it were too great a
diminution to his honor, whom God made the chief creature in the inferior
world, and but little inferior to Angels themselves, that he should be looked
upon only as a heap of dust, or a lump of clay, as a mortal, momentany
perishing creature; therefore he grants that man has an excellency; but all
the excellency that he has, whether natural or artificial, bred in him, or
acquired by him, as a man, when he goes, goes too, Does not their excellency
which is in them go away? or journieth not their excellency with them? as Mr.
Broughton translates, alluding to our passing out of the world, as in a
journey; when a man dies he takes a journey out of the world, he goes out for
ever; and (says he) does not his excellency journey along with him? yes, the
question affirms it, when man goes, his excellency goes too. The word (Jether)
which we translate excellency, signifies primarily, a residue or a remain, and
that two ways. First, a residue of persons, Judges 7. 6. But all the rest of
the people bowed down on their knees to drink water. So the vulgar understands
it here. They who are left after them, shall be taken away from them: namely
their heirs or posterity. Secondly, it signifies a residue of things, Ps. 17.
14. where describing worldly men who have their portion in this life, he says,
their bellies are filled with hid treasure, they are also full of children, and
leave the rest of their substance to their babes. Thus others take it here.
Does not the wealth and riches which men leave when they dye, dye also and go
away, as their persons are mortal, so are their estates; there is a moth will
eat both. And Iather, quod est superesse non solum excessum quantitatis
significat, sed etiam qualitatis dignitatis, ficut verbum latinu^ supero non
solum superesse, sed etiam vince^e and excellere. Pined. (...)
as the word signifies a quantitive remainder, or overplus, both of persons and
things, so also a qualitative excess or remainder: or that which exceeds in
quality: any excess in the goodness of a quality, is called excellency. Thus
Jacob calls Reuben in regard of his primogeniture; the excellency of dignity,
and the excellency of power; yet blots him in the next Verse, because of his
sin, thou shall not excel, Genesis 49. 3, 4. This sense of the word suits well
with the scope of the text in hand. His excellency, that is, whatsoever does
excel, or is best in him. But what is that? Some by his Excellency understand
the soul; as if he had said, that best part of man, the soul, which may be
opposed to clay and dust before spoken of, that noble guest, that royal
inhabitant of this house of clay goes out when death enters. Death dissolves
the union between soul and body.

Or rather we may take excellency for any special endowment; first of the
body, as beauty or strength. Secondly of the mind, as wit and knowledge,
learning or skill. Thirdly, we may take it for those worldly excellencies of
riches, honor, or authority; when a man goes out, all these excellencies
which are in him, or which are about him, go out too. This excellency is the
same which is called the goodlinesse of man, by the Prophet (Esaias 40. 6.) The
voice said, cry, what shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse
thereof is as the flower of the field. Not only is the flesh, but the
goodliness thereof fading also. So here, not only the house of clay and the
foundation of dust, but the excellency of it: all the adorning and polishing,
the guilding and painting, the rich hanging and precious furniture of this
house go away.

Taking excellency here for the soul, then, we see wherein our excellency
consists As man was the principal part of the creation, so the soul is the
principal part of man. The constitution of the soul is man's natural
excellency, and the conversion of the soul is man's spiritual excellency.

Secondly observe, Death is the going away, or the departure of the soul from
the body. Death is called sometime a departure of body and soul out of the
world, Now let thou thy servant depart in peace (says old Simeon, Luke 2.)
Man goes to his long home, Eccles. 12. 5. I go the way of all flesh, says
Moses, and I go away, says our Lord Christ of his death. Death is also called
a departure of the soul from the body. The death of Rachel is thus described,
Genesis 35. 18. And it came to pass, that as her soul was in departing, for
she dyed.

From the other interpretation, which I rather insists upon. Observe, that in
death all a man's natural and outward excellency whatsoever, leaves him and
departs from him, Psalm. 49. 16. Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when
the glory of his house is increased; why? for when he dies he shall carry
nothing away with him, his glory shall not descend after him; though a man have
an excellent outside, a great stock of riches, beauty and honor, though he
have excellent linings of wisdom and knowledge, yet all ends as to him, when
he ends, and therefore David concludes (Psalm. 39.) Man at his best state, or in
his best estate is altogether vanity. The excellencies that are in him go
away, in that day all his thoughts perish, his counsels and his projects perish
with him. One of the ancients standing by Caesar's Tomb, (who was one of the
most accomplished men in the world, for natural, civil, and moral
excellencies; learned, valiant, noble, rich and powerful,) he (I say) standing
by Caesar's Tomb, wept and cried out, where is now the flourishing beauty of
Caesar? what is Vbi nunc pulch^itudo Caesaris? quo abiit magnificentia tua.
become of his magnificence? where are the armies now, where the honors of
Caesar? where are now the victories, the triumphs and trophies of Caesar? All Is
gone, all is departed, the goodlinesse of them is as the flower of the field,
his excellency which was in him is gone away. And thus it will be said of all
those, who (without grace) are most excellent in any thing below. Though your
clay be curiously wrought, and stamped with such beauty, as renders you almost
Angelical to the eye of others. Though your bodies are strongly joynted, and
blessed with such health as renders your lives most active and comfortable to
your selves; though your minds are stored with variety of learning, and you
know as much as is knowable in the whole circle of Nature, or of times; yet
when Death comes, all these excellencies go away. Nothing will stay by us then,
and go (not from us but) with us, but the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus our Lord, for whom (Paul did, and) we ought to suffer the loss of all
things, and count them but dung, that we may win Christ, (Phil. 3. 8.) For
notwithstanding all other knowledge and wisdom, we shall dye and conclude (as
this Chapter concludes of man) without wisdom. They dye even (...)
without wisdom, or word for word. They dye not and in wisdom. We may
understand it two ways. First (as if he had said) though men are excellent in
wisdom, yet they dye; their wisdom is to them in death, as if they had no
wisdom; they have no more privilege or defense against the stroke of death,
by all their wisdom, learning Nalla est sapi. entia qua mortem effugiant. Merc.
and knowledge, then fools or bruit beasts who have no knowledge, no wisdom
at all, they dye even without wisdom, or even as if they had no wisdom. Died
Abner as a fool dies, said mourning David? 1 Samuel 3. 33. yes, Abner dyed as a
fool dies. And so in one sense do the wisest of men. He was the wisest of
all the children of men, and he spoke it by the wisdom of God, who asking this
question, How dies the wise man, answers, as the fool, Eccles. 2. 16. Let not
any man pride himself in the excellency of his wisdom: for that dwells in a
house of clay whose foundation is in the dust: his frailty is not curable by
his excellency, nor his mortality conquerable by his wisdom, he shall dye as
if he had no wisdom. And some who have most worldly wisdom, dye Non in
sapient^a extenuatio est, i. e. in magna stultitia, Pined.
with least, yea, they with the greatest folly. Not in wisdom, may be an
extenuation, or a more gentle, easy expression, for, in abundance of folly. I
remember it is observed concerning Paracelsus (a great Physician, a man
exceedingly verst in Chymicall experiments) that he bragged and boasted, he had
attained to such wisdom in discerning the constitutions of men, and studying
remedies, that whosoever did follow his rules, and keep to his directions,
should never dye by any disease, casually he might, and of age he must, but he
would undertake to secure his health against diseases; a bold undertaking. But
he who by his art promised to protect others, to extreme old age from the
arrest of death, could not by all his art or power make himself a protection in
the prime of his youth, but dyed even as one without wisdom, before, or when
he had seen but thirty. Secondly, they dye without wisdom. That is, they
cannot carry their wisdom away with them; as not their worldly riches and
pomp so nor their worldly wisdom and knowledge, Chap. 36. 12.

Thirdly, They dye even without wisdom, that is, they prepare not wisely for
death. This is the condition of most men, their excellency goes away with them,
and they die without wisdom; they have had wisdom, but they die as if they
had none, that is, they apply not their wisdom while they live, to fit
themselves for death: They die before they understand what it is to live, on
why they live. This wisdom is wanting in most men, and of all such, the
Psalmist concludes to this sense of the place, Man being in honor and
understands not, is like the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49. 20. That is, he
perishes foolishly and without wisdom, like a beast, though in his life a man
of honor and excellency. He Moriuntur in simen^es vel insipienter. Drus. Prius
moriuntur quam quicquam intellexg^i^t de divina sapientia, Mer.
that dies unpreparedly, dies foolishly. It is the wisdom of man to live in
the world in the meditation of, and preparation fo his departure out of this
world. And it is such a wisdom as is above man, therefore David prays, Psalm.
39. 4. Lord make me to know mine end and the measure of my days, what it is;
that I may know how frail I am: as if he had said; Lord I have been
considering this and that thing (happily David's thoughts were in the dust, and he
had been handling the clay out of which he was made) yet says he, by all those
considerations of my natural constitution, I cannot bring my heart to be so
sensible of my frailty, as I ought to be; therefore he turns himself to God,
Lord make me to know this thing. Here is our wisdom, when we seek to God to
spiritualize natural considerations, and make them effectual for the
attaining of this wisdom, the knowing of our end, and the measure of our days.

But is it not some ignorance of our duty no petition for the knowledge of our
end? May we desire to know what God has no where promised to reveal? To
petition for the literal knowledge of our end, that is, what year or day, our
lives shall end, is a sinful curiosity, and a presumptuous intrusion into the
secret will of God: But to petition for a spiritual knowledge of our end, that
is, how we may end well, any day of the year, or any hour of the day, is a
holy duty, and an humble submission of our selves to the revealed will of God.
Thus to know our end, how soon ceasing (as one translates) short lived and
brittle ware we be; Thus to know, how defective we are (as the Greek renders
it) or what we lack, namely to the end of our days, is above the instruction
of any creature. We may preach, and you hear of death as long as you and we
live, and yet not know he frailty of our lives, till God makes us know it;
therefore (says he) Lord make me to know how frail I am; none could teach him
this lesson but God himself. The same holy desires are breathed out, Psalm. 90.
12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom;
as if Moses had said; Lord I have been numbering my days my self, and telling
over my life, I can tell no further than three or four score, and yet though I
can tell no farther, I cannot apply my heart unto wisdom; we need but little
Arithmetic to unmber our days, but we need a great deal of grace to number
them. A child may be wise enough to number the days of an old man, and yet
that old man a child, in numbering his own days, that is, not able to number
his own days so, as to apply his heart to wisdom. To number them so, is a
very special point of wisdom; the true Christian Philosophy: perfectly
Meditatio mo^tis vita est perfecta. Greg. Moral. 13. Su^ ma philosophia, Bern.
to meditate on death is the perfection of life. And it is therefore our
wisdom to die well, because we can die but once; Aman had need do that wisely
which he can do no more. An error in death, is like an error in War you
cannot commit it twice. We have most reason to look to it, not to err at all,
where it is not possible to err again. Actually to err twice, is more
sinful, but not to have a possibility of erring twice, is most dangerous. We
transgress the laws of living over and over a thousand thousand times: But as
for the laws of dying, no man ever transgressed them a second time. That we so
often transgress the law of living, is an aggravation of sin upon all men. And
that we can transgress the law of dying but once, is the seal of misery upon
most men. Let us then cry unto God to be taught this great wisdom, how to
die, and not without wisdom.

JOB. Chap. 5. Verse. 1, 2. Call now if there be any that will answer thee, and
to which of the Saints will thou turn?

For wrath kills the foolish, and envy slays the silly one, etc.


THE five first verses of this Chapter, contain the fourth Argument, by which
Eliphaz goes on to convince Job of sinful hypocrisy. And the conviction is
made two ways, from a twofold comparison. First, He compares Job to the
Saints, and finds him unlike to them: Secondly, He compares Job to the wicked,
and finds him like to them; if so, then Job must needs be a hypocrite, who had
carried it fair all the while in the world, for a great professor, and yet
when he comes to the trial, was unlike all the Saints, and most like the
wicked of the world. The first Argument may be thus framed.

He is not a just or a holy man, who in his affliction is altogether unlike
holy and just men.

But Job, thou in thy affliction art altogether unlike holy and just men.

Therefore thou art not a holy or a just man.

The proposition is implied: The Minor or the Assumption, is in the first
verse, Call now, if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the
Saints will thou turn? As if he should say, Inquire as much as thou will, thou
shall find none among the Saints like thy self; they, who have been somewhat
like thee (of whom thou shall find but few) in the troubles which thou have
borne, even those thou will find altogether unlike thee, in bearing those
troubles. Scarce any of the godly ever suffered such things as thou have done,
but none of the godly ever did such things in their sufferings.

As he argues him in the first verse of hypocrisy, by his unlikenesse to the
Saints; so in the next words, he argues him of hypocrisy, by his likeness to
the wicked: His first argument for this, lies in the second verse, and in the
three following verses there lies a second argument to confirm the same point;
He attempts to prove Job like a fool or a wicked man, two ways.

1. In his manner of suffering. 2. In the matter of his suffering.
First (says he) thou art like a fool, or like a foolish man, like the worst
of men, in the manner of thy carriage under sufferings; The argument may be
framed thus.

He that behaveth himself like a fool, or like a wicked man while he is in
trouble, is a man either openly wicked, or grossly hypocritical.

But Job, thou behavest thy self, like a foolish or a wicked man in thy
troubles.

Therefore thou art wicked, etc.

The Assumption, or Minor Proposition, is in the second verse, Wrath kills
the foolish, and envy slays the silly one. As if he should say, Thou pinest,
ragest and vexest thy self under they sufferings, after the rate of foolish
and silly ones, that is, sinful and wicked ones.

Secondly, He would prove Job, to be a hypocrite, because his sufferings for
the matter of them, were like the judgments which God uses to power forth upon
wicked und ungodly men; and that argument may be thus framed.

Wicked men flourish a while, and then sudden destruction comes upon them,
they and their children, and their whole estates are swallowed up in a moment.

But Job, thou having flourished a little while, wast suddenly surprised and
swallowed up by judgments, thou, thy estate, thy children, all devoured and
consumed.

Therefore thou art a wicked man, a very hypocrite; God has dealt with thee as
he uses to deal with his enemies, and therefore thou art not his friend.

This is the Logic of the context, or the reasons couched in them, whereby
Eliphaz would convince Job of sin; By this, a general light is let into the
whole Context.

Now, we will consider the words, and open their sense distinctly.

Call now if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints
will thou turn? Interpreters vary much about the meaning of these words.

First, Some of the Jewish Writers, look upon these words, as proceeding from
hight and pride of spirit in Eliphaz, as if he disdained to talk with Job any
longer about the business; as if he looking upon Job as no match for him, in
point of argument, bids him look out an Angel or a Saint to grapple with him
in these disputes, and see if he could find any one of those, who would
undertake for him as an Advocate, or be his Second, forasmuch as himself was
so unable to defend his cause, or justify what he had done; Call now if there
be any that will answer thee, that is, answer for thee, or to which of the
Saints will thou turn for help, to patronize or plead thy cause? But I shall
pass that.

Secondly, Others of the Jewish writers make the sense out thus, as if Eliphaz
had said with Paul in the point of the Lords Supper (1 Cor. 11. 24.) That which
I have delivered unto you, I have received of the Lord, so, that which I
delivered unto thee in my former argument, I received from the Lord in a
vision, it was revealed unto me from Heaven: now, do thou try whether thou
can learn any thing from Heaven, or from the Saints upon the earth (who are
instructed to and for the Kingdom of Heaven) which may answer my arguments, or
confute the reasons which I have broughc against thee. I had a vision from
Heaven, now call thou to Heaven, and see if thou can have any answer from
thence; Turn also to the Saints, to any Saint upon the earth, and see what
they will answer thee, I believe thou will not find one amongst them all,
differing in judgment from me, or from that Oracle, with Nemo tibi prave
corrupteq. de his rebus iudicanti patronus aderit, nemo qui tibi respondeat,
tibi ac^inat, tuam sententiam ^ueatur.
which I have now acquainted thee. They will all agree with me in these great
principles, about the providence, power and justice of God, about the
sufferings sinfullnesse and weakness of man. That Is a second sense.

Thirdly, Others take the words as an Ironie, as a derision, or scorn put upon
Job by Eliphaz; As if Eliphaz had mocked him thus; Thou have handled the matter
well, thou have carried thy self so, in the days of thy peace and prosperity,
that now when thou art in trouble, thou may call long enough, and cry till
thy throat aches and thy spirits be spent, and yet have none to answer thee,
none to speak a word to thee, or to do thee any good; though thou cry to all
the Saints, and send to all thy friends round about thee, yet in this day none
will hear or regard thee: Thou will find thy self forsaken of all, no man
will give thee any assistance, or take any care of thy condition. Just, as
Elijah brake forth in holy scorn against the Prophets of Baal (1 King. 18.
27.) when they were crying out to their Idol for help, and a sign by fire,
Cry aloud (says he) cry aloud; he bad them cry aloud, yet he knew the Idol was
deaf and dumb, and could neither hear their cry, nor give them answer; So
Eliphaz seems to speak to Job, Cry aloud now, to this, to that Saint, with
whom thou art acquainted here on earth, or cry to Heaven, cry to God himself;
call this way, call that, if any will answer thee, either God above, or Saint
below, thou shall not find here or there any to assist, any to releeve thee.
And so he seems to allude to that just retaliation of God, who usually turns
his ear from their cry in a day of trouble who have turned their ears from
his counsels, in the days of comfort; As (Prove 1.) Wisdom threatens, They
shall call, but I will Vox in tribulatione eum non invenit quem men's in
^ranquilitate contempsit. Greg. in loc.
not answer, they shall cry, but I will not hear. Why? because they have
refused instruction, and have not chosen the fear of the Lord.

In the fourth place, Most of the Popish writers, busy themselves much to
ground invocation of Saints, and the intercession of Saints for us, upon this
text: As if Eliphaz had directed Job to cry to the Saints departed; Call now if
there be any that will answer, and to which of the Saints will thou turn? what
Saint will thou choose for thy patron or helper in this sad condition? So they
teach and practice, having appointed a particular Saint in the Calendar of the
year, to the help of every particular affliction in their lives, and to these
they turn themselves in every distress: They have a Saint for the sea, and a
Saint for the land, a Saint for the fire, and a Saint for the water, a Saint
for each disease of the body, and for each disaster in the family: To some of
these they suppose Job was advised to have recourse, for succor and comfort in
his troubles. And yet they are divided in opinion, and give a double sense
about it. First, As if Eliphaz had thus bespoken him; If thou do not give
credit unto me, nor believe what I have spoken was revealed Aquinus in loc.
from God, then call thou thy self upon God, and try whether he will not give
thee some answer, and resolve thy doubt: Or if by reason of thine own
unworthiness, thou can not obtain an immediate answer at the hand of God,
then turn thee to some of the Sainrs, that by their mediation thou may
receive light from God, to assure thee about my vision, whether it were sent
from Heaven or no. Secondly, Others interpret it more largely, as if Eliphas
perceiving Job to be brought to some light and acknowledgement of his sins, and
now to thirst after the pardon of them: he in these words, exhorts him to call
upon, and cry unto God for pardon, if perhaps he himself would vouchsafe to
answer; But in case shame did so cover his face, and guilt so stop his mouth,
that he could not speak unto God immediately, then he advises him to pray in
aid, from some of the Saints departed, who might manage this suit, and
intercede for him at the throne of grace. The grossness of this
interpretation is such, as carries a selfe-refutation with it, and therefore I
shall not need to stay long, about the refuting of it. Neither will I stay to
argue against that groundless, useless Doctrine in general, The invocation
of Saints departed, Which finds no letter of command or direction, no letter of
promise or acceptance, no letter of example or practice, for our imitation, in
the whole Book of God. But is a reproach to the Saints, and a dishonor to
God, whose Name and incommunicable Title is, The God hearing prayers, and
therefore to him shall the desires of all flesh come, and if all to him, then
who to Saints or Angels? Only He can be the object of our prayer who is the
object of our faith, Romans 10. How shall they call on him, on whom they have not
believed? To whom we pray, upon him we must believe Saints departed, are not to
be believed upon, how then shall they be called on?

But, to leave the question, I shall only touch two things, to show how wide
they are in this exposition.

First, The confessed Doctrine of Popery tells us, that, before Christ's coming
in the flesh, and his resurrection from the grave, all the Saints departed were
in Limbus, a place which they have framed and built up in their own fancies, as
the common receptacle of all those, who died in the faith of Christ, before
Christ died; Therefore, they tell us (to eke out the story) That as Christ went
down into Hell, the place of the damned, to strike terror into the Devils, so
he went into this Limbus, thence to deliver the fathers from that prison* and
carry them up with himself into glory. Now this being their Tenet, how
senseless is it, for them, to ground their opinion, of invocation of Saints,
upon any Scripture of the old Testament? and therefore it is so, to ground it
upon this.

Secondly, if we consider these words we may as well seek for fire in the
bottom of the Sea, as for the invocation of Saints in this Text, for here is
no such thing spoken of; and if any thing sounds that way, it is rather to
condemn praying to Saints, then any confirmation of it: for call now if there
be any that will answer thee, carries this sense rather; call now, for there is
none to answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn? that is, none
among Voca si quis est qui tibi responde^^ q. d. nemo tibi respondebi^. Merc.
Quod quidam nosto^um hunc locum adsanctorum mor^o^u^ invocationem quam veteres
ne agn^ve^unt q^idem referun^ merum de^er^um est. Idem Paulo post. Nihil hic de
sanctorum m^rtuorum invocatione; Thomas Aquinas and Ly^an^^ eo quidem
referun^^ed aequae inep^e ne d^cam impre. Idem in loc (...) Nec, licet
insultantis aliquando sit, ut plu^i^^u^ tamen suaden^is and exh^rtantis est. V^
Sodes Am^^o la^inis.
all the Saints (if thou turnest to them) can give thee any help: As Mercer a
moderate Papist gives the meaning of this Scripture; against the current of
their interpreters.

And this will appear more fully, in opening the Gramaticall sense of a word
or two, which also will give the clear meaning of the whole passage. Eliphaz
(as was hinted in drawing out his arguments) calls upon Job to call to
remembrance former times, to search the records of antiquity, and see whether
he could find an example of any one among all the Saints, who either had such
troubles as his, or in his troubles spoke and behaved himself as he had done;
he bids him name one, if he could.

Call now] or, Call I pray thee. What we translate, now, is sometime a particle
of insulting, but most usually of persuading or entreating. We render it as an
Adverbe of time, but it rather imports a request. So Genesis 12. 13. Abraham
entreates Sarah, Say I pray thee, thou art my sister. The word (Kara) which we
translate, call, signifies first to cry aloud by way of preaching or
proclamation, Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, lift up thy voice like a trumpet.
Secondly, by way of prayer or invocation, as Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the
day of trouble. but it rather signifies, and that more properly, to call by way
of appellation, or by way of nomination, As Ruth 1. 20. Call me not Naomi, but
call me Marah. So here, Call now that is, look over the names, or call over
the names of all the Saints, as we use to say, when many should meet together,
and we would know whether they are all met: or as Stewards when they pay many
hired servants their wages, take the Bill and call over their Names, and so pay
them one by one; Mat. 20. 8. In the evening, the Lord of the vineyard says
unto his Steward; call the laborers, that is, call them by their several
names, and give them their hire. Thus we may understand the phrase in this
place, read the catalogue of the Saints, call every one by his name, and put
the question to them, ask them whether ever they had such afflictions as thou
have? or ask them whether they behaved themseves under their afflictions as
thou have done? I believe thou will find none to answer thee. To this sense Mr.
Broughton translates, Call now if there be any that will defend thee, that is,
be thy patron or advocate, in word, or in the example of their lives.

If there be any that will answer thee.] For, ehe word which we render answer,
signifies not only, answering unto a question, but an answering to a condition,
or a correspondency in practice. Verbum responde^e, in hoc loco significat
po^^us similitudinem vel comparationem quam responsionem. Bold.
There is an answering by likeness of works, as well as by fitness of words.
A real answer, and a verbal answer. Take it so, and then, Call now to the
Saints, call them all by their names, intends only thus much, see if there be
any that are like thee, or suit either thy spirit or thy condition, if there be
any to whom thou may parallel thy self, either in the matter or manner of
thy sufferings. Thou art more like a Heathen, who knows not God, then any of
the Saints, in these complainings. And seeing, out of the abundance of the
heart, the mouth speaks, these words speak thy heart abounding in sin, but
empty of grace. Face answers face in the water. But neither thy face nor heart,
will answer either heart or face of any of the Saints, in these waters of
affliction. We find this word signifying similitude or comparison, or the
equivalence of one thing to another, in that instance, Eccles. 10 19. Money
answers all things; the meaning of it is, that money in a proportion or value
suites paralels and fits all things: There is nothing in the world, but you may
suite it with a proportion of money, money will answer it; money answers or is
like all things, by an equivalency, though not in a formality.

And to which of the Saints will thou turn? The Septuagint read it, To which
of the Angels will thou look? (...).
And the learned Mercer adheres to that translation, as thinking that by Saints
are meant Angels, though he be so far from laying any bottom in the words
for the Popish opinion of the mediation of Angels, that he expressly condemns
it; but he gives the sense thus, as if Eliphaz had reproved Job of pride, for
contesting with God, when as if he did turn himself to Angels, he should find
himself far below, and much overmatcht by them: What? thou dust and ashes,
more righteous and just than God? Though he charged his Angels with folly, yet
even they are too wise and holy for thee to deal with. If thou were put into
the balance with Angels, how light would thou be? then, how much lighter
then vanity art thou, being weighed with God? But the Hebrew is better
translated Saints. The word signifies a thing or person, separated or set apart
from common, and dedicated to a special especially, a holy use. Holiness (in
the general nature of it) is nothing else but a separation from common, and
dedication to a divine service, such are the Saints; persons separated from the
world, and set apart unto God; The Church in general (which is a company of
Saints) is taken out of, and severed from the world: The Church is a fountain
sealed, and a Garden enclosed; so also, every particular Saint is a person
severed and enclosed from the common throng and multitude of the world: Come
out from among them, and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch no unclean
thing, and I will receive you, 2 Cor. 6. 17.

Turn thee, it is both a witty and judicious conceit that Eliphaz in these
words alludes to painters or Picture-drawers, who when Allu^ere vide tur ad
pict^res qui frequenter ad prototypum and exemplar, quod incitari conan^ur;
oculos dirigam and ad illud convertuntur.
they are drawing the Picture of a Man, or of any other thing, frequently turn
their eyes upon the proto-type, upon that which they are to draw by: when a man
sits (as they speak) to have his picture taken, the Artist turns his eye
often upon him; so here, to which of the Saints will thou turn thee to see thy
picture, or to see any one like thee? where will thou look now, and by looking
observe a Saint of thy complexion, a holy man like thy self? If the pictures
of all the Saints were lost, none of them could be found in, or coppied out
from thee. The word which we translate turn, Verbum (...) non simpliciter
respicere sign^ficat, aut aliquid intueri, sed cum qu da^ animi intention and
ad aliquem fluem.
does not signify simply to look about or turn the eye, but to turn the eye
about with much intention or curiosity of observation, to make a discovery, and
find out somewhat. Sometime it signifies to look in compassion, Psalm. 25. 16
Turn thee unto me (says David) and have mercy upon me, for I am very low: To
look in compassion, notes a strictness of observation, to find out what
charity or mercy should supply: such a look or view of his estate David
desired, that God would turn his eye upon him: to what end? that he might
consider and find out all his necessities, and in mercy succor him.

So then, To which of the Saints will thou turn? sounds thus much, upon what
Saint will thou fix thine eye, to find thy own likeness, a representation of
the sufferings thou bear or of thy bearing these sufferings? Take the sum
and sense of the whole verse thus; Call over the roll or catalogue of all the
Saints; which either ever were, or at this day are upon the face of the earth,
See, if there be any whose condition or actions will answer in proportion unto
thine; turn thine eye upon all the holy ones, see if thou can observe any
like thy self, in the matter or manner of thy afflictions, in the dealings of
God with thee, or in thy complainings against God. Job, thou stand alone for
all the Saints, go to the fools of the earth, and to the prophaner Infidels,
among them thou may happily meet thy pattern, and among their records read
the story of thy own impatience and miscarriage: For (as it follows) wrath
billeth the foolish, and envy slays the silly one.

How like a fool and silly one art thou* who have thus almost vexed thy self
to death at thy own troubles, and pinest with envy at the prosperity of others.
Such seems to be the connection and dependence of the second verse with, and
upon the first, which I shall presently descend to open, when I have added an
observation or two from the former already opened.

It was good advice which Eliphaz gave Job in that condition, namely, to take
view of the Saints, and to compare himself with them: Thence observe;

It is profitable for us to look to the example of the Saints, either those
departed, or those alive, and by them to examine, both what we do, and how we
suffer.

God has given us, not only his word for a rule, but he has given us examples
as a rule, to walk by. He has given us his own example, that, we looking unto
him, should be holy as he is holy in all manner of conversation; be ye holy as
I am holy: God, who is The holy one, is the Highest pattern of holiness. And
he has given us his Son, who is the express image of his person, and the
brightness of his glory, to be our example. The life of Christ is a fair copy
indeed, a copy without any blot, or uneven letter in it; For, He also is The
Holy one. Christ is not only The principle of holiness, but also The pattern
of holiness to his people; they that say they abide in him, must walk even as
he walked; His works, (excepting those which were miraculous and works of
mediation between God and us) are our rule, as well as his word, Heb. 12. 2.
Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, etc. words of near importance with those in the text, to
which of the Saints will thou turn thee? Look to Jesus; when you are in
sufferings and have a race of patience to run, let your eye always be upon
Christ, and draw the lines of your carriage, both in your spirits and outward
actions, according to what you see in Him, Look to Him: And ver. 3. Consider
him that endured such contradiction of sinners.

Which the Apostle Peter (1 Pet. 2. 21.) gives us in plain terms, For even
hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving an
example that we should follow his steps: We must follow his steps both in the
matter and in the manner of our sufferings; therefore Christ says; Take my
yoke upon you, and learn of me, Mat. 11. 29. Christ calls it his yoke (it is a
yoke of affliction as well as a yoke of instruction) And he calls it his yoke,
not only because, he, as a Lord lays it upon the necks of others, but because,
he, as a servant bore that yoke himself; therefore he says, Take my yoke upon
you and learn of me, that is, not only take my yoke upon you for the matter,
but learn of me for the manner, how to bear that yoke. Besides these grand
leading, unerring examples of God and Christ, the examples of the Saints are
also commended to our imitation, both in doing and in suffering. Whatsoever
things were written (and examples were written) aforetime, were written for our
instruction. Why has the Holy Ghost set so many pens a work, to write the
lives of the Saints? why has he kept a record of them in his own book, but for
direction to his people in aftertimes. The Lord has not registered any one act
of the Saints, but is useful for us. The acts of Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Samuel, David, are full of practical Divinity. The sufferings and troubles of
these and many others, are full (if I may so speak) of pathical Divinity: As
the Apostle James his counsel does more then intimate (James 5. 10.) Take my
brethren the Prophets who have spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an example
of suffering affliction and of patience; Hence those ancient Saints and
believers (Heb. 12. 1.) are called a cloud of witnesses; A cloud, because there
is a directive or a leading virtue in them; As there was a cloud that went
before the children of Israel in the day to lead them, so this cloud of
witnesses, leads us up and down the wilderness of our sorrows, and in the
dark night of our sufferings. Turn you to the Saints, to that cloud of
witnesses, eye them, and see what becomes you in sad times; They have suffered
joyfully the spoiling of their goods, suffer you likewise, if you come into the
hands of spoilers. They lived by faith in the midst of a thousand deaths, live
you likewise by faith in death, when ever you come into the hand of that king
of terrors. And when at any time your own hearts or the ways of others are out
of course, check and chide them for and from those disorders, by sending them
to the practice of the Saints. Look to the Saints, from which of the Saints
have you learned to be proud and high minded? from which of the Saints have you
learned to be earthly and covetous? from which of the Saints have you learned
to seek and set up your selves, or to be impatient under the hand of God? That
man has reason to suspect he has done ill, who does that, which a good man
never did, or ever repented the doing of it. Observe further;

When God forsakes a man, all the Saints on earth forsake him too. Eliphaz
looks upon Job, as a man forsaken of God, and then he bids him get help if he
could among the Saints. He that opposes God, shall be opposed by all who are
Gods. There is the same mind in the servants of Christ, which is in Christ
their Master. They love where and whom he loves, they hate whom he hates, they
are ashamed of those, of whom Christ is ashamed; If God reject a man, the
Saints will not undertake or answer for him. So much of the first Argument,
ranking Job with the wicked, because (as Eliphaz thought) he could not find any
in the rank of Saints like himself.

The second Argument rises to a like conviction, because, (in the same man's
opinion) he might easily see himself so like the wicked.

For wrath kills the foolish man, and envy slays the silly one.

Here are two sinful passions, wrath and envy, and here are two sorts of
sinful persons, The foolish man, and The silly one producing two sad effects,
(which yet in effect are but one,) The one kills, and the other slayes, both
are deadly and destructive, wrath kills the foolish man, and envy slays the
silly one. There are several sins and lusts which accompany, as the several
ages and deg^ees, so the Omne pomum, omne g^anum, omne frumentum, omne lignum
habet vermem suum, and alius vermis mali, alius pyri, alius Tritici. August.
several tempers of men. Rashness and intemperance, hurry and inflame young
men; ambition blows up riper years, and covetousness often tyranizeth over
old age: Wrath takes hold of fools, and envy seizes the silly one. These
worms strike the root of such men, and make them wither. As there is a
special worm killing special trees, and consuming their fruits; so there are
special lusts, which like worms, eat out, and destroy the life of man; wrath
kills the foolish man.

The foolish man.] He is A fool, who has not wisdom to direct (...)
Temerarius, audax, imprudens, percitus ira.
himself; but The fool, is he, who will not follow the counsel and direction
of the wise. The word signifies, not so much a fool, who has no knowledge; as
a fool, who makes no use of the knowledge, which he has: such a one is a
foolish man indeed. Or it notes a man hasty, bold, inconsiderate, rushing on
hand over head, without fear or wit. A man, who either is master but of little
knowledge, or that which he has (be it little or much) masters him. It agrees
fully in sense, and is the same to a letter in found, with our English word
Evil; Such the Prophet (Zech. 11. 15.) describes: Take (says he) the
instruments of a foolish sheapheard, he does not mean, the instruments of a
rude and merely ignorant sheapheard, a man that has no knowledge or learning,
but of a rash and imprudent shepherd, or of a lazy and idle shepherd, who,
though has knowledge, yet knows not how (or has no heart) to improve his
knowledge for the good of his flock. The Prophet Ezekiel gives us the character
of such, Chap. 34. 4. The diseased have ye not strengthened, nor have ye healed
that which was sick, nor bound up that which was broken, etc. but (will ye
know what work they made?) with fury and with cruelty have ye ruled them; ye
have been moved with fury, not with pity, and acted by passion, not by reason,
much less by grace. So in this place, the foolish man, whom envy slayes, is
not a mere ignorant, one that has no brains, but one hare-brayn'd and
uncompos'd Eliphaz hints at Job secretly in this word, whom he knew reported
for a man of great knowledge and learning, according to the learning of those
times, yet he numbers him with N^n his solum sed calamo i^os ^imur in
scribendo, eumque (...) and fra^g^mus, and pecto^^s penecallo and alcato res
tesseris and cuicunque instrumento quil^bet, ex quo d^fficultatem se pa^^
arbitratur August ^ra stultitiae come^.
sooles, because, he conceived him wrathful, rash, intemperate, not having any
true government of himself. Anger rests in the bosom of fools, Eccles. 7.
9. A fool is not able to judge of the nature of things or times, or occasions,
and therefore he is angry with every thing that hits not his nature or his
humor. He will be angry with the Sun, if it shine hotter then he would have
it, and with the winds, if they blow harder then he would have them, and with
the clouds, if they rain longer then serves his turn. They that are emptiest
of understanding, are fullest of will, and usually so full of will, that we
call them will-full. Hence, unless every thing be ready to serve their wills,
they are ready to dye by the hand or judgment of their passions.

Wrath kills this foolish man.] Wrath may be taken here two woyes, either for
the wrath of God, or for the wrath of man. In the former sense, the meaning is,
That the wrath of God kills foolish men; Which is an undoubted truth, but I
rather adhere to the latter, which gives the meaning thus, That the wrath of a
foolish man, kills himself; his own wrath, is as a knife at his throat, and
as a sword in his own bowels: The word which we translate wrath, signifies
indignation, anger, teastinesse or touchinesse: Properly wrath is anger
inveterate; anger is a short fury, and wrath is a long anger; when a man is set
upon it, when his spirit is steeped and soak't in anger, then it is wrath. Esau
raked up the burning coals of his anger in the ashes, till his Fathers
Funeral, The time of mourning for my father will shortly come, then will I
slay my brother. But our word rather notes, a servent heat and (...)
distemper of spirit presently breaking forth, or an extreme vexation fretting
and disquieting us within: As Psalm. 112. 10. The wicked shall see it and be
grieved, (that is, he shall have secret indignation in himself to see matters
go so) He shall gnash with his teeth and melt away. Gnashing of the teeth is
caused by vexing of the heart; And therefore it follows, he melts away; which
notes (melting is from heat) an extreme heat within. The sense is very
suitable to this of Eliphaz, wrath slays the foolish, or wrath makes him melt
away, it melts his grease with chafing, as we say, of a man furiously vexed;
Hence that deplorable condition of the damned, who are cast out of the presence
of God for ever, is described by weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth;
which imports not only pain, but extreme vexing at, or in themselves. Those
fools shall be slain for ever with their own wrath, as well as with the wrath
of God.

Wrath kills, etc.] But how does wrath kill a foolish man? his wrath
sometimes draws his sword and kills others: but is his wrath as a sword to kill
himself? Many like Simeon and Levi, in their anger have slain a man; but that
the anger of a man should slay himself, may seem strange? The passion of
wrath is such an engine, as recoyles upon him that uses or discharges it. As
the desire of the slothful kills him, Prove. 21. 25. so, the wrath of a
foolish man kills him: that place enlightens this; how comes desire to stay the
slothful? thus; A man slothful in action is full of desires and quick in his
affections after many good things: he would feign have them, he longs for them:
but the man is so extreme lazy, that he will not stir hand or foot to get
the things which he desires, and so he pines away with wishing and woulding,
and dies with grief, because desire is not satisfied. So, in like manner,
wrath is said to slay a man; first, because it thrusts him headlong upon such
things, as are his death; he runs wilfully upon his own death, sometimes by
the dangerousnesse of the action, whence casual sudden death surprises him;
sometime by the unlawfulness of the action, which brings him to a legal or
judiciary death. Secondly, his wrath is said to kill him, because his wrath is
so vexations to him, that it makes his life a continual death to him, and at
last so wearieth him out, and wastes his spirits, that he dies for very grief:
and so at once commits a threefold murder; First he murders him intentionally,
against whom he is wroth: Secondly, he, really, murders his own body; and
thirdly, he, meritoriously, murders his soul for ever, except the Lord be more
merciful, then he has been wrathful, and the death of Christ heal those
wounds, by which he would have procured the death of others, and has (as much
as in him lies) procured his own.

And envy slays the silly one.] These two expressions meet near upon a
sense. Envy is the trouble which a man conceives in himself, at the good which
another receives. This disease gets in at the eyes and ears, or is occasioned
by seeing or hearing of our neighbors blessings. In the 1 John 2. All the
lusts in the world are reduced to three heads, The lust of the eyes: the lust
of the flesh; and the pride of life; Envy is the chiefest lust of the eyes, and
it is properly called the lust of the eye: because a man seldom envieth
another, until he sees, some good, he has above himself. This passion is a
murderer also, it begins at the eyes, but it rots down into the bones.

Envy slays the silly one.] There is not much difference between the nature
of these two, the foolish man, and the silly one: But the Original words by
which they are expressed are very different. The root signifies to persuade,
to entice, or allure: And it (...) Sua sus per sua sus, d^^eptus, seductus
fuit, h^nc (...) sua deo, apud Grecos. (...) Japheth le Ja^he^h.
is taken sometime in a good sense (as in Genesis 9. 27.) where the Holy Ghost
speaks with admirable elegancy, God will persuade the perswadable; we
translate it, God will persuade Japhet. Japhet had his name from being
persuaded or perswadable, God shall entice or persuade Japhet: which was a
prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles, who are descendants from Japhet, as
the Jews are from Shem. So, that word is applied to Gods drawing, or, alluring
men by the sweet promises and winning enticements of the Gospel. God does (let
it be taken in holy reverence) tole men on by promises, and deceive them
graciously into the Gospel. (Hos. 2. 14.) I will allure her and bring her into
the wilderness. And because by persuasions men are often deceived and seduced
to evil, therefore the word signifies also to deceive and beguile, as well as
to persuade; and in the passive to be beguiled and deceived; Hence, the word in
the text is derived, which we translate a simple one, or a man that will easily
be persuaded and led by another, a sequatious or easy man, whom you may carry
with a mouth full of good words, and fair promises, whether you will. Yet, we
find this word (Psalm 116. 6.) used in a good sense, for a man without sinful
guile and craft, a simple, honest, plaine-hearted man, The Lord preserves the
simple. But here and often elsewhere it is taken in an ill sense, for a man
without sense and reason, without heart and spirit, a man that cannot in any
competency judge of things, or make out his way, but is merely led, and lives
upon the opinion and judgment of another: To such wisdom cries without and
utters her voice in the streets, how long ye simple ones, will ye love
simplicity, Prove. 1. 20, 22. This silly one envy slays; Exiguo animo and
abjecto spiritu.
He is out of his wits already, and a little matter will put him out of his
life: Envy slays him, that is, a simple man looking upon the prosperity and
blessings of God upon his neighbor, will needs afflict himself: he looks
upon himself, as having lost all, if that man gain: he falls, if his brother
stands, and can with more ease die miserably, then see another live happily. In
this sense it is, That envy kills the silly one.

Now the reason why Eliphaz speaks of these two, the foolish and the simple
one, and characters them, as dying by the hand of these two lusts, wrath and
envy is, because he conceived all Jobs troubled, and (as he thought) muddy
complaints in the third Chapter, arose from these two impure and filthy
springs, wrath and envy, from proud wrath, and impotent envy; he looked upon
him, as angry and displeased, yea as enraged, because God had dealt so ill with
him; and he supposed he saw him pale and wanne, eaten up and pined with envy,
because others were so well, because his friends enjoyed health and lived in
prosperity round about him. As if he had said, Thou art wroth at thy own
poverty, sickness and sores, and thou art envious at our plenty, health and
ease. And may not folly and simplicity, challenge that man for Theirs, whose
spirit thus resents, either his own evils, or his neighbors good? Observe
hence,

First, Every wicked man, is a foolish, a silly man; Sin is pure folly, In
the Proverbs all along, wickedness is the Interpretation of foolishness. It
is folly to take brass Counters for gold, and to be pleased with Bugles more
then with Diamonds. When an heir is impleaded for an Idiot, the Judge commands
an apple, or a counter, with a piece of gold to be set before him, to try which
he will take; if he takes the apple or the counter, and leaves the gold, he is
then cast for a fool, and unable to manage his estate, for he knows not the
value of things, or how to make a true election. Wicked men are thus foolish
and more, for when bugles and diamonds, counters and gold are before them, they
leave the diamonds and the gold, and please themselves with those toys and
bables; when (which is infinitely more sottish) Heaven and hell, life and death
are set before them, they choose hell rather then Heaven, and death rather then
life; they take the mean, transitory, trifling things of the world, before the
favor of God, the pardon of finne, a part in Jesus Christ, and an inheritance
among the Saints in light All the wisdom of wicked men, is wisdom in their
own conceits. And Solomon assures us, that there is more hope of a fool then
of such, that is, of those, who are sensible of their own failings, and are
willing (as the Apostle directs) to become fools that they may be wise, 1 Cor.
3. 18. Opinion in it self is weak, but self-opinion is very strong; even the
strongest of those strongholds, and the highest of those high Towers, which
the spiritual war, by those weapons which are mighty through God, is to
oppose and cast down: which, till they are cast down, these fools are
impregnable, and will not be led captive unto Christ.

Secondly, observe, That to vex and to be angerie at the troubles that fall
upon us, or at the hand which sends them, is a high point of folly and of
ignorance. Wrath and discontent slay the foolish, such are at once, twice
slain, slain with the wrath of God, and with their own.

To die thus, is to die like a fool indeed. For first, this wrath of man
springs from his ignorance of God: Man would not be angry at what the Lord
does, if he knew he were the Lord, and may do what himself pleases. The
ground of anger is a supposition of wrong.

Secondly, This wrath of man springs from ignorance of himself. He cannot be
angry with any cross, who rightly knows himself.

First to be a creature.

This notion of our selves teaches us that lesson of humility, to be subject to
the will of our Creator. The law of our creation calls us to all passive
obedience, as well as unto active, as much and as quietly to suffer, as to do
the will of God. But especially, if a man did fully know himself to be a
sinful creature, he would not be angry; yea, he would lay a charge upon his
mouth, not to utter a word, and a charge upon his heart not to utter a thought
against what the Lord does with him. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him, says the Church, Micah 7. 9. As if she had
said the remembrance of my sin takes away all pleading, much more all
quarrelling, in how angry a posture soever the Lord sets himself to afflict
me: And therefore my spirit is resolved, that because my flesh has sinned, my
flesh shall bear the indignation of the Lord. He that knows what it is to
sin, knows that all sufferings l^sse then hell, are l^sse then sin. If a
man were convinced of this, that, what he bears is less then his sin
deserves, he would bear it, with thanks, not with complaints. Irascitur, quia
omnia sibi ceberi pu^at.
Yea he would say, that, as he has deserved all these and more then all these
strokes, so he has need of them. The bundle of folly in his heart calls for a
bundle of rods upon his back and he sees want of correction might have been
his undoing. Therefore to be angry with affliction, argues a man ignorant of
himself as a creature, much more as a sinful creature. Once more the
foolishness of such wrath appears to the eye of nature and common reason,
because this wrath brings no ease or remedy at all to those wounds, but rather
makes them more painful, if not remediless. It is an argument of folly to do
a thing, whereby we cannot help our selves, but it is folly and madness to
do that which hurts, which makes our wound fester and our disease grow
desperate. Did any man ever ease himself by fretting or raging under the
cross? How many have made their cross more heavy upon them, by raging at it?
A man's own wrath, is heavier to him then his cross. A stone is heavy, and
sand weighty, but a fools wrath is heavier then them both, Prove. 27. 3. A
fools wrath is very heavy to others, but it is heaviest to himself. The text
is express for it, which may be a third observation.

To be angry and discontent at Gods judgments is more destructive to us, then
the judgments themselves.

The wrath and judgments of God afflict only, but your own wrath destroys;
wrath slayes the foolish. Probably God came only to correct you, but wrath
kills you. The wrath of man is a passion but it is very active upon man, and
eats up the spirit which nurses and brings it forth: Frowardness and anger are
at once our sin and our torment. He that is angry when God strikes, strikes
himself, whereas humble submission to the blow, turns it into a kiss or an
embrace, and they that sit down quietly and believingly under any evil, bear
it at present with more ease, and in the end, find it in the inventory of their
goods. So David, It is good for me that I have been afflicted. Fourthly note,

That to envy another man's good or prosperity is an argument of the worst
simplicity.

Envy slays the silly one.] Envy is a common theme, I will not stay upon
it; but shall only give you two reasons to demonstrate the silly simplicity of
an envious person.

1. The good of another is not thy hurt, thou have not the less, because
another has more. Leah's fruitfulness was no cause of Rachels barrenness.
Thy portion is not impaired by thy brothers increase; thou have thy share, and
he has but his; how silly a thing then is it to envy him, that has much,
when as, his having much is not the cause why thou have little. Again, this
troubling thy self that others have more, will not get thee any more; envy
never brought in earnings or increase.

2. A man of wisdom will make all the good of another his good. Take away
envy, and that which is mine, is thine, and if I take away envy, that which
is thine, is mine. To have a heart to bless God for his blessings upon
another, is it self a great blessing, and gives thee likewise a part in those
blessings. Thus we may enjoy all the joys and comforts, the favors and
deliverances, the Toll invidiam and quod meum est, tuum est, and si ego tollam
itvidia^ quod tuu^ est meum est.
health and peace, the riches and plenty, the gifts, yea and the very graces of
all those, in whose graces and gifts, plenty and riches, peace and health,
etc. We can really and cordially rejoice. Whereas an envious man ever stands in
his own light, and cannot rejoice in his own mercies, for grieving at his
Brothers.

So far of the second part of the argument, whereby Eliphaz would convince
Job of wickedness, his likeness to the wicked in bearing of, or rather
fretting against his troubles.

JOB. Chap. 5. Verse. 3, 4, 5. I have seen the foolish taking root, but suddenly
I cursed his habitation.

His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the gate, neither is
there any to deliver them.

Whose harvest the hungry eats up, and takes it even out of the thorns, and
the robber swalloweth up their substance.


TWo parts of the fourth argument were cleared in the two former verses. In
these three Eliphaz argues further, to the same effect. His argument is
grounded upon his own experience, which had showed many examples of foolish
men, like Job (as he supposed) both in his rising and in his falling, in his
good days and in his evil. I have seen the foolish taking root, and suddenly I
cursed his habitation, etc. The argument may be thus framed.

Foolish men flourish a while and then come to certain and sudden destruction,
they and their children and their estates are all crushed and swallowed up.

But thou did flourish a while, and grow up like some goodly tree, yet sudden
destruction came upon thy children and upon thy estate, the robbers have
consumed and swallowed all up.

Therefore thou art foolish, etc. I have seen the foolish taking root, but
suddenly I cursed his habitation; I have seen thee taking root, and I observe
thy habitation cursed; Thy outward condition is so parallel with theirs, that I
know not how to distinguish thee, from them, in thy inward and spiritual
condition.

I have seen the foolish taking root. Eliphaz urges experience. He urged
experience in the fourth Chapter, v. 8. Even as I have seen they that plow
iniquity and sow wickedness, reap the same, etc. He urges experience here
again, and this superadded experience seems to answer an objection which
might be made against that former experience: For some might say, many wicked
men plow iniquity enough, and sow wickedness abundantly, yet they reap
comforts and the contentments of this world: they have what their hearts
desire, a full harvest of riches, pleasures and honors.

It is true (says Eliphaz) I grant it, I have observed the like also I have
seen the foolish taking root; yea, but I can answer quickly and remove this
objection: it does not at all weaken my former assertion, grounded upon that
experience, for as I have seen him take root, so, suddenly I cursed his
habitation, his children are far from safety, etc. He flourishes, but he
withers quickly, he takes root, but he is soon pulled up by the roots.

I have seene] Experience is the mistress of truth. Truth is called the
daughter of time, because experience brings forth many truths; and the word
of God is made visible in the works of God. I have seen (says he) This truth
has run into my eye. In experiences the promises of God stand forth, and in
experiences, the threatenings of God stand forth, and show themselves: all the
experiences that we have in the world, are only so many exemplifications of
the truths contained in the promises or threatenings of the word.

The foolish] I shall not stay to open that term, for we met (...) Levem
homine^ notat, qui sine consilio agit, vul^ and facit nullamque facti rationum
habet, nisi quia ita ven^^ in mentem Goc.
with it in the former verse, wrath slays the foolish one. Only in a word,
this foolish man is one, who acts without counsel, and whose will is too hard
for his understanding. He has no reason for what he does, but because he has
a mind to do it. A foolish man is a wicked man, and here the foolish man is a
wicked man at ease, a wicked man in his fullness and abundance of outward
comforts: A fool is ever worst, when he is at ease. And as he more abounds in
comforts, so, he abounds more in sin. All mercies are to him but fuel for his
folly, and meat and drink for his madness. That rich man who pleased himself
so in his worldly successes is called a fool, Thou fool, this night shall thy
soul be taken from thee, and then whose shall all these things be which thou
possessest? (Luke 12. 20) All wicked men are foolish, and wicked rich men have
ever the greatest stock of folly. And they are therefore more foolish then
others, because they think themselves wiser then all. If a man can get riches,
if his root be well settled in the earth, and his branches spread fairly out,
he accounts himself very wise, and so do many others account him too. A
thriving sinner is a foolish and an unprosperous man, but he that plots how to
thrive by sin, is the most foolish man in the world, and therefore in all his
prosperity most unprosperous. As the foolish take root, so, that by which they
take root is often times their folly.

Taking root] Wicked men under the outward curse are compared to trees not
taking root, Isa. 40. 24. He brings the Princes to nothing, yea they shall
not be planted, yea they shall not be sown, yea their stock shall not take
root in the earth; And Psalm 129. 6. Let them be as the grass upon the house
(having no earth to take root in) which withers before it grows up, whereof
the mower fills not his hand, nor he that binds up the sheaves his bosom.
Wicked men prospering, are compared to a tree well rooted. I have seen the
foolish taking root; that is, confirmed and settled in their outward prosperity.
A root is to the tree as a foundation is to the house, the establishment of it;
when a tree is well rooted, it takes in the moisture of the earth freely, then
the body or trunk grows big, the branches spread forth, the leaves are green,
and it abounds with fruit. So that with the welrooting, we must take in all
that concerns the flourishing of a tree. Hence, other Scriptures express the
men of the world by trees, not only secretly taking root in the earth, but
putting themselves forth and appearing in their visible beauty and verdure.
(Ps. 37. 35.) David produces his experience, I have seen the wicked in great
power (how? taking root, yea) spreading himself like a green bay tree. They
are described by their boughs, branches and leaves. And in Isa. 2. 11. The day
of the Lord, shall be upon the Cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up,
not only upon the Cedars of Lebanon that are deeply rooted, but upon the
Cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, and upon all the Oaks of
Bashan; In the 14. of Hosea v. 5. The prosperous estate of the Church (under
the dew and influence of heavenly blessings) is held forth to us under the
notion of a tree taking root. I will be as the dew to Israel, he shall grow as
the Lilly, and cast his roots as Lebanon (that is as the trees in Lebanon) his
branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree, and his smell
as Lebanon.

In the fourth of Daniel, the state, glory and magnificence of the kingdoms of
this world are shadowed by a tree: Nebuchadnezzar in a vision has a tree
presented before him, he knew not what to make of it, and therefore calls for
the Wisemen to expound the vision, which he thus relates, ver. 4. I saw and
behold a tree in the midst of the earth, the height thereof was great, and
the tree grew and was strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and
the sight thereof to the ends of the earth, and the leaves thereof were fair.
When Daniel comes to interpret it, (ver. 22.) he says to the King, Thou art
this tree, etc. Nebuchadnezzar in all his worldly pomp, is set forth by a
goodly tree. In the 53. of Isa. v. 2. Where the birth of Christ is prophesied,
it is said, That, he shall grow up before him, as a tender plant, and as a root
out of a dry ground. As a very flourishing estate, whether in spirituals or
temporalls, is expressed by a tree planted by the water side: So a mean, low
estate is signified by a tree in a dry ground. Our Lord Jesus, in regard of any
outward glory, was like a tree in a dry ground, as the words following expound
it, He has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no
beauty that we should desire him. His kingdom was not like the kingdom of
those great Monarchs, strong, and high, and beautiful with any created luster.
Hence observe,

First, That wicked men may flourish in great outward prosperity. I have seen
the foolish taking root. The Prophet Jeremiah in the twelfth of his Prophecy (a
Scripture touched before, Chap. 4. v. 7. to this purpose) being somewhat
scandalized at the prosperity of treacherous dealers, describes them thus, ver.
2. Thou have planted them, yea they have taken root, they grow, yea they bring
forth fruit. Here are four degrees; first they are planted, there is many a
tree planted that takes not root, but (says he) thou have planted them, yea,
they have taken root: There are some trees which are both planted and have
taken root, yet they do not grow, especially not to any height or greatness,
though they live, yet they do not thrive; These are planted, and they take
root and they grow; but there are many trees planted, rooted and growing, which
yet are fruitless; these have all, they are planted, they take root, they grow
and they bring forth fruit; And who are these? Surely the worst of men, as the
very next words evidence, God is near in their mouths, but he is far from
their reins; God is near in the mouth of such, that is, they may speak of him
sometimes, but he is far from their reins, there is nothing of God in their
hearts; and surely they that have nothing of God in their hearts, have nothing
of goodness in their hearts, or in their lives.

This present glory and prosperity of wicked men, lifts up the glory of Gods
patience. How is the glory of the patience of God exalted, in letting them have
ease, who are a burden unto himself? in letting them prosper, who are (as God
can be pained) a pain unto himself? in suffering them to flourish who vex his
people, in suffering them to laugh, who make his people mourn.

Further, He gives them leave to take root and flourish (whom he could blast
and root up every moment) that all may see what is in their hearts. If God did
not permit them to take root, yea and sometimes to grow up and flourish, we
should never see what fruit they would bring forth: we should never see those
grapes of gall, those bitter clusters; if these vines of Sodom, and fields of
Gomorrah, were not watered with the dew, and warmed with the Sun of some
outward prosperity.

Lastly, The prosperity of wicked men, is a great trial of good men; The
flourishing of the ungodly is as strong an exercise of their graces, as their
own witherings. Observe secondly,

That wicked men may not only flourish and grow, but they may flourish and
grow a great while. I ground it upon this, the text faith, that they take root,
I have seen the foolish taking root, and the word notes a dcep rooting. In the
Parable of the sower (...)
(Matthew. 13. 21.) it is said, that the seed which fell into stony ground
withered, because it had no root, noting, that the cause of a sudden decay or
withering in any plant, is the want of rooting; whereas a tree well rooted,
will endure many a blast, and stand out a storm. Some wicked men stand out
many storms, like old Oaks, like trees deeply rooted, they stand many a
blast, yea many a blow; spectators are ready to say, such and such storms will
certainly overthrow them, and yet still they stand: but though they stand so
long, that all wonder, yet they shall fall, that many may rejoice; and take up
this proverb against them (as of old against the King of Babylon) How has the
oppressor ceased? The Lord has broken the staff of the wicked, and the
scepter of the Rulers: He who smote the people in wrath, with a continued
stroke, he that ruled in the Nation with anger is persecuted, and none
hinders. Therefore many shall break forth into singing, yea the Fir trees
shall rejoice at him, and the Cedars of Lebanon, saying, since thou art laid
down no feller is come up amongst us, Isa. 14.

Thirdly observe,

Outward good things are not good in themselves. The foolish take root. The
worst of men may enjoy the best of outward comforts. Outward things are unto
us, as we are. If the man be good, then they are good. And though the Preacher
tells us, Eccles. 9. That all things come alike unto all, yet all things are
not alike unto all. There is a great difference between the flourishing of a
wise man, and the flourishing of a fool; all his flourishing and fastening in
the earth is no good to him, because himself is not good: Spiritual good
things are so good, that though they find us not good, yet they will make us
good: we cannot have them indeed, and be unlike them. But worldly good things
find some really good, and make them worse; others who had but a show of
goodness, they are occasions of making stark naught; Rooting in the earth,
never helped any to grow heaven-wards: Many deeply rooted in the earth, have
grown down, and gone down to the depths of Hell.

Fourthly observe, as a consequence from the former; That the enjoyment of
outward good things, is no evidence, can be made no argument that a man is
good. I have seen the foolish taking root. And yet how many stick upon this
evidence; blessing themselves because they are outwardly blessed. Yea, though
they meet with a discovery of their sins, and sinful bosoms in the word,
though they find those sins threatened, yea cursed with a grievous curse in the
word, yet they bless themselves and say, we are rich and flourish, we have a
good estate and credit, we take root and stand, but they forget that all this
may be the portion of a fool. I have seen the foolish man taking root.

And suddenly I cursed his habitation. The word here used, to curse, springs
indifferently from two roots, which yet meet and are one, in signification:
Namely, to strike through or to pierce, as a man is struck through with a
staff (...) deducitur, vel a (...) vel a (...) fodit, perfodit, terrebravit,
and per me taphoram maledixit, execratus est; est metaphora translata ab his
qui gladio aut pugione aliquem-transverberant, tanquam si aliquis Dei aut
hominis maledictione trajiceretur. Cartw. in Prove. 11. 26.
or sword, or stabd with a dagger; Thus Hab. 3. 14. Thou did strike through
with his Staves the head of the villages. And Isa. 36. 6. The piercing of a
reed into the hand of him that leans upon it, is expressed by this word. So then
it carries a metaphorical allusion to the effect of a curse, the curse of God
always, and the curse of man upon due grounds, is as a sword or a dagger,
piercing a man thorough and thorough, through both soul and body. I have
cursed his habitation, that is, I have smitten his habitation quite through
with a curse.

I cursed his habitation. Some read, I abhorred or I abhominated his
habitation. I was so far from envying this flourishing, spreading tree, or from
being in love with his goodly seat and brave habitation, that I loathed and
could not abide it. The cottage of an honest man was more delightful to me,
then the tents or palaces of wickedness.

But the word bears rather to curse; which is first to wish evil unto
another: And secondly to foretell, to pronounce or denounce evil against
another. Often in the Psalms, David's curses upon his enemies, are predictions
from the Spirit of God, not maledictions or ill wishes from his own spirit;
Good men know not how to wish evil; their cursings are Prophecies not prayers:
they foretell or foresee evils, but they desire them not. I have Pium non
decent dirae.
not desired the woeful day, Lord thou know, said that Prophet, who had
denounced many woeful days, Jer. 17. 16.

In Scripture, many are said to do that which they declare to Id fieri ab
aliquo dicitur in Scriptura quod faciendum denunciatur.
be, or foretell that it shall be. As (to give an instance or two) Levit. 13.
in the case of the Leper, the text says, that when the Priest makes up his
judgment concerning the Leper (having found the tokens of Leprosy upon him)
he shall defile him (ver. 3. and ver. 8.) or make him unclean, so the
Original gives it; which we translate, The Priest shall pronounce him
unclean. In that sense the Ministers of the Gospel (whose business is to
cleanse) defile many; yea, one way to cleanse men, is thus to defile and
pronounce them Lepers. So Isa. 6. 8. the Lord sends the Prophet against that
people, and says to him, Make the heart of this people fat, and make their
ears heavy, and shut their eyes; Praedic excaeeanaos o^ulos, and aures
aggravandas.
Now, the Prophet did not act this himself, he did not deafen their ears, or
blind their eyes, but only foretold or denounced that this, judgment should
fall upon them; because they had so long stopped their ears, at last their
ears should be stopped and made heavy enough; and because they had so long
winked and shut their eyes, at last they should be blind, and their eyes shut
fast enough; How fast are those eyes and ears locked up, which are thus double
locked. Once more, Jer. 1. 10. The Lord gives the Prophet a strange commission,
See (says he) I have this day set thee over the Nations and over Kingdoms, to
root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, and to build
and to plant. One would think this commission, more fitting for a Caesar or an
Alexander, for great Commanders attended with numerous Armies, than for an
unarmed Prophet; what could he do? could he root out Kingdoms, and destroy
Nations? Yes, by denouncing the destroying judgments and consuming wrath of
God, due unto them for their rebellions and provocations: Thus a poor weak
Prophet can overturne a whole Kingdom, and root up the strongest Nations. And
the truth is, that, never was any Nation or Kingdom rooted up by the sword,
but it was first rooted up by the word; first God hewed them to pieces, and
slew them by his Prophets, and then let in Armies of cruel enemies to do it.

So here in the text, I have seen the foolish taking root, but suddenly I
cursed his habitation; The clear meaning is, I foretold a curse, I knew what
would shortly become of his habitation It Non per invidiam and iram dira
imprecacarer, sed animus p^aesagiret, male ipsi fore. Coc.
was not anger against his person, or envy at his estate, that moved me to
curse him; but it was an eye of faith, which showed me him marked with a curse
in the just threatenings of God: I saw a curse hanging over his family and
dwelling, over his riches and honors: And though he then flourished, that, yet
he should quickly wither and be destroyed root and branch. The curse of the
Lord is in the house of the wicked, Prove. 3. 33. Man does but see it there, the
Lord sent it there.

The word is considerable which we traslate Habitation. It signifies (...)
a quiet, a settled, a peaceable, a beautiful habitation: And so carries an
aggravation of the judgment upon this foolish man; his judgment is the worse
upon him, because he thought himself so well, so well seated, so well settled,
so secured and accommodated that he should never be removed: They are most
troubled with removings, who thought themselves settled; troubles afflict them
deepest, who supposed themselves beyond trouble. When David thought God had
made his mountain so strong, that it could not be moved, how was he troubled,
as soon as God hid his face? Ps. 30. 6, 7. And if they are so troubled with
shakings, who look upon their estates as settled by the favor of God, how will
they be troubled to meet with totterings and shakings, much more with ruinings
and destructions, whose estates at best, are bottomed only upon their
policies, often upon their sins? We may observe from hence;

First, The estate of some wicked men, is out of the prayers of Gods people.
When they go by their dwellings, they cannot say, The blessing of the Lord be
upon you, we bless you in the name of the Lord, Psalm. 129. 8. It is a great
mercy to stand under the influences of prayer, and for a man to have his
estate, land, dwellings watered with showers of blessings and hearty good
wishes from the mouths of Saints. Their blessings or their cursings, are next
to the blessings and cursings of Christ, nay, they are his; It is an argument
that Christ has blessed or cursed a man, when the spirits of his people
generally are carried to either. It is one of the saddest presages in the
world, for a man to be cast out of the prayers of the Saints, or to be cast by
their prayers; that is, when their prayers are against him, and he presented
naked to the displeasure of Christ: It shows that the sin of a man is a sin
unto death, when the faithful cease praying for him, 1 John 5. 16. What can it
prognosticate then but approaching ruin and destruction, when they bend the
strength of prayer against him? There was never any habitation of wickedness, so
firmly founded or strongly fortified, but that Great and Holy Ordinance has or
may shake, and batter it to the dust. The fair Towers and walls of Babylon, the
seat and state of Antichrist, have long been under this curse; All the Saints,
whose eyes God has unscaled and brought out from Egyptian darkness, have seen
That foolish man taking root, and have cursed his habitation. Secondly observe;

A wicked man in prosperity is under the curse of God. He is often under the
curse of man, but ever under the curse of God. Esau have I hated (says God,
Romans 9. 13.) yet even at that time the fatness of the earth was his dwelling,
and of the dew of Heaven from above, Genesis 27. 39. While the meat was in the
mouths of the murmuring Israelites, the wrath of God was upon them. They did
at once eat their lust and their death, wrath was mingled with their meat;
and while he gave them their request, he sent leanenesse into their souls,
(Psalm. 106. 15.) This is the most dreadful curse of all, To have a fate
estate, a well fed body, with a lean starven soul.

Thirdly, Observe a vast difference between godly and wicked men, between the
foolish and the wise. When a godly man withers in his outward estate, and is
plucked up by the roots, yet God loves him; when a godly man is poor, God
loves him, when he is sick, God loves him, when he is in prison, God loves him,
when he is in disgrace, God loves him, and when the world hates him most, then
God usually shows, that he loves him most; The world cannot cast a godly man
into any condition, but he meets with the love of God in it; his estate may
vary and vary, change and change a thousand times, but the love of God toward
him is unchangeable. On the other side, we see in the text, when a wicked man
takes root, and the branches of his outward estate bear fruit abundantly, God
curses him; when he is at ease, God is angry with him. That place is very
observeable (Zech. 1. 15.) I am very sore displeased with the Heathen, that are
at ease; the Heathen were at ease, yet God was extremely displeased with them.
When a wicked man is in health God curses him, when he is rich God curses
him, when all men honor admire and flatter him, God abhors, hates and
detests him; he can be in no condition, but he is sure to meet with the curse
of God. As a foolish man, a wicked m^n, gives God many things, but he never
gives God his love, or his affection; A wicked man may give God prayers, but he
does not give him his love; he may give him praises, but he never gives him any
love; he may give God his purse, but he gives not his love or his heart;
whether such a fool praises God, or prays to God, or gives unto God, he
hates God. So likewise, whatsoever God gives to a wicked man he hates him,
whatsoever he bestows on him he curses him: This should awake men rooted in
the earth, to consider whether they are under the influences of Gods eternal
love, as well as under the influence of temporal blessings: This is the ground
of David's conclusion, Psalm. 37. 16. A little that the righteous has, is better
than the ricehes of many wicked: the reason is this, because many ungodly ones,
swimming in a full sea of riches, have not so much as one drop of the love of
God, nor one beam or ray of the light of his countenance shining upon them:
but a godly man, if he have but a small estate, he has much love mixed with
it, if he have but a little purse, he has a large portion of the favor of God
in it, and this makes it so out-worth and out-value a wicked man's estate, this
puts the price and stamps an excellency upon his little. The love of God does
so far exceed the fatness of the earth, in the esteem of Saints, that they
in rating their estates, reckon not upon earthly things at all, they see
nothing to value themselves by, but their interests in the love of God. As when
God gives his people their portion, he looks upon outward things, as mere
additionalls, or as an overplus given in by way of vantage. All other things
shall be added (Mat. 6. 33.) when a man casts in a handful of wheat after the
bushel is full, or gives a fingers breadth after the due measure of the cloth;
So it is in the case of all temporals bestowed upon the Saints: Then fourthly
note;

Outward good things, are no argument of the favor of God.

As we showed before, that, they are no evidences of the goodness of a person,
so neither are they any evidences of the grace and favor of God unto a person.
A man cannot find an evidence of Gods love in his purse, in his land, in his
honor, in his credit: Yea a man may flourish in better things then these I
speak of, and yet have no evidences of Gods love to him; A man may flourish in
knowledge, be deeply rooted in learning, may have extraordinary branches of
parts, and wonderful fruits of gifts, yet notwithstanding all this while, his
habitation and his person too under a curse. And therefore, be sure that you
look for your evidences of the love of God in the right box, do not look
for evidences of the love of God in your chests, or in your purses, but look
into your hearts, and see what Christ has done there, look into your lives,
and see what light shines there from the Spirit of Christ; Look whether grace
flows from the Spirit of Christ, and is rooted in your spirits. If grace be
rooted in thee there, if it spring up and bring forth fruit in the life, this
is an evidence indeed. They that are thus rooted, God never curses, Grace and
holiness were never under any curse.

Observe one thing further, As these words hold forth the judgment or opinion
of a godly man, concerning the wicked in prosperity. I have seen the foolish
taking root, and presently I cursed his habitation.

A godly man sees the wicked of the world to be miserable in their best and
most flourishing condition.

When thousands stand about the great ones of the earth, admiring, applauding,
making little gods of them, envying their happiness, and thinking none happy
but they, or such as they are; then a godly man pitties them, mournes over
them, sees them, and all such as they are, miserable; He looks through all
their outward glory and beauty, riches and honors, and sees them cursed through
all, hated of God through all; He sees nakedness through their clothing,
emptiness and want through all their plenty and abundance: neither is this
unhappiness confined to their own persons, but derived to all, to whom they
derive life, or stand related. So it follows;

His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the gate, neither
is there any to deliver them, etc. Secundum genus calamitatis quod Deus
imp^obisimmit^it, posteritatis exitiam deplo^a^u^, and quidem acclamante
pub^ico consensu
These words contain a further effect of this curse. I cursed his habitation,
and what then? was it an ineffectuall curse? was it but wind and words,
returning and doing nothing? or did it spend all its strength upon this foolish
man in his own person? No, His children are far from safety, they are crushed
in the gate, etc. One of the Rabbis conceives that these words and the verse
following, are the form wherein the curse was pronounced upon the habitation
of the foolish man; As if Eliphaz had said, I cursed R^bbi Solomon, for^am
maledictionis esse vult.
his habitation thus, Let his children be far from safety, and let them be
crushed in the gate, neither let there be any to deliver; as for his harvest,
let the hungry eat it up, and let the robbers swallow up their substance. And
we find such a form, Psalm. 109. David pronounces the curse upon those wicked
enemies, in language very suitable to this (ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.) Set thou a
wicked man over him, and let Satan (an adversary) stand at his right hand. When
he shall be judged, let him be condemned: and let his prayer become sin. Let
his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow; let his children be
continually vagabonds and beg, let them seek their bread also out of desolate
places, let the extortioner cath all that he has; and let the stranger spoil
his labor.

But we may rather take it, as the matter, then as the form of a curse. I
cursed his habitation, and the curse brake forth upon his children, and upon
his estate, upon the branches, and the fruit of that goodly tree: much like
that in the vision, Dan. 4. 13, 14. I saw in the visions of my head upon my
bed, and behold a watcher, and a holy One, came down from Heaven, He cried
aloud and said thus; Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off
his leaves, and scatter his fruit, etc. This Allegory may be rendered in the
plain words of Eliphaz, I cursed his habitation, his children are far from
safety. The Master of the Family is the tree, His children are either fruit or
branches, His leaves are riches and honor, the beauty and pleasantness of his
habitation.

Some things in the letter of the text are to be opened, but I shall first
observe one thing in the general, from the connection of this fourth verse
with the third, I suddenly cursed his habitation (verse 3.) Then follows, his
children are far from safety. Observe from it; That

Creatures cannot stand before the curse of God. How strongly soever they are
rooted, the blast of the breath of Gods displeasure, will either blow them
down, or wither them standing. The curse comes powerfully, suddenly and
secretly, it is often an invisible stroke. When we see neither axe nor spade
at the root, nor strome at the top, yet down it comes, or stands without
leaf or fruit. When Christ in the Gospel cursed the fruitless fig tree, his
Disciples passing by that way, wondered saying, how quickly is this fig tree
whithered? it was but only a word from Christ, Never bear fruit more, and the
fig tree which had no fruit, lost its life. Some are such tall Cedars, such
mighty Oaks, that men conclude there is no stirring of them, no Axe can fell
them, or blast loosen them; yet a word from the Lord will turn them up side
down: or if he do but say to them, never fruit grow upon your actions or out
of your counsels, presently they wither. The curse causlesse shall not come,
but when there is a cause, and God speaks the word, the curse will come;
Neither power nor policies, neither threatenings or entreaties can hinder or
block it up. It is said of the water of jealousy in the book of Numbers, that
when the woman drank that water, if there were cause of her husbands
suspicion, presently her belly swelled, and her thighs did rot, the effect was
inevitable. So, if God bid judgment take hold of a man, family or Nation, it
will obey. A word made the world, and a word is able to destroy it. There is no
armor of proof against the shot or stroke of a curse.

Suddenly I cursed his habitation, and the next news is, His children are far
from safety; If God speak the word, it is done as soon as spoken; as that
mysterious Letter said of the Gun-pouder plot, As soon as the paper is burnt,
the thing is done. Surely God can cause his judgments to pass upon his
implacable enemies, such horrid conspiratours against Churches and
Commonwealths, truth and peace, with as much speed, as a paper burns; with a
blaze and a blast they are consumed. That in the general from the connection of
these two verses: As Soon as he was cursed, his children and his estate, all
that he had went to wrack, and ruin. I shall now open the words distinctly.

His children are far from safety,] Some read, Were far from safety, (and so
the whole passage in the time past) because he speaks of a particular example,
which he himself had observe^ in those days, as is clear v. 2.

Having showed the curse upon the eoot, he now shows the withering of the
brauches.

Some of the Rabbis understand, by Children; the Followers or Imitators of
wicked men, such as assisted them, or such as were like them. These are moral
children; but take it rather in the letter, for natural children, such as were
borne to them, or adopted by them, these come under their fathers unhappiness.
They are far from safety.

The Hebrew word is commonly rendered, salvation. His children are far from
salvation. But then we must understand it for temporal salvation, which our
translation expresses clearly by safety. His children are far from safety.
It is possible that the children of a wicked man, may be near unto eternal
salvation; Though godly parents have a promise for their seed, yet grace does
not run in a blood, neither is the love of God tied or entayl'd upon any
lineage of men. Election sometimes crosses the line, and steps into the family
of a reprobate father. Therefore, it is not said, His children are far from
salvation, in a strict, but in a large sense. We find the word salvation,
frequently used for safety (2 Kings 13. 17.) when Elisha bad Joash the King of
Israel shot the arrow, he called it, the arrow of the Lords salvation, which we
render, the arrow of the Lords deliverance. So Moses bespeaks the trembling
Israelites a^ the red Sea, Stand still and behold the salvation of the Lord,
that is, behold what safety the Lord will give you from all these dangers, what
deliverance from the hand of Pharaoh. The Prophet represents the Jews thus
bemoaning their outward judgments. We roar all like Bears, and mourn sore
like Doves, we look for judgment, but there is none, for salvation, but it is
far off, Isa. 59. 11.

They are far from safety. To be far from safety, is a phrase importing
extreme danger; As when a man is said to be far from light, he is in extreme
darkness; and when a man is said to be far from health, he is in extreme
sickness; and when a man is said to be far from riches, he is in extreme
poverty: So here, His children are far from safety, that is, they are in
extreme danger and peril, they walk (as it were) in the regions of trouble,
in the valley of the shadow of death continually. That phrase is used also,
respecting the spiritual estate of unbeleevers, They are far off from God, far
off from the Covenant, Isa. 57. 19. Ephesians. 12. 13. that is, they have no
benefit by the Covenant, no interest in, no favor at all or mercy from the
Lord. To be far off from mercy is to be near wrath, and to be far from safety
is to dwell upon the borders of danger.

And they are crushed in the gate. In the forth Chapter Eliphaz describes man,
as crushed before the moth, to show how suddenly, how easily man is destroyed.
This man's children are crushed in the gate, as a man would crush a fly or a
moth between his fingers.

They are crushed in the gate. That notes two things.

First the publikenesse of their destruction, they shall be destroyed in the
sight of all men; for the gate was a public place (Pro- 31. 31.) her works
praise her in the gates, that is, she is publicly known by her good works. To
do a thing in the gate is opposed to the doing of a thing secretly. To suffer
in the gate is to suffer publicly.

Secondly, to be crushed in the gate, is to be crushed or cast in judgment;
for The gate was the place of old, where justice was Inportis judicia
exercebantur. Merc.
administered and judgment given; and for a man to be crushed in the gate, is
as much as for a man to be overthrown in his sure, when he has any
controversy or trial before a Judge, whether for his estate or for his life.
So this phrase, They are crushed in the gate, implies that all businesses shall
go against them, if they have any controversy in law, or if they be charged
with any crime they shall certainly be condemned.

I need not stay to prove that judgment was given in the gate; only take a
few texts. First, in this book (Chap. 29. 7.). Job describes his own
prosperity thus, When I went out to the gate, that is, to sit in judgment; And
Chap. 31. v. 21. the word is used in the like sense; So Genesis 23. 17. Chap. 34.
20. Ruth 4. 1. Isa. 29. 11. Those words of the curse, Psalm. 109. 7. when he is
judged, let him be condemned, are the full Exposition of this, They are crushed
in the gate. Ne agricola litis causa veniens, civitatis frequentia and novo
terreretur conspectu nec u^bi habitator, long ab urbi properaret and
subvectionem. quaereret jumen. torum Jerome in Amos c. 5. v. 10.


And the reason given by one of the Ancients, why justice was usually
administered in the gate, is the accommodation and convenience both of strangers
and Citizens: For strangers, who lived far off in the country, that they might
have justice, before they entered into the city, whose pomp and throngs of
people might possibly occasion either some terror or diversion in the minds of
poor countrymen. And then likewise, that the Inhabitants of the City, might
not be either charged or tired with long journies into the country; To which we
may add, that judgment was therefore administered in the gate, because gates
are places through which all pass in and out, and therefore the declaring of
judgment there, was the making of it more public, that all might take notice
of what passed, in such and such cases, as the sentence and resolution of the
Judges.

Neither is there any to deliver them. This is the third degree of evil
falling upon the foolish man's children. Though a man be brought to and cast in
judgment, yet An summis malis reminem habebunt asse^to^e Ve injusti
con^un^ibuntur and contundebuntur in judi iopub^i^e co^am tribuna^ibus.
he may have a friend to help and deliver him; but these shall have no help,
none to speak a good word for them, none to mediate either for reprieve or
pardon. Some give the sense thus, His children shall neither find a Judge to
give a favorable sentence, nor an Advocate to plead for them, and make the
best of their cause; This also answers another part of the curse, Psa. 109. 12.
Let there be none to extend mercy to him, neither let there be any to favor
his fatherless children; None shall be found either able or willing to rescue
or pluck them out of the hand of danger.

Hence observe, first,

That a wicked man and his children are often wrapped up in the same destruction.

I cursed his habitation and his children are far from safety, they are crushed
in the gate. A godly man is a defense for his children; Liberi paren^u^ poenis
saepe implicantur.
It is a great blessing to be born of holy parents, and it is a curse to be
borne of oppressing wicked parents. As, the blessing of God descends from the
father, upon the children; so, the curse of God many times descends from the
father, upon the children, and they inherit their judgments, as well as their
lands. Though the justice and goodness of God, will make that Proverb cease
in all the families of the world for ever, which was once taken up by the Jews,
Ezekiel. 18. 2. The Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are
set on edge. The Naturalists observe, and experience teaches, that when a man
eats very sour grapes (and so makes a sour face) another standing by is
affected with a sympathy, (...) dicatur a philosophis. Aristot. Sect ^. prob
quest 5.
and his teeth are set an edge or pained with the very sight or grating of
another teeth, though himself taste not the grape. The present Jews thought
themselves but bare lookers on upon their fathers sin, and yet they suffered.
But the Lord found the sour grapes in their mouths also, or them risen up in
their fathers stead, an increase of sinful men to fill up the fierce wrath of
the Lord against them. Now (I say) though the Lord will make that proverb
cease, in their sense: For no child is punished merely in contemplation of his
fathers sin. Yet when a son is wicked, the wickedness of a father, whether
immediate or further off, may come in remembrance against him, and at once
aggravate his sin, and increase his sorrow. Secondly, note this from it,

Whom God will destroy, no creature shall be found able to deliver out of his
hands.

God can take away the help, and stop up the pity of all creatures, None shall
deliver them. And though themselves should endeavor to escape, they shall not
escape (Amos 9. 1.) They that fly shall not fly away, and they that escape
shall not be delivered, that is, by endeavoring to escape, they shall not be
delivered, they shall attempt it in vain. If God will not deliver, none can,
If a Lot be taken prisoner He bids Abraham arm and rescue him. If a Paul be in
the mouth of a Lion, the Lord will deliver him. It needs not trouble us, who is
our enemy, if God will be our deliverer: nor can it avail what friends so ever
we have, if God says, ye shall not be delivered; A wicked man (when the Lord
appears against him) either has none to deliver him, or none shall. Salvation
is far from the wicked, for they keep not thy statutes, Ps. 119. 155. From
the children, judgment proceeds to the estate of this wicked man.

Verse 5. Whose harvest the hungry eats up, and fetches it even out of the
thorns, and the robber spoyleth all his substance.

Whose harvest the hungry eats up.

By his Harvest, we are to understand not only the return of that which he has
sown, as corn and other fruits of the earth; but all the goods or provisions,
which he has gathered or laid up for his Messis nomine parata bona omnia
to^elligitur condenda and reponenda in annos plurimot.
support and accommodation. A man's harvest is the improvement of his whole
estate. And this man's harvest is all he has gotten, by right or wrong, by
industry or by injury, by sweat or by deceit, by secret practices or open
violences. To eat up a harvest, is as much as to devour a house, with which
Christ charges the hungry Scribes and Pharisees (Math. 23. 14.) who made
Beggars as fast as they made Prayers, Ye devour widows houses and under
pretense make long prayers.

The greatness of his affliction is set forth by the loss of those things,
which cost much pains to get. A harvest is not had with idleness. The earth
must be broken, plowed and sowed before we reap. The law of Nations (I am sure
of this Nation) is very tender in this point, providing, that they who till and
sow the Land, shall also enjoy the crop. But this wicked man shall not reap
what he sowed. The labor shall be his, and the benefit another man's. The
hungry shall come and eat up his harvest. Whence observe in general.

It is a great evil when we cannot enjoy the thing we labor for.

What greater disappointment to the husbandman; then to deprive him of his
harvest. Poets have sung this in mournful verse. And we find this threatened in
the law, as the very sting of those Impius haec tam culia novalia miles
habebit? Barbarus has segetes? en que is consev^mus agros? Virg. Egl. 1.
evils, which should come upon a disobedient people, Deuteronomy. 28. 33. The fruit
of thy land and all thy labors, shall a Nation which thou know not, eat up;
All thy labors, that is, The fruits for which thou have labored, shall be
eaten up by strangers. And (Levit. 26. 16.) Ye shall sow your seed in vain,
for your enemies shall eat it. The sloathfull man rests not that which he
took in hunting, so we translate, Prove. 12. 26. But it seems not so proper to
the sense of this proverb. A sloathfull man is not usually a hunter, That sport
requires an active spirit. And usually men that are slow at work, are quick at
meat, and will not loose their venison for the roasting. Therefore more
properly (I conceive with others) to the original, and fully to the point in
hand, it may be translated thus, Deceit or the deceitful man shall not roast
his hunting, or* that which he has taken in hunting. That is, he shall Non
aduret fraudulentia, (sive vir dolosus) venationem suam. Ari^s Mont. Pagn.
not take pleasure in that, which he has got by extreme pains (as all hunters
do) or by craft and stealth, as some hunters do. Somewhat comes between his
mouth and his morsel, his cup and lip, either he cannot get his meat to his
table, or he rises hungry from it. Therefore Solomon puts a great blessing in
this, when a man enjoys his labor, Eccles. 2. 10. My heart rejoiced in all
my labor, and this was my portion of all my labor, namely, the fruit and
benefit which God gave me by my labor; I enjoyed it, and this was my portion.
Again (Eccles. 3. 13.) And also that every man should eat and drink, and
^^^oy the good of all his labor, it is the gift of God; He puts the Emphasis
upon this, when a man has taken pains to lay in provisions for a comfortable
subsistence, that then he may sit down quietly and enjoy it, It is the gift of
God. Therefore on the other hand, not to eat and drink, and enjoy the good of
our labors, but to have all violently snatched from our mouths. It is the
judgment of God. This judgment the Prophet also threatens (Isa. 1. 6.) Your
land strangers shall devour it, in your presence; when you are looking on,
strangers shall devour it, Thou preparest a Table before me in the presence of
my enemies, says David, Psalm. 23 5. As it is one of the greatest outward
mercies, to eat at a Table, prepared in the presence of an enemy, so, it is one
of the greatest afflictions, to have an enemy eat up what is prepared for our
Table, in our presence, (Mic. 6. 15.) Thou shall sow, but thou shall not reap,
thou shall tread the Olives, but thou shall not anoint thee with oil, and
sweet wine, but shall not drink wine. Observe how he puts in their labor to
aggravate their sorrow. If they had not sown, it had not been so troublesome,
not to reap, if they had not trod the Olives, it had not been so grievous to
have had no oil; but this was their calamity, they sowed, but reaped not, they
trod the Olives, but had no oil to anoint themselves. The misery of that rich
man (Lu^. 12.) is thus described, when he had made larger barnes, and got in
his harvest, when he had made provision for many years, then the Question is,
Whose shall all these things be that thou have provided? The rich man was not
unprovided of an answer to the Querie long before. Whose shall they be? Mine
own I warrant you. I am not such a fool to take pains for others. Little did
he think his grave was a making while he was making his barns: Or, that all
his providence and care should redound to strangers. How will it cut the heart
to see all those things taken away, in and about which, a man has laid out his
whole strength, and laid up his whole heart. This Job imprecates as the
extremity of all outward evils, in case he were an hypocrite, and dealt falsely
with God (Chap. 31. 8) If any blot has cleaved to my hands, that is, if this
blot of insincerity (Job did not think himself to be without all blot of
sin, but, if such a blot as I am charged with) cleave to my hands, then let
me sow, and let another eat. This judgment which Eliphaz hints at in another
person, as already fallen on Job for his hypocrisy, Job, in his own person
calls for, if he were an hypocrite. Let me sow and let another eat, yea let my
offspring be rooted out.

Whose harvest the hungry eats up. The hungry.

There is some difference in opinion, who are to be understood by the hungry.
Some take this hungry one for the Devil; He is a hungry one indeed: but his
hunger is not after our riches but after our souls, it is them he goes about
like (a hungry) roaring Lion, seeking to devour. (2 Pet. 5. 8.) It is a truth
also, that Satan goes about as a hungry one to devour our estates, so he did
Jobs, His harvest that hungry one did eat up, but, it was not because he
desired Jobs harvest, but because he gaped for Job Himself. He thought if God
would but give him leave to rob Job of his riches, Job would quickly let his
soul lapse into his hands. A soul is the dainty morsel, which That hungry
spirit waits for. The most delicate things in the world are meat too gross
for a spirit, though an unclean one.

Others, by the hungry one, understand the Heir of this rich worldling; His
heir whom he had kept low, and bare and short, as long as he lived, now, when
he is dead and gone, comes hungry to the estate, and quickly consumes it; he
eats it out, drinks it up and lavisheth it away. It is often seen that the
heirs of great, rich men come very hungry to their inheritances, and as
quickly swallow them down. They have been kept so short, that like empty and
sharp set stomachs they waste all, when they come where they may have their
fill. That estate which is got by the oppression, and kept by the base
covetousness of parents, is usually spent out in riot and luxury. A hungry
heir devours the harvest.

Thirdly, The hungry, may be taken for those poor oppressed ones, whose
estates those Nimrods of the world had unjustly and cruelly ravished from them.
They, whom wicked men make hungry and lean by their exactions and cruel
dealings, come at last (though unbidden and unwelcome guests) to eat the bread
from their Tables. And these poor Hungry-ones are conceived by some to be
Wisdoms children, the people of God, whom those wicked fools had stripped of
their estates, and would have eaten them too like bread, Psalm. 14. So the
Septuagint renders it, The just or (...).
the godly shall eat up or devour the harvest of this rich worldling. Put both
these together, and this may be the sense, The hungry eats up his harvest,
that is, the godly poor, whom this man had unjustly oppressed, and even put to
starving, God, by his just judgment shall send in, to take free Quarter, to
eat their fill of his harvest, and never reckon with their host.

From that sense take this note,

That God does sometimes give the riches of wicked men to poor godly men, whom
they have oppressed.

Job himself, Chap. 27. v. 16. gives us this truth in express terms, where
speaking of a wicked man, he says, Though he heap up silver as the dust, and
prepare raiment as the clay, he may prepare it (let him prepare it, let him
scrape it together as fast as he can) but the just shall put it on, and the
innocent shall divide the silver, that is, those just and innocent persons whom
he had wronged, shall by a divine retaliation enter upon his estate. The wicked
grind the faces of the poor, to make themselves bread, but at last the poor
shall make bread of their corn and griest.

We may see the tract and footsteps of this judgment in our days; How many
sons of violence, who have made many persons, yea, families hungry, naked and
desolate, are now made desolate and naked? God has so wrought, and answered us
by terrible things in righteousness, that Oppressed Innocents have been put
into the houses, and have fed upon the fatness of Unrighteous Oppressors.
Must we not say, verily there is a God that judges the earth, when we see this
vengeance? And for the rest, may we not say as those searchers of Canaan,
(Caleb and Joshua) made their report, when the rest complained of
impossibilities, Numb. 14. 9. Let us not fear them, for they are bread for us,
that is, we shall easily get in amongst them, and live upon their estates: Let
us not fear those giantly sons of Anak, who have fleeced the poor of Gods
flock, and knaw'd their bones, for (by the power and justice of God) they are
bread for us; they have made hungry ones enough to eat up their own harvest.

Fourthly, We may take the hungry, yet more largely; for any In communi
quicunque raptor and depraedator famelicus appellatur. Pined
that are low and poor, whom God stirs up and sends in judgment as his
teeth, to consume and eat up, to devour and destroy the portion of such fat
ones. Every spoiler is a hungry one; spoilers devour as if they had never
eaten in their lives, they sweep all away: The word which we translate to eat
up, signifies the most fierce kind of eating: when a man eats, as if he could
never have enough. And therefore it is applied to the eating of fire, which we
know is the most hungry thing in the world; nothing will satisfy (...) Est
acrius quam nostrum comedere, significat enim co^ede^^o consumere. Ingentem
aviditatem comedentis prae sesert, adeo ut de igne quae omnia avide depascit
utatur.
the appetite of that hungry element, the more it eats, the more hungry and
devouring it is. Hence that adjunct of fire (Isa. 29. 6.) A flame of a
devouring fire, or, the flame (it is the word of the text) of an eating fire; a
fire whose stomach is able to digest all the material creatures in the world.
So (Job 1.) it is said, that the fire of God, or a great fire did eat up the
sheep, the fire came hungry and consumed them; such is the force of the word
here used; and secondly, it is applied in Scripture, to the eating of the
sword; which (alas!) we know is very hungry too, My sword shall devour flesh,
Deuteronomy. 32. 42. Thirdly, it is applied to savage beasts (Genesis 37. 33.) when Jacob
bewaileth the loss of his son Joseph, he says, an evil beast has devoured
him. Fourthly, the cruelty of persecutors (in whom wild beasts, and sword and
fire are all met, if not swallowed up.) The cruelty, I say, of persecutors is
expressed by this word, They eat up my people like bread, Psalm. 14. 4. Wild
beasts, and sword, and fire, and above all the persecuting spirits of men, are
the most hungry and speedy devourers, such a devouring shall consume the
harvest of these foolish men, The hungry shall eat it up: Here we may observe,
That

They who consume others shall at last be consumed themselves.

Such as have raised themselves upon the ruins of others, shall raise others
by their own ruin. God will send devourers to eat up the estate of those, who
have devoured the estates of their brethren; especially, if they have devoured
the estates of his own people. The Apostle, Gal. 6. 7. gives this general law,
Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. He that sowes oppression, or
makes his seed-time, to be the reaping of his neighbors harvest, may find
reapers, which he hired not, in his field at harvest. The Prophet Isaiah
denounces a woe against those, that join house to house by oppression, and
what is the woe? their houses shall be made desolate; So Zeph. 3. 19. I will
undo all that afflict there. And Jer. 30. 16. They that devour thee shall be
devoured; and they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon
thee will I give for a prey; It is just with God (2 These. 1. 6.) to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you. The rich man who hoards up that for
himself and for his children, which he has pulled out of the bellies of
others, shall have his meat devoured from his table, and pulled from between
his teeth.

The hungry eat up his harvest, but where does he find it? He takes it even
out of the thorns.

There is some difficulty in that expression. Mr Broughton reads it, The
hungry shall eat up his harvest which he had gotten thorough the thorns! And
others thus, he shall fetch it out from among the (...) Spinae, aliqui deducunt
a (...) unde (...) scutum, clipeus.
arms or weapons. The Hebrew word which we translate thorns, gives occasion
of these various readings, which some derive from Tsinnah, which signifies a
shield, and so by a trope, it notes any kind of arms or weapons.

If we take the word in the first sense, for thorns, a threefold
interpretation may be given of this clause.

First as Mr Broughton reads it, which he had gotten thorough the thorns.
This refers to the manner how a worldling obtaines his estate; he has a great
harvest, and how came he by it? he got it thorough the thorns; that is, he got
it thorough vexing, pricking cares, for so (Mat. 13.) in the Parable of the
sower, when Christ expounds the meaning of the thorny ground, he shows, that
the thorns are cares, the cares wherewith men are vexed in getting riches, or
compassing the things of the world. Hence a man is said to get riches thorough
the thorns, when he gets them thorough overmuch care and vexation of spirit.

Secondly, As the word signifies thorns: some conceive, that Eliphaz closely
describes the persons who should take away his estate, as he did in the former
branch; there he said, the hungry eat up his harvest; now he describes
another sort of men that shall eat it up, namely, Men of thorns, or Men
coming out of the thorns; This rendering, is not easily made out of the
Original, though, it has learned a bettors, and therefore I am not confident
of it; yet it may yield some advantage to our meditation upon the words. The
meaning is this: Mean or contemptible men shall Homo ex spinis exiens, sc.
abiectus and contemptus eum rapiet. Homo ignobilis qui de spinis nascitur. Merc.
take it away: As in our language, when we would express a vulgar person, a
man of low birth, we say, he was borne under a bush; or under a hedge, that is,
he is a man of a low pedigree, none of the Gentry; and so it is, as if he
should say, this great, rich, mighty man, who has so much honor and riches
about him, and thinks himself safe, shall see a man coming out of the
thorns, some obscure person, and take all that he has from him. This
exposition may yield us a profitable observation, That

When God reckons with the greatest of wicked men, he can humble and pull them
down by the meanest and poorest of men. A very shrub, a man that comes out of
the thorns may pull down the tallest Cedar; It increases affliction, to be
overcome by a weak, despised, inconsiderable enemy. It troubled Abimelech more
to be slain by a woman, than to be slain; and therefore (upon the matter) he
would have the pain to be twice killed, rather than the disgrace to be killed by
a woman; for having received his deaths-wound by her hand, yet, he calls
hastily to the young man his Armor-bearer, and said unto him; draw out thy
sword now, and slay me, that men say not of me, a woman slew him, Judge. 10. 54.
The Lord threatens it, both as a just retaliation for the sin, and an
aggravation of the punishment of his people, I will move them to jealousy with
those that are not a people, I will provoke them to anger with a foolish
Nation, Deuteronomy. 32. 21. The Gentiles, as Paul expounds this place, Romans 10. 19.
and Peter, 1 Peter 2. 10.) whom the Jews slighted as a foolish people, as no
people, came in and eat up the harvest of the Gospel, and were invested with
greater privileges than they. This made the Jews mad with anger, as you may
read in that famous record of it, Acts 22. ver. 21, 22. They could not bear
it, that, Those men of the thorns, should partake of the fatness of the
Olive. As Jotham spoke in his Parable, (Judge. 9 15.) when the question was,
which of the trees should be King, the olive or the vine, etc. at last it fell
to the brambles lot, or to the thorn. That parable gives some light to this
exposition: For those several sorts of trees shadowed out the several sorts
of men, and the bramble shadowed out the meanest sort of men; a man of thorns,
or a man coming out of the thorns. And he adds (which further answers this
sense) Let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the Cedars of Labanon;
which in plain English is, let there come power from a powerless man, who is
but as a bryer, or as a thorn, and consume the greatest and the mightiest.

And it may support us (while we see so many great Cedars and strong Oaks, with
whom we have to do) that God can send a man out of the thorns to subdue their
pride; and can cause a bramble to consume Cedars, when himself pleases, The
Prophet Amos puts the question, By whom shall Jacob rise, for he is small? The
only answer is, Jacob has a great God, a God that can do great things: If we
should question, by whom shall the wicked fall, for they are very great? I
answer, happily, they shall fall by him, that is very small, A man out of the
bushes, a man of thorns, some poor shrub, armed with the power of God, shall
shake and overthrow them in the height of all their wickedness and worldly
glory.

Thirdly, Take it according to our reading: He shall fetch it out of the
thorns. Which some interpret, to be thorns growing naturally in or among the
corn; according to that general curse upon the earth, Genesis 3. 18. Thorns and
thistles shall it bring forth to thee. But rather (if not alone) these are
thorns platted together industriously, and wrought into a hedge, to save corn
fields or corne-stackes from spoil. So the meaning is, that when the hungry
man comes with a commission from God, to eat the harvest of the foolish, he
will have his estate whatever it costs him, or what danger soever he incurres
for it. For, as a man is said to fetch a thing out of the fire, or out of the
Lions mouth, when he E spinis, hoc est, e magno periculo: sicut nos dicimus ex
ore Leonum. Drus.
gets it with much peril and hazard; so, what a man gets with much difficulty
and labor, he is said to get it out of the thorns. And the reason is this,
because, men were wont, when they had gathered in their harvest (take it
especially about that, and in proportion about any thing else) they were then
wont (I say) to secure Quamvis inter spinas abdita sit and forsan ut tutior
sit. Merc.
it with a thorn-hedge, or to lay bushes about their stacks, to keep off cattle
or any other annoyances. We read among the Laws given by Moses, somewhat
answerable to this practice, Exodus 22. 6. If fire break out and catch in
thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or standing corn, or the field be
consumed therewith, he that kindled the fire, shall make restitution. This Law
intimates it for an ancient custom, to make fences of thorns about corn
brought home or stackt up; And that fields while the corn was standing, were
hedged about with thorns. To either of which, the allusion may be made by
Eliphaz: So that, to fetch his harvest out of the thorns, is to fetch it
through the fences made to secure his harvest, to fetch it, though it cost (as
we speak proverbially) a scratcht face, or scratcht fingers. We say, hunger
breaks through stones walls, certainly then these hungry ones, will break
through a thorn hedge.

When the Lord would keep his Church from wandering in sinful paths, he
resolves thus, Hos. 2. 6. I will hedge up her way with thorns: there are
pleasures that she would go fetch, but as men fence their ground and pastures
with thorns, so will I do with her, I will hedge up her way with thorns, she
shall pay dear, she shall smart for her pleasures, ere she come at them. And
therefore, as it shows the extreme intensivenesse and resolvednesse of a man
to sin; when a man will sin, though God has hedged up his way with thorns,
that is, when a man will break thorough many dangers, and run hazzards to
satisfy his lusts; so here in this place, the hungry man's taking it out of the
thorns, notes a resolvednesse and eagerness of spirit, to have the estate of
this rich man, let him secure it by all the power and policies he can.

From this Exposition, we may observe first, the practice of worldly wise men;
when they have gotten riches, they do not leave them loose and open to
surprisall, they keep them among the thorns; they will secure their estates as
much as they can. As they get riches with thorns, so they will keep riches with
thorns, that is, they will bestow care to keep, as well as to get: A godly man
takes great care to get more of Christ, more riches of grace, he improves all
means, and makes this his business night and day; these spiritual cares are
his thorns: and when he finds his stock of holy things increasing, his next
care is to preserve his stock, to maintain communion with Christ, and to keep
up his graces to their height; The care of a godly man, is as much to preserve
grace and comforts from the power of that hungry one the Devil, as it was to
fetch them in. And Satan is so hungry after our spiritual harvest, that, he
would fetch it out of the thorns and fences of all our prayers and holy cares,
were it not that Christ himself keeps it for us, His care over his peoples
spiritual welfare is such a thorn hedge, as the Devil can never break
thorough; We are kept by the power of God as with a garrison, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

Such also, is the wisdom of that generation, about worldly things: they fence
in, and fortify their riches, so that if any man will have them, he must have
them through the thorns, or come upon the pikes.

Secondly, Though he lay up his estate within the thorns, yet, the hungry man
will fetch it out. Note then,

That all the care of worldly men, all the thorne-hedges they make about their
estates, shall never secure them from spoil and ruin. The hungry will press
and venture through the thorns to take them.

Further, As the word signifies a Buckler (or any kind of arms, whether
offensive or defensive) as the text is by some translated, He shall fetch it
out of their Arms, or from among their weapons. De Armis ^ollet eam, sc.
messem. Et ipsum rapiet armatus. Vulg.
And then, the sense may be thus conceived (which agrees fully with the former
Observation)

Though, this wicked man in his high estate, should get many armed men together
to defend it, yea though he should get an Army of men, with sword and buckler,
with pike and shot to defend it, yet none of them shall be able. The wrath of
God, by the man out of the thorns, the meanest instrument of his wrath, shall
break through all And in allusion to this, the vulgar (more truly then as a
translation) reads it,

The armed man shall take him away, that is, he shall carry him away prisoner,
and spoil him of his harvest: Which, though it does not comply with the letter
of the Original, yet it implies the sense of it. For when Armed men come to
take any thing away, it intimates, that the thing was, or was supposed to be
protected with arms. The Chaldee paraphrase says the same: Soldiers with
Quod juxta tex^um Hebraicum extaret, de armis rapiet, vertit vulgaris Biblia,
rapier armatus, non enim nisi armatus prssit de medio armorum eam rapere. Bold.
Milites armis sivi instrumentis bellicis abducent eos. Chald. Erunt exercitus
vos cingentes. Chald. Bibent f^^ientes divitias eju^s. Vulg. (...) vel a (...)
s^^ire, vel a (...) quod est capillus aut caesaries Praedo sic dictus, quod
more ferino capillos nutriet, ut mos est in terra Ismael. Rab. Dav. Kinchi in
lib Rad. Tsammim, praede, quem sic appellarum existimant, a coma, quam alit,
vel quod sanguinem humanum fitiat. Drus.
weapons and warlike instruments shall carry them away. This word is in other
places rendered An Army, in the Chaldee. So Josh. 23. 15. That which we
translate, They shall be thorns in your eyes: The Chaldee glosseth thus; They
shall be an Army besieging or compassing you round about. And so much for the
second branch of this verse. He takes it even out of the thorns.

There is a third branch: And the robber swalloweth up their substance.

It is the same in substance with the former, and we may say here as Joseph
about the dreams of Pharaoh, The dreams are the same, and they are doubled,
only to note the certainty of the thing: The matter here is the same, only
the words are doubled (as the Holy Ghost often does) to note the certainty of
this thing, that the foolish man's estate shall be consumed.

Yet, there is somewhat very considerable in the phrase here used, and
therefore I shall open it a little; The robber swalloweth up his substance.

The robber.] Some translate, the thirsty shall drink or swallow up their
substance; Mr. Broughton, the thirsty shall swill up their wealth; And it
suites fairly with the former words, there the hungry shall eat up his
harvest, and here, the thirsty shall swill up their wealth; so you have both
the hungry and the thirsty to make riddance of all; neither his corn, nor his
wine, his bread nor his drink, neither wet nor dry, shall escape, where both
hungry and thirsty come to consume.

We render it, The robber swalloweth up their substance. The reason of this
difference is from the Original word, which may have a double derivation:
First from a root, signifying to thirst or to be thirsty: Secondly from a root
which signifies the hair of the head, or the locks, or extraordinary
ruffian-like long hair and locks. And the reason, why we translate Robber, is
given from both: From the first, because robbers and spoylers are commonly
Toss pots and drunkards, men that love their liquor, a thirsty generation in
that sense; and they always thirst for a prey, they thirst for the estates or
lives of others: From the latter, because robbers, plunderers and spoilers,
usually wore very long hair, either to disguise or make themselves the more
terrible; So that a robber may be denominated, both from his unnaturally
natural thirst after the pot, and from his uncivilly civil thirst after a
purse, or from his long, shaggy, bushy hair: To this latter sense, one of
Absorbea^ pilcs^^ divitias eorum. Rab. Mordo^hai. Horridus. H^spidus. (...)
Proprie a^traxit per nares, aut os: trax it aerem ad os; Per Metaphoram,
inhiavit, ardenter cupijt, qui enim ardenter aliquid cupiunt; pre desiderij
magnitudine, ad os ae^em frequentius ^r^hunt seu respirant.
the Rabbis translates, The hairy man, or the man with long hair, shall
swallow up their estates; Hence some express him by a Latin word, which
signifies a man all overgrown with hair; This Ruffian or Robber shall swallow
up his substance.

Swallow up] The word notes an utter exhaustion, he shall exhaust his
substance: As we say, when a spender or an unthrift is described, He has
exhausted his estate, he has, as it were sucked it up, guzl'd or swallowed it
down his throat; the radical word may import, drawing or sucking up with a
pipe; properly it signifies, to fetch wind, or draw breath; and by a metaphor
to swallow down, to sup or suck up; as also, with fervency and pleasure to
desire, because vehement desires are often expressed by quick breathings, yea, to
breath after a thing, is to desire it; or it notes a mind to swallow it up,
either from the delight we have in it, or hatred of it. In which latter sense
Daved applies it to his enemies (Psalm. 56. 2.) Mine enemies would daily swallow
me up. They breath after me, to devour me. So then the meaning is; This
robber, this hairy spoyler or thirsty one, will be so dry that he will swallow
all up, he will soop and drink up the foolish man's estate to the very bottom;
he will draw it down to the very dreggs or lees, and not leave a drop behind
him.

The robber swalloweth up their substance. In the first chapter we read Job
described, A man of a very (...) Non magis ad corporis quam ad ingenij vires
pertinet: and tres sere virtutes continet, fortitudinem, justitiam, prudentiam.
great substance, Job's subsistence in cattle was thus and thus: Here also it
is said, The robber shall swallow up his subsistence; but the word in the
Hehrew, is very different from that in the first chapter; there the word
signifies properly substance in cattle; but here it signifies, substance in
any kind of wealth or riches whatsoever; And it notes three things.

First, and most properly, strength, either strength of body or of mind,
namely, valor, activity and courage, also wisdom and industry to get or
defend our substance; So Genesis 47. 6. Pharaoh tells Joseph, that if among his
brethren, there were any men of activity, he should make them rulers over his
cattle. (...)


Secondly, It notes riches and wealth, or any worldly substance; because much
activity, wisdom and strength, is usually employed in obtaining them; or
because both wisdom and strength are requisite for the keeping and retaining
of them, (Prove. 11. 16.) Strong men retain riches: as if he should say, though
a man have abundance of riches, yet if he have not strength, he shall hardly
hold them, they will be wrested out of his hands. Once more, Riches are thus
expressed, because men, usually account their riches to be their strength, a man
naturally puts confidence in his riches; Prove. 13. 15. The rich man's wealth is
his strong City; Riches are called strength, from that corrupt opinion which
the world has of them, making them Idols, and trusting to them, as they should
unto God alone. Though yet, there is a truth in it, that Aristoteles divi^ias
appellat vires re^um, quia per ipsas o^nia possumus. lib 1. Polit. cap. 8.
riches have much strength in them, a rich man, and a powerful man, are
mutually put for each other.

Thirdly, The word signifies an Army of men, Psalm. 33. 16. There is no King
saved by the multitude of an host: We may take it either way, this hungry man,
this robber, shall come and swallow up his substance, his riches, his strength,
or he shall come and swallow up his very Army, by which he thought to defend
his substance; All shall be lost, neither the estate, nor the means used to
protect the estate, shall stand before this hungry, thirsty, hairy robber. In
this description of a total desolation brought upon the estate and family of
the foolish man, together with the character of the persons, who shall make him
desolate, questionless Eliphaz would represent to Job, the desolation brought
upon his estate and children, by those troops of hungry, hairy, thirsty
robbers, the Chaldeans and the Sabeans, who swallowed all his substance at one
morsel, soopt up his estate at one draught. Whence observe;

It is a great point of wisdom, to show a man his condition, in another, and
to seem only relating the History of our foreign observations, when we mean
the person to whom we speak; what is proposed as seen in others, works the
heart to see it self; and does at once mitigate the sharpness of the
reproof, and open the spirit, to let it in. As we see in the instance of
Nathans Parable to David, 2 Samuel 12. Eliphaz said only, I have seen the
foolish taking root, etc. He does not lay it boysterously and directly upon
Job; I saw thee taking root etc.

Thus we have opened the context of these five verses, wherein Eliphaz argues
Job of wickedness and insincerity, because God had dealt with him, as he
usually does with the wicked and infincere, whose habitations are cursed, their
children crushed, their substance swallowed up, by thirsty, and eaten up, by
hungry robbers, who take it out from the very thorns of their own cares, in
getting, or means in securing, what they have gotten.

JOB. Chap. 5. Verse. 6, 7, 8. Although affliction comes not forth of the dust,
neither does trouble spring out of the ground.

Yet man is borne unto trouble as the sparks fly upward.

I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause.


THus far Eliphaz has spent his discourse, in reproof and conviction; And you
have had out of the 4 Chapter, and the precedant part of this, four heads of
reason, or arguments, by which Eliphaz labors to reprove Job, for, and
convince him of, close sin, or of gross hypocrisy. Now Eliphaz turns himself
to another style, and falls to counsel and exhortation, directing and advising
Job what becomes him, what he ought to do, in his condition: His exhortation
consists of two distinct branches.

The former whereof begins at this sixth, and is continued to the seventeenth
verse of the Chapter. The sum of this exhortation is, That, for as much as he
had found him so distempered in his speech and carriage, he now earnestly
beseeches and entreats him, that he would seek unto God, beg favor, and
believingly commit himself and his cause unto God.

The second branch of exhortation begins at the 17 verse, and is continued to
the end of the Chapter. The Scope whereof is, That Job would humbly and
patiently submit himself unto, and under, the correcting hand of God, quietly
waiting the time of his deliverance.

The matter of the former exhortation lies in the words of the 8 verse, I would
seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause.

He strengthens this exhortation by two arguments, whereof

The first is taken from the cause of his afflictions, and that either the
efficient, or the meritorious cause of his afflictions, both which we find in
the 6 and 7 verses.

The second argument by which he strengthens his first exhortation, is
contained in the 9, 10, 11, and 12 verses following, and it is grounded upon
the power, wisdom and goodness of God: As if he should say, Who would not seek
unto God, who is of infinite power, able to deliver? Who would not seek unto a
God, and commit his cause unto him, who is gracious, and pitiful, merciful
and ready to deliver? Who would not seek unto a God, and commit his cause unto
him, who is of infinite wisdom to find out ways and means for the contriving
of deliverance, though man's condition (to the eye of sense or humane reason)
seem altogether desperate and remediless?

These three verses contain the first exhortation, together with the first
argument; And we may form it thus, both respecting the efficient, and the
meritorious cause of his afflictions.

First, respecting the efficient cause, the argument seems to lie thus.

He is to be sought unto in our afflictions, who is the principal efficient
cause or sender of our afflictions.

But, God is the principal efficient cause and sender of our afflictions.

Therefore, he is to be sought unto, and, to him our cause is to be committed.

The Major or first Proposition, is not expressly in this text, but it is
plainly supposed, and logically to be understood. The Minor or the Assumption,
lies in the 6 and 7 verses, where he proves that God is the efficient cause or
sender of afflictions; And his proof is grounded upon a denial, or a removal
of all other efficient causes. As, if he should say, there must be some
efficient cause of affliction, but no efficient cause can be assigned or named,
except God: therefore God is the efficient cause, the sender and orderer of
afflictions. That, no other efficient cause can be assigned, he proves plainly
in the sixth verse, thus; Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground, yet, man is borne to trouble etc. As if he
should say, our eyes teach us, we see plainly man is full of trouble; man is no
sooner borne, but he is afflicted; these afflictions must have some efficient
cause, some hand or other does frame, form, and fashion them, they come not
alone; and if they come not alone, then, we must find out this cause either in
earth or in heaven: we must find it, either in the Creator or among the
creatures, but from the earth, or from creatures, they come not. Affliction
comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground,
that is, it rises not by or from the creatures in themselves, and alone
considered; and if so, it must needs come from heaven, from the hand of God,
who dwells above, and disposes all things according to the pleasure of his
own will. It is such a kind of speech, as often falls from us, when a thing is
lost; we say, some body must have it; Sure it is not gone into the gound, You
or You must have it, for there were none else in the place. So, Eliphaz seems
here to argue about the afflictions, which he saw upon Job: here are heavy
afflictions upon thee, these afflictions must come some way upon thee, They
come not out forth of the dust, neither do they spring out of the ground, they
come not up alone; Either then they must come from God or man; and from man,
they come not; they spring not out of the earth: therefore he leaves it as a
clear inference, that God is the efficient cause or sender of affliction.

Again, if we consider this argument, as it strengthens the exhortation from
the meritorious cause of his afflictions. It may be formed thus.

If the sin of man be from himself, and the sufferings of man be for his sin,
then in his sufferings for sin, he ought to seek unto God, and to commit his
cause unto him.

But, the sin of man is from himself, and the sufferings of man are for his
sin.

Therefore, he ought in such a condition to seek unto God, and commit his
cause unto him; For, remedy is no where else to be had. This second argument is
grounded rather upon the exposition, then the letter of the text, as shall be
further cleared in pursuance of the words.

Thus, you see, how the Minor or second Proposition is confirmed, both, as it
respects the efficient cause, and the meritorious cause of man's affliction. The
conclusion lies in the 8 verse, which Eliphaz Conclusi enunciata in persona
Eliphazi. quod modestum cohortationis genus magnam vim habet, and est
usitatissimum, Merl.
pronounces in his own person, I would seek unto God, therefore seek thou unto
God, he speaks it in his own person, thereby more freely to insinuate his
counsel, and make way for his exhortation. As if he had said, Were I in thy
case I would do so, therefore do thou so likewise, Seek unto God and commit
thy cause unto him.

So much of this context and the Logic of it, as it contains an exhortation,
with an argument to strengthen and back that exhortation. Now for the clearing
of the words.

Although afflictions come not forth of the dust. The Hebrew particle, which we
translate Although, may be taken three ways, and so I find it rendered upon
this place.

First (which is its most proper sense) it is taken causally, and then the text
is read, For, affliction comes not forth of the dust. So Mr. Broughton, for
sorrow issues not from the dust.

Secondly, It may be taken Adversatively, as we read it, Although affliction
or sorrow comes not forth of the dust.

Thirdly, it may be taken Affirmatively, according to which acception the text
is thus carried, Certainly, Affliction comes not out of the dust, or Surely,
affliction comes not out of the dust.

Either of these ways, the sense is good, yet to me our translation by the
Adversative Although, does a little obscure the sense: And to say, Surely or
certainly, affliction comes not forth of the dust, seems to carry it more
clearly.

Surely affliction comes not out of the dust; It is considerable, that the
word by which affliction is here expressed, (...) Iniquitas, vanitas, molestia
bibor, quia iniquitas laborem afflictionemq parturit Sept. vertunt per (...)
and (...) Sclund.
bears a double signification in Scripture, and I conceive it may also in this
text: properly it signifies sin, iniquity, iniquity of all sorts, but
especially, That sin of Idolatry; As (Hos. 4. 15.) when the house of God
(Bethel,) was polluted with idolatry, the name is changed and it is called
Bethaven, the house of an Idol, or the house of iniquity: or of that special
iniquity, namely of idolatry; Sin alters the nature of man, no marvel then,
if it alter the names of things, Hos. 10. 15. and often in the old testament
(...) Ascendit Eliphaz ad comunem and naturalem sortem hominis quod omnes ^n
peccato et ad miseriam nascimur, damnati in Adamo Coc
we find this word added, to set out the worst of men, the workers of iniquity,
Psalm. 5. 5. etc. Iniquity comes not out of the dust, the soil where it grows,
or the shop where it is wrought and formed is man's heart. Eliphaz would carry
us to the wel-head our sinful natures, or our birth-sin.

Secondly, the word signifies affliction or sorrow, calamity or misery, because
sin is the cause of affliction, the mother of sorrow: And therefore by a
Metonimie of the effect for the cause (which is frequent in Scripture) The same
word notes both sin and sorrow; The mother and the daughter are called by the
same name. We translate by the effect, Surely, affliction comes not out of
the dust; Many by the cause, Surely, iniquity comes not out of the dust. And
for the full understanding of the text, we must take in both; where the effect
only is mentioned, the cause is supposed, Affliction springs not out of the
dust, because sin springs not out of the dust.

Now this form of speaking (Iniquity or affliction springs or comes not
forth of the dust) is proverbiall: and no doubt was P^ove^bialis quaedam
sententia est, qua tollat casum asseratque divinam e^ga res humanas and
im^^^ru^ supplic^um providentiam. P^n^d Sanct.
well known and often used in those times. When they would remove chance or
fortune (as we say) or deny any event to be without a certain directive power,
They spoke in this language, This came not from the ground; thereupon the
vulgar translates it so in terms, Nihil in terra sine causa sit. Vulg. Quasi
dicerit non casu ma ^ nabis accidunt, neque ex terra germinant ut solent herbae
nullo jacto semine.
There is nothing in the world without cause, alluding (it is probable) to the
Proverb. Hence a man obscurely borne, whose parents and original are
unknown, is called Terrae filius.
A sonnne of the earth. Which imports, that no man can tell whence he is, or
how descended. They whose original cannot be assigned, are usually assigned to
the common original, Mogna parens terra est.
or parent of us all, the earth; and as in regard of persons, so of things,
when no man can tell how or which way they come, they are said to come out of
the ground; We speak also (in the other extreme) affirmatively, Such a thing
comes out of the clouds, that is (we know not, but) God knows how it comes. So
then, here is a denial of chance or fortune; As if Eliphaz should say, reason
may be found and assigned for these things, they come not out of the dust.

Further, for the clearing of this, The dust and the ground stand in a twofold
opposition. First unto God, and secondly unto our selves. First in opposition
to God thus, Affliction springs not from the ground, that is, it comes from
the wisdom, power and disposition of God, as the efficient cause. Secondly, in
opposition to our selves, and then the sense may be thus conceived, that, the
material and meritorious cause of our affliction, is not without us, N^n exi^
e pulvere iniquitas, q. d. ab hominibus est non eter na vol pulvere, nam terra
non profert iniquitatem sed homines, ea est natura eo^um co^rupta proin and
proclives a^ ea^ jucuntur. D. us.
it is not in the ground or in other creatures, but it is in our selves. Every
man in himself has the ground which bears, the source or fountain which
bubbles out his sorrows and his sufferings. Man has no reason to accuse or
charge heaven or earth, as the authors of his sorrow, he carries the reason
about with him, The sinfullnes or sink of his own polluted nature. And
therefore (to allude to that of the Apostle in the point of Justification, Romans
10. 6, 7.) Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into heaven, that is to bring
thy troubles down from above, or who shall decend into the deep, that is to
bring up thy troubles from below, for the cause is nigh thee, even in thy mouth
and in thy heart, that is, The corruption of nature, which we preach.

The latter branch of this verse, Neither does trouble spring out of the
ground, is of the very same importance with the former, therefore I shall not
need to stay upon it. The word which we translate Trouble signifies properly,
toylesome labor, or any laborious toil (...)
accidental to man in this life, as a fruit of sin. This does not spring out
of the ground. It is an allusion to plants or herbs, which grow in the open
field, without the work or care of man, and so are opposed to plants or herbs
in a garden: As if he should say, Terra nata dicuntur illa, quibus nulla ab
agricolis impensa est opera, ut su^^ herbae quas ^^tro terra fund ^ in pratis
and locis incu^^is. Sa^ct.
thy troubles are not like those herbs, that grow wild, in the fields, without
the labor and pains, the care or art of man. There is some hand or other,
that both plants and waters them.

We may ground some observations as the text is read, Iniquity comes not forth
of the dust. And then as it is read, Affliction comes not forth of the dust*
And it is necessary to give it this latitude; the word equally bearing both
senses. As it is read, Iniquity comes not, etc. We learn,

First, The material cause of sin is in our selves.

We bring forth the fruit at our tongues or fingers ends, and the root is in
our hearts. Our sins spring not out of the dust, but out of the dirt and
filth of our own corruptions, Genesis 6. 5. Every thought of the imagination of
man's heart it is evil, and only evil, and that continually; the Hebrew is,
every figment or every creature in the heart of man, whatsoever a man moulds
and fashions within himself, naturally, is evil* and nothing but evil, and it
is always so. The natural births of man's heart have all one common face and
feature; They are all of one common constitution. Evil all. Secondly, We may
observe, That

The meritorious cause of man's suffering is from his sin.

Iniquity springs not from the ground, neither does trouble come out of the
dust. As iniquity springs from our selves, so we may resolve it, that misery
springs from our sin. It is a truth, (as has been touched upon the second
Chapter) that, God, in many afflictions laid upon his dear children and
servants, respects not their sin as the cause procuring and drawing on these
afflictions. And very many are afflicted by the world, not for sins sake, but
for righteousness sake. As Christ, so some Christians may say in their sphere,
We have done many good works, for which of them do ye stone us? Yet this is as
clear a truth, that, the sin of any man is in it self a sufficient
meritorious cause of any, yea, of all afflictions. A creature cannot bear a
greater punishment, then the least of his sins deserves. Man weaves a spiders
webb of sin out of his own bowels, and then he is entangled in the same
webb; the troubles which ensnare, and wrappe about him, are twisted with his
own fingers. Thirdly, observe,

Naturally every man seeks the reason of his sorrows and afflictions out of
himself.

When man is afflicted, he is not willing to own himself, as the cause of his
afflictions, or acknowledge that they spring from his sin; and, that may be
the reason, why Eliphaz speaks thus to Job, as if he had said, thy thoughts are
wandering abroad, thou little think that thy afflictions were bred in thy own
bosom: Thou art fastening the cause of then upon this, and the other thing; Thou
art complaining of the day wherein thou wast borne* but thou should rather
complain of the sin wherein thou wast born; The birthday has not hurt thee,
but thy birth-sin. Thy birth-sin has given conception to all the sorrows of
thy life.

The Jews in the Prophet Isa's time were in great distress, and could get no
deliverance. The ports and passages of mercy were all obstructed. Now, whether
went their thoughts? And what did they look upon, as the reason of those
abiding lingering evils? we may read their thoughts in the refutation of them;
we may see what the disease of their hearts was, by the medicine which the
Prophet applies unto them: he labors to purge them from that conceit, as if
either want of power, or want of love in the Lord were the stop of their
deliverance. The Lords hand is not shortened that he cannot save, neither his
ear heavy, that he cannot hear, Isa. 59. 1, 2. as if he had said, I know what
your apprehensions are in these affliction, you think the reason is in God,
that either he cannot, or he will not save you: You think the hand of Gods
power is shrunk up, or the ear of his mercy shut up, but, you reflect not
upon your selves, nor consider, that Your iniquities have separated between you
and your God; Your sin does you hurt, and you touch not that with a little
finger, but lay the weight of your charge upon God himself. So (Hos. 13. 9.)
Thy destruction is from thy self, in me is thy help. God is forced to tell them
so, that their destruction was from themselves, they would not believe it: they
supposed it was from the cruelty or malice of the creature, from the wrath and
rage of enemies, from some oversight or neglect of their friends; therefore the
Lord speaks out in express terms, Thy destruction is from thy self. It
springs not forth of the dust, neither is thy destruction from me; In me is thy
help; in both the heart of man fails equally, we are ready to say, that the
good we have comes from our selves, that our help and comforts are from our own
power and wisdom, and so offer sacrifice to our own nets, as if by them our
portion were fat: but for evil and destruction we assign it wholly over,
sometime to men, and so are angry; sometime to God, and so blaspheme. We
naturally decline what reflects shame upon our selves, or speaks us guilty.

From our translation, Although affliction, etc- Observe

First, Every affliction has a cause.

The Proverb carries that sense, in every common understanding. Our
afflictions have a cause, a certain cause, they come not by hap hazard, or by
accident. Many things are casual, but nothing is without a cause. Many things
are not fore seen by man, but all things are foreordained by God. The Prophet
Amos (Chapter 3. 6.) sets forth this by an elegant similitude, Can a bird fall in a
snare upon the earth, where no ginne is for him? As if he should say, is a bird
taken in a snare by chance, where none have prepared, set or industriously laid
a snare or a ginne to take him? The bird saw not the snare, but the snare was
set for the Bird. Snaresfall not on the ground at adventure, they grow not out
of the earth of themselves: but the fowler, by his art and industry, invents
and frames them a purpose to catch the bird: Thus, the calamity and troubles in
which men are caught and lime-twig'd, ensnared and shackled in the world, come
not out of the ground, They are not acts of chance, but of providence: The wise
and holy God sets such snares, to take and hold foolish, unruly men, like silly
birds, gaping after the baits of worldy pleasures. Which meaning is clear from
the scope and tendency of the whole Chapter; but the next question resolves it
in the letter, Is there any evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?
Those words are both the conclusion and explication of the former similitude.
Secondly, observe

Affliction is not from the power of any creature. As it comes not by chance or
without a cause, so not by the power of creatures, they are not the cause; dust
and the ground, are opposed to Heaven or to a divine power: Creatures (in this
sense) can neither do good, nor do evil. The world would be as full of
trouble, as it is of sin, if sinful men could make trouble: It is not in the
compass of a creature, no not of all the creatures in Heaven or earth, to
form or to make out one affliction, without the concurrence, and allowance of
God himself. Men alone, can neither make staves of comfort, nor rods of
affliction.

Whence thirdly, A consectary from both may be, That Afflictions are from the
Lord as from the efficient cause, the directer and orderer of them.

These evils are from a creating, not from a created strength. I (says the
Lord) form the light and create darkness, Isa. 45. 7. Natural darkness has
only a deficient cause, but poenall darkness has an efficient cause.
Darkness is created. As in the first creation God said, let there be light, so
in providence (which is a continued creation) he says, let there be darkness.
If afflictions come not forth of the earth, then they come from Heaven. That
wicked King preached very good doctrine, when he said of an extreme devouring
famine, This evil is from the Lord, though he failed utterly in the use or
application, while he murmured out why should we wait on the Lord any longer?
2 King. 6. 33. For, the reason holds strong to the contrary, This evil is from
the Lord, we will wait upon the Lord for ever.

Verse 7. Yet, man is borne unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward. Yet man,
or but man is borne to trouble: Some read, Man is borne to sin, that is, he is
borne with a nature ready and prone to sin, because he is borne in sin, Psalm.
51. 5. And so by consequent he is borne to trouble, which is caused by and is
the fruit of sin. These two, sin and trouble, are so near in blood and
kindred, that still one word includes them both; The former word which
signifies sin, properly is translated affliction, and this word which signifies
affliction, properly may be translated sin. When it is said, That Man is borne
to trouble or sin; It notes two things.

1. A right to them, a right to sin, and a right to sorrow. That which a man
is borne to, is duly his, it is his inheritance, or his birthright; that is
the common understanding of the phrase: As some men are borne to a great
estate, to lands and honors, etc. so all men are borne to trouble and sin;
They are ours by a line all right, derived from our next, yea first parents, so
they descend to us as land descends.

2. It implies a readiness, or a fitness to commit sin, or to falls into
trouble: When a man is said to be borne to a thing, it note him exceeding apt
and forward to take it: He needs little teaching and instructing, little
cultivating or manuring. As when a man makes verses readily, we say he was
borne to Poetry; or when a man gets wealth easily, we say, he was borne to be
rich. So in the present case; A man's understanding, will and affections, need
no manaring or dressing to bring forth sin, or the fruit of it, sorrow. He is
borne to sin.

The latter clause of the verse cleares the sense fully, Manis borne unto
trouble, or unto sin, as the sparks fly upward; The meaning is, as the sparks
have a principle in themselves, by which they ascend, they need no directing;
when a spark comes out from the fire, no man bids it fly upward, or shows it
the way, it will fly upward alone, it knows no other way, but upward; so, it
is a natural course for man, as soon as he is borne, to sin and work his own
sorrow. This he can do, the first thing he does, and before he can do any
thing, well, he can do this, but, too well; He needs no Tutor for these,
sinning and sorrowing, are not his art, but his nature; though he should have
neither rule nor example in the world, he would find out the mysteries of
iniquity, and do enough quickly to make himself miserable.

The particle, As, is a copulative in the Hebrew. So diverse render it in this
Text, Man is borne to trouble, And the sparks fly upward; Vau.
that is, man's trouble and sparks flying upward, are alike natural; we, as in
diverse other places, translate it by way of similitude; Man is borne unto
trouble, as, the sparks fly upward; So Job 34. 3. The ear tries words, and,
the mouth tastes meat; we translate the copalative by a comparative; The ear
tries words, as the mouth tastes meat. Again, Mark 9. 49. Every one shall
be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt; The sense
lies in the similitude, Every one shall be salted with fire, as every sacrifice
is salted with salt; It is an allusion to the old sacrifices, wherein salt was
continually used; so here, Man (...) Filijpru^ae hoc est scintillae.
Metapherice ferru^sagi^tae incalescens motu, and q^icquid volat in aere sive
scintil^ae, sive sag^^^ae, sive aves
is borne unto trouble, and the sparks, that is, as the sparks fly upward.

As the sparks] The Hebrew is, The sons of the cole; the sons or children of
the cole, are sparks; blow a cole, and presently a spark is begotten and
borne; therefore the Hebrew elegancie calls sparks, The sons or children of
the cole. And it is observeable, that by a metaphor this word signifies in the
Hebrew, the Head of an Arrow heated with motion, as also, a bird flying in the
air; and the reason is, because birds fly up in the air, they ascend
naturally, they fly about and flutter like sparks of fire in the air. Hence
the vulger and some others translate the words, Man is borne unto trouble, as
the birds fly upward; The Septuagint, as the young Vultures fly upward,
others, as the young (...). Sepr. (...), Comput. Non secus ad aerumn^s and
miserias hic perserendas na^us est homo, quam innatum est and natural
scintilis and volatilibus om nibus ut in sublime artolantur. Merc.
ones of the Eagle fly upward: Aben Ezra a learned Rabbin, makes use of that
sense also, and gives the gloss thus, as it is natural and innate for birds
to fly, so it is natural for man to suffer trouble. Hence observe, first,

Sorrow and sin, are the portion, and all the portion, that man has by
nature. He is borne to these.

They who are ascended to the greatest heights, and have got the greatest
stock, either of spiritual or outward comforts, were borne to nothing, but a
cup of sorrow, to the bread of affliction, and to the waters of adversity: And
these we are instated in, yea possessed of, as soon as we are borne; we need
not wait the death of our parents for this inheritance, they devide it all to
every child, and yet keep it all, to themselves: all our real comforts are from
our second birth, and have their pedigree from the blessing and love of God.
Therefore he Apostle puts that general question, what have thou, that thou
have not received? that is, what good have thou? Thou have all thy evil from
thy self, but whatsoever good thou have, was received from above; all our good
is founded in free Grace. Secondly observe, That

All sins and sorrows are contained virtually, in the nature of man.

Though a man does not formally commit or bring forth every sin, though a man
does not formally bear every affliction, or taste every cup of sorrow, yet
virtually and radically a man has every sin in him, or it is possible for any
sin to be formed and shaped out of the nature of man: Radically also every man
has every affliction all sorrows in him; and the justice of God, may form
the most dreadful shapt afflictions out of his sins: And as the spark lies
closely in the fire, or the flint, till you smite or blow them up, so sin lies
secretly in our hearts, till some temptation or occasion smites and brings it
out.

Again we may observe, That

Man can sin without a teacher. You need not instruct him, or teach him to do
evil, He does that by a natural instinct, since his nature was corrupted. He
sins as the sparks fly upwards, or as a bird flies in the air, whom no man
directs, how to use her wings, Nature. is her rute. There needs much teaching
against sin, and it is the business of all the Ordinances to bridle us from
acting our corruptions: But man walks in the ways of wickedness, without guide
or precept.

It was the ancient error of the Pelagians, that the sin of man came only by
imitation: they denied that man had a stock of corruption in his nature, or
that his nature was corrupted; but, seeing others sin, he sinned; an opinion
which carries its condemnation in its own face, as well as in our hearts. And
though similitudes are no proofs, yet, the reason of a similitude is: man's
sinning is therefore compared to a sparks flying, to show how naturally he
sins. A spark flies upward without any to lead it the way; and a bird would
fly, though she should never see another bird fly: And if a man could live
so, as never to see any one example of sin all his days, yet that man, out of
his own heart, might bring forth every sin, every day. Example quickens and
encourages the principles of sin within us, but we can sin without any
extrinsick motion or provocation, without pattern or president from without.
Lastly observe,

To sin, is no burden or labor to a natural man: For it is his nature. It is
no pains to the spark, to fly upwards: what we do naturally, we do easily.
Holy duties are no burdens to a godly man, because, through grace, he does them
naturally; he has an inward principle, which dictates the law of holiness to
him, though he should want outward teaching: He has an unction from the holy
Ghost, and knows all things, 1 John 2. 20. Not that a godly man becomes like
God, Omniscient, or knowing all, for at most we know, here, but in part: but he
knows all things necessary, and so far as necessary: his new birth teaches
him: He lives not merely upon the outward teaching, he has both light and
liberty in himself; and so has a tendency to these things in his own spirit,
as there is a tendency in fire to ascend.

We should wonder and rejoice, to see how grace conquers the course of sinful
nature. The new man is born to mercy and holiness to grace and glory, as the
sparks fly upward. Hence it is said, He that is born of God, cannot commit sin,
for the seed of God remains in him. As, the spark cannot fly downward,
because the heat of fire remains in it: The Apostle affirms it, of himself
and his Fellow Laborers in the Gospel, we can do nothing against the truth,
but for the truth, 2 Cor: 13. 8. The possibilities and impossibilities of a
regenerate man, are directly opposite to those of a natural man: The one
cannot sin, the other cannot but sin: the one can do nothing against the truth
the other can do nothing for the truth; gracious acts become as natural, as
sinful, when nature is changed from sin to grace. What a blessed change is
this, that man should do good as readily, as once he did evil; that, he who
was borne free to iniquity, should be re-borne free to righteousness, as the
spark; fly upward. A godly man is a heavenly spark: He has a fire in his
nature, which carries him upward for ever.

Thus having opened these two verses, being the grounds of the following
exhortation; let us now examine the matter of the exhortation it self,
contained in the 8th. verse.

Verse 8. I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause. Our
Translation omits one word in the beginning of this sentence, which though it
may be understood in our reading, yet the (...)
expression of it betters the sense. Surely, or truly I would seek, etc.

There are two opinions about the meaning of these words; Some conceive, that
Eliphaz speaks in high contempt of Job: and I may give you their sense, by that
proud schooling, which the Pharisee gave the poor Publican, Luke 18. As that
Pharisee insulted over the publican, thus, I thank God, I am not such a one as
thou art, etc. but I fast, and I pray, etc. So, they represent Eliphaz here
insulting over Job, I thank God, I am not such an impatient person as thou art,
no such rude curser of my day, or complainer of my trouble; I am not (I thank
God) so distracted, and so distempered as thou art; and if I had been in thy
case, I should have showed more wit, and grace too, then, to do, as thou have
done; I should never have been so vain and foolish, so forgetful of my own
duty or the Lords Sovereignty, as, to cry out against and accuse his providence
and dealings with me, to lay about me like a mad man, as thou have done; no, I
would have songht unto God, and committed my cause unto him, this should have
been my course, such and such the frame and temper of my spirit.

But I rather take these words in a good sense, implying much sweetness and
meekness of spirit in Eliphaz. And so this verse is as an application of the
Doctrine, contained in the former two; As if Eliphaz had said, Seeing matters
stand thus in themselves and these are undoubted truths, that afflictions come
from our selves, and that our sins are our own: and seeing thy case stands
thus, that now thou art under great afflictions and troubles; I do assure thee
my loving friend Job, were I in thy condition (I will give thee faithful
counsel, and tell thee my heart, what I would do) I would no longer stay
complaining against my day, cursing creatures, distempering my head, and
disquieting my heart with these passions; but, I would even go and address my
self unto God, I would apply my self to Heaven, I would seek for remedy
there, earth affords it not. I have ever found this the way to ease my heart
when burdened; to assuage my sorrows, when increased; to compose my spirit,
when distracted; to strengthen my resolutions, when unsettled: I can give thee
this rule with (A Probatum est) an assurance from mine own experience, in the
use of it, and with clearness of conscience, that it is my purpose in such
cases to use it ever.

I would seek unto God.] The word signifies a very diligent (...) Significat
quaerere diligenter and cu^ cur^ sed interregatione and ve^bi^ ut plurimum.
search; I would seek exactly and enquire laboriously unto God. It signifies
to seek by asking questions or by interrogating: And it imports seeking with
much wisdom and skill; a curious or a critical inquiry; So Eccles. 1. 13. I
gave my heart (says Solomon) to seek and search out by wisdom. And this
seeking implies four things.

First, A supposition and a sense of our wants; no man seeks that which he
has already, or, but thinks he has it. He that is full loathes a hony-combe.

Secondly, A strong desire to find that, which we want; it notes not a bare
desire only, or woulding, but a kind of unquietness or restlessenesse till we
find: such a desire took hold of David. Psalm. 132. 4. I will not give rest to
mine eyes, nor slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord,
or, until I find the Lord.

Thirdly, A care to be directed about the means which may facilitate the
finding or recovery of what we want, and thus earnestly desire. A seeking
spirit, is a careful spirit, after light and counsel.

Fourthly, A diligent and faithful endeavor, in or about the use those
means, to which counsel directs us. Through desire a man having separated
himself, seeks and intermedleth with all wisdom, Prove. 18. 1. That is, he
is very industrious in pursuing those advices, which wisdom shows him, or,
which are showed him, as the ways of wisdom. A lazy spirit is unfit to seek.

I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause. In the former
clause, the word for, God, is El, and in the latrer, Elohim, both names note
the power of God. El, notes power or strength to act and execute; Elohim, power
or authority to judge and determine. I would seek unto El, The strong God. I
would commit my cause to Elohim, the Mighty God: As if he had said: Thou art in
a weak and low condition, now therefore seek unto God, the strong God, the
mighty God, who is able to deliver thee. Thou want the help of such a friend
as he.

The Hebrew, word for word is thus rendered, Unto God would I put my words, or
turn my speech. We reach the meaning fully, rendering. Unto God I would commit
my cause, or put my case.

The term which we translate, cause, signifies any business or (...)
Significat ver^um vel negotium, res meas ei committe^e^.
cause, but most properly a word; Explicit prayer is the turning of our
thoughts into words, or the putting of our case to God, It is a speaking to, or
a pleading with the Lord. The Septuagint is clear in this sense, I would
deprecate the Lord, I would call upon the Lord, the governor of all things.

Both these significations of the word, are profitable for us, and congruous
with the scope of the text, I would turn my speech and (...). Sept.
prayer, or I would commit my cause unto God.

The committing of our cause to God, notes a resignation of our selves and of
our condition into the hands of God: It is as much as to say, Let God do what
he will, or determine what he pleases concerning me, I will not strive or
contend about, question or dispute his decision or judgment of my cause: I
will lay my self down at his feet, and tell him how she case stands with me;
then, let him do with me, what seems good in his eyes: This is the committing
of our cause, and condition unto God. And the Original word here used for God,
does very well suite and correspond with this sense; I will commit my cause
unto God, unto Elohim, the great and impartial Judge of Heaven and earth; the
God who loves Judgment, and the habitation of whose Throne is righteousness:
The God who knows how to discern exactly between cause and cause, person and
person, and will undoubtedly give a righteous sentence concerning every cause
and person, that comes before him. Unto this Elohim would I commit my cause,
and refer my self to his arbitration.

Observe first in the general; Eliphaz having reproved Job, turns himself to
counsel and exhortation; From which we may learn, That

As it is our duty to reprove a fault in our brother, so it is our duty to
advise and counsel him how to amend, or come out of that fault, for which we
reprove him.

It is not enough to espy an error, but we must labor to rectify it; or, to
tell another that he is out of the way, but we must endeavor to reduce him.
Many can espy faults and failings in others, who either know not how, or care
not to reform and help them out. Secondly observe, That.

It is a duty to exhort and excite our brethren to those duties, wherein we
find them flack or negligent.

Eliphaz conceived, that Job was much behind in the duty of prayer and
self-resignation unto God, and therefore he quickens him up to it. The Apostle
calls us to this Christian inspection (Heb. 3. 13.) Exhort one another daily,
lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; sin growing and
getting strength, hardens the heart; it is best to oppose it betimes, and
therefore he bids them do it at all times, exhort one another daily. Though
the Apostle Peter (2 Pet. 1. 12.) was persuaded of the Saints establishment in
the present truth, yet (says he) I will not cease to put you always in
remembrance of these things. It is a dangerous error (which some hold) that the
Saints in this life may out grow counsel and exhortation; as if there were no
need, to bid a godly man pray and seek unto God, no need to bid a godly man
repent, or humble himself, or believe, he cannot but do these things (say they)
these are connaturall to him. They are indeed to the new man, within him: But
let them withal remember, that the neglect of all these duties, is as
connaturall to the old man within him. While there are two men within us, we
had need every man to look, not only to one, but to one another. It may go ill
with the better part, the new man, if while he has an enemy within to oppose
him, he has not a friend without to help him. On this ground (besides the
command of Christ) the holiest man on earth, may be exhorted, to look to his
holiness: none are in more danger then they, who think they are past danger
And, as it is a certain argument, that a man was never good, if he desires not
to be better; so, it is a great argument, that a man was never good, who fears
not that he may be worse, They who are truly assured they cannot fall from
grace, are assured also that they may fall in grace, and fall into sin: The
foundation of God stands sure, but the footing of man does not and therefore,
Let him that stands, take heed least he fall: And let them who see their
brethren, heedlesly falling, lend them the right hand of exhortation to raise
them up again: and when they are careless of, or wandering from the Lord lead
them by the hand of counsel, into ways where he may be found. I would seek
unto God. Observe in the third place; That

We ought to manage our exhortations with meekness and tenderness,

This of Eliphaz is a mild and tender expression; and to make it more easy he
puts the exhortation (as was noted before) in the first, not in the second
person; he does not say, seeing afflictions come not from the ground, and that
man is borne unto trouble, therefore do thou seek unto God, and do thou
commit thy cause unto God; but seeing thy case is thus, truly brother, I advise
thee as I would advise mine own soul, Seek unto God. It moves strongly and
gains upon the affection of another, to tell him, we would do the things our
selves, which we desire he should, and we wish him, as we do our own souls.
Fourthly, observe, That

It is both our wisdom and our duty in all our afflictions to seek unto God.

I would (says Eliphaz) if I were in thy case, seek unto God. Unto whom should
we go, but unto God? He is our best friend, when it is best with us, and he is
our only friend, when it is ill with us: all other friends will be Physicians
of no value, as Job himself found them, therefore seek unto God. As the
Disciples said unto Christ, when Christ asked them, Will ye also go away?
Whether shall we go (say they) for thou have the words of eternal life? So
faith the soul in afflictions, To whom shall I go? Unto this creature or that
creature, unto this friend or that friend? No, I will seek unto God, That is
the wisest and shortest course: all other courses are about, if not in vain.
Other ways may be used as helps, but this must; pitch mainly upon God.

When we are directed to seek unto God in afflictions, it speaks four things.

First, To seek unto God about the cause of our afflictions, desire that God
would inform us, what his mind is in sending such an affliction, or what it is
he aims at, in sending it. Afflictions are the Lords messengers, and we should
never be quiet, till we know their errand. This is it which Job complained of
in the third Chapter, That his way was hid, which was expounded, that he knew
not the cause of his afflictions, the cause was hidden; and so was the issue,
he could neither tell how he came in nor how he could come out; If our way in
afflictions be hid, we must seek unto God for the opening of it.

Secondly, To seek unto God for strength and patience, to bear the affliction.
As the affliction comes from God, so does the strength, by which we stand under
it, or get victory over it

Thirdly, To seek unto God for the sanctifying of affliction to our profit,
that we may be partakers of his holiness. Afflictions are the good creatures
of God, and they (as all other creatures) are sanctif^ed to us, by the word and
prayer. We have as much reason to seek unto God for a blessing upon our daily
Rod, as upon our daily bread.

Fourthly, Seek unto God for cure and ease, for the removing or mitigating of
them. In their affliction they will seek me early, says the Lord, Hos. 5. 15.
But, for what will they seek? even, for medicine and healing. Come and let us
return unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten
and he will bind us up, Hos. 6. 1.

Observe from the other branch, And unto God would I commit my cause; That

It is a very great ease unto the soul in affliction, to commit our cause unto
God, and to put our affairs into his hand.

Man is not able to stand alone, under the weight of his afflictions. Both
sin and sorrow are burdens too heavy for us to bear: if you would have
ease, lay both upon Christ, it is no unbecomming boldness to do so, for, he
calls us to it, and bids us do it, Psalm. 55. 22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord,
and he shall sustain thee. Christ is willing to bear a part and put his
shoulder under these burdens, yea, it is his strength that bears the whole.
The committing of our cause to God, is at once our duty, our safety, and our
ease. Thus David did, Psalm. 142, 2. I powered my complaint before him, I showed
before him my trouble. David brought out his evils and set them (as it were)
one, by one, in the sight of God, and told him, thus it is with me. We may see
David acting this rule, to the life, when Absalom had fomented a most
unnatural rebellion against His: He hastens out of Jerusalem, All the Country
wept with a loud voice, and the Priests with the Arc of the Covenant of God
came with him also. In what posture was David's spirit, in the midst of these
commotions? His words to Zadok show (no doubt) the true picture of it. And the
King said to Zadok, carry back the Ark of God into the City, if I shall find
favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it
and his habitation: but if he say thus, I have no delight in thee, behold, here
am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him (2 Samuel 15. 25, 26.) As if he
had said, I am uncertain what God will do with me: but I am resolved to let
the Lord do with me, what he will, I am willing to be, what God will have me;
I lay my cause and leave my business at his footstool, if he will have me
dethroned and unking'd, I am content my honor should lie in the dust. If he
say, I shall never come again to Jerusalem, or see the Arc of his strength
and presence, I am content for ever to be banished Jerusalem, never to see the
Arc, (which to me is the most beautiful and desirable sight in the world) any
more. Here was self-resignation, and cause-committing to the height. And when
David had brought his heart to this, his heart was unburden'd, he (doubtless)
found the weight and stresse of the whole business lying upon God himself,
His cause was with God, and his cares were with God; And therefore, Though his
throne shaked, yet his heart was fixed. Nor do I find, that ever his heart was
more fixed, then in this stresse, while his Throne and Crown were tottering.
Hezekiah did the like with like success. In the day of that great and public
calamity, he went and spread the letter of Rabshakeh before God, he, as it were
desired God to read it, to observe the blasphemous contents, and see in what
condition he was. He that commits his cause to God, breathes a composed spirit,
when the greatest storms and distractions are upon his body or estates, upon
Church or State.

Only, take this caution, be sure the cause you commit to God, be a good cause.
The committing of a sinful cause to God, is a dishonor to, and a high strain
of presumption against God. We may commit a doubtful cause to God, desiring,
that he would try, and examine, whether it be good or bad. But we must not
commit a doubtful cause to God desiring him to protect it, or us in it whether
it be good or bad. And if (in this sense) we may not commit a doubtful cause
to God; What shall we think of those, who shall dare to commit an openly
unjust. and wicked cause to God? A wicked man's prayer is always sinful, but,
how abominable is it, when he prays to be prospered or directed in acting his
sin, or to be strengthened in suffering (impenitently) for his sin. There is no
gracious act, but a wicked man, at one time or other, will imitate. He will
pray, and repent, and forgive, and commit his cause to God, and when he dies,
commit his soul to God. There is no trusting to a mouth full of good words,
while the heart will not empty it self of wickedness. It is good always to
commit our cause and our souls to God, but a cause or a soul are not
therefore good, because committed unto God. The language of Israel is often
spoken by the men of Ashdod; And many who never had the least part of holiness
in them, can yet set themselves (when there is no remedy) to act a part in it.
The Apostle Peter gives us this rule, (1 Epist. 4. 19.) Let them that suffer
according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their souls to him, in
well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. Except we suffer according to the
will (or from the hand) of God, and also, do well in our sufferings, Christ
will not admit this Feofement, though we commit our selves to him, he will not
accept the trust. But he that suffers according to (or by) the will of God, and
does well in suffering, that is, has a good cause, and a good conscience, He
(I say) may commit all to God, (and in the mercy of the most High) he shall not
miscarry.

Lastly, Whereas Eliphaz says, I would seek unto God were I in thy case,
observe, That

It is a wise course in advising others, to show our selves ready to follow
the same advise.

It wins exceedingly upon others, to take our counsel, when it appears we are
ready to follow the same counsel, our selves. We ought to do nothing unto
others, but what we would have done unto our selves, and we should advise
nothing to others, but what we our selves would do; It puts strength into a
rule, when he that gives it, is ready to enliven it by his own practice. As a
Physician, for the encouragement of his patient to take a nauseous medicine,
will say to him, Sir you seem unwilling to drink it, but if I were sick and
distempered, as you are, I would drink it readily, and that you may see there
is no hurt in it, I will taste a little my self; His tasting sweetens it, and
the patient likes it well. Thus when either Minister or private friend offers
advise or counsel, and shall say, thus I would do, this I would follow; This
takes upon the heart: whereas it disparages prayer or any duty, to say to
another, Seek unto God, put your case unto him, fast and pray; When he that
gives the counsel neglects all these duties, and is careless of communion
with God.

Christ says of the Pharisees, that they bound heavy burdens upon the
shoulders of others. These burdens were counsels and directions, rules, and
canons; they would have men do thus and thus, in the manner of Gods worship,
or daily converse with men. But, They themselves would not touch them with one
of their fingers (Mat. 23. 4.) That is, they would not practice them in the
least degree. As to do evil with both hands, (Mic. 7. 3.) notes the highest
degree both of desire and endeavor, in doing evil: So not to touch that which
is good with a finger, notes a total neglect of doing good. A finger is the
least member, and a Touch is the least act, then these Pharisees not touching
with a finger, imports they did not act at all. It is good to act a rule
privately by way of experiment, before we put it upon others: but it is most
necessary to act it by way of example, when we have published it to, and
pressed it upon others. It was a speech of one of the Ancients, I never taught
my people any thing, but what I had first practiced and experimented my self.
Doctrine is sooner followed by the eye, then by the ear; He that (like the
Scribes and pharisees, Mat. 23. 3.) says and does not, shall find but few to
do what he says. No man ought to teach any thing, which he is not willing (as
he is called) to do and observe himself. It is very sinful to give counsel,
which we will not take. Our works ought to be the practice of our words, and as
practicable as our words. Woe unto those of whom it may be said, as Christ of
the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 3. Whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and
do, but do not ye after their works.

JOB. Chap. 5. Verse. 9. Which does great things and unsearchable; mavelous
things without number, etc.
THis context unto the 17 verse, contains the second argument, by which
Eliphaz strengthens his former Exhortation, To seek unto God and to commit
his cause unto him. The argument may be thus formed.

He is to be sought unto, both in duty, and in wisdom, and unto him our cause
is to be committed, who is of absolute, infinite power, wisdom and goodness.

But God is of absolute, infinite power, wisdom and goodness.

Therefore it is our duty and our wisdom to seek unto God, and unto God to
commit our cause.

That, God is infinite in power, wisdom and goodness, Eliphaz proves by an
enumeration or induction of diverse effects and works, which call for infinite
power, wisdom and goodness to produce and actuate them.

These effects are laid down, first in general, v. 9. Who does great things
and unsearchable; mavelous things without number.

Then, these works or effects are given in particulars, and the first
particular instance of Gods mighty power, is in natural things, or his
preservation of the world, at the 10 verse, Who gives rain upon the earth,
and sends waters upon the fields.

The second instance is given in civil things, or his administrations in the
world, at the 12, 13, 14. verses. And that we may consider two ways.

1. In destroying the counsels and plots of the wicked, in the 12, 13, and 14.
verses, He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot
perform their enterprise, etc.

2. In delivering those who are in trouble, at the 15. verse, He saves the
poor from the Sword, etc. These are works of Power.

Further the goodness of God shines forth in two things.

1. By the present intendment, or end aimed at, in these mighty works, ver. 11.
To set up on high those that be low, that those which mourn may be exalted to
safety

2. By the future benefit of these works, and that in two respects, verse 16.

1. The raising up of their spirits who are oppressed, So the poor has hope.

2. The confounding and shaming of their oppressors, expressed in their silence,
at the latter end of the 16 verse, And iniquity stops her mouth.

Thus you have a brief account, of the several points contained in this
argument, and the disposition of the whole context. For the better
understanding thereof, we will first consider what might be the aim or scope
of Eliphaz, in making so accurate and large a description of God, in his great
and mavelous works, and then survay these works in order as they are digested.

To the former, we may take notice of a fourfold aim, which Eliphaz might
have in describing these works of God.

First, plainly to assert the providence of God, in ordering or disposing all
actions and events here below: and so it is in prosecution of what he had said
in the 6 verse, Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble
spring out of the ground.

Or secondly, his intent might be, to humble Job, to bridle and take down his
spirit, which he conceived over-bold with, and too much heightened toward the
Almighty; A discovery whereof himself made in his extravagant speeches before
noted, in the third Chapter. The remembrance of God in his greatness is one of
the readiest means to humble man: And God himself took this way to humble
Job, in the latter end of this book, even, by a large discourse of his own
power, exemplified in many great acts and pieces of the creation.

Or thirdly, the intent of Eliphaz might be, to support and comfort Job in his
afflictions, by showing him a God, that had done such wonders, and therefore
able to work another wonder in delivering and raising him up again: A God,
who could provide medicines for all his diseases, heal all his breaches,
repair all his losses, supply all his wants, and resolve all his doubts. To
consider God in himself and in his works, who he is, and what he does, is a
mighty encouragement to seek unto God in our greatest extremities, in the
saddest and cloudiest day of our afflictions. Neither can we do any thing more
prevalent, for the support and relief of our own spirits in a time, when we
are lowest, than to spread before the eye of our own thoughts, the power,
greatness, and goodness of the high God, in his works and wonders.

A fourth intent in probability was to stop Jobs curiosity, in enquiring so
much into the reason of Gods dealing with him; which Eliphaz it seems observed
in the complaints of the third Chapter, where Job expostulates, Why is light
given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God has hedged in? Job was troubled,
because he could not see the bottom of Gods dealings with him, he could not
see through them, either what the cause was, why he came into those troubles,
or by what issues, and out-lets, he should escape those troubles. Now, to stop
Jobs curiosity in prying too far, or too boldy, into the secret workings of
God. Eliphaz tells him, That God does great things and unsearchable, no marvel
therefore, if his ways were hid; That he does mavelous things without
number, no marvel then, if he could not measure his dealings, by the line of
humane understanding, or sum up their account, by the best of his Arithmetic.

This in general, for the common tendency of his discourse, about those noble
acts of divine Providence in earthly things. I come now to open the words in
particular.

Which does great things and unsearchable, mavelous things without number.
Which does. He speaks in the present tense, he says not, which has done
great things, or, which will do great things; but which does great things. And
that notes not only a present act, but a continued act, or an everlasting act;
or, as if the workings of God were but one act past, and to come, all included
in the present, He does. As in his Nature and Essence, though God was from all
eternity, and shall be unto all eternity, yet his Name is, I am. So in his
works, though he has done great things, and shall do great things for ever,
yet all are comprehended in this, I do, or He does great things. Christ (Joh.
5. 17.) speaks this language, My Father works hitherto; works; All that
which God had done, and all that he should do, is to be looked upon as his
present act, My Father works hitherto..

Again, there is some what to be considered in the natural emphasis (...)
of the word it self, as well, as in the circumstantiall of the time. The word
which we translate, Does, signifies more than an Apt concinne, and exq^isi^e
facit. E^a^ vocatus, quia cum nasceretur. suit f^ctus. and perfectus pilis.
Esau sonat perfectum and ornatum, nam perfectior pueris, ie instructus pilis in
lucem venerit. Jun. in loc.
ordinary Doing; which does great things. The Critics observe, that in
strictness and propriety of the Hebrew, it signifies to do a thing
completely, perfectly and exactly, or (as we say) the setting of our last hand
to a work. Hence Esau (Genesis 25. 25.) had his name. When Jacob and Esau were
borne, Esau came forth first, and the text says, they called his name Esau,
and why? because he was borne, made up, in greater perfection, than an ordinary
child. Esau signifies, adorned and perfected, because he came into the world
hairy, or with hair upon him, which is both a natural ornament, and an
argument of natural strength activity and heat of spirit, etc. Hence they
called him, Esau: So then, the word [doth] imports doing, not by way of essay
or inchoation, but doing completely, or to carry a thing on, or up to an
extraordinary degree of perfection. I shall give one Scripture to illustrate
that significancy of the word, Isa. 43. 7. where the Lord by the Prophet,
showing the abundant increase of the Church, speaks thus, Bring my sons from
far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth; even every one that is called
by my name, for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him, yea I have
made him. Observe, here is a plain gradation in those three words, Created,
(...) Produxit ad esse (...) Constituit rem in forma su^ (...) Perfecit,
disposuit.
formed, made; I have created him, signifies the bringing of a thing from a
not-being, to a being. But, says God, I have not only given him a being, but,
I have formed him; which notes the limming proportioning and polishing of a
thing: And not only have I done so, but, in the third place, (which is the word
of the text) I have made him. There is more in this word, than in the former
two, and therefore we translate it with an emphasis, yea, I have made him; that
is, I have not only given him a being and a shape, but I have put upon him all
the perfections of nature, yea, and the perfections of grace, the impressions
of my special love and favor; I have lifted him up to the top of all; and so
some render the word, I have magnified or made him great; I have exalted and
set him upon the highest pinnacles of perfections, and mountains of holiness,
Hence observe,

When God begins a work, he compleats and carries it through. He does not only
Create, and give a being: Form, and give proportion, but He does, or he makes,
giving beauty and exactness to his works. Whether we consider the works of God
as natural, civil or spiritual; in this sense God does them. Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
Moses speaks in general, concerning all the works of God; He is a rock, and
his work is perfect: The works of Creation are admirable to the eye; the works
of Providence, how often do they fill the heart with admiration: That which he
spoke to Samuel concerning the house of Ely, is appliable both to his works of
Mercy and of judgment; When I begin, I will also make an end, 1 Samuel 3. 12.
that is, I will do it fully, there is nothing shall take me off, or stay me in
the midway; I will not work to halves, I will also make an end. And so it is
in spirituals, when once God has begun, he carries on his work of grace, when
once he has laid the foundation stone of mercy, he never leaves, until he
has set up the the top stone, the highest stone of glory. Hence the Apostles
(Heb. 12.) entitles Christ, The author and finisher of our faith; that is, the
beginner and ender, Alpha and Omega, first and last about our faith. It shall
never be said of any work of God (as Luke 14.) That, he began to build, but
could not finish it.

And as he finishes, so he beautifies: all his works are full of order and
comeliness: He does his work exquisitely (or as we say) artificially; yea,
those works that we look upon, as full of confusion, are full of order; and
those works, in which we see no form, or nothing but deformity, even these will
one day appear (now they are) admirable in beauty and comeliness. That which
the Apostle speaks in his exhortation to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 15. bidding him do
the work of an Evangelist, bidding him show himself a workman, that needs
not to be ashamed, is most true concerning the great God of Heaven and earth,
He shows himself a workman, or a worker that needs not to be ashamed: When
he works, he does the work of a God; He works like himself: Man cannot so much
as be suspected to have done such things: The Name, that is, the wisdom, power
and goodness of God, is written upon them in so fair and clear a letter, that
it must be said, by way of assertion, This has God wrought: And by way of
admiration, what has God wrought? Numb. 23. 23. A man (sc. a mere natural man
beholding these things) shall say, verily he is a God that judges the earth,
Psalm. 58. 11. Man cannot judge, or do like this. The Lord needs not engrave or
subscribe his Name to his works; His words, like so many Capital letters,
spell, and like so many Heralds, proclaim his Name.

Which does great things. To pass from the act or manner of doing, we will
consider the object; He does great things. Some men with a great deal of pains
do nothing; and others with a great deal of art, do a thing of nothing, a
trifle, a toy, a mere fancy; at least some mean or inferior work takes up
their time, skill, and study: But when God goes to work, we may expect a noble
work, He does great things. The works of GOD, answer the style or Attributes of
God. He is a great God, and His are great works. The works of God speak a God.
And here are four things spoken in this one verse, of the works of God, which
speak aloud, This is the finger of God: I will first bundle them together, and
then, both take and weigh them asunder.

He does First, Great things. Secondly, Unsearchable. Thirdly, Wonderful.
Fourthly, Innumerable, or without number.

No works of man or Angel, are capable of such a fourfold stamp as this: no,
nor any one work of all the creatures put together, could ever be stamped with
any one of these characters, in any comparison, with the works of God. Some, in
a sense, have done great things but none have done things unsearchable: Man may
fathom the works of man, his closest ways are not past finding out. As there
was never any thing made so strong by the strength of man, but there was some
other strength in man, that could match, yea overthrow it; so there was never
any thing so wisely, so artificially or mysteriously contrived, by the skill,
knowledge and deepest understanding of a man, but that the skill knowledge and
understanding of another man, has, or might have ridled and searched it out.
The works of most men, are wrought above ground, and their intentions flote and
swim upon the face of their actions: And although some, as the Prophet
speaks (Isa. 29.) work deep to hide their counsels (as they hope, not only
from men but) from God, yet God gives other men a light, to discover the very
lowest hell of those counsels, even, all the depths of Satan, The
master-Engineere of those mines and subterranean contrivances. Further, Though
some men do that, which makes other men (especialy fools, or men weak in
knowledge) wonder, yet no (Thaumaturgas, or) wonder-worker ever did that, which
makes all men wonder. Or, if it should be granted, that any have done things
great, unsearchable, wonderful, yet I am sure, none have done these things
without number; one great, unsearchable, wonderful work, is task enough for
one man's life: And a little skill in numbers will serve the turn, to cast up,
and give us the total sum and number, of all the works of all men, which
deservedly bear (as man's may) the title and superscription of great,
unsearchable, wonderful.

More distinctly. First, He does great things. There is a greatness upon every
thing God does: The great God leaves (as it were) the print of his own
greatness, even upon those things which we accont little; little works of
nature, have a greatness in them, considered as done by God, and little works
of providence, have a greatness in them, considered as done by God; If the
thing which God does, be not great in it self, yet it is great, because he
does it. As there is no sin of man little in it self (though comparatively it
be (because committed against a great God: So there is no work of God little
(though comparitively it be (because acted by the great God. Further, if God
does a thing, which in it self considered, or considered according to the line
and rule of the creature, is unjust; yet because God does it, or commands it to
be done, his very doing or commanding stamps justice upon it; as is clear in
the case of Abraham's call to sacrifice his son, and the Israelites carrying
away the jewels of the Egyptians. If then the act of God (whose will is the
supreme law) makes that lawful, which according to the common rule, is
unlawful; how much more does the act of God make that great, which in ordinary
proportion is accounted small.

Again, When it is said, God does great things, we must not understand it, as,
if God dealt not about little things, or as if he let the small matters of the
world pass, and did not meddle with them: Great in this place, is not
exclusive of Little, for, he does not only great, but small, even the smallest
things. The Heathens said, their Jupiter had no leisure to be present at the
doing of small Non vacat exignis rebus adesse Jovi.
things, or it did not become him to attend them. God attends the doing of
small things, and it is his honor to do so: the falling of a Sparrow to the
ground, is one of the smallest things that is, yet that is not without the
providence of God; the hairs of our head are small things, yet as not too
many, so not too small for the great God to take notice of; Christ assures us
this, The very hairs of your head are all numbered, Mat. 10. 29, 30. We ought
highly to adore and reverence the power and inspection of God, about the
lowest, the meanest things and actions. Is it not with the great God, as with
great men, or, as it was with that great man Moses, who had such a burden of
business in the government of that people upon his shoulders, that he could
not bear it; therefore his Father in law advises him, to call in the aid of
others and divide the work: But how? The great matters, the weighty and knotty
controversies must be brought to Moses; but the petty differences and lesser
causes, are transmitted and handed over to inferior judges; And it shall be,
that every great matter, they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter
they shall judge, Exodus 18. 22. But God, the great Judge of Heaven and earth,
has not only the great and weighty, but small matters brought unto him; the
least motions of the creature, are heard and resolved, disposed and guided by
his wisdom and power.

You will say, What is this greatness, and what are these great things? I
shall hint an answer to both, for the clearing of the words.

There is a twofold greatness upon the works of God. There is (so we may
distinguish) First, the greatness of quantity; Secondly, the greatness of
quality or virtue: That work of God which is greatest in the bulk or quantity
of it is the work of Creation; How spacious, huge and mighty a fabrique is
Heaven and earth, with all things compacted and comprehended in their
circumference! And in this work, so vast for quantity, what admirable qualities
are every where intermixed! Matter and form, power and order, quantity and
quality, are so equally balanced, that no eye can discern, or judgment of
man determine, which weighes most in this mighty work.

Yet among these works of God, some are called great in regard of quality,
rather then of quantity. As it is said (Genesis 1. 16.) That God made two great
lights, the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the
night. (Sun and Moon) these are great lights, not that there are no lights
great but these, or that both these are greater, then all other heavenly
lights; for many Stars are greater then the Moon, as the doctrine and
observation of Astronomers assures us; but the lesser of these is great in
regard of light and influence, excellency and usefulness to the world.

And as to these works of creation, so the works of providence, are great
works: When God destroys great enemies, the greatness of his work is
proclaimed. When great Babylon, or Babylon the great, shall be destroyed, the
Saints song of triumph shall be, Great and mavelous are thy works Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints (Rev. 15. 3.) Great
and mavelous works, why, Because thou have destroyed great Babylon, and have
executed great judgment, and powered out great wrath. So, great works of mercy
and deliverance to his people, are cried up with admiration, And has given us
such a deliverance as this, says Ezra, Chap. 9. 13. when the Jews returned
from their captivity out of Babylon; That mercy was a kind of miracle, that
deliverance a wonder, and therefore he mentions it in terms of admiration.
Such deliverance as this! How great: So great, that he had neither words to
express, nor example to parallel it, but lets it stand nakedly by it self, in
its native glory; Such deliverance as this!

The Spiritual works of God, are yet far greater; the work of redemption, is
called a great salvation, the conversion and justification of a sinner, the
pardon of our sins, and the purifying of our nature, are works as high, above
creation and providence, as the Heavens are in comparison of the earth. Take
two or three Corolaries or Deductions from hence: As first;

It is the property of God to do great things: And because it is his property,
he can as easily do great things as small things.

Among men, Great spirits count nothing great; A great spirit swallows and
overcomes all difficulties: Much more is it so with the great God, who is a
Spirit, all Spirit, and the father of spirits; To the great God there is
nothing great: He can as easily do the greatest as the least: 1 Samuel: 14. 6. 2 Chronicles. 14. There Animo mag^^ nihil magnum.
is no restraint to the Lord, to save with few or by many, or it is nothing
with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power; It is
not so much, as the dust of the balance with God, to turn the scale of
victory in battle, whether there be more or less: Seeing all Nations before
him, are but as the dust of the balance, as nothing, yea less then nothing.
So that whether you put him upon any great work or small work, you put the Lord
to no more stresse, to no more pains in the one, then in the other, for he
does great things; and to do them, is his property, not his study, his nature,
not his labor. He needs not make provisions or preparations, for what he would
have done, the same act by which he wills the doing of a thing, does it, if he
wills. What great things has the Lord done in our days. We may say as the
Virgin (Luke 1. 49.) He that is Mighty, has done to us great things, and Holy
is his Name; and as they, Acts 2. 11. We have both heard and (...), Magnalia
Dei.
seen the great things of God done amongst us; and I believe greater things are
yet to be done. It was a great work at the beginning of time, to make Heaven
and earth, and will it not be a great work, to shake Heaven and earth? That God
has said he will do, before the end of time. Yet once it is a little while,
and I will shake the Heavens and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land, Hag.
2. 6. The words following, seem to interpret this earthquake, and Heaven-quake,
I will shake all Nations. Again, It was a great work, to make the old Heaven
and earth? and will it not be a great work, to make a new Heaven and a new
earth? That is the business, which God is about in these letter days, as he
promised, Isa. 65. 17. Behold I create a new heaven and a new earth; what is
that? Jerusalem a praise, and her people a joy. When God reformeth the face of
his Church, and settles the affairs of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, he makes
new Heavens and a new Earth.

And if it be the property of God to do great things, then, it is a duty in
us, to expect great things. We ought to look for such things, as come up to,
and answer the power and greatness of God; we dishonor, and as it were, humble
God, when we look only for low and mean things; Great expectations from God,
honor the greatness of God. As the Lord expects to receive the greatest
services from us, because he is a great King, Mal. 1. 14. So we ought to
expect, that we shall receive the greatest mercies from the Lord, because he is
a great King; It dishonours God as much and more, when we believe little, as
when we do little. A great King thinks himself dishonored, if you ask him a
petty suite; he looks more what becomes him to give, or do in bounty, then the
petitioner to ask in necessity. The Great Alexander, could tell his suitor
(whom he had more astonished, then relieved with his favor) That though the
thing might be too great for him to receive, yet it was not too great for
Alexander to give. If dust and ashes can speak and think at this rate, O how
large is the heart of God! Then, it is not only our privilege, but our duty
to ask and believe great things; we ought to have a great faith, because God
does great things; Is it becoming, to have a great God, and a little faith? To
have a God that does great things, and we to be a people (his people) that
cannot believe great things? nay, To have a God who can easily do great
things, and we a people, that can hardly believe small things? How unbecoming!
if some small thing be to be done, then usually faith is upon the wing, but if
it be a great thing, then faith is clogged, her wings are clipped, and we at a
stand; why should it be said unto us, as, Christ said unto his Disciples, O ye
of little faith. It may be as dangerous to us, if not as sinful, not to
believe the day of great things, as to despise the ^ay of small things. Why
should not our faith in a holy scorn, baffle the greatest difficulties, in
that language of the Prophet (Zech. 4. 7.) Who art thou O great Mountain?
before Zerubbabell thou shall become a plain.

There is another useful consequence from this truth. He that does great
works, ought to have great praises. As, we ought to have great faith, that he
will do great things, so, he ought to have great acknowledgments, when he has
done great things. Shall God do great things for us, and shall we give him
some poor, lean, starven sacrifices of praise? It is very observable, that, as
soon as the Prophet had described the Lord in his greatness (Isa. 40. 15.) he
adds in the very next verse, And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the
beasts thereof, sufficient for a burnt Offering. That is, no services are great
enough, for this great God. Lebanon abounded in spices for Incense and perfume;
it abounded with cattle for Sacrifice and burnt offerings; To say that Lebanon
had not spice enough to burn for incense, nor beasts enough to burn for
Sacrifice, shows the Lord far exalted in greatness, above all the praises and
holy services of his people.

Lastly, seeing God does great works for us, let us show great zeal for, great
love unto the Lord. We should aim at the doing of great things for God, seeing
God indeed does great things for us. So much of the first Attribute of the
works of God. Who does great things.

And unsearchable.] The Hebrew is, and no search. The word (...)
imports the search of those things which are most abstruce and secret. As the
heart, which the Lord only can search, Jer. 17. 15. The heart lies too low,
not only for the eye, but for the understanding of man. Hence it is used,
Psalm. 95. 4. to note the Foundations, or deep places of the earth, because they
cannot be known, but by deep searchings, or rather, because they are beyond the
deepest Penetralia terrae, ut Aben Ezra explicat, quae sci^i nequeunt, nisi
exquisita per scrutatione, vel potius quod homini minime sunt perscutabilia,
Deo autu^ in prepatulo. Buxtorf.
search of man. And the same phrase we find, Psalm. 145. 3. Great is the Lord
and greatly to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable; or according to
the letter, of his greatness no search; as when the Psalmist speaks of the
greatness of God, in his nature and essence, presently he adds, and of his
greatness there is no search; so here, when Eliphaz speaks of the greatness
of God, in his works, the next word is, they are unsearchable. As God in
himself is great, and of his greatness there is no search; so many of the
works of God are so great, that of their greatness there is no search, that is,
you cannot find out their greatness by any search. God is in working (and so
are men, the hand cannot act beyond the head) as he is in understanding. There
is no searching of his understanding (Isa. 40. 28.) Therefore there is none of
his working.

This unsearchablenesse of the works of God, may be considered two ways.

1. As that, which cannot be found by inquiry. 2. As that, which ought not to
be found or enquired.
There are some works of God, which are not to be searched into, Arcana imperij.
they are to be adored by believing, not to be pryed into by searching; and in
that sense they are called unsearchable (Romans 11. 33.) O the depth of the
riches, both of the wisdom of and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his
judgments! Many of his judgments, that is, his works of judgment, are so
unsearchable, that it is not industry or duty, but presumption, to search into
them. As those unspeakable words, which Paul heard in the third heavens, were
such as (2 Cor. 12. 4.) is not lawful for a man to utter; so unsearchable
judgments may be interpreted such, as is not lawful for a man to search.
Great Princes will not have all their actions scanned, at least, not by all,
They keep state in their works. If all a man's actions be level to the lowest,
his person will be so too. The reason why the works of Antichrist were to be so
mysterious and miraculous, is, because he was to be adored and Godded, to be
exalted above all (in man) that is called God, or that is worshipped, 2 These.
2. 4. They who aspire to divine honor, have, or at least pretend to have many
secrets. Because secret things belong unto God, things revealed unto man (Deuteronomy.
29. 29.) And as the Angel at once answers and reproves Manoah (Judge. 13. 18.)
Why ask thou after my name, seeing it is secret, or wonderful? As if he had
said, thou must not enquire after my name, for it is a secret. Such prying into
the works of God, is as dangerous, as prying into the Ark of God (1 Samuel 6.
19.) It were more profitable for us, and more honorable to God, if we did
search our own secret ways more, and Gods less.

There are other works of God, which cannot be searched, yet we may and ought
to search them. It is our duty to study them, though we cannot find them. We
may search and find many of the works of God, with our senses; there are
others which we cannot find, though we search for them, with our reason and
understanding. As some parts of the word of God (2 Pet. 3. 16.) So some part of
his works are so hard to be understood, that unstable men wrest them to their
own destruction. The mind of God is legible in very many of his works, and we
may read them without a Comment or Interpreter. Other of his works are
mysterious and aenigmaticall, very riddles, insomuch, that if an ordinary man
looking on them, should be questioned, Understand thou what thou see; he
must answer, as the Eunuch did Phillip, How can I except some man teach me. And
these works are unsearchable, two ways.

First, in regard of the manner of doing; we cannot find out the ways and
contrivances of Gods work. His ways are in the deep, and his footsteps are
not known, says the Psalmist, that is, the way which God goes to the
accomplishing of his ends, are oftentimes like steps upon the water, which
leave no impression or track behind them.

Secondly, his works are unsearchable in their causes or ends; what it is which
God aims at, or intends, what moves or provokes him to such a course, is
usually a secret. He does such things, as no man can give an account of, or
render a reason, why. Peter knew not how to construe or expound that work of
Christ, John 13. when he took a Towell with a basin of water, to wash his feet.
Therefore Christ tells him, What I do thou know not (that is, thou know
not, what moves me to do this, for his eye taught him what Christ did) but
thou shall know hereafter. In due time this shall be interpreted to thee, and
thou shall know the reason, why I did this.

But it is said (and that may be an objection against both text and Exposition)
Psalm. 111. 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all those, that
have pleasure therein. To seek out, notes a full discovery. And in Psalm. 106. 7.
Failing in this, is charged upon the fathers, and confessed by the children, as
a fault, Our fathers understood not thy wonders, that is, the great things
which God did for them in Egypt. How then is it said here, The works of the
Lord are great and unsearchable.

To clear this, First, I say there are some great works of God, which are easy
and plain; And it is our duty to be acquainted with, and learned in these
works of God, as well as in the word of God.

Secondly, those works whose text is hard, we must search and labor to expound
them, so, as to further duty, but not to feed our curiosity; We may search them
with submission to the mind of God, not for satisfaction, only, to our own
minds. We may search with desire to honor God, but not to humor our selves.
We may search them to make us more holy, though not barely to make us, more
knowing. Take two Corolaries from this.

First, if the works of God are unsearchable, then how unsearchable are the
counsels of God; the deep and secret counsels of God! The works of God are the
cousells of God made visible. Every work of God is the bringing of some
counsel of God to light. Now if we are not able to find out his counsels when
they are made visible in his works; how shall we find out his counsels, when
they lie hidden in his breast?

Secondly, If the works of God are unsearchable, then, we are to submit unto
the dispensations of God, whatsoever they are, though we are not able according
to reason, to give an account of them; though we cannot search out either the
manner how, or the cause for which they were done, yet we must reverence them;
And what we cannot believe by knowing, we must know by believing. It is our
duty, not only to wink and believe, shut our eyes and believe, or believe
when we cannot see; but, we must often believe, where knowledge is shut out,
believe when we cannot understand. Abraham by faith followed the call of God,
not knowing whether he went, Heb. 11. 8. It is dangerous to follow men
blindfold (how seeing soever those men are) but it is safe, and our duty to
follow God blindfold, how seeing soever we think our selves to be. We must not
be displeased (as Joseph was at Jacob his Father, Genesis 48. 17.) when we see God
laying his right hand upon Ephraim, and his left upon Manasses, doing things
cross to our thoughts; much less may we take upon us to direct the hand of
God, as Joseph would Jacobs, where we please. The Lord knows (as Jacob answered
Joseph) what he does, and it becomes us to acquiesce in what he does, though we
know it not. Some Romish Parasites, have said of the Pope, That if he should
carry thousands to hell along with him, there is no man must say to him, Sir,
why do you so? They adore him so in the unsearchablenesse of his ways and
doings, that it is enough for them, if he does them.

This abominable flattery of that Man of Sin, is a sober truth concerning the
holy God; Though God east thousands of souls into hell, no man may say to him,
what do thou? And though God turn Kingdoms upside down, though he send
great afflictions upon his own people, and make them a reproach unto the
Heathen, though he give them up unto the power of the adversary and make all
their enemies to rejoice, yet no man may say unto God, why do you thus; His
works are unsearchable. It is beyond the line of a creature, to put any
question, A why or A wherefore, about the work of the Greatour. Shall the thing
formed say unto him that forms it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the
Potter power over his clay?

Some think they could do things better then God has done, or at least that
God might have done better; if they had the power in their hands, things should
not go thus and thus; What an insufferable indignity is this, to the wisdom
and power of God, that He whose works are unsearchable should be made
accountable for his works? That of Augustine, when he was in a deep meditation
about the nature of God, may well be applied to the works of God, who walking
by the sea side in deep thoughts of God, either heard this voice, or was
filled with this thought, That he might as soon empty the sea with, or
comprehend the Ocean in one of those little cockle-shels, which lay on the
shore, as with the narrow vessel of his Spirit, comprehend the infinite
greatness of the God of Spirits.

Mavelous things.] Inscrutabile and mirabile differunt; inscrutabile est,
qued la^et and perquiri non potest: Mi^abile est, quod ipsum q^idem apparet sed
causa ejus perquiri non potest. Aquin. in loc.
Unsearchable things and mavelous, differ thus; Those things are
unsearchable, which lie hid, and cannot be found: that is a marvel whose cause
cannot be found, though (...) from (...)
it self be not hid. This is the third adjunct or attribute of the works of
God. The word is derived from a root, which signifies, Separated, Disjoined or
Divided. And mavelous things are expressed by that word, because marvels or
wonders are separated or Separatus, disjunctus. Hinc significat, mirab^lia quia
talia sunt a nobis separata, and captum su erant, ita ut ratione quis ass qui,
aut re praestare ^equeat.
removed from us three degrees at least. They are separated

First, from our knowledge or reason.

Secondly from our sense: not that marvels are invisible, marvels and miracles,
are wrought to be seen, and the use of them lies in this, from the sense to
confirm faith, or to convince of unbelief. Which (by the way) quite
overthrowes the Popish refuge of a miracle, in their supposed
transubstantiation of the bread at the Eucharist, who tell us of a miracle, but
can show us none. But though in all miracles and marvails the thing wrought is
plain to the senses, yet both the power and manner of doing it, are removed
from the senses, The marvel wrought is seen, but the working of the marvel
is not seen.

Thirdly, Marvels are separated or removed from our imitation; we cannot do
such things. The Lord stands alone working wonders. They are separated part and
portion for God himself. The Egyptian Sorcerers seemed to do by their
devilish enchantments, what Moses did by the command and power of God: But at
the best they did but seem to do like Moses, and presently they could not so
much as seem, Exodus 8. 18. And the Magicians did so, (that is, they attempted
to do so) but they could not. They that work by the devils art or power,
cannot work long, They will quickly be at A Could not. Both their religions
and their miraculous works are at best but in appearance, at last they will
not so much as appear. In these three respects marvels are rightly called,
separate.

Further, the word also signifies sometimes, A hard or a difficult thing,
because those things that are very hard and difficult have somewhat of wonder
in them, and cause us to wonder at them, Deuteronomy. 17. 8. If a matter come which is
too hard, the word is, which is too mavelous and wonderful for thee, etc.
And Genesis 18. 14. Is any thing too hard for me (says God) the word is, Is any
thing wonderful to me? Nothing is wonderful to us, but that which is too hard
for us. There is nothing wonderful to God, who does all wonders, and is
himself all Wonder. It has been said concerning those lovers of and
searchers after secret wisdom, called Philosophers, that it does not become a
Philosopher to wonder: For admiration is usually the daughter of ignorance; we
marvel at most things, because we know the causes of few things. It was
therefore a shame for a Philosopher to wonder, because it betrayed his
ignorance; who would be thought studied in, yea a master of all causes, and
able to give a reason of all things in nature. But it is most certain, the
great God never marvelleth at any thing; For is any thing too hard for me,
says the Lord. Wonders are things too hard for us, and the same word signifies
a wonder and a thing, too hard.

There are three words of near alliancec in the Hebrew, Signs, (...)
Miracles and Mervails. And they may be distinguished thus, A Sign is the
representation of a thing present, or before us: A Miracle or Portentum (as
contra-distinct from the former) shows forth somewhat future, or, that is to
come. A Mervaile, as differing from both, is any act of providence, secret or
separate from us in the manner of doing or producing it, a thing to us
unsearchable; so (Exodus 33. 16.) Wherein shall it be known, that I and thy
people have found grace in thy sight (says Moses) Is it not in that thou go
with us? So shall we be separated, I and thy people; So we translate it, or
made wonderful; that is, if thou go along with us, thou will do such
marvails for us, as will make a difference between us, and all the people in
the world: we shall be a people marvell'd at, all the world over, or a
spectacle to the world, Angels and Men. The presence of God with a people, is
their difference, or will make them differ, from all people with whom God is
not (under the Notion of Favor and Protection) present.

Again, Marvels are taken sometimes for Miracles, which are merely and purely
supernatural. For in ordinary acceptance of the word, a Marvel is only the
heightning and sublimating of nature, or acting in the highest Sphere of
nature; but a Miracle is a crossing or a contradicting of nature. A work
altogether above, yea against Nature. Now we are not to take marvels here in
that strict sense, for miracles; for the great works of God are called marvels
or wonders which yet are but either the ordinary constitutions of Nature, or
the extraordinary motions of nature, as Psalm. 136. 4. O give thanks to the
Lord, to him, who alone does great wonders: What are these? In the 5, 6, and 7.
verses, instances are given in natural things, as making the heavens and
stretching out the earth above the waters. The making of those great lights the
Sun and Moon Mirabilior est grani in terra multipl^catio, quam illa quinque
Panum. August. T^act. 24 in Joh in. Quicquid mirabile fit in mundo, profecto
minus est, quam totus hic mundus. Qua ^vis ilaque miracula visibiliu^ natura^um
videndi assiduitate vile scunt, tamen cum ea sapienter intuemur,
inusitatissimis ra^^ssimisque majora sunt. August. l. 5. de Civ Dei, cap 12.
. One of the Ancients discoursing upon that miracle in the Gospel, The
multiplying the loaves, observes, that in natural things there are very great
wonders, though we lightly pass them by; They were astonished to see the
loaves multiplying, while they were eating: To see bread grow upon the Table or
between their Teeth, made all wonder: but there is as great a miracle wrought
every year, and no man takes notice of it: That is, when Corn cast into the
ground, multiplies thirty, sixty, a hundredfold, It is (says he) a greater
miracle for corn to multiply in the earth, then for loaves to multiply on the
Table. And he makes a like Conclusion in his Book of the City of God,
Whatsoever is wonderful in the world, is not so great a wonder, as the world;
Yet men rarely wonder at the making of the world, the Earth, the Heavens, the
Sea, the Air, every creature in them exceed in wonders* the things we wonder
at. Ordinary works of Nature are mavelous. First, because they proceed from a
divine power. 2. Because man is posed to give a reason of most of them, Can
thou tell how the bones grow in her that is with child? says the Preacher. The
bringing of an Infant alive from the Womb is a wonder, as well as the raising
of a man from the dead: And the budding of a Tree, as well as the budding of
Aarons Rod Per multa sunt quae admirari nonsolemus propterea quod vulgo
quotidieque fiunt. Renova and in solita commovetur animus.
. The usualnesse of the one, and the rareness of the other is, though not the
only, yet the greatest difference. And as the ordinary works of Creation, in
making, so of Providence, in governing the world, are full of wonders, though
they pass unobserved, Such Eliphaz takes notice of, in the words following,
The disappointing of crafty oppressors and the deliverance of the poor. When
God shall destroy Babylon, the Song prepared is, Great and wonderful are thy
works; and (Exodus 15. 11.) from whence that is taken, Who is like unto thee, O
God! Who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders! The wonder was, a deliverance, the wonderful deliverance of his
people from Egypt, and through the red Sea. Works of judgment are often called
works of wonder (Deuteronomy 28. 59.) I will make thy plagues wonderful; and Isa. 28.
21. The Lord shall rise up as in Meunt Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the
valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work, and bring to
pass his act, bis strange act: What act was this? An act of judgment upon
his, and his peoples enemies, as is clear 2 Sa. 5. 20. and Josh. 10. 12. where
we may read, what God did in Mount Perazim, and in the valley of Gibeon;
strange works indeed. And these works of God are called mavelous, not only,
when God is in them alone, and acts without the intervention of the creature,
but when he act* with the creature, above the strength of a creature, so that
little of the creature appears in the act: this also is a marvel. What God
does more by a man, then man can do, whether in strength or wisdom,
ordinarily assisted, so much of a wonder shows it self, in what man does. And
therefore no man is ordinarily to attempt any thing beyond his strength, for
that is to tempt God, and call him to work a miracle, at least a wonder for
us, Lord (says David, Psalm. 131. 1.) Mine heart is not Non mae ex^uli ad ea,
quae maeas vires aut ingenium su^eraret. Eleganter Th^odoretus, Meipsum
me^^eba^, and quae me excedunt, non aggrossus sum.
haughty, nor mine eyes lofty; neither do I exercise my self in great
matters, or in things too high for me; The word is, in things too wonderful
for me; that is, I do not ordinarily put my self upon things which are
extraordinary, or beyond my strength and parts. I measure-my undertakings and
my abilities together, and would keep them even. I do not put God upon doing
wonders every day; therefore I set my self to those things, which are
according to the line of man. If God call us to it, we may expect a miracle,
but we must not call God to work miracles for us, or with us. I do not
exercise my self in matters too high for me, Miracles or marvels are not every
days exercise. We ought rather to be above our work, or any of our designs,
then below them: but we must be sure they are not above us. It is the safest
and holiest way for man, in all his actions to be upon a level. We cannot but
displease God and hurt our selves by clambering: It is but sometimes that the
Lord will work wonders to releeve our necessities and help our faith, but he
will never (unless in wrath) work wonders to please our humors, or comply with
our ambition. Hence observe. First,

When we see marvels done; we must acknowledgc the hand of God. Marvels are
proper unto God, Psalm. 75. 1. In that thy Name is near, thy wondrous works
declare: Wondrous works are an argument that God is near: When wonders are
among us, we may know, who is among us, and if so, then, this is a time wherein
God is seen among us. We may well apply that of the Psalmist to our selves,
Mavelous things has the Lord done in our sight, in Ireland and in the Fields
of England, Psalm. 78. 12. Mervails are rare things, things seldom done, or
seen.

We have things amongst us, which were never done or seen before in our Nation.

A Parliament, which cannot be legally dissolved but by its own Vote.

An Assembly, where neither Diocesan Bishops nor Deane (as such) can Vote.

The three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, entered into a solemn
Covenant, approved by the Assemblies, and authorized by the Parliaments of two
Kingdoms. May we not conclude of these in the language of the Prophet, Who
has heard such a thing? who has seen such things? Isay. 66. 8 Surely we may
say as Moses to Israel (Deuteronomy. 4. 34.) Has God assayed to go and take him a
Nation, from the midst of another Nation by temptation, by signs and by
wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by
great terrors, according to all that the Lord our God does for us in England,
before our eyes. To take a Nation out of the midst of a Nation, is our case. If
England finding (as now it does) her children struggling in her womb, should
go enquire of the Lord as Rebecca did; (Genesis 25. 22.) why is it thus? The Lord
may answer, as he did to her, Two Nations are in thy womb, and two manner of
people shall be separated frem thee. A Nation fearing God, and a Nation
blaspheming God, a Nation seeking Reformation, and a Nation opposing
Reformation.

Secondly, If God work mervailes and we believe him not, has he not reason to
marvel at our unbelief; Christ having wrought miracles to gain the belief
of his country men, marvailed at their unbelief, Mark. 6. 2, 6. Unbelief is a
great sin at all times, but in a time when mervailes are wrought for the cure
and healing of it; unbeleefe is a mavelous sin. Will not Christ, think you,
marvel at our unbeleefe, if we believe not after all these marvels? Ye will
not believe (says Christ, and he rebukes the Jews for it, Joh. 4.) except you
see signs and wonders: Surely if they were so charged, because they would not
believe, except they saw signs and wonders, how shall they be charged, who
will not believe, when they see signs and wonders, especially when God seems
to work a wonder a purpose, that they might believe? God loves and prizes the
faith of man so highly, that sometimes he bids a miracle for it, rather then
go without it. And surely now, as God has wrought marvels, to abate the
mavelous pride of the Adversary, so, to overcome the mavelous unbeleef of
his own people: As has been observed concerning the Lords swearing, As I live
I desire not the death of a sinner, etc. O happy man, for whose sake the Lord
swears; but O most unhappy, who do not believe the Lord, when he swears.
So, we may say of the Lords-wonder-workings: O happy people for whom the Lord
works wonders; but O most unhappy people, who believe not the Lord, when he
works wonders.

Thirdly, Seeing God works extraordinary things for us, let not us stay in
ordinary duties. Let our works have somewhat of a marvel in them too? Let our
repentance, and the change of our lives be marvelous; let our zeal and courage
for Christ be marvelous; like that of the Apostles, who carried themseves with
such heroical magnanimity, in the work of the Gospel; that when the Highpriest
and Council (who had convented and threatened them) saw their boldness, They
marvelled, says the text, Acts 4. 13. Let our love and thankfulness be
mavelous, let us pray marvellously, and believe marvellously; marvels don by
God, should ever work faith in man: And faith in man, does sometime work
marvelling in God. Christ speaks with a kind of admiration to the woman of
Canaan, O woman great is thy faith, Mat. 15. 28. O that his people in this
Nation, would set Him, thus a wondering once more, O England great is the faith
in me! O England great is thy love to me! O England, great is thy zeal for me!
O England, great is thy repentance, exceeding glorious thy Reformation.

I will close this point with this one word. God has begun to do so many
marvels amongst us, that I verily believe, the work he is about, will end in a
marvel too: and we in the close shall be made either a wonder of mercy, or a
wonder of judgment to all the Nation's round about.

The fourth Attribute of the works of God, raises the glory of them all. They
are innumerable.

He does mavelous things without number. The Hebrew word for word is; Until
there be no number: Without number may be taken three ways.

First, Strictly and absolutely, for that which is without number; and thus
there is no number innumerable: Things absolutely without number would be
infinite; but there cannot be two Infinits: As God is so One, and without
number, that he is Infinite; so whatsoever could be so many, that it were
without number, would be infinite too.

Secondly, Without number, is that which man cannot reckon or cast up the sum
of it. (Rev. 7. 9.) John speaks of a great multitude, which no man could
number: As a small number is said to be such, as a child may write, Isa. 10.
19. So such a multitude as a man cannot write, notes the greatest number. And
Heb. 12. 22. there is mention made of an innumerable company of Angels: So God
calls Abraham out, and says Look now toward Heaven, and tell the Stars,
if thou be able to number them, Genesis 12. The Stars are innumerable, that is,
beyond man's Arithmetique.

Thirdly, Things are said to be without number, or innumerable (in a more
common sense) when they are a very great number; and so we find it frequent in
Scripture: As that which is very high is said to be as high as heaven: Thus the
discouraging Spies, describe the Cities of the Canaanites, to be Cities walled
up to Heaven, Deuteronomy. 1. 28. And when Seamen or Mariners are tossed upon the
waves and billows of the Sea, they are said, to mount up to the Heaven, and to
go down again to the depths, Psalm. 107. 26. So here a very great number, is
said to be innumerable or without number: In this third, and in that second
sense, the great works of God are innumerable: God has done so many mavelous
things, as are inpossible for man to reckon. His mighty works are not only
beyond the writing of a child, but of the wisest men: The man who numbers most
days, cannot number the wonders of God.

I shall note but one or two Instructions from this That the works of God are
innumerable. First Then, what God has done, he can do it again a second
time, yea a third, a fourth time, ten times, yea ten thousand times over, if
our necessity and his good pleasure meet together, for his works are
innumerable: Eliphaz speaks not only of what God had done, but of what he can
do, yea of what he is a doing; he does innumerable marvels. Some men can do
great things, many have done great things, but they cannot do them without
number; even a child may write all that any man can do, and at most it needs
but a man to reckon all the great things, which all men have done. The hand of
God shortens not in an eternity, but the hand of man shortens every day,
sometimes in a day, and therefore he cannot do things innumerable: Man cannot
do that to day which he could yesterday, whether we respect his civil
abilities, or his natural. As old Barzillai said unto David, 2 Samuel 19. when
the King invited him home with him, and offered him all the pleasures of the
Court, Can I any more hear the voice of singing men and singing women? or can
I any more taste what I eat and what I drink? As if he should say, It is true,
Sir, I have known the time when I could have made use of this royal favor, and
have taken in the pleasures of your Court; I once delighted in music, and my
ear could taste a sweet voice; I once delighted in rich fare, and my pall at
could taste meat and drink, but can I any more do thus? my natural strength
is gone, my senses cannot renew innumerable acts of pleasure: if grace does not
weane us from the abuse, yet nature will tire, in the use of worldly comforts.
But the civil abilities of man wither sooner then his natural; you may see a
man, that has done great things in a State or Commonwealth; come to him a
while after, and he may say, Can I any more do those things? I am not what I
was, my power is gone: But come to God, after he has done this or that, and a
thousand great things, he will not say, can I help you any more? can I deliver
you any more? can I destroy your enemies, can I discover their plots and
counsels any more? yes Lord, as thy works are unsearchable, so they are
innumerable, and thou can do them for evermore. The Lord says sometime to a
people, as he did to Israel (Judge. 10. 13.) in anger, I will deliver you no
more? But he never says to any people out of weakness, I can deliver you no
more: Psalm. 78. The people provoked God by making a question of this (ver. 20.)
Behold (say they) he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the
streams overflowed, (we acknowledge that God has done a marvel) but can he
give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people? surely he cannot do this
marvel also: what says the text? The Lord heard this, and was wroth, so a
fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel: What do
you think that I can do but one great thing? that I have but one blessing, but
one deliverance, but one wonder? Know that I who smote the rock, can provide
you flesh; I who gave you water, can give you bread, I who have discovered one
wicked plot of the enemy, can discover all; I who have given you one victory,
can give you a thousand; I who have given you one deliverance, can give you
innumerable deliverances; Therefore take heed of setting bounds to God, of
limiting the Holy one of Israel: Men love not to be limited, but God ought not.
We at once provoke and dishonor the Lord by thinking, that our wants can
renew, faster then his supplies: or that our innumerable evils, shall not find
innumerable good things to balance or remove them, from the hand of God. We
weary men, when we come often to them, to do great things for us, yea to come
often for small matters, will weary men. But we never weary the Lord by coming
often, we weary God, only, when we will not come often. How does the Prophet,
not only complain, but expostulate, because that unbelieving King wearied God
(take it with reverence) by not setting him aworke, and that about the hardest
and most knotty piece of work, that can be, the working of a miracle, and that
as hard a one as himself would ask, either in the depth beneath; or in the
height above. Is it a small thing with you to weary men, but will ye weary my
God also, Isa. 7. 13. It is no weariness to God to do innumerable miracles
for us, but he is weary when we will not believe he can do them. To be
distrusted the doing of one, is more laborious to God, then to do a million of
Miracles.

To conclude this, take heed above all, that you limit not God in works of
spiritual mercy; As, to fear, to ask pardon of sin, because ye have asked it
often. His great works of forgiveness are as much without number, as any of
his works, He multiplies to pardon, says the Prophet, Isa. 55. 7. And when the
people of Israel had committed a new sin, it is admirable to read, by what
argument, Moses moves the Lord for pardon. It is not this (as usually with men)
Lord this is the first fault, Lord thou have not been often troubled to sign
their pardon: But pardon I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people, as thou
have forgiven this people from Egypt until now, Numb. 14. 19. as if he had
said, Lord, because thou have pardoned them so often, therefore I beseech thee
pardon them now. It is a most wicked argument to move our hearts to sin,
because God will pardon often; but when we have sinned, it is a holy argument
to move God to pardon again, because he has pardoned often before: For he
pardons without number.

Secondly, Seeing God does innumerable great things for us, let not us be
satisfied in doing a few things at the command, and for the glory of God: Let
us continue in acts of holiness, charity, humility, zeal and thankfulness,
without number: Let us never stand reckoning our duties, when we hear the
mercies of God are beyond reckoning. It is a noble rule in our friendship with
men, That courtesies must not be counted: I am sure it is a holy rule in our
obedience to God, That duties must not be counted: God, has no need of any one
of our good works, but he will not bear it if we think we have done enough, or
can do too many. Let out Amicitia non est reducenda ad ealculos. Obediantia
non est reducenda ad calculos.
hearts be like the heart of God as he does great things for us, let us do (in
what we are able) great things for God and good things for one another, without
number.

So much in general of the proof of Gods power, by the Greatness etc. of his
works.

JOB. Chap. 5. Verse. 10, 11, 12. Who gives rain upon the earth, and sends
waters upon the fields.

To set upon high those that be low, that those which mourn, may be exalted to
safty.

He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise, etc.


THis Context, from the 9. to the 17. verse, contains the second argument, by
which Eliphaz strengthens his exhortation upon Job, to seek unto God. The
argument speaks to this efect. He is to be sought; and unto him our cause is
to be committed, who is of absolute power, infinite in wisdom and goodness:
But such is God; Therefore seek to him, and commit thy cause unto him. That
God is of infinite power, wisdom, etc. was proved in general at the 9.
verse, by those four adjuncts of his works, Great, unsearchable, mavelous,
and without number. And now at the 10. verse he begins his proof, by an
enumeration of the particular effects of Gods power, wisdom and goodness.
The first instance is in natural things; God does great things and
unsearchable, mavelous things without number: And would you know what those
things are? You need not go far to enquire; there are things very near unto
us, and very common among us, which yet if they be well looked unto; will
advance the power, wisdom and goodness of God; Every shower of rain drops
down this truth, that God does great things; He gives rain upon the earth,
and sends waters upon the (...) Generale nomen est ad quamcunque plaviam. Non
desunt qui pu^ant cognatione^ habere cum (...) quod est humectari. quod pluvia
liquesan^at, humectet and dissolvat dura, Mercer.
fields.

There is not any difficulty about the meaning of these words which calls for
stay in opening of them. Therefore in brief, The Hebrew word for Rain, in out
letters (Matar) is so near in sound to our english, water, that some think it
a derivative from it.

By the Rain, we are to understand, not the showers only which fall from
Heaven, but all those blessings and benefits for the support of our naurall
life, which are the fruits of rain: He sends rain (as it were) on his
errand, to bring or carry the blessings of plenty, and to drop fatnes on the
earth. He gives rain to the earth, and then the earth gives her increase. The
Rabbis have a saying, that rain is the husband of the earth, because those
showers foecundate the earth, and make that great mother of plenty, Imber
maritus terrae.
fruitful, in bringing forth all things useful and comfortable for the life
of man.

He gives rain upon the face of the earth, (so the letter of the Original)
that is upon the earth; as the face of Heaven, and the face of the sea, so the
face of the earth, is an Hebraisme, for the earth it self.

It is said in the latter clause of the verse, that he sends waters upon the
fields; We must distinguish these waters from the rain, taking them for rivers
and streams of water, as the Psalmist speaks, He causes the rivers to run
among the hills; and the Prophet Habaccuk, Thou cleavest the earth with the
rivers.

The word is of the Dual number it the Hebrew, and therefore (...) Forma duali
significantur aquae duplices, superiores in coelo, ut nubes, and inferiores in
terra, ut mare, fon^es and flumina.
by some applied to those two sorts of waters: or to the waters above, and to
the waters that are beneath; So the waters are distinguished, Psalm. 104. v. 3.
we read of the upper waters, Who lays the beams of his chambers in the
waters, who makes the clouds his chariot; and of the inferior or lower waters,
Genesis 1. 9. The Lord said, let the waters under the earth, be gathered into one
place: and both are put together, ver. 7. God made the firmament, and divided
the waters that were under the firmament, from the waters that were above the
firmament. So that the waters above, and the waters below may both here be
understood.

It is added further, He sends waters upon the fields. The word we traslate
[fiolds] signifies any place, that is without (...) Nomen propr^e est, sed
juni^tur saepe adverbialiter, pro fortis; and in universu^ pro loco exteriori.
Merc. Deserta, horrida loca and mortali bu inaccessa.
doors, as streets and highways; and because fields are without (sub dio)
covered only with the canopie of the heavens, therefore we translare, he
sends waters upon the fields. And it takes in all sorts of fields, whether
tilled or untilled: though some conceive that here Eliphaz means, those fields
especially which are untilled, unsowne or unmanured: fields where men come not;
namely deserts and wildernesses; as if he should say, there is no place but God
sends waters to it; Hence the vulgar read, in stead of fields, all places: He
moistens all places with waters.

Here first, Forasmuch as an instance of Gods greatness, power Irrigat aquis
universa. Vulg.
and insearchable wisdom is given in the rain, a natural thing we may note;
That

The common blessings of God, are not dispensed without a special providence:
Nature works not without the God of nature.

He does great things; and what; He sends rain. The whole course of nature
moves, as it is turned by the hand of God, and directed by his connsell. It is
not in the frame of nature, as in many artificial frames, which being once set
up, will stand, or go alone. When the Artificer has made a clock, and put it
in frame, and hung on the weights, let him go whether he will the clock will
go; and if there were room for the weights to descend, the clock (continuing
in frame) would go perpetually, though no hand helped or touched it: But it is
not so, in the frame and workings of natural things; God has set all
creatures in a frame and curiously ordered them, one within another, but there
is no motion of the least wheel, much less of the whole fabrique, without the
special hand of God: when rain comes, God says go; rain is his gift, not
the clouds; the cloud receives a commission from God to distill and dissolve
upon man: The most full, spongy clouds Cum plenae sunt nubes effundunt pluviam,
non tamen absque Dei jussis. Drus.
distill no more then the rock did in the wilderness, till the Lord speaks to
them. As, When he utters his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the
Heavens, and he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, Jer.
10. 13. So till he utters his voice not one single drop of all that multitude
of waters, falls from heaven; nor will those vapors descend and return again
to the earth, except he bid them.

He gives rain upon the earth. Rain is the special gift of God. Special,
not in that sense as grace is a special gift, for rain is a common gift: but
special, because it is that, of which and about which, God takes special
notice, as we read, Amos 4. 8. I caused it to rain (says God) upon one
place, or upon one City, and not upon another: There is a special
discriminating work about the rain; it raines by appointment, not accident,
upon one place, rather then another. And Isa. 5. 6. when God expresses
displeasure against his vineyard (he says) I will command the clouds, that
they shall rain upon it: The clouds are as vast bottles full of rain, but
they cannot unstop themselves, or let out one drop, until God himself
commands them; He melts the clouds (as it is in Job) and then the rain
falls down. Thou O God did send a plentiful rain, whereby thou did
confirm thine inheritance when it was weary, Psalm. 68. 9. How weary or dry
soever the Earth is, unless God by a word broach those vessels of rain, the
very inheritance of God cannot have a draught, no nor a drop, to quench its
thirst.

Therefore though rain be a common blessing in respect of all places and
persons; yet we ought to acknowledge a special hand in giving it. And this
checks that natural Atheism, which reigns in their hearts, who think that
they are beholding only to the motion of the winds, or change of the Moon for
rain: and hence in times of drought they look most, when the wind will turn,
or when the Moon will change. To confute this, the Prophet tells us by the way
of question, That as Idols cannot, so neither can the Heavens give rain, Jer.
14. 22. Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain?
Or can the Heavens give showers? They cannot. Indeed the holy Prophet Elias
speaks such language, as if he had carried the keys of the clouds at his
girdle, or had been master of the rain, 1 King. 17. 1. As the Lord lives,
there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word. But
the Apostle James shows us what word this was, namely a word of prayer, not of
command, Chap. 5. 17. Elias prayed and it rained not; again he prayed and it
rained, All the power of man cannot prevail with the heavens to rain. but the
prayer of faith can prevail with the God of heaven, To send rain was the
work of God, though it were at the word of a man. They who deny God in one
work will quickly deny him in another. And if we deny him in lesser, yea the
least of his works, in a drop of rain, we are in danger to deny him in the
greater. And they who deny God in his working, have but an easy step, to the
denial of his being.

This should teach us to walk in dependence upon God for all natural
comforts. He gives rain. All creatures drink from Heaven, that they may have
their eyes and their hearts in Heaven. And if we must walk in dependence upon
God for natural comforts, how much more for spiritual; if for the rain of the
clouds, how much more for the dews of his Spirit, and the rain of grace upon
our hearts? Further observe, It is a great, wonderful and unsearchable work
of God to send rain: For we must put the stamp of those four characters upon
all these works, And so rain, is a great a wonderful, and an unsearchable
work of God: so great and wonderful that (as has bin proved*) no creature
can communicate with God, or share in the honor of this work. The Rabbis
have a saying, that upon every (apex or) Tittle of the Law their hangs a
mountain of sense and holy Doctrine. We may say, that in every drop of rain
there is an ocean of wisdom, of power, of goodness, and of bounty. If we study
the ordinary In ea mira Dei in suas creaturas specta^ur benignitas, clemen^iae
simul and potentia, unde passim Prophe^e, and praesertim in hoc lib^o, quando
socij Job, aut Job ipse, admiranda Dei* opera* pr^ponunt pluviam inter ea,
primo lo^o ponunt. Merc.
works of God, we shall learn somewhat extraordinary in them; common things
are full of wonder, and among all common things, none fuller of wonders then the
rain; To illustrate this a little, in some particular considerations.

First, There is mavelous power seen, in causing and giving rain. Is it not
mavelous power, which raises the vapors and holds (as we may so speak) A
sea of water above the earth? That such mighty seas and floods of water hang in
the air, and thence are distilled and sprinkled down (as Job speaks) in
small drops, are acts and arguments of the wonderful power of God.

Secondly, Behold in the rain the wonderful goodness of God: who by this
means cooles and refreshes, nourishes, and suckles all earthly living
creatures. When the ground is enapt and gapes, as it were with open mouth, the
Lord opens these bottles and gives it drink. And a miracle of goodness is seen
in this forasmuch as when his very enemies hunger, he thus feeds them, when
they are naked he thus clothes them, when they thirst, he thus gives them
drink. Mat. 5. 45. He sends rain upon the just and upon the unjust: They
are maintained in life by the goodness of God, whose lives maintain a
continual war against his justice.

And as there is a wonder of goodness in giving rain for the use of evil men:
So there is a wonder of bounty in sending rain upon those places, which are
not of use to any man; he sends waters upon the fields, that is, all over the
world. Hence when Elihu would set forth the mavelous power and bounty of God,
he exemplifies it in this (Job 38. 25.) Who has divided a water course for the
overstowing of waters, to cause it to rain on the earth whereno man is, and on
the wilderness, where there is no man? Such an open and bountiful house does
the Lord of Heaven and earth keep, that rather then any shall want, he will (in
a sense) let the water run wast, God will not have so much as an herb or a
plant to want: though there be no man to come there, yet the grass and shrubs
shall have drink, and taste of his bounty.

And so legible is that goodness of God, which is written with drops of rain, so
wonderful his power and bounty in giving rain, that the Prophet wonders, at
the stupidity of those men, who are not convinced of and taught obedience by
it. They have not said, let us fear the Lord that gives the first and the
latter rain in his season, (Jer. 5. 24.) As if he should say, what a strange
thing is it that sweet showers of rain have not softened the hearts of men,
into the fear of God, and made them blossom with and bring forth abundantly
the fruits of holiness? Hereupon it is very remarkable, how Moses makes this a
motive to persuade the children of Israel to obedience in Canaan, because that
country stood in much need of rain, which Egypt, from whence they came, did
not, Deuteronomy. 11. Therefore shall ye keep all the Commandments, which I command
you this day, ver. 8. For the land whither thou go in to possess it, is not
like the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowest thy seed,
and wateredst it with thy foot, like a garden of herbs. That is Egypt being a
flat plain country, all upon a level, when the Land wanted moisture, thou
did not stay for or depend upon the rain, to moisten it, but with thy foot,
thou diggedst draines and made sluices or watercourse, from the river side
(meaning Nilus that famous river, which ran quite through Egypt) and that
refreshed thy lands and made them fruitful. But (Canaan is another kind of
Country, verse. 11, 12.) the Land whether thou go in to possess it, is a
Land of hills and valleys, and drinks water of the rain of Heaven. A land
which the Lord thy God cares for, his eyes, are upon it, etc. As if he had
said, Canaan is not a country capable of being watered by the foot, it is so
mountanous and uneven. All the labor of hand or foot, cannot bring the streams
upwards, to give thy thirsty land drink, it must drink from heaven, or be
burnt up and parcht with thirst, and if so, then, that must be the Lords care,
his eye must observe* when tbou want rain, his hand must make watercourse
in the heavens, and open the sluices and cataracts of the clouds for thee. And
will thou not serve this God in duty, who in bounty thus serves thee, and
gives thee such a sensible evidence of his care over thee? The Apostle Paul
preaches this to the Gentiles, as Natural Theology, to leave them
inexcusable, Though he suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways (in
that he gave them not either the light or restraint of grace, yet he did give
them light and restraint too in nature) Nevertheless he left not himself,
without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven. Acts 14.
17.
As if he had said, though ye have not had the rain of the word, yet the
rain of the cloud, if such a Preacher of Gods power and goodness, as will
leave you for ever without excuse. The Lord himself seems to glory in this,
as one of the chiefest of his works: (Job 38. 37.) Who can number the clouds in
wisdom? Or who can stay the bottles of heaven? I challenge all creatures to a
competition with me in this. And again in this book (Chapter 36. 26.) Elihu lifts
up the greatness of God in this act of his providence, Behold God is great,
and we know him not; (wherein does he instance his greatness?) it follows,
ver. 27. For he makes small the drops of water, they power down rain
according to the vapor thereof. Read parallel texts, Jer. 10. 13. Psalm. 65.
10, 11. Psalm. 147. 8. So much of this first work of God, the rain; and of his
power, wisdom, goodness, bounty visible and apparent in it.

The second instance of Gods power and wisdom, etc. is in civil things, both
in setting up and pulling down: First, in raising and setting up.

To set up on high those that be low, that those which mourn may be exalted to
safety. As if he should say will you see another way, wherein God shows
himself in his power, wisdom and goodness? It is in looking thorough the
world, for such as are low that he may lift them up: in espying out mourners
and weeping eyes, that he may wipe them, and more; exalt them to safety.

Some of the Jewish Writers connect this verse with the former; making this as
an effect of Gods bounty and wonderful work in sending rain. He sends
rain and showers upon the earth with such plenty of blessings, that by this
means, many who were poor, low, mean and sad-hearted, may be set in high
estate, and exalted unto safety. And there is a truth in it, Gods blessing upon
the earth has exalted many, that were low, to an high estate, to riches and
prosperity.

But rather, we shall take it in a more general sense; And so Eliphaz in these
words seems to comfort Job by giving him a hint, that though his estate was
now very low, yet if he would apply himself unto God, as he had advised, ver.
8. By seeking unto and committing his cause to him, as low as he was, he might
be set high again; and though he was now a mourner, sitting in dust and ashes,
He might be exalted to joy and safety; for in this the power, wisdom and
goodness of God are usually put forth and exalted.

The words carry an allusion to that custom of Princes and Magistrates, who
sit in high places, upon erected thrones. As (1K. 16. 19.) it is said of
Solomon, that he built him a magnificent throne or chair of state, which had
an assent of six steps to it, he sat on high. And the Prophet Isaiah (Chap. 6.
ver. 1.) describes the Lord in the same manner, sitting in state, I saw the
Lord (says he) sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up. The pride and
arrogance of the Assyrian is thus expressed (Isa. 14. 13.) He has said in his
heart, I will exalt my throne above the stars, I will sit also upon the Mount
of the Congregation. So that to sit on high, is as much as to be preferred or
advanced, whether we respect honor or riches, dignity or authority.

To set on high those that be low. The word may note either those, that are low
in their own eyes, or those that are made low by others, active or passive
lowness. Grace in our own hearts causes the former lowness, and sinful
oppression from the hand of others, causes the latter. The former are humble,
the latter are humbled; The Lord sets both these on high. And

Those which mourn.] The Hebrew word signifies to be (...) a (...) Obscurus,
obscuritus, luce privatus fuit, nigruit per Metaphoram c^n^ristatus fuit, in
tristitia enim fugit sple^dor faciei. Sic latin, Atriti dicuntur lugentes
(...), maesti vultus.
black, dark, or obscured. And the reason why that word is borrowed to note
mourning or sorrow, is, because sorrow causes blackness, or darkness of
habit or countenance; Mourning and blackness usually go together (Jer. 4.
28.) For this cause shall the earth mourn, and the heavens above shall be
black. And usually Mourners go in black, it is the die and dress of
Mourners. As white is the color of joy, Let thy garments be always white,
says the Preacher to him, that is to eat his bread with joy, Eccles. 8. 8. Yea
the very beauty of the face is obscured, the light of the countenance shadowed
or clouded with tears and sorrow. Hence the Seventy render it, They whose
faces are sad or sour. It is the word used, Mat. 6. 16. When ye fast be not
as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance; It implies an affected, studied
sadness, severity, austerity, grimnesse, gastlinesse, unpleasantnesse of
countenance, proceeding from art, rather then from nature, much less from
grace, as the words following imply; for they disfigure, vitiate or discolor
their faces, corrupt or abolish their native complexion, so as it appears not,
what it is, that they may appear, what they are not. Hypocrisy can paint the
face with black, as well or rather worse then pride with red and white; and so
does real sorrow sometimes, whether for sin or outward affliction. True
passion in the heart, will dim the brightness and stain the beauty of the
face.

These Mourners shall be exalted to safety.] The word which (...) in lo^^
^ub^^mi sterit exal^a^us, adeo ut ab hostibus pertingi nequeat. Per Metaphorem,
ta^us, in expugnabilis. Hinc (...) ^u^^is. Olim munitiones extrueb^ntur in
locis editioribus in montibus prae uptis and inaccessis, ut latin, arx ab
host arcendo dicto est.
we translate Exalted, signifies to set in a high place, and in a place so high
that a man so placed, is beyond the reach of danger or the power of an
adversary; it is to be set upon a place impregnable; Hence the word is used for
a Fort, Tower, or Castle, because forts and Towers, being places of defense,
were for the most part built upon some high place, upon some rock or
praecipice (Prove. 18. 10.) The name of the Lord is a strong Tower; That is, we
are as safe under his protection, as in a strong Tower founded on the steepest
rock. And the Prophet describing the safety of him who walks uprightly, gives
it in this word; The place of defense shall be the munition of Rocks, Isa. 33.
16. So Jer. 48. 1. Misgab is confounded and dismayed; That is, the high place
or Castle of defense is dismayed, That word which is common to all places of
safety, being supposed by our translators, as the proper name of some one place
of more eminent safety.

Further although this word (Exalted) implies safety, yet in the Original, we
have two words, They are exalted to safety. He that is exalted (according to
the sense of that word) is safe: But to show the compleatnesse of their safety,
safety or salvation is expressed. He is exalted to safety with salvation, or he
is safely (...). Endyadis.
exalted in safety. It is a full and a perfect safety, to which God exalts his
mourners and oppressed servants. They are as safe as salvation it self can
make them. That Is the force of the Hebraisme.

From the former clause of the verse, we may observe.

First, That advancement is the gift of God.

He sets on high those that are low, Psalm. 75. 6, 7. Promotion comes
neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South (neither this way
nor that way, nor any way of man) but God puts down one and sets up
another. When a man is advanced by the favor of a Prince, it is God that
sets him up. If a man be advanced by the vote of the people, yet it is God
that sets him up. Though a man be advanced by that, which may seem to have
most contingency in it, by a lot, yet it is God that sets him up, Prove. 16.
33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the
Lord. The Lord gives special direction to man's peradventure, and certainly
determines, what we call contingent.

Secondly, observe;

They that are low and mourning, are nearest to exaltation and safety.

To be very low, it is to be (as it were) in a due posture and readiness to be
exalted very high; He sets the low on high (Luke 1. 51.) He has put down
the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble and meek; or, has
exalted the lowly and the meek. We are not to understand it only of those,
who are low, that is, lowly in mind (that frame of heart which is wrought
above in the highest heavens (is in this sense) lowest upon the earth) but we
may understand it likewise of those, who are low in their estates; (many that
are low in mind, may be high in place; a man may have abundance of humility in
the height of outward eminency) Therefore (I say) we must take in both; Before
honor goes humility, as a high mind before a fall, Prove. 15. 33. And (Psalm.
113. 6, 7.) He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lists the needy out
of the dunghill, that he may set him with Princes, etc.

And as it is in reference to particular persons, so to the Church and people
of God in general; when they are low, then look for their raising up. The
Scripture is frequent in this, Deuteronomy. 32. 36. Psalm. 12. 6. Psalm. 102. 13. And in
that notable place, Isa. 33. 9, 10. The Ambassadors of peace weep bitterly,
the earth mourns, and Lebanon languisheth, and Carmel shakes off her fruit,
etc. All places, every creature is brought in, mourning with that mourning
people. When it was thus with them, Now will I arise, (says the Lord) now will
I be exalted, now will I lift up my self. There are three Nowes for it, to
note That the special Now of their exaltation. But the text says, God would
then be exalted. Was he brought low? God is always alike exalted in himself,
but he is not always alike exalted in his people; therefore when he says, now
will I be exalted, the meaning is, I will exalt this people who are low, that
my name may be exalted and lifted up in the sight of all people.

Therefore our low estate should be so far from sinking, that it should lift
up our faith in believing deliverance and exaltation. A low estate, is a great
advantage for faith; faith has surest footing when we lie prostrate upon the
ground: There faith stands firmest, because there faith meets with most
promises; Promises are the foundation of faith. The people of God have never so
much of the word about them, as when they have least of the world about them.
The covenant sits closest to us, when we are divested of the creature. When the
river is at the lowest ebb, we are sure the tide is coming in: The night is
darkest a little before day breaks: When the days are shortest, and the
winter sharpest, then the spring of mercy is at hand. As the highest flourish
of ungodly ones, is the immediate forerunner of their downfall (Psalm. 92. 7.)
When the wicked spring as the grass, what then? would you know the meaning of
it? The next words are a comment upon the former: It is, that they shall be
destroyed for ever; So, the lowest downfall of the godly, is usually the
immediate forerunner of their advancement. When the godly wither as the grass,
the interpretation of it is, That they shall flourish for ever.

Observe in the third place, from that word, exalted to safety That

God can set his people on high, beyond the reach of all their enemies. Beyond
the reach of their heads or counsels, and beyond the reach of their hands and
swords; Isa. 33. 16. The munitions of rocks shall be their place of defense:
He sets them on high, that no ladders can be found long enough to scale
these rocks, nor any Artillery or engine, strong enough to batter them down;
And least any should say, but we will hold the siege, till we starve them out;
it follows in the text Bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure. I
remember a story in Alexanders wars, that when he came to besiege the
Sogdians, a people who dwelt upon a rock, or had the literal munition of rocks
for their defense, they jeered him, and asked him whether his Soldiers had
wings or no? Unless your Soldiers can fly in the air, we fear you not. It
is a most certain truth, when God exalts a people, he can set them upon a
rock, so high, that unless their adversaries have wings, and those more then
Eagles wings, to soar higher then God himself, they are beyond annoyance. He
carries his own upon Eagles wings, what wings then must they have, who get
above his people?

There are these two things, about which the thoughts of men are most
conversant. The one is, to be set on high; the other is, to be set in safety.
They both meet in the mercy here promised; He sets on high those that are
low, that is their honor; He exalts them to safety, that is their comfort. The
first thoughts of men are spent to get a great estate, but their next thoughts
are to keep and protect it. Experience has often showed us the men of the
world, rolling riches and Titles together into a mountain, but it has been a
mountain of snow, one hot day has melted all down. The mountain of outward
blessings, upon which God raises his people, shall be (if he pleases) like a
mountain of Adamant, which cannot be melted, or like mount Sion, which cannot
be removed. A high place is seldom a safe place: All high things are
tottering, N^tare solent excelsa omnia.
and the more high, the more tottering. Then how unsearchable is the wisdom,
how great the power of God, who can set his people very high, and yet very
safe? who can make a man stand as firm and steady upon the highest pinnacle of
honor, as upon a level ground, or in a valley of the lowest estate and
condition. He exalts to safety.

And hence we may draw down a difference between Gods exaltation of his own
people, and the exaltation of his enemies and wicked ones. Wicked men are often
times exalted, and God exalts them, though they know it not: but how? He exalts
them to a high place, but does exalt them to a safe place? No, the Psalmist,
after a long temptation, concludes, Thou have set them in slippery places, thou
castest them down into destruction; how are they brought into desolation, as
in a mement, Psalm. 73. 18, 19. Haman was exalted high, but not in safety: Many
are exalted, as Jezabel exalted Naboth, high among the people; but it was to
stone him, rather then to honor him. It is said of Pharaoh, he lifted up the
head of his chief Baker, he lifted up his head out of prison indeed, but he
lifted up his head to the gallows also; he lifted him out of prison, but it
was unto his death. Such is the lifting up of wicked men, they may be set on
high, but they are never set in safety. How many have we seen suddenly
advanced, and as suddenly depressed? We are never safe, but where God sets us,
or while God holds us in his hand. Fourthly observe;

It is a wonder, a wonderful work of God, to exalt those that are low, and set
mourners in safety. The 107 Psalm, is a Psalm, recounting the wonderful
works of God; O that men would praise the Lord for his wonderful works! is the
burden of that holy song. And all those wonders conclude in this, ver. 39. 40.
Again, they are minished and brought low, through oppression, affliction, and
sorrow: what then? He powers contempt upon Princes, etc. yet sets he the
poor on high from affliction, and makes him families like a flock. How
wonderful is this, that the Lord will give Kings for the ransom of his
people, and to raise his poor, will power contempt upon Princes? The highest
must down, rather then his low ones shall not be set on high. There are four
things, which increase this wonder, and make it exceeding wonderful. First,
These poor have no strength, (Deuteronomy. 32. 36.) He sees that their strength is
gone. Secondly, Many times they have no hope, no faith, When the Son of Man
comes, shall he find (among low ones) faith (this faith to be exalted) upon
the earth, Luke 18. 8. Thirdly, They have many enemies, subtle enemies,
powerful enemies, confident enemies, enemies (above hope) arrived at
assurance, that they shall keep poor ones at an under for ever. Lord (says
David) how many are they that trouble me? So many they were, that he could not
tell how many. Fourthly, They are supposed to have no friends, none to appear
for them. Let us persecute and take him (say they) for there is Psalm. 71. 11.
none to deliver him. Not a man, no nor God, as they conclude, They say of my
soul, there is no help for him in his God. I need not say, it is a wonder to
exalt a people, upon all these disadvantages: The fact speaks; should you see
a man trod upon the ground, and many there holding him down, one by the arm,
another by the leg, a third laying a great weight upon his breast, were it not
a wonder to see this man rise up, and rescue himself from them all? Thus it is
with the Church and servants of God, when they are low, all the world is upon
their backs; the world of wicked ones hang about them, one with his power,
another with his policy, all with their utmost endeavors to hold them down;
yet the Lord sets them on high, who were thus low, and exalts them to safety,
who were thus in danger. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
and declare his wonderful works to the children of men.

And this is further cleared in the 12th verse, He disappointeth the devices of
the crafty, so that their hand cannot perform their enterprise. As if Eliphaz
should say, would you know, how God exalts his people, and sets them in
safety? It Is true, they have many enemies many that plot and devise evil
against them, but the Lord breaks their plots, he out-plots them; He
disappointeth the devices of the crafty, etc. And as this is a proof of the
former, so it is a further instance of Gods wonderful works. The first was in
natural things, sending rain; The second and third were in civil things,
first, exalting his own people; and secondly, in defeating the policies and
power of their adversaries: so then, this twelfth verse, may be taken either as
it has reference to the former, or as a further instance of Gods wisdom and
power.

He disappointeth the devices of the crafty.] Or, he defeateth the purposes of
the subtle (so Mr Broughton reads it) that their hands can bring nothing
soundly to pass. The Apostle in 1 Cor. 3. 19. sets the holy stamp of divine
authority, upon this whole book, by quoting this or the next verse, as a
proof of his doctrine; For it is written (says he) He takes the crafty in
their own counsel; He disappoints the devices of the crafty (says Eliphaz)
and, He takes the wise in their own craftiness.

He disappointeth.] The word signifies to break, to break a (...) a radice
(...) fractus contritus.
thing to pieces: and by a metaphor to disappoint or to defeat, because if an
engine or instrument, with which a man intends to work, be broken, he is
disappointed of his purpose and cannot go (...) Confregit, dissipavit.
Metaphorice irritum fecit Latin potest reddi^abrogari.
on with his work: So here, He breaks the devices of the crafty, the crafty
frame very curious engines and instruments, they lay fine plots and projects,
but the Lord breaks them, and then they are defeated or disappointed. The word
is often used for breaking or making void the law, as Psalm. 119. 126. Ezra 9.
13 because wicked men, as much as in them lies, would defeat and disappoint
the holy purpose and design of God, in giving those laws. They would repeal
and abrogate the laws of God, that they might enact their own lusts. They would
do that by the will of God, which the Lord does with their wills, Null and
disappoint it.

The devices.] The word which we translate, devices, signifies (...) a radice
(...) Cogitavit, excogitavit, denotat opus ingeniosum, inventum artificium,
quia artificium fit p^r cogitationem.
not barely cogitation or thinking, but excogitation, or studied thinking; not
only a natural thought, but an artificial thought, or thoughts made up and
formed after long debate of a business in our own breasts: This is properly
expressed, by devising. Those pooles of water in the 7^h Cant. ver. 4. are called
from this word, The pooles in Heshbon; some take Heshbon for a City. (Numb. 21.
26.) and so it notes the place where those pooles were: Others translate it
thus, Aisworth on the Cant.
Pooles artificially made; And we may observe much skill and curiosity used, in
making pooles or water-workes. So (Exodus 28. 8.) the holy girdle which was made
for the High Priest, is called, a curious girdle; it is from the same root;
because that girdle was made of cunning work, and exquisite embroyderies. So
that, this word notes, the very spirits and quintessence of sinful wit, drawn
out for the devising of evil. In the 119. Psalm. verse. 29. David uses this
word, to show the accuratenesse, and holy curiosity which he used in
surveighing his own life. I thought on my ways, that is, I studied my self
and my works, with greatest exactness, to find out every error or failing, or
to frame my ways to a hairs breadth (if it were possible) according to rule;
which answers the Apostles phrase, Ephesians. 5. of walking circumspectly or
exactly. Grace will vie it with sinful craft, for exactness, that will make
as curious works or devices in holiness, as the other can in wickedness.

Of the crafty. Here the workmen are described as well as their work; their
works are devices, and the workmen are crafty. As the man is, so is his
employment; we are in working as we are in being. Devices are the proper trade
of crafty ones. The Original word, sometimes imports holy wisdom; and
sometimes corrupt and sinful wisdom: We read it in a good sense (Prove. 1.
4.) and (Prove. 22. 3.) The prudent man (a man that has holy craft and skill in
him) foresees the plague, and hides himself; Again, Prove. 8. 12. I wisdom
dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of witty inventions. But usually
the word is taken in an ill sense, for subtle and sinful craft, for
craftiness and subtilty to do mischief; therefore the vulgar translates it,
He disappointeth the devices of the Malignants; noting, that it is not an
honest craft, but a malignant craft, by which the counsels and devices of
these men are contrived or acted: (Psalm. 83. 3.) that word is used, They have
taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden
ones: And Genesis 3. 1. Now the Serpent was more subtle than any beast of the
field; The word properly signifies to be (...) Nadus, significat etiam
involutum vas^um, cuju^ in animo plures sunt flexiones, and diverti^ula
naked; and by a metaphor, to be subtle, fly, crafty, nimble; because men, who
(as tumblers, racers, ropedancers) are to do a thing nimbly and speedily,
subtly and slily, often stripped themselves of all, but will never cumber
themselves with many clothes. We know, that craft always puts a cloak or
veil upon actions, and walks in a disguise: yet because the crafty man is so
nimble to turn and wind, and vary himself a thousand ways, both for the
plotting and acting of his designs, therefore he is elegantly named, from
nakedness. Hence also in the Greek language (...) exer^eo, unde (...). Locus
ubi nudi se exercebantur nanc sumitur pro ludo literatio ubi ingenia litteris
d^scendis exercentur, Nudi s^nt agilio^es; and m^^us praepediti.
, the word which signifies nimble acting or exercising the mind or body, as
also places and Schools where those exercises were performed and taught, is
derived from nakedness, or from being naked: And it is observeable, that our
first parents Adam and Eve, before they sinned, are called (Genesis 2. 25.) naked;
And the serpent in the very next verse, (being the first of the third chapter)
is called subtle, by one and the same word. Our first parents were naked
outwardly (innocence needed none, and glory shall need no clothing) they were
also (in opposition to evil) naked inwardly; they were simple, plaine-hearted,
without any cloak of malice or wickedness. But the serpents nakedness, notes
only a fitness, slynesse, readiness or activenesse to do evil: For he was
double clothed with craft, cloakt and hooded with subtilties, to act mischief
unseen. The naked-crafty ones of the text, are the seed of the serpent, his
children, and therefore they bear their fathers name The Chaldee paraphrast
tells us, that the crafty ones here meant by Eliphaz, were especially the
Egyptians, who when they would oppress the people of God, said, Come on, let
us deal wisely with Intell^git cogitationes Egyptiorum, qui sapiemes f^er^nt
ad malefaciendum Isaeli. ^ac.
them, least they multiply, Exodus 1. 10. A crafty man, is one, who has not
always more understanding then his neighbor but ever less conscience: Yea,
how great soever his wit is, his conscience is so little, that it never stands
in his light, whatsoever he is doing. He takes measure of his actions, not by
what he ought to do, but by what he would have done; and yet, he can seldom
do what he would, for the Lord disappoints the devices of the crafty so, that
as it follows in the text,

Their hands cannot perform their enterprise To every business, two things
are required, Invention and Action; or the electing of Means, and the pursuing
of the End: The former is Head-work, the latter is Hand work. The hands are the
instruments of action, as the head is the instrument of invention and
consultation. These crafty heads were at work before, now their hands go to
it: What they devise craftily, they would act industriously; but they cannot,
Their hands cannot perform their enterprise.

The word which we translate Enterprise, signifies Being, as also reason,
wisdom, and virtue; because wisdom, virtue and (...) a^radi^e (...) ab (...)
Denotat essentiam, rationem sapientiam, vi^tuiem semper permanentem alijs rebus
in mundo transeuntibus. Hinc significat, omne quod cum inteplectu and ratione
fic; and hic specialiter proeo, quod qula sibi statuit ut faciat quo finee^
optatum assequatur, etiam in malum. Mer.
reason, are as it were, the being, stability and permanency of things; And
therefore as in the Hebrew, this word signifying wisdom and virtue, is derived
from a root, which notes Being. So the word signifying wickedness and folly,
is derived from a root (as some Critics observe) which notes only a negative,
or a not Being of any thing: because wickedness is nothing, or it is good for
nothing: Those things which want wisdom and reason, are as if they were not,
and shortly will not be at all. Hence some render the words thus; Their hands
cannot perform their wisdom, that is, they cannot bring to pass that
enterprise, which they had determined and laid (as themselves conceived) with
so much wisdom and strength of reason. Mr Broughton to the same sense: Their
hands brings nothing soundly to pass. And the Chaldee exemplifies it in the
Egyptians before mentioned, who as the holy story informs us, could not
effect, that which they had consulted with those depths of policy; and
principles of sinful wisdom, The destruction of the children of Israel. Here
then we may observe. First, That

The wisdom of natural men is nothing but craft or wit to do wickedly.

The Prophet Jeremie gives us this character of them, They are wise to do
evil (Jer. 4. 22.) And to be wise to do evil is very ill wisdom, the worst
wisdom, indeed mere folly; better be a fool, than to be but so wise: And
these have it from their father, it dwells and is derived in their blood, They
are the seed of the Serpent (as was touched before) and his subtilty was made
the instrument of the greatest evil, the tainting of that first created
innocence* and the overthrow of man: Now they are called the serpents seed,
because they are like the Serpent; the Serpent was the subtillest of all the
beasts of the field, and these (as Christ speaks of the men of the world) are
wiser in their generation than the children of light; yet is but in their
generation, and their wisdom lasts but for their generation, if it last so
long: Elymas (Acts 13. 10.) being charged to be full of all subtilty and
mischief, is called at the next word, child of the Devil. Subtle to do
mischief, is the Genius or disposition of the Devils children; and they shall
have the serpents, the Devils portion: For as the serpent, who was once the
subtillest of all the beast of the field (applying his subtilty to mischief)
became the most cursed of of all the beasts of the field; so they who are thus
the subtillest among the children of men, shall be the most cursed of all the
children of men, Jer. 18. 18. we find crafty men in consultation, and under a
curse. Come (say they) let us devise a device against Jeremiah, and let us
smite him with the tongue; Let us devise devices, it is the same word in the
text, but doubled for greater emphasis: These were their craftimasters; To
devise devices, notes more then ordinary skill in that black art; as to work a
work (Joh. 6. 28.) notes great industry and intention of the mind in working.
Some play their works rather then work their works. I must work the works of
him that sent me, says our Lord Christ, Joh. 9. 4. None ever labored as
Christ labored, therefore his was working a work. As (I say) to work a
work, notes great industry in working; so to devise a device, implies much
cunning and skill laid out in devising. Now as these men would be witty above
others in devising evil, so they are cursed above others in bearing evil. The
Prophet gives them their load, ver. 21, 22. Therefore deliver up their children
to the famine, and power out their blood by the force of the sword, and let
their wives be bereaved, etc. And it is most just, that they should be deepest
in the curse, who are deepest in such craft; for the truth is, that, Every
sinful act, the more skill there is in it, the more sin there is in it; it
is best to be a dullhead, a very bungler in doing mischief. Wit commends and
sets off other things, bue it makes sin the more sinful and deformed. Secondly
observe; That

Satan makes use of subtle, crafty men, and abuses their parts for his own
purposes. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty. God never disappointeth
those, whom he sets aworke: If God disappoints the devices of men, these
devices were not of God; Satan sets those aworke, whose work God spoils. The
Lord loves to break Satan's engines, tools and instruments. Christ came to
destroy the works of the Devil, both his works within us, and his works
against us. All Satan's works and workmen shall rue it, when Christ pleases. And
here we see whom Satan sets aworke, even men of the finest wits, of the most
reaching brains, of the decepest judgments and richest endowments: these he
draws in to his pay, and makes serviceable for his ends; that is Satan's
design; such as are amongst men, as the serpent amongst the beasts, the most
subtle of all, these Satan makes use of: The deep policy of an Achitophel,
the Great Oracle of his times for counsel, he desires to improve against a
David; The high parts and learning of a Julian, he desires to improve and boil
up against the Christians; such a one will not only Fire and sword, but set
hard to jeere and wit them out of the profession of the Gospel.

And it is observable, that the seeds of the greatest heresies and errors,
that ever poisoned the spirit of man, or vexed the Church of God, have been
sown in that rank soil, the wits of Philosophers. Which gave Tertullian
occasion to call Philosophers, The Philosophi haereticorum Patriarchae. Tert.
Patriarchs of Heretics, or The Patrons of Heresies; They were men of high
conceits and apprehensions, and in those fertile and rich grounds, Satan with
great success cast the tares of error. When Christ came into the world, he
had most opposition among the crafty Scribes and Pharisees; And Herod the Fox
(as Christ himself calls him for his subtilty) was a notorious instrument of
Satan, to hinder the receiving of Christ. Our Lord Christ sometimes chooses the
simplest the meanest the plainest men, fishermen to do his work. But Satan
chooses the subtilest he can find in learned Throngs, to send of his errand.
The reason of this difference between Christ's choice and Satan's, is; Satan
cannot make a Mercury out of every block, he is not able to give a man
understanding, wisdom or abilities for his work: neither can he increase or
improve any man's parts and gifts: he must have instruments ready to his hand,
he can but put them forward and tempt them on. He will give such as are strong
and crafty, many motives to serve him, but he cannot furnish them with
strength or craft to serve him. But Christ can give gifts to men, which they
have not, and raise the parts, which they have. He can make himself a Mercury,
a messenger out of any block. Christ can send a fool of his errand, and cause
him to do it wisely; He can cause the stammering tongue to speak plain, and
the plainest man to speak the highest Rhetoric. When a Moses complains of a
slow tongue, he can say, I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou
shall say, Exodus 4. 12. If he finds us not fit to do his business, he can
make us fit. If Christ please, he can make a man master of his trade, before,
or as soon as ever he is a servant to it. Thus, without the wisdom of the
world, Christ overcomes the wisdom of the world; And by the foolishness of
preaching (as men count foolishness) saves those that believe (1 Cor. 1. 21.)
the foolishness of God is wiser then man, That is, those instruments which
Christ impioyes, how foolish soever men account them, shall foil all the
wisdom of man.

Therefore let no man boast of his natural parts, unles they be spiriualiz'd,
and resigned up (for such Christ commonly uses, though he can make use of
others) to the service of Christ. Consider to whom you are isntrumental, with
your parts and knowledge. All wit out of Christ's work, degenerates into craft,
and wisdom into wickedness. It is Satan's work to solicit the learning of
men (even as an Adulterer sollicites the beauty of women) that he may commit
folly with it, and beget some monstrous birth of mischief and villainy.

For, when such appear on Satan's side, they are a great credit to his cause,
and by the reputation of their learning and parts draw others to it. Do ye not
see (will he suggest to inferior ones) such and such wise, learned men, go
this way; such learned Divines, such learned Lawyers, such deep Politicians,
and do you scruple? And how many have been caught in this sna^e, and led aside
by the noise of their abilities, whom Satan abuses to his own side; what? such
wise men, such learned men, think thus, and do you simple ones stand off?
Has he not reason then to say of wise men, (as it was once said of one) Seeing
ye are such, I wish you Cum talis sis, utinam noster esses. Habeo Themistoclem
Atheniensem.
would come over to me: and to brag of them, as much as ever that Persian
Monarch did of Themistocles, whose revolting to him, from the Grecians
transported him so, that he broke suddenly out of his sleep with these words,
I have Themistocles the Athenian. I remember what Augustine observes (it is a
very remarkable passage) in an Epistle unto a young noble man of great
learning, who it seems had been sometimes his Scholar. Augustine having
received from him a Poem or copy of accurate verses (but Augustinus ep. 39. ad
Licentium Juvenem nobilem and doctu^ Da Domino meo te qui tibi illud donarit
ingeniu^ etc. Accepisti a Deo ingenium spiritualiter aureum, and ministras inde
^ibidi^ibus and in illo Satan^ pro^in^s teipsum? Ornari abs te diabolus qua^it.
perceiving that he abused his wit to wantonness or useless curiosity)
returns him answer to this effect. I have read this Poem, and I know not with
what verses, or with what lamentation to mourn over it; because I see an
excellent wit sparkling in every line, but such an one, as I cannot dedicate
unto God. A little after he thus exhorts him, Give thy self unto my Lord, who
has given thee this excellent wit; If thou had found a golden Cup, what
would thou have done with it? Would thou not have given it to some good
public use? God has given thee a golden wit, Thy understanding is a golden
Cup, and will thou let thy lusts drink out of it, or will thou drink thy
self to the devil in it? I tell thee thus much the devil would feign make
thy wit his ornament, and thy parts, the oredit of his Court and Cause. Satan
serves himself of the best wits, and his is the worst service of wit. Such
shall be paid at last with crying. We fools. Of all fools the knowing; wise
fools, will be in the saddest condition: Observe thirdly,

The crafty are full of hopes, that their devises will succeed, and full of
trouble, because they succeed not. Otherwise it could not be said, that God
disappointeth the devises of the crafty; Disappointment implies expectation;
And it is no afflicting affliction to miss of that, which we never looked for.
These thought all sure. These doubted not to over-wit and overpower all, at
last. This brought them somewhat beyond hope, even to the borders of assurance
at least it so endeared them their hopes, that they would rather hazard their
souls, than loose their plots, they were burdened to be delivered. Having
conceived mischief, they were in travel with iniquity Psalm. 7. 14. As the
Lord suffers his own people to fear much, that when deliverance comes, their
joy may be full: so, he suffers wicked men to hope much, that their sorrows may
be full, when they cannot be delivered. A woman forgets the pains of her
travel, for joy that a man child is borne into the world; And these men shall
remember the pains of their travel, for sorrow that a monster (such are their
designs) is not borne into the world. That their mischief comes not (in their
sense) to light, leaves them in desperate darkness. Fourthly observe,

What such plot and devise, they labor to act and effect; Their hands cannot
perform their enterprise; which intimates, that they put their hands to the
work, as well as their heads; as soon as they have laid their plot, they fall
to acting. We should in this imitate our enemies, not to stand devising and
consulting, this is a good way, and to others a good way, and then do neither;
or then sit still and moulder away in expectation; love to, and zeal for
Christ, and his truth, should render us as full of action, as of invention, of
execution as of design.

Fifthly, though they did attempt it with their hands, yet they could not
effect it with their hands, Their hands did not perform their enterprise.
Hence note, That

Crafty men may devise strongly, but they have not strength sufficient to
accomplish their devices.

The Pharisees after all their confederacies against Christ were forced
(without any rack, but that of their own consciences) to make this
confession, Joh. 12. 19. Perceive ye how we prevail nothing. At this day, they
have many fine devices and Idaeas ready framed in their heads, but the hand
shakes, They cannot perform their enterprise. They want not counsel, nor
craft, nor skill* nor will, nor desires, nor endeavors, only they want God
with them. Hence it is, that though they gather very proper materials, and lay
very strong foundations, yet they cannot rear up their building. And in the
issue (Luke 14. 29.) All that behold it shall mock, saying, These men began to
build, and were not able to finish; It is the maine work of God to stop evil
men in their works: what they would do, he says they shall not, and what
they would not do he says they shall. Pharaoh devised a devise against the
children of Israel, but his hands could not perform his enterprise, Haman
devised a devise against the Jews, but his hands could not perform his
enterprise. Achitophel gave crafty counsel against David, but his hands could
not perform his enterprise. Herod the Fox plotted against Christ, to hinder
the course of his Ministry and Mediatourship, but he could not perform his
enterprise; It Is so all along* therefore (Psalm. 2. 1.) it is said, Why do the
Heathen imagine a vain thing; a vain thing, because a thing successelesse,
their hands could not perform it, It was vain, not only, because there was
not true ground of reason, why they should imagine or do such a thing, but
vain also, because they labored in vain, they could not do it. And
therefore it follows, v. 4. He that sits in the heavens shall laugh, the
Lord has them in derision. The Lord sees what fools they are, and men (yea
themselves) shall see it. The Prophet gives us an elegant description to this
purpose (Isa. 59. 9.) They weave the spiders web, but their webs shall not
become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works. As if
he had said, they have been devising and setting things in a goodly frame to
catch flies, they have been spinning a fine thread, out of their brains, as
the Spider does out of her bowels, such is their web; but when they have this
web, They cannot cut it out, or make it up into a garment. They shall go naked
and cold, notwithstanding all their spinning and weaving, all their plotting
and devising. The next broom that comes will sweep away all their webs, and
the Spiders too, except they creep apace. God loves and delights to cross
worldly proverbs and worldly crase.

How many visible demonstrations have we of this in our times! How many
cunning, but ruining devices, lie by the walls at this day unacted! They went
through the Head-worke, but they could not get through their Hand-worke. We may
say as in the Psalm (76. 5.) None of the men of might have found their hands:
The men of craft sound their heads, but the men of might (blessed be God) have
not yet found their hands, to execute up to the height of the divisers, either,
wit or malice.

In this we see the glorious prerogative of God. How many thousand, thousand,
thousand thoughts do men loose. The thoughts of many years are lost in a
moment. God never lost, nor never shall loose one thought. And therefore David
puts these two together in a breath. Having said (Psalm. 33. 10) The Lord
brings the counsel of the Heathen to naught, he makes the devices of the
people of none effect. In the next verse, he subjoynes, The counsel of the
Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all Generations. And as
the counsel of the Lord stands so he causes the counsel of those to stand,
who consult for him. He confirms the word of his servants, and performs the
counsel of his Messengers, Isa. 44. 26. So that their hands shall perform
their enterprise, as the Lord encourages the ancient people (Zac. 4. 9) The
hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house, his hands shall
also finish it: And again, Chap. 8. 13. Fear not, let your hands be strong. As
if he had said, Fear not, go on with your work; For your hands shall
perform their enterprise, you shall not beaten from your work, neither shall
ye work in vain. The Lord himself has no barren counsels, and he makes all
the counsels which are for him, bring forth in their due time, desired fruit,
the longed for and beloved issue.

Lastly, observe; That

It is a great and wonderful work of God, to disappoint the devices, and stop
the enterprises of crafty men,

Eliphaz puts this among the wonders of God. This is reported in a way of
admiration concerning God (Isa. 44. 25.) He frustrateth the tokens of the liars
and makes diviners mad, he turns wise men backwards, and makes their
knowledge foolish. The wisdom of God is most seen, in defeating the wise, as
the power of God is most seen, in overthrowing the strong. While we consider
that Theirs are secret devices, and that they are subtle devices, that they
have many devices, and that they have many ways to bring these devices to
pass, it cannot fall below a wonder in our thoughts, that their thoughts, or
devices are not accomplished. Therefore the Psalmist concludes (Psalm. 124.)
Unless it had bin the Lord, who was on our side, etc. we had bin swallowed up
quick and taken in their snare. As if he had said, if we should have had any
less then God, to help us, we had been gone, all the world could not save us.
To pass through a place full of gins and snares and pits set and made on
purpose, to take a man, and that man not taken, is mavelous in our eyes. Thus
it is with the people of God, they walk among snares and traps; The trade of
most wicked men, is to be Trap-makers, Snare makers, if not Sword makers
against the Saints of the most high. They meet with devices upon devices, and
plots upon plots; now, that God shall disappoint all these, and exalt his
people to safety in the very face of death and dangers, how admirable!

But some may object; Yet we see that, at least some of these plots are not
disappointed, at least some of these devices take, and we have seen bloody
hands performing their enterprise.

I answer, in a word; First, this text and the observation bottomed upon it,
are to be understoood of what is often done, not strictly of what is always
done. The Lord very frequently disappoints the devices of the crafty.

But secondly, their very success is a disappointment, and their prosperity is
their curse. For their cause is under a curse, and so are their persons, when
both seem most succesfull. If outward judgments slay not wicked men, Their
prosperity shall, Pro. 1. 32.

Thirdly, all the success, which the devices of wicked crafty ones have,
tends to the fulfilling of Gods counsels, more then their own: So that, though
it be to the eye, or in the letter, success to them, yet in truth, and upon the
matter, it is success to the cause of God, Craft prevails no further, and no
longer on earth, then serves to accomplish the counsels of heaven, and fulfill
what infinite wisdom has devised. Therefore when you see any devices of the
crafty thrive, know, that God is serving himself upon them, and that they are
but acting, What his hand and counsel has determined before to be done, Act.
4 28. As Christ himself overcame by dying, so do they who are Christ's, they
have success in all their disappointments; and these are disappointed in all
their successes, and die while they overcome. No sinful device of man ever
did, or ever shall prevail, beyond a contribution to the just and holy purpose
of God. All their prevailings are disappointments, who intentionally oppose,
though they really accomplish the good pleasure and purpose of God.

JOB Chap. 5. Verse. 13, 14, 15. 16. He takes the wise in their own craftines;
and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.

They meet with darkness in the day time; and grope in the noon day as in the
night.

But he saves the poor from the Sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of
the mighty.

So the poor has hope, and iniquity stops her mouth.


IN these four verses Eliphaz proceeds in, and finishes the former argument,
by a further and fuller clearing of the power and wisdom of God, in catching
and over-matching crafty ones, in their ways and counsels. Having showed
before (in the 12th verse) that their devices are disappointed, he shows now,
that they are entangled in their devices. There, we say they could not perform
their enterprises; and here we shall see them ruined in their enterprises. It
is a sore trouble to ungodly men, when they cannot do the mischief; which
they intend to others; but is a far sorer trouble, when their counsels
recoyle, and when their own projects promote their own ruin: when their own
actions effect that, which they had rather die, then see done, when that
mischief falls upon their own heads, which they intended others; That Is
their calamity in this text.

He takes the wise in their own craftines. These wise men, are no better then
the crafty, before mentioned, for we see their wisdom is but craftiness. We
had the Crafty in the former verse; and here we have their craft or craftines.
The Apostle in 1 Cor. 3. 19. quotes this text of Eliphaz; The wisdom of this
world is foolishnes with God; For it is written, He takes the wise in their
own craftines. The Greek word there used has (...), quasi di^as, ad quodlibet
opus promptus, qui dexteritate ingenij valet ad quodlibet agendum.
somewhat more in it, then the Hebrew word, opened at the 12 v. For it notes a
fitness for all purposes, a dexterity to serve any turn be it never so sinister
or evil. Such a man can be on any side, and is for any purpose, you will turn
him to. A godly man has but one work, and he can do but one work, that is,
one work in kind, Every work he does (as a godly man) has a stamp of
goodness, or godliesse, of holiness, or justice upon it. But these crafty
ones are for any work, for various works, you may turn them loose to any
service; they are ready to do good for a need, to serve their own ends, and
they will not stick at any evil, for their own ends. Their byas is not
within them, but upon them, and they can clap it to which side they please, or
may be most pleasing to, or taking with others; yet this Turn-coat Crastines
shall not serve their turn; For says the text, He takes the wise in their
own craftines.

The word which we translate [He taketh] is very significant. It imports a
taking by force or strength, and it imports a taking by skill or stratagem. God
will have them both ways: If these cunning men work by their wits, He can
take them: The Lord has more stratagems to take them, then they have had to
take others: Or if they work by power and by plain strength, he can take
them. The Lord has more strength to take them, then they have had to take
others. (...) C^pi^, apprehendit de ^o^o aut urbes expugnavit in opinatu and
violenta expugnatione.


The word is applied to the taking in of Cities or Forts, places strengthened
both by art and nature, and to the taking of them (which includes both senses)
either by siege or sudden surprisall; Read Numb. 21. 32. Josh. 6. 2* Deuteronomy. 2.
34. And so the sense may be that, although these men think, they have so
entrenched and fortified themselves by their wits, policies and counsels (as
it were in a strong City or Castle) that they seem impregnable, and laugh at
all opposite power: Yet, then God besieges, batters and takes them presently;
he takes in, and sleights their works with ease, he levels to the ground their
great thoughts, even the high Tower of their imaginations; That may be the
force of the word [He takes them.] For as every natural man labors to secure
himself and his insts, against the power of the word of God, by carnal
reasonings and pleadings for them. All which the Apostles calls strong holds (2
Cor. 10. 4, 5.) The weapons of our warfare are not carnal: but they are mighty
thorough God to the casting down of strong holds. Now (I say) as natural men
secure themselves (a^ it were in strongholds) by their carnal reasonings; so
wicked Politicians think to secure themselves, and fortify their designs by
plots and platformes of crafty counsel. But as God in the ministry of his
word, casts down all the arguments which a man frames in his heart, to
protect his lusts. So the Lord in the administrations of his providence,
throws down all the fortifications, which crafty men frame in their hearts, to
protect their law-lesse practices, and takes them in

Secondly, The word may imply the taking and binding of a man in bonds or in
fetters. He takes the wise in their own craftines, that is, he takes and binds
them as with a chain, or he fetters them in their own craftiness, so the word
is used (Prove. 5 22.) His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he
shall be holden with the cords of his sins.

Thirdly, The metaphor may be carried in an allusion to Hunters of wild beasts,
or to bird takers; who set nets and gins, traps or toils to take them: These
wise, crafty men, are cunning hunters, their trade and business is, to set
nets to catch, and toils to entangle, they dig pits and lay snares for others
to fall into; So the Prophet describes them (Jer. 5. 26.) They lay wait as he
that sets snares, they set a trap, they catch men: But at last, God takes
the wise in their own craftiness, that is, the pits they have dug, and the
snares they have laid, and the nets they have set shall catch themselves.

Fourthly, The word is applied in Scripture, to a taking, or a discovery by a
lot; So (Josh. 7. 15.) The rule was thus given, He that shall be taken with the
accursed thing shall be burnt; and verse. 18. Achan was taken, that is, taken by
a lot, the lot discovered and caught him. Achan had hid the Babylonish garment,
and the wedge of gold safe enough, as he thought: and one would have thought,
that in such a multitude, in such an huge host and throng of people, he might
have been hidden too; but God sends a lot, and takes out Achan from the midst
of all the multitude, he calls him out by name, this is the man. There may be a
like meaning and use of the word in this place, He takes the wise in their own
craftines, that is, men who think to shelter themselves amongst the multitude,
or to walk in the clouds of craft; men who hide and shadow themselves from the
eye of the world, as if none should see who they are, or what they do; even
these God will take, he will direct a divine lot. one time or other to
apprehend and lay hold on them; he will discover Achans, the troublers of his
Israel in their wicked counsels; and bring to light their stolen wedges of gold,
and their Babylonish garments.

There is one thing further considerable, from the sense of that Greek word,
which the Apostle uses (1 Cor. 3. 19.) (...), Manu capio and firmiter teneo
fugientem in cursu deprehendere ^anuque injecta capere, quicquam ut n^n
elebatur; unde (...) manipulus pugillus, Erasm.
He takes the wise, etc The Apostles word signifies properly to take, or a
taking with the hand, a laying hold upon one that is flying: As in a battle,
when the enemy flies and runs, the pursuer takes hold of him, and will not
let him escape: And so the sense is, that though these crafty ones think to
make an escape, when they have done mischief to out run the justice of men,
yea, to get out of the reach of God, yet he takes them, as flying enemies or
malefactors, that would make an escape; he catches them by the back, takes
them by the shoulder, lays fast hold on them, so that they shall not be able
to get away. He takes the wise in their own craftiness.

Lastly, It is observeable, that the Preposition [in] he takes them [in] their
craftiness, may be understood instrumentally; Plerosque astus illorum facit
Deus instrumentum ad arcendum ab ijs quod cogitant. Rab. Levi.
and so it as much as the Preposition [by:] He takes them in, that is, he takes
them by their devices; That preposition is often put instrumentally (Genesis 32.
10.) Jacob says, In my staff I passed over this Jordan; we translate, with my
staff, or, by my staff I passed over this Jordan. And so Heb. 1. 1. God who
at sundry times, spoke in time past to the fathers [in] the Prophets, so the
Greek; we translate by the Prophets, because they were the means or the
instruments, which God employed to speak by. Thus here, He takes the wicked
[in] their craftiness; or [by] their craftiness, their craftiness is the very
means and instrument by which God apprehends and takes them. So much for the
opening of the first clause. We may note hence, first, That

No wisdom or craftiness of man, can stand before the wisdom and power of
God. He not only takes them in their foolishness, but in their craftiness; He
stays not, till they begin to dote and do weakly, before he takes them; but
when they are in their height of wit, and in the depths of worldly wisdom and
policy, when they put forth the quintessence of craft, and give counsel like
the Oracle of God (2 Samuel 16. 23.) then God takes them. He takes them in their
craftiness. (Pro. 21. 30.) There is no wisdom, nor understanding nor counsel
against the Lord. No counsel against the Lord. How is it then said in the
second Psalm, The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take
counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed? There are many
counsels opposed against the Lord, but there are none prevailing against the
Lord. The meaning of that holy Proverb, is, That no wisdom, not the most
sublime and refined wisdom; no counsel, not the most machivilian or
Achitophelian counsel, can prevail against the Lord. Men, usually catch
others, when they are at a fault, or take them upon some advantage, and error
in their counsels. Most successes of men, are made out of the slips and defects
of their adversaries: They take, upon mistakes, either in advising or acting;
but after the most deliberate and grave debates, the choicest and best grounded
resolves, the Lord takes them. For (1 Cor. 1. 25) The foolishness of God is
wiser than man: And if the wisdom of man cannot match the foolishness of God,
how shall it contend with the wisdom of God? As the Prophet Jeremiah speaks
in another case, If I have run with footmen and they have wearied me, how can
I contend with horses? so if these men are not able to deal with the
foolishness of God, how shall the, deal with his wisdom? Not, that there is
any, the least imaginable foolishness in God, for as God is light, and in him
there is no darkness at all, so God is wisdom, and in him there is no
foolishness at all; but the holy Ghost speaks thus, to put God as low as the
foolishest thoughts of man can put him, which is to think there is foolishness
in God, yet in that, or then, he is wiser than they. Secondly observe;

That God turns the counsels of wicked men against themselves: He takes the
wise, not only in, but by their craftiness; He beats their own weapon against
their heads; He wrests their weapons out of their hands, and with them wounds
their hearts. Those counsels and contrivements, by which they thought to secure
themselves are their destruction. He destroys them in their counsels and by
their counsels.

This wonderfully magnifies and commends the wisdom of Qui scipserunt de art
militari, di unt summum genus demicandi, quoties calcato u^b^me adversarij, se
in hostilem cly^eum e^ig^t m^les and ^a contra stan^is vulnerat te^ga. S^^v. in
V^rg. Aen. 1 ^.
God: He does not trouble himself to devise some new way or stratagem to take
these men, but he makes use only of that which they have devised. It is the
noblest way of conquering, to conquer our enemy with his own weapon; such was
that victory of David over Goliath: and that was a type of Christ's victory over
the Devil and all spiritual wickednesses. And such will his victory be over
all the wickednesses of this world. The Lord is (and shall ^ver be) known by
the judgment which he executes, the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands, Higgaion Selah Rem medit^^dam sum^e, Jun. in loc.
, Mark and meditate, Psalm. 9 16.

It was the plot of Satan, to tempt man, who was made in the image of God (for
the doing of good and avoiding evil) to desire to be as God, knowing good and
evil; he tempts man to affect a Ditty, or a God ship, and his plot was to
ruin man below the beasts, by aspiring to an equality with God; or to make man
less then he was made, by seeking to be, as much as his maker. Now the Lord
takes (as it were) this weapon out of Satan's hands, and destroys him by it.
Satan would have man aspire to be a God, that he might be ruined; and God
becomes man to ruin Satan; This was the greatest counterplot that ever was.
God took the Devil in and by his own craftiness. As if God had said; Satan,
thou shall see what a fine device thou have devised I will meet thee in thy
own way, and turn it upon thee. Thou would have man become God, so to ruin
him; now God shall become man, and by that I will at once ruin thy counsels,
and repair the broken condition of man.

Joseph's brethren, had a device to hinder his prophecies, and make his dreams
but phancies; Joseph dreamed that his brethren should worship him; they sell
him for a captive into Egypt: what more opposite to honor among his brethren,
then captivity among strangers? yet this device effected what they opposed;
Joseph was exalted in Egypt, and his brethren pressed with want, worshipped or
bowed unto him for bread.

The Jews took counsel to kill Christ, and what was the motive? A wise man
among them suggests this fear; If we let him thus alone, the Romans will come
and take away both our place and Nation (Joh. 11. 48.) But the Lord took the
wise in this craftiness; For that cruel act in killing Christ, brought the
Romans upon them; The time comes (says Christ, he foresaw what would come)
that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and
keep thee in on every side, and they shall lay thee even with the ground, and
thy children within thee, and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon
another, because thou knew not the time of thy visitation, Luke 19. 43. 44.
And thus as the Psalmist (Psalm. 64. 8.) prophesied of his enemies, they made
their own tongues to fall upon themselves. A strange thing, that the fall of a
man's tongue should oppress his body, and whole estate; yet so it is, the weight
of a man's tongue falling upon him crushes him to powder. The seventh Psalm is
the paraphrase of this point (ver. 14.) He travelleth with mischief. and has
brought forth a lie; (that answers the 12th verse, He disappointeth the devices
of the crafty:) He made a pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch
which he made; his mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent
dealings shall come down upon his own pate: Here is the 13th verse made good,
He takes the wise in their own craftiness.

How does this aggravate the sorrows of crafty men? It is sad enough with the
crafty, when they are taken by the craftiness of other men; That any man
out-wits them, is enough to put them out of their wits; How then will they
live, being taken and ensnared b^ their own wit, when they see themselves
accessory to their own undoing; when they see they have pulled down their
estates with their own hands, and have put fire to their own houses? As it
greatens the sin, so it greatens the punishment, when a man falls by his own
hand; self-murder is the most sinful and most bloody murder. Neither is their
sin or punishment less, who die, by the craftiness of their own heads, then
theirs, who die by the violence of their own hands.

This is a visible truth among us, and he that runs may read it in the book of
Gods later providence, I believe our age will be able to make as fair a
record of this point for posterity, as any that has passed, if not as all that
have passed for many generations; my work not admitting long confirmations, I
shall give but three instances, that by them this truth may be established.

First, The Prelates procured a stinted, and (in some passages) a corrupted
Liturgy, to be sent unto, and imposed upon the Scottish Nation and that
occasioned the total suppression of their Prelacy in that Nation.

Secondly, The Prelates who were rooted fast enough in the Laws of the Land
before, would make a Canon Oath, to settle themselves in the consciences of men
to, that they being established both by Law and conscience, might be like Mount
Sion which cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever: yet that very Canon
Oath, has been turned upon themselves, and has not only blasted their pomp,
but battered down their power and has produced a Sacred Covenant-Oath, by
which both Houses of Parliament and the people of these three Kingdoms, are
engaged for their extirpation.

Thirdly, That act of many of the Prelates protesting against the validity of
any proceedings in Parliament, in that their absence from the house, as being
against Law; Gave occasion for a Law (which has also passed the Royal assent)
for their absence from that house (as members of it) for ever. O that men would
acknowledge and praise the Lord in his wisdom, and in these wonderful works,
which he has done among the children of men! He takes the wise in their own
craftiness, And, as it follows in the text;

The counsel of the froward is carried headlong. The counsel.] There is
somewhat further in that; not only are their devices disappointed, but their
counsels; Counsels are the results Consilium est ali quid faciendi non
faciendivee excogitata ra tio, Cicer, l. ^. de Invent.
of serious and sad debates; Craft is of one, counsel of many heads laid
together. Counsel is the extract of reason, both about what we are to do, or
leave undone: These counsels God carries headlong: There is nothing more
opposite to counsel then precipitation, long deliberation should go before
determination, but their counsels shall be carried head long: They shall either
be overhasty in counsel, or their counsels being solemnly enough settled, shall
be overhastily acted: Rash headlong execution may be as dangerous as rash
headlong resolutions. But whose are these counsels? the same men's still, though
under another notion. The counsel of the froward Before we had, the devices of
the crafty; and again, the craftiness of the wise; Now here, the counsel of
the froward. The Spirit of (...) a r^u^c. (...) Et in niph^^ Niph^^, tortus,
d^^ortus, per Me^^nyn. ^^ luctatus fu^t, qui enim lacta^ur cum al^quo, eum
vary torquet ^one^ eum vincat and prosternit. Notatur hic talis vel versutia,
qua quis facile alium a^icumq* habium ind^i^ ut nec facite cave ri, nec facile
teneri possi^ in actionib^s suis; vel ad luctatoes alludi^ur, Goc.
God varies words, but the men are the same. There is scarce variety enough of
words in all languages, to express the variety of wickednesses, which one
heart speaks. The Hebrew word in the root, signifies to wrest or to writh a
thing, or to rest and turn a thing as wrastlers their bodies. Hence by a
trope, it is translated often, to wrestle; because a cunning man in wrestling,
turns and windeth his body, and works himself in and out every way, to get
an advantage of his adversary any way; therefore your cunning-headed men, your
crafty men, are fitly presented under this word; they are like wrastlers, who
turn, and wind themselves in and out, and lie for all advantages; or, as we
speak, they lie at catch. A man knows not where to have them, or what they
mean, when they speak plainest, or swear solemnest: when we think we see
their faces, we see but their visards, all their promises and performances too,
are under a disguise. Such cunning gamesters or wrestlers are here intended.
One of the Patriarchs had this name (Genesis 30. 8) Napthali, and the reason is
there given, for (says his mother) with great wrastlings have I wrastled with
my sister, and I have prevailed, and she called his name Napthali: The Hebrew
is, with wrastlings of God, that is divine and vehement wrastlings; As if she
had said, I have used great and earnest endeavors, both with God in prayer,
and all other means, as a wrastler by might and flight, to obtain these
blessings (given before to my sister) and now I have prevailed. And it (...) No
^^ne lite^^s^, g^minatis, u^ insignis vafricies, and qu^si duplica^a ca^^dit^s
signif^^etur. Con^o^tupl^catus.
is observeable, that the Hebrews call an extraordinary cunning wrastler,
Pethalthol, which is this word doubled in the latter syllable because he is a
man of a double or extraordinary skill in wrestling, the word is doubled: and
so it expresses one that is double witted, or that has craft enough for two or
three, though not honesty enough for one. And this word is applied to the Lord
himself (Psalm. 18. 26.) V^iur hoc ve^bo, ut indicetur maxima quaedam and
invicta Dei quasi distor^io, impl^^atio and sacra caliditas adversus pravos,
calidos, distortos, q. d. adversus Cretenses cretiz at Deus, cum vafro
luctatorevare luctatur Deus, supplantatores supplanta^.
with the froward thou will show thy self froward: that is, If men will be
winding and turning, and thinking to catch others, or overreach the Lord
himself, with tricks and turnings of wit, the Lord will meet and answer them
in their own kind, he can turn as fast as they, he can put himself into such
intricate labyrinths of infinite wisdom and sacred craft, as shall entangle
and ensuare the most cunning wrast^er or tumbler of them all. He will Cretize
the Cretians, supplant the suppla^t^rs of his people.

Some of the Greeks Olymprodorus vertit (...), homin^s varios, nodoso^,
im^licitos, intricatos.
interpret this elegantly by a word in that language, noting a thing that has
many knots, folds or twists wreathes or plaits in it, as plaited hair, or a
folded garment; thereby shadowing out men like a serpent, of knotted, twisted,
enfolded spirits, men who wreath and plaite their actions so closely and
artificially that few can understand or tell what to make of them, or where to
find them: The counsels of these cunning, intricate, froward men,

Are carried headlong.] It is very observeable (Isa. 44. 25.) how the Prophet
threatens, that the counsels of the wise shall be turned backward; And here,
their counsels shall be carried headlong, that is, froward. God has ways of
all sorts to cross ungodly policies: he turns them sometime backward, and
sometime forward, by both or either they are disappointed: Counsels, are turned
backward, when the event is quite cross to the design, or the motion of
things, to the resolutions of the mind: As if a man purposing to go Eastward,
should be turned about (he knows not how) with his face into the West:
Counsels are carried headlong, when Omne consilium a^ta um in se^^^na^^one est
stultitia. Rab. Sol.
they go^ too fast forward, and make so much haste on in their way, that they
tire and are out of breath, or stumble and break themselves before they can
attain their journies end.

The Original word, signif^^s to hasten, and thence to be precipitate, (...) a
radi^e (...) Accel^rare, festinare, a^q inde praecipitem esse, impruden tem,
stultum; tam prudentia tranquil^^a^e and deliberatione gaudet. Eruto
impeturuunt in su^m pestem. Coc.
rash or foolish in counsel; Prudence uses to go softly, wisdom keeps a kind
of state in her pace, and loves to go step by step, not headlong; A prudent
man sets his head before his feet; his head goes before his feet in
consultation, but he loves to go upon his feet, not upon his head, in action:
It is the curse of the froward, their councels are carried headlong; when they
should go steddily upon their feet, they run upon their heads or run their
heads against the next wall; The meaning (in a word) is, They shall make more
have then good speed: or, they shall go so fast to their ends, that their end
shall be their undoing: As the Lord (in mercy) makes the rash understand, so
(in judgment) he makes the understanding rash. As this is here threatened, so
the former is graciously promised, (Isa. 32. 4.) The heart of the rash shall
understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerer shall speak plainly.
When the Prophet would show, how great a blessing God powers out upon his
people by Christ, he thus expresses it: Christ, who is the wisdom of the
Father, causes the heart of the rash to understand knowledge; it is the word
of the text, the heart of those who naturally run headlong upon businesses, who
have no steadiness nor stableness in their understandings, shall be stayed and
balanced with wisdom and gravity from above. Christ will take them off their
hurrying pace, and teach them to go and do, to advise and act with sobriety
and deliberation. The letter clause of the promise, joints fitly with this, And
the tongue of the Vt b^^sit do l^^g^ae accelerationem habet cum fitan haesi^ia,
ut nihil experite pronunciare possit, and quo magis prope^at eo minus proficit,
citata illa ling^a votubilitate. Ita qui intelligentia festinus est. nullum
profert util^ and integrum consilium sed manca omnia and (...). Bold. Bold.
stammerer shall speak plainly; such as stammering is to speech, the same is
rashness to counsel; A man that stammers huddles his words: he that has an
impediment in speech, speaks fastest, and because he cannot speak one word
well, he speaks many words at once: This have is his hinderance: in making so
much have to speak, he cannot speak at all; therefore we usually advise
stammerers, to take heed of speaking hastily, that they may speak plainly. The
Prophet joins these sweetly, to note the complete abilities of a Cstristian,
The rash shall understand, and the stammerer shall speak plainly; that is he
shall advise judiciously, and speak elegantly; depth of wisdom, and
sweetness of elocution shall meet in him though before rude and rustic. But
the counsels of the froward, though men of great parts, and filed speech, shall
be crried headlong. Observe hence,

Hasty counsels are successelesse counsels. Have in counselling always makes
waste, and so does hastiness in acting. Have in either may hurt, as much as
sloth, though usually we may divide the miscarriages that are in the world;
between hastiness in counsel, and slownesse in action. I know not which is the
greater prejudice to an honest design, to be quick in concluding, or to be
dull in executing. They who will not take time to consult about what they a^,
may have time enough to repent of what they have done. And they who will not
take the time for doing what they consult, loose all the time they took for
consultation.

Note Secondly, That

God disappoints evil counsels, as by stopping them, so by putting them
forward. The Princes of Zoan are become fools (says the Prophet) Why? The
Lord has a mingled a perverse spirit (or a headlong vertiginous spirit) in the
midst thereof, and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a
drunken man staggereth in his vomit, Isa. 19. 13, 14.

Verse 14. They meet with darkness in the day time, and grope at noon day, as in
the night. Here is a further agravation of the misery upon crafty, froward
Counselors, They meet with darkness in the day time. Some understand this for
the darkness of trouble, falling upon these men suddenly in the day of their
prosperity; as if the holy Ghost had said, In the day time of their greatest
glory, when they think their Sun at the height, then they are clouded and over
cast, they meet with the darkness of sorrow, and are benighted in a moment, Amos
8* 9. I will cause the Sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the Earth in
the clear day; (it is meant of great afflictions, as the next words interpret)
And I will turn your feasts into mourning.

But rather by darkness in the day time, we are to understand the Diurnae
tenebrae ignorationem denotant rerum clarissima^um.
ignorance of those things which are very plain and clear. They meet with
darkness in the day time, that is, they are puzzled to find out and discover
those things which are as clear as the light. God often sends such a spirit of
giddiness and blindness upon the counsels of his enemies; that easy things are
hard, plain things, obscure, and common questions very ridles to them.

They meet with darkness in the light. There is a double light necessary to the
seeing, or discovery of a thing. First, an external light. And secondly, an
internal light. External light is of the Medium or place, in which we see: the
air must be enlightened: Internal light is, of the Organ or instrument by
which we see; the eye must be enlightened. Though there be much light in the
air, a blind eye sees nothing. So the meaning of these words may be explained
[They meet with darkness in the day time] though these men have outward light,
though the business they are about, be plain, a clear case (as we speak) yet
they are so darkened in their understandings, that they cannot apprehend or make
it out. The Idoll*sheapheard is threatened with this woe, Zach. 11. 17. The
Sword shall be upon his arm (his power shall be broken) and upon his right eye
(his understanding shall be darkened) The Idol shepherd, shall be like an
Idol, having eyes, but seeing not; He was before a blind Seer, sinfully, and
now he shall be a blind-Seer judicially. A^ that wicked Priest, so these wicked
Politicians in the text, shall have a sword upon their right eye, a wound in
the best of their understandings, which shall make them also blind-Seers, and
make the light to be darkness round about them. The latter clause clears it
farther.

They grope at noonday, as in the night. To grope at noonday.] is the
description of a blind-man. For what the eye is to a man that sees, the same is
the hand to a man Palpare in merid^e est caeci periphrasis* Caecus tentat and
palpat manibus antequam pedem effe^t. Praebent manus ^aecis ^ulorum usus and
ministe^ia, Sanct. in ca. ^9.
that cannot see. A man that sees, looks his way, but a blind man feels it,
his hand is in stead of an eye to direct his way. They as it is said in the
text, Grope at noonday, as in the night. When the Sodomites were smitten with
blindness, They wearied themselves to find the door of Lots house, Genesis 19.
11. And when the Philistines had put out Sampsons eyes, and he was brought to
make them music at their feast, he said to the lad that held him by the hand.
Suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house stands, etc. he
could not see them, but he could grope or feel them out Groping infers either
want of light or want of sight These in the text, had light enough, therefore
the failing was in their eyes, They grope at noonday. This fearful judgment
the Lord threatens against his own people, Deuteronomy. 28* 29. Thou shall grope at
noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness. And it was brought upon them, as
themselves lamentably complain, Isa. 59 10. We grope for the wall like
blind-men, and we grope, as if we had no eyes, we stumble at noonday, as in
the night,

In that as it is here added as a further aggravation of the judgment of God
upon these, who thought themselves Eagle-eyed, all eye, and all the world
blind, That they shall meet with darkness in the day time. We may observe; first,

It is a sore judgment not to see when there is light. It is like starving at
a full Table, or perishing with thirst, in the midst of a fountain. It is a
great judgment not to have light to see by, but it is a greater judgment, not
to see by the light. It is a great judgment to a people, when they have not the
light of the Gospel; when Christ who is the light, is not shiningly preached
among them; but if light shine, if Christ be preached, and a people see it not,
This is a far greater judgment. The poor Gentiles before the light of the
Gospel came to them, sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death; and in that
estate, they could only (like blind men) grope after God, as the Apostle
elegantly expresses it Act. 17. 27. He has made of one blood all Nations of
men, etc. that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him
and find him. The Gentiles were inexcusable, if they did not find the Lord by
Feeling after him in the dark: What then are they, who find him not by seeing
in the light? The Apostle shows us them as lost men, and blinded by Satan, to
whom the light of the glorious Gospel does not shine, when it shines (2 Cor. 4,
3, 4.) To grope in Gospel Light, to be in darkness, when truth is at her
high-noon, is, as the shadow of death. It is the worst of sins to sin against
the light, and it is the worst of judgments, not to see the light; by which we
may avoid sin. The heat of divine wrath breaks out in this, when abused light
is hunished with want of sight, or when light is sent, and eyes taken away,
(Isa. 6. 9, 10.) When the Prophet brought killing light to the Jews, he says,
See ye indeed; but perceive not, that is, because ye have had light, and would
not see beleevingly; Now ye shall have light, which ye shall not see,
perceivingly, or distinctly: as the man in the Gospel saw, but he did not
perceive, when he saw men walking as trees, he had not a distinguishing eye, or
a discerning sense, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 5. 14. But why shall they not
perceive, when they see? The Prophet tells us, because the Lord had said, Shut
their eyes least they see. The work of a Prophet is to open eyes, but when men
wilfuly shut their eyes, then

God shuts them judicially, and blinds them with light. The Apostle quoting
this text, Acts 28. 27, expounds it so, Their eyes, have they closed, least
they should see; for this, God closed them that they could not see. Paul was
preaching, and he preached Christ the true light, The Sun of righteousness:
Behold the misery spoken of in this text, They met with darkness in the day
time. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light. Why love they darkness? Because they see not the
light: And because they see not the light, therefore they cannot love it. It is
impossible to see the light, the beautiful face of the truth, as it is
revealed in Christ, and not to love it. A Heathen said, if virtue (much more if
Gospel truth) were seen, every eye would be taken, and every heart led captive
by it. A great part of the world has not this light to see, and the greatest
part of those, who have this light, see it not. They must needs meet with
darkness, who are darkness, in the daytime. And they must grope at noon day,
as in the night, who are night. If men hear the law and the testimony, and
neither speak nor do according to that word, it is (as the Prophet gives the
reason) because there is no light in them; or as the Hebrew, No Morning in
them, Isa. 8. 20. Till the day starr arises in our hearts, the day before our
eyes, is night.

Secondly, observe,

Plain things are often obscure to the wisest, and most knowing men.

They grope at noon day, as in the night.] That which a man may see with half
an eye (as we say) these men, who think themselves All eye, cannot see. Men of
acute and sagacious understandings, men quick-sighted like Eagles, prove as
dull as Beetles. Owls and Bats see in the dark, better then in the light; And
(in a sense) it is true of these, they can see about the works of darkness,
but the light of holiness and justice, they cannot see. The reason is given in
that of Christ, The light that is in them is darkness, no wonder then, if the
light without them be darkness; if the inward light, the light that i^ in them
be darkness, how great is that darkness; so great that it quite darkens the
outward light. Inward darkness is to outward light, as a great outward light is
to a small one (in regard of our use or benefit) it extinguishes and overcomes
it. Hence these men cannot see, the plainest object, in the clearest light.
Light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not, Joh. 1. 5.

Christ breaks forth into a vehement gratulation to his Father, (Mat. 11. 25.)
I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven nnd earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. The wise
and prudent could not see, so much as children. They were so wise in their own
conceits, that they could not conceive the things of God. As it is in
spirituals, so likewise, in regard of civil counsels. God hides wisdom from
the wise, and understanding from the prudent. They shall not be able to do or
see, what a child might have done or seen, they shall do such things, and so
absurdly, that a child would not do them. Mysteries are plain* when the Lord
opens, and plainest things are mysterious, when he shuts the eyes of our
understanding.

Thus far Eliphaz has set forth the power and justice of God against
subtle, crafty counselors. Now he shows the opposite effect of his power and
goodness.

Verse. 15. But he saves the poor from the Sword, from their mouth and from
the hand of the mighty. But he saves the poor.] It is very observeable in
Scripture, that usually, if not always after the mention of judgment and
wrath upon the wicked, the mercy, goodness and love of God unto his own people
are represented, least any should think, that judgment is a work wherein God
delights, he quickly passes from it, and concludes in what he delights,
Mercy. As he retains not his anger for ever toward his own people, so he stay
^s not long upon the description of his anger against his enemies, because he
delights in mercy, Mich. 7. 18 A subject of mercy is most pleasant both to
the hand and pen of the Lord. He wishes rather to write in honey than in gall,
and to draw golden lines of love, then bloody lines of wrath. Satan is a
Destroyer, and he does nothing but destroy, and pull down. The Lord destroys
and he pulls down, he defeats and disappointeth, but he has another work
besides, he saves and delivers, he builds up and revives the hopes of his
people.

He saves the poor.] These poor, are Gods poor; Some may be called the
Devils poor, for they have done his work, and he has given them poverty for
their wages. Satan will give all his hirelings full pay when they die, The
wages of sin is death; while they live, many of them receive only the earnest
of it, poverty and trouble. All that are poor, stand not under the rich
influences of this promise, He saves the poor. Wicked poor are no more under
Gods protection, then wicked oppressou^s or wicked rich men are. This poor man
cried, and the Lord heard. Ps. 34. 6. Not every or any poor man. Some poor men
may cry, and the Lord hear them no more, then he did the cry of Dives, the
rich man in hell, Luke 16. Forget not the Congregation of thy poor, Psalm. 74.
19 Thy poor, by way of discrimination: There may be a greater distance between
poor and poor, then there is between poor and rich. There are many ragged
regiments, Congregations of poor, whom the Lord will forget for ever. But his
poor shall be saved. And these poor are of two sorts; either poor in regard
of wealth and outward substance; or poor in regard of friends or outward
assistance. A rich man especially a godly rich man, may be in a poor case,
destitute and forsaken wanting patronage and protection: God saves his poor
in both notions, both those that have no friends, and those that have no
estates.

The Hebrew word for Poor, springs from a root signifying desire; (...) a
radi^e (...), quod est desiderare, quasi pauper omnia de^ideret, cum nihil
habeat, inde Ebion haer^ti^us, quasi mentis, and inteligentiae inops, Schiud.
Quia omnibus indiget omnia cupit and g^ata habe^. Rab. Da.
and the reason is, because poor men are commonly rich in desires. They that
are full of sensible wants, are full of earnest wishings. They that are
empti^st of enjoyments are fullest of hopes and longings. And the reason why
poverty of spirit, in our spiritual estate, is pronounced a blessing, is,
because the poor in spirit are full of desires after spiritual riches. They
are ever craving and seeking to be filled with that fullness, which is in
Christ, with grace for grace; they would have every image of every grace in
Christ engraven upon their souls. Or (in a holy covetuousnesse) they would be
as rich in grace as Christ is. Grace for grace: as a covetous man, would have
penny for penny, pound for pound with his richest neighbor; or as an ambitious
man would have honor for honor, title for title with his greatest neighbor.
That Christian who sees his estate lowest, usually set, his desires highest,
his affections are ever upon the wing, for supplies from Christ. Both the
civil poor man, and the spiritual poor soul, would fain be enriched.

He saves the poor from the Sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of the
mighty. Some read this by apposition, he saves the poor from the Sword,
their mouth, making the latter to be but an exposition of the former, From the
Sword, their mouth, that is, their mouth is the Sword, from which God saves
his poor. So taken it is a truth for the mouth is a sharp Sword, as killing
as any instrument or engine of war. Hence others who keep this sense, read
it thus, A gladio or^^ ^orum. Vulg. Ab o^^isione oris eorum Chas. Vt (...)
genn^ivum. (...) G^ad^^ oris est ipsa lingua mala. i. e. calumnia falsa, qu^
homo tanquam g^adio ne^a^ur. Sed me^ius a gladio qui ^x ore ipso^um, i. e. a
falsis Testimoniis Drus.
He saves the poor from the Sword of their mouth, or from the killing stroke
of their mouth; making the particle Mem, in the Original, to govern the
genitive case, The Sword of their mouth, or the Sword coming out of the mouth.
There are two Swords of the mouth, two coming out of the mouth, or one double
edged. 1. Slander. 2. False-witnesse, by which often the reputation and
sometime the person of a man is murdered,

But I conceive that the clearest meaning of the Original (though both are
good) is, to read these as distinct evils from which, He saves the poor,
namely, 1. From the Sword. And 2 From their mouth. 3. From the hand of the
mighty. That is, From Nimrods, mighty hunters, oppressors of the poor; or
from the violent man. I returned (says the Preacher, Eccles. 4. 1.) and
considered all the oppressions that are done under the Sun, and behold the
tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter and one the side of
their oppressors there was power, but they had no comforter. Oppressors are
always clothed with power, and the oppressed seldom find so much pity, from
men, as to be their comforters, Therefore for the oppression of the poor, and
the cry of the needy, the Lord arises, and he saves his poor.

From the slaying Sword. slandering tongue. oppressing hand.

These three ways crafty, powerful men seek to destroy the poor. First, by
the Sword to cut off their lives. Secondly, by slander to blemish and blot out
their good names. Thirdly, by strong hand, to captivate their persons or
oppress their estates and liberties. To be saved from all these destructions
is complete salvation. Let the wicked attempt as many ways as they will or
can, to destroy, the Lord both will and can find out as many ways to save. The
malice of man shall never out act or over-match the mercy of God. He saves the
poor from the sword, etc.

I should here more distinctly open these great evils, The Sword, The mouth,
and the hand of the mighty, with the goodness of God in saving his poor from
them; But these particulars occur again, v. 20, 21. Where you may find a
more distinct explication of them. From these words thus far opened. Observe,

First, to what all the devices and crafty counsels of ungodly Politicians
tend. Here we have the issue or English of their counsels, the meaning of their
State mysteries is interpreted, Oppression. Their craft concludes in cruelty,
and their witty devices, in drawn Swords, slandering tongues, or the hands of
violence. We may say of them, as Jacob of his sons Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.
5, 6. Instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul come not thou
in their secret, for in their anger they will slay men, and in their self will
dig down a wall.

Secondly, observe their method. First, here is the bloody Sword, they will cut
them off, and rid their hands of them, if they can: They could wish (as that
bloody Roman Emperor) that the heads of their smpposed enemies (possibly their
best friends) were set upon one shoulder, and that they might cut them all off
at one blow. But if God save his poor from the mouth of the Sword; then, the
next weapon is the Sword of their mouths* Slanders and defamations, lies and
false accusations shall reach them, whom, iron and steel, pike and shot
cannot. The tongue is a little member, but it is a world of iniquity, and
beasteth (often acts) great things, Jam. 3. 5, 6.

But if God saves his poor from both mouth and Sword, so that their enemies
cannot prevail at sharpes. Then they try at blunts, by a heavy hand, to
over-loade, oppress and keep them down, in their estates, liberties and
privileges.

Observe thirdly; That

Salvation is of the Lord.

The faith of David grasped this, as his richest treasure, Psalm 68. 20. He that
is our God, he is the God of salvation; The Lord is called, the God of
salvation, as the God of comfort, both affirmatively and negatively. Salvation
is to be had in him, and there is no salvation to be had without him. Truly in
vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains
(from Armies, or from counsels; from the power and polices of men) In the Lord
our God is the salvation of Israel, Jer. 3. 23.

Fourthly, it is observeable against whom these crafty, cruel men muster up
and levy the united forces of sword, tongue and hand, They are the poor. He
saves the poor. Why, will not God save the rich, will he not save the mighty,
the Princes of the earth? Yes God will save all that fear him, both high and
low, rich and poor. Why then is it said, He saves the poor? As it were,
determining Salvation upon them. The reason is, because as the poor are most
easily oppressed* so usually they are most oppressed: where the hedge is lowest,
men go over fastest. And because, for the most part, Gods people are poor,
comparatively to others they are the valleys the lower parts of the earth; and
wickedness is commonly advanced upon the mountains of wealth honor and
greatness; therefore the denomination is taken from them; He saves the poor.
They whom God loves most, the world loves least, and they have least of the
world. The world gives most to its own; And God has given his own so much
beyond the world, that, the loss of a world, is not discerned in their estate,
and worldly gains are not often discerneable in their estates; therefore,
though in Christ, they are heirs of all things, and all is theirs, yet their
rank and titles are among the poor.

Fifthly observe: They are poor ones, yet what devising and plotting is here
against them? Crafty counsels, drawn swords, envenomed tongues, strong hands
lifted up: Against whom are all these? Against the poor: Note thence, That

Wicked men plot against the people of God, how poor and low soever they be.

As David said unto Saul (1 Samuel 24. 14.) After whom is the Facis quod est
tanto rege indignum, dum me tenuissimum tanto comi^atu persequeris, Jun. in loc.
King of Israel come out? after a dead dog; after a flea? As if he had said,
whom do thou pursue? thou do that, which is unworthy and much below so
great a King; will thou set thy strength against my weakness? Why do thou
arm against him, by whose conquest thou can get no honor? Alas, I am but a
poor man, a mean subject, no match for thee; I wonder you trouble your self
so much in following or opposing me? I am (in comparison) but as a dead-dog, or
as a flea. A dead dog cannot bite, or if I bite, it is but a flea-bite; A dead
dog can do no hurt, and a living flea can do but little. The people of God
(as such) never have any will to do wrong, and it is seldom that they have
any power to do wrong, and yet the world is all up in pursuit against them;
What Is the reason of it? what is the matter? The truth is, how poor and low
soever they are, yet there is an eye of jealousy awake upon them: The world
looks upon them as a suspected party, the world has secret misgivings, that
one time or other, they must rise upon their ruins; and therefore they will
keep them down (yes that they will) as long as they can. What a distance was
there between Haman and Mordecai? the one sat in the gate, and the other stood
at the Kings elbow, and had his ear, yea and his signet (upon the matter) at
his command: yet this Haman must needs oppress Mordecai, because he would not
bow: Haman had a jealous eye upon him, he was a suspected person; Though he
could not reach Haman yet Haman feared he might undermine him.

Again there is a continual Antipathy between the two seeds; and Antipathy is
incureable; To oppose the godly, is not so much the disease, as the nature of
wicked men: And we know, antipathies are against the whole kind, revenge
against this, or that individual is no ease to it; Antipathy is not spent, but
in the consumption of the whole kind. It is not this or that sheep which the
wolf hates, but every sheep, fat or lean, shorn or unshorne, that is all one
to the wolf; he will suck the blood of a sheep that has not a l^ck of wool
upon his back, as greedily as if that sheep had a golden fleece. Let a godly
man be poor or rich* low or high, their sword shall be unsheathed, and their
mouth opened against him; the old hatred and quarrel is against all. Haman
thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecay alone, wherefore Haman sought to
destroy all the Jews, Hest 3. 6. He hated those whom he never saw, those who
had never wronged him, happily had bowed unto him; yet, because Jews, dye they
must.

Sixthly observe (But he saves the poor) God delights to help the poor. He
loves to take part with the best, though the weakest side. Contrary to the
course of most, who when a controversy arises, use to stand in a kind of
indifferency or neutrality. till they see which part is strongest, not which is
justest. Now if there be any consideration (besides the cause) that draws or
engages God, it is the weakness of the side. He joins with many, because they
are weak, not with any, because they are strong; therefore Psa. 10. 14. 18
Hos. 14. 3.
he is called, the helper of the friendlesse, and with him the fatherless (the
orphans) find mercy; By fatherless, we are not to understand such only whose
parents are dead, but any one that i^ in distress; as Christ promises his
Disciples, Joh. 14. 18. I will not leave you orphans, that is, helpless, and
(as we translate) comfortless, though ye are as children without a father, yet
I will be a father to you. Men are often like those clouds, which dissolve into
the sea, they send presents to the rich, and assist the strong; but God sends
his rain upon the dry land, and lends his strength to those who are weak.
This poor man cried, and the Psalm. 34 6.
Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. Forget not the
Congregation of thy poor for ever: The truth is, he never Psalm. 7. 4. 19.
firgets them. They are graven upon the palms of his hands, such poor are his
treasure, his Jewels, as the signet upon his right hand; Therefore always in
his eye, yea always in his heart, though they lie in the dirt, or be trodden
under foot like mire in the streets. The Prophet makes this report to God of
himself (Isa. 25. 4.) Thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to
the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, etc.

Thus far Eliphaz has given instance of the great, mavelous and
unsearchable works of God, in a double reference: First, to wicked crafty
oppressors; Secondly, to poor helpless innocents; He shuts up this narration
with a double effect of these works upon those two sorts of men. First, showing
what effect they produce in the poor* namely hope: Secondly, what in the
wicked, namely, shame and confusion of face,

Verse. 16. So the poor has hope, and iniquity stops her mouth. Here is the
conclusion or result of all, the Epiphonema or exulting close, in which Eliphaz
perfects the story of those admirable works of judgment and of mercy; So the
poor has hope, etc.

This Original word for [poore] varies from the former, though a radice (...)
Exhaustus, de humo reproprie, per metaphoru^ de vi^ibus corporis and opibus
attenuatus, tenuis fortunae homo.
the persons and their estate be the same: That word noted them full of desire,
and this (which is the cause of it) empty of comforts: Properly it signifies
one, that is exhausted or drawn dry; Poor persons are exhausted persons,
exhausted of their strength, exhausted of their estates, exhausted of friends
and credit in the world. It is a metaphor taken from rivers, ponds or pooles,
that are drawn dry, when we would take the fish, or take away the defense which
they give to forts or Cities. Isa. 19. 6. And they shall turn the rivers far
away, and the Brooks of defense shall be emptied and dried up: which also
enlightens that text, Isa. 33. 21. Where the righteous Lord will be unto us a
place of broad rivers. A river that shall not be drawn dry or sluced out (as
Euphrates was by Cyrus when he took Babylon) but shall sill its banks and
shoares perpetually; that is, the Lord will be there a perpetual defense: A
river that shall never be impoverished, but shall keep a full stock and
treasure of streams and waters.

Dalilah had her name from this root, and it carries an elegant allusion to the
qualities of all Dalilahs, or insinuating lascivious women, they drayne the
strength, exhaust the purses, dry up the credit, wast the All, of the mightiest
Sampsons, whose hearts are entangled by their flatteries, or ensnared by their
beauties

The poor have hope.] The word has been opened at the 6th verse of this
Chapter, to note strong and earnest expectation; The poor man observing the
wonders, which God does in the world, cannot be out of hope, though he be out
of possession; And though his own strength be gone, yet he lives upon the
strength of Christ; he hopes strongly (that is the force of the word) when he
feels no strength. When I am weak (says the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 10.)
then am I strong, that is, I am strongest (through hope) in Christ, when I am
weakest through sense in my self.

More distinctly, this hope may be taken two ways.

1. For the object or thing hoped for. 2. For the act or grace of hope.
In the former notion of hope, the sense runs thus; God having taken the wise
in their own craftiness, and disappointed the device of the crafty, having
delivered the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of the
mighty, now the poor has the thing he looked for, the thing he prayed for, the
thing for which he has been seeking and waiting upon God: So the poor has
hope, that is, he has the mercy, he expected, salvation from the sword, etc.
he is made partaker of his hope, by those glorious administrations of the
justice and mercy of God. Hence observe; First,

Gods poor, hope for good in the worst times. When deliverance comes, these
poor have but that which they looked for; they looked for light, when they
were in the darkest condition. When they were exhausted, they knew God was not
exhausted; and when they were drawn dry, they knew the Lord was not; though
their treasure was spent, yet they were assured the treasury of Heaven was
full: When strength is gone, and money is gone, and friends are gone, yet God
is not gone; and therefore they know the good may come, which they hope for.
Turn ye to the strong holds ye priseners of hope, says the Prophet, Zech. 9.
12. The people of God (though prisoners) are yet prisoners of hope, that is,
they have hope of deliverance and enlargement, in their greatest streights: The
power of God is never imprisoned, and while his people can make this out, their
spirits are not. Secondly observe; It is no vain thing to hope in God.

The poor has his hope. The Prophet brings in the Jews thus trumphing in
God, (Isa. 25. 9.) And it shall be said in that day? What day was that? The
former verse points it out, A day wherein death shall be swallowed up in
victory, wherein tears shall be wiped away from off all faces, etc. And in
that day the people of God shall thus boast of God, and (as it were showing him
to the world) shall say, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he
will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation; vain hopes fill our face, with shame; but hopes
fulfilled, fill our hearts with rejoicing. The poor has his hope; he can show
his hope, it is visible: As Hannah, when she came to present her Son unto Eli,
For this child I prayed, as if she should say, Sir, here is my prayer, you
could not hear my prayer, when I was in the Temple, you thought I was drunken,
but now you may see my prayer, here it is, for this child I prayed, and the
Lord has given me my petition which I as^ed of him, 1 Samuel 1. 27. So the soul
says; In such a time of trouble, personal or national, I was praying and
seeking God, I was believing and hoping, men knew not, understood not the
workings of my soul, toward Christ, yet now they may see them, here is the
thing I prayed for, here is that I hoped for; So (first) the poor has hope.

Secondly, The poor has hope, that is, the grace of hope, or the gracious
actings of hope; and taking it so, the sense rises thus: So (that is) God
having done such great things, in disappointing the devices of the crafty, and
in saving his poor, by this means, the poor come to have hope, the grace of
hope strengthened and confirmed in them. Hence observe, That

The experience we have of Gods power and mercy, in saving us out of former
troubles, breeds and nourishes hope, against future times of trouble.

So the poor has hope. Though the poor man was in a hopeless condition
before, yet now seeing the works of God, he has hope laid up for ever. Psalm
64. 9, 10. All men shall fear and declare the works of God, for they shall
wisely consider of this thing: And what follows? The righteous shall be glad
in the Lord, and trust in him; that is, if they have failed in their trust
h^^etofore, and not given God honor by confiding in him, yet these wonderful
works of God (of which he speaks in that Psalm) work this hope. Romans 5. 4.
Tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope.
Graces have a generation one from another, though all have but one generation
from Christ at once. We have here the genealogy of hope in three descents.
Experience is the next, or immediate parent of hope. So the poor has hope.
Thus it is begotten. 2 Cor. 1. 10. God who has delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver, in him we trust, that he will yet deliver us. An armed
daring Goliath, should be looked upon as vanquished already, when we can but
remember a vanquished Lion and a Bear.

Again, The poor has hope: He does not say, God having thus destroyed the
ungodly, and saved his own people from the sword, etc. now they have liberty,
now they have peace, now they have abundance of riches and prosperity; but he
makes this the issue, now they have hope: Whence note, That

Hope is a greater and better possession unto the people of God here, than all
the great and good things which they possess.

Put as much into their hands us you can, there is more than that put in their
hearts by hope. The poor has hope: he looks over all his possessions, and
pitcheth upon expectation as his portion. The estate which a believer has in
the promises, is more than the estate he has in possession: Riches in the
promise, is better than riches in the chest. And so the deliverances and
protections which are laid up for the Saints in promises, are more than all the
deliverances and protections received and enjoyed: There is no enjoyment but
that in Heaven (where we shall enjoy all that ever was promised) so good as
hope, for what is promised. Alexander an Heathen, had such a notion about an
earthly hope, which had no ground neither, but the great things his own
ambition promised him, for when one seeing him give away all his present
inheritances, Persp^cta hac Dei providentia erga pauperes and humiles, maligni
and nocendi studiosi retrahent sese, neque inter se amplias ineant prava and
iniqua adversus pios consilia Aquin.
said, what Sir, will you make your self a beggar, no (says he) I will
reserve hope for my self.

And iniquity stops her mouth. Here is the opposite effect, iniquity; the
abstract is put for the concrete. iniquity, for men of iniquity, wicked men,
these stop their mouths. And it is observeable, that as before God made them
active in their own destruction, so here he makes them active in their own
silence; he says not, God stops their mouths, but they stop their own
mouths; that is, the wicked seeing those wonderful works of God, have not a
word to say, nor a counsel to give more against the godly; they are as mute as
fishes, as dumb as dogs, they know not how to slander, or of whom to
complain, and therefore they suspend, and enjoyne silence upon themselves. As
that word of Christ, Friend how came thou in hither, not having on a wedding
garment? (Mat. 22. 12.) so these works of Christ shall make his enemies
speechless, Iniquity stops her mouth,

This stopping their mouths, is caused two ways; First, from shame; A man is
sometime silent, because he is ashamed to speak: disappointments (especially
such as theirs before noted) produce shame naturally, and shame makes silent. A
man that blushes much, speaks little, and he that days not lift up his head,
will not be forward to lift up his voice. Mich. 7. 16. I will show mavelous
things (says the Lord, and what then?) The Nations shall see and be
confounded, they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be
deaf: They shall see it, and be confounded, that is, they shall be greatly
ashamed; confusion of face is but shame heightened, and the Holy Ghost puts
shame and confusion of face together in diverse places. Now this great shame
lays their hands upon their mouths, and puts their fingers in their ears;
they are resolvedly both dumb and deaf, at the sight of those mavelous
things.

Secondly, Admiration and amazement silence them: The works of God being
mavelous, they shall stand admiring and wondering at them, till they cannot
speak. Read the like, Isa. 52. 15. and Psalm. 107. 42. where, when the Prophet
had reckoned up many wonderful works of God, he concludes as in the Text, ver.
42. He sets the poor on high, etc. the righteous shall see it and rejoice
and all iniquity shall stop her mouth; while the Lord seems to do nothing, or
to do but little, iniquity will do nothing, but talk, or it talks very
much, it is very talkative; but if once God begin working, iniquity has done
speaking, you shall hear no more of them, till the next success on their
side. Then observe, First,

Wicked men will never cease slandering and censuring, bragging and boasting,
till some eminent judgment stops their mouths. So iniquity stops her
mouth, they will never stop their mouths before: Isa. 26. 11. Lord, when thy
hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see, and be ashamed for
the envy at thy people; I will make the judgment bigger and greater; write my
wrath in fairer, or rather in bloodier characters, that they may see them: As
small judgments will not open the eyes of wicked men, so small judgments will
not stop their mouths, but when God begins to work wonders, they are dumb, they
have done. Secondly observe, That

God will do such things for his people, as shall put the crafty to silence.
The Saints ought to live so holily, that by well doing they may put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2. 15. The Lord will do so justly and
gloriously, as shall put to silence the malice of the wisest men: These two,
the holiness of the Saints, and the Justice of God, are stopples in the
mouths, or the stop-mouthes of ungodly men. As they by unrighteous acts have
stopped other men's mouths, and silenced them, so God by terrible things in
righteousness, will stop their mouths, and silence them for ever: They shall
have nothing to say at last, either against the justice of God, or a against the
innocence of his people; against both these their mouths chiefly open. They
impute and fasten unrighteousness on God: you talk of God, and boast of his
promises, where is he? where are they? The Prophet brings them in, belching out
such blasphemies (Isa. 5. 19.) They say, let him make speed and hasten his work
that we may see it; and let the council of the holy One of Israel, draw nigh
and come that we may know it. Words filled with as high a sense of spiritual
wickedness, as wit and malice can infuse. They jeere the patience of God, as
slacknesse, and as if Justice it self were tired, or too slow paced, they
spur it on, to ruin themselves. You have often told us of the Holy One of
Israel, and what he would do, but threatened men live long, we see. You are
nimbler of your tongues, then your Holy One of Israel is of his hands:
Therefore let him make speed (if he can) and hasten his work that we may see it.

Will not the jealousy of the Lord awake, at the noise of this hellish
blasphemy? will he not stop the mouth of this iniquity? surely he will: And the
Prophet assures us he will at the 24th verse: Therefore as the fire devoureth
the stubble, and as the flame consumes the chafe, so their root shall be
rottenness, and their blossoms shall go up as dust. But how does the fire
devour the stubble? how does the flame consume the chafe? even in a moment;
fire needs no blowing, to make it take hold of dry stubble: Stubble is at once
flame and ashes. So speedy shall the consumption of these men be, who called
the Lord to make speed; Then (I believe) they will no more bid him make haste, The
mouth of this iniquity will be stopped for ever. Our God shall come, and shall
not keep silence. A fire shall devour before him, Psalm. 50. 3. And then the
wicked shall be silent in darkness, 1 Samuel 2. 9. The fire of wrath is all
heat, no light.

Lastly, all their slanders against the innocence of the Saints shall be so
confuted, that the adversary shall have nothing to say against them, Their
innocence shall be made, as clear as the light, and their justice as the
noonday: Yea God will so order it, that these crafty oppressors shall carry a
justification of God, and of his people in their own hearts. Their conviction
shall be so strong and their light so clear, that iniquity it self shall not
be able to gainsay, but must stop it is mouth for ever.

JOB Chap. 5. Verse. 17, 18. Behold happy is the man, whom God corrects,
therefore despise not thou the chastning of the Almighty.

For he makes sore and binds up: he wounds and his hands make whole, etc.


WE have finished the first branch of exhortation, begun ver. 8. wherein
Eliphaz moves Job, To seek to God, and unto God to commit his cause; with the
several arguments and reasons, strengthening that Exhortation. At this 17.
verse. Eliphaz begins a second branch of exhortation, and it is continued to the
end of the Chapter. We have the exhortation (or dehortation rather, for it is
expressed in the negative) in the latter clause of the 17. verse. Despise not thou
the chastning of the Almighty.

The first argument by which he quickens Job to receive this counsel, lies in
the former part of the same verse, Behold happy is the man, whom God
c^rrecteth: The argument may be framed thus. That condition is not to be
despised, wherein a man is truly happy. But, under the correcting hand of God,
a man is truly happy. Therefore that condition is not to be despised. Behold
(says he) happy is the man, whom God corrects, therefore despise not thou
the chastning of the Almighty.

Behold, happy is the man. To behold, calls here both for attention and
admiration: For here is a strange sight, An afflicted man, a blessed man,
N^^^^ll sense and reason cannot agree about this conjunction. They know not how
happiness and correction should meet, and kiss the same person: Therefore
raise up thy attention (says Eliphaz) to consider this wonder. When the Angel
of the Lord appeared unto Moses in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush,
he looked and behold the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush
is not burnt, Exodus 3. 2, 3. Such a great sight, this text shows us. A bush
burning, and not consuming, yea a bush burning, and yet flourishing, a bush on
fire, and yet a fruit-bearing bush, a bush blooming and blossoming with the
pleasantest and sweetest fruit on earth, or rather with the fruit of heaven,
fruit upon which we shall feed for ever in heaven, Fruit, the tastes of which,
make a heaven here on earth, Happiness. Well then, is this strange sight
presented to us, with A Behold.

Happy is the man whom God corrects, etc. Happiness is the enjoyment of good
commeasurate to all our desires. That Is perfect happiness. Happiness is the
sum of all our desires, and the aim of all our endeavors: And when we have
attained perfect happiness, we shall be at a full point, both of our desires
and endeavors.

But though all men have happiness in their eye (to be happy is their end, and
this happiness is but one) Yet the ways, which men have chalked out, as
leading to happiness, have been not only various, but almost infinite. Some of
the learned have reckoned up two or three Centuries, or hundreds of opinions,
concerning this one point. And it is well observed, that men varied thus in
opinion about happiness, because they thought the enjoyment of that, wherein
any of them was defective, would make them happy. He that was poor, said, I
should be happy, if I had riches, and thence grew his opinion, that happiness
consisted in riches: The sick man said, I should be happy, if I had my health,
and thence grew his opinion, that happiness consisted in health: Another was
obscure, mean and low, O (said he) how happy were I, if I were honorable, and
thence grew a third opinion, that happiness consisted in honor; Thus they
varied according to their particular necessities and interests. But amongst all
those Opinionists; we meet not with any one, who pitched upon this in the Text.
This is a Paradox to them all, A natural man cannot place happiness in
correction. No Philosopher or pure Moralist ever said, happy is the man, that
is sore; happy is the man, that is sick; happy is the man that is disgraced;
or happy is the man, that is in prison; These are riddles, such as nature is
not able to expound or make out; the Philosopher would as soon place light in
darkness, the Sun in a cloud, heat in coldness, the element of fire in the
water, as blessedness in sufferings. Therefore no marvel if Eliphaz usher it
in, with a Behold, Behold happy is the man, whom God corrects.

The word, Happy, is of the Plural number, or rather of the (...) Beatudines
constat indeclinabile esse, and formam habere n^n tam pluralis quam dualis;
Duall in the Hebrew. Some translate it in the Abstract, Behold the
blessednesses of that man whom God corrects: But it is fully rendered by the
Adjective, as we, Behold happy is the man, etc.

There is much contention among the Grammarians about the word, whether it be
abstract or concrete, a Nown, or an Adverb: But I will not stay on those, only
consider a little what account is given, why the word is used plurally or
dually.

First, it is to increase the signification, and heighten the sense; as noting
the confluence of many good things in happiness. Happiness Beati, beatitu do in
multis bonitatibus consistit^. Rab. D.
is not a single good; happiness consists in the concurrence or meeting
together of many good things: God, who is infinitely happy, infinitely blessed
in himself, and an infinite blessing, all blessing to his people, is not a
single good, or a particular good, but he is all good, both to himself, and to
his people. A godly man is happy in the largest sense, in all senses; because
his, is not this or that particular good, but all good. And he is not happy
only at this or that particular time, but at all times. He is as happy, when he
is suffering under the hand of God, as when he is serving God, as happy in his
passive as in his active obedience. And therefore the same word expresses his
condition, both in the one, and in the other.

Secondly, because there is a twofold happiness: First, the happiness of
this life. And secondly, the happiness of the next; Temporal happiness, and
eternal happiness; Corporal happiness and spiritual happiness. To note a
complication of all these, the word may be given in the Duall or Plural
number; He that is thus corrected, looses not temporal happiness, and he gains
in spiritual, and toward eternal happiness. The present and future happiness of
the Saints, the happiness of grace and of glory, differ but in degrees; It is
the same state in a higher stature: The same book in a more correct edition and
fairer letter. These differ as a child from a man, or as the morning light,
from the light at high-noon; So then, this word includes all kinds and degrees
of happiness: yet, here it is properly to be understood of the happiness of this
life, which only is consistent with correction; There are no rods in Heaven,
and we shall be past children, before we come thither.

Thirdly, we may answer plainly, that the word in the Hebrew Simplex and
genuina responsio est quod nomen ipsum quo He braei bea^itudinem notant, est
plurale tantum, ut latinis opes d^vitiae Ames: in Ps 3.
is only Plural or Duall, being never read in the singular number: As in the
Latin we have many the like words.

It is further observable concerning this word, that it is always applied unto
man, whereas the word (Barac) blessed, is applied both to God and man. This
happiness is a special and peculiar happiness of man: The Lord being
infinitely above, both obeying and suffering.

Happy is the Man. Enosh, the Hebrew word for Man (of whom happiness under
correction is predicated) is very suitable to this business of correction.
Enosh signifies a sickly, weak, miserable man: We might render the full sense
of the word thus, Happy is that miserable man, whom God corrects. That is look
upon a man according to the ordinary account of the world, and calculation of
reason he is a miserable man, a weak, sickly man; yet happy is this weak,
sickly, miserable man in the account of God, and by the calculation of faith.
Grace makes that good sense, which is a contradiction, both in nature and in
reason, A miserable man, and a happy man, one and the same.

In Psalm. 1. the word Ish is used, Blessed is the man, that is, Blessed is that
excellent man, that holy man, that strong man, walking and delighting in the
Law of the Lord. Yea blessed with the same blessedness is that miserable man
(smarting under the rod of the Lord) whom God corrects.

And yet blessedness is joined with all the words, by which man is expressed.
It is joined with Adam, Psalm 32. 1. Blessed is the man whose iniquity is
forgiven. Adam is the general word for Man, and is therefore most fitly joined
with blessedness in pardon of sin, because all men are sinners, and no man
can be blessed, except he be pardoned. Blessedness is joined also with Geber,
a strong, powerful and mighty man, Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou
chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy Law; Blessed is (Geber) the
great man, the honorable man, the highest by birth or place, whom thou
chastnest.

The Chaldee Paraphrase restraines the word [Man] to an individual, Beatus
Abraham, virpius quem corripuit Deus. Chald. Pa^ap.
to Abraham, as if Eliphaz had put the instance in Abraham, and said, Behold,
happy was that holy man Abraham whom God corrected, therefore despise not thou
the chastning of the Almighty; I can give thee a famous example of a godly man
corrected, Abraham (thy Ancestor) met with afflictions as well as thou, and yet
he was a most happy man: therefore despise not thou the chastning of the Lord.
But the word is general, and so we are to understand it; though this be a
truth in any or every instance among the servants of God

I must yet put in a caution for the right understanding of this proposition,
Blessed is the man, whom God corrects. The meaning is not, as if happiness
were the portion of every miserable man, or of every man that is afflicted, do
not think so; many are at once, corrected and cursed, troubled and miserable
in trouble. To many, their present sorrows, are but the fore-tasts of eternal
sorrows; As Christ spoke in a common case; These things are but the beginning
of sorrows: So we may say to the particular cases of many groaning under
sickness, poverty, disgrace, etc. Alas, poor souls, ye are so far from being
happy in these, that these are but the beginnings of your unhappiness; God
does but begin to call for some arreares, due to his justice, which you must be
a paying and satisfying to all eternity.

There is no happiness in affliction naturally considered; it is accidental
to afflictions, that happiness is associated with them. Affliction in it self
is grievous and it would be only so to us, did not the overruling, admirable
dispensations of God, temper, order, dispose, and work it to an end above its
own nature; it is the art and wisdom of the Physician, which corrects
poisonous simples and ingredients so, as to make them medicineable. And did not
the wisdom and goodness of of God, correct our corrections, they would not
be medicine to us, but poison. It is not correction, but the hand of God with
it, and in it, which makes us happy.

Happy is the man, whom God corrects. The word, which we translate (...)
Arguit, redarguit, corripuit, praeparavit verba contra aliquem, disputa^do and
ostendendojus. Quod et si verbis plerumque fiat pertinet tamen ea vox ad
sevirorem discip inam and verbera, quae cujuspia^ peccati reprehensionem
comitari solet. Pined.
correct, signifies to reprove or to convince, by arguments or dispute; To
argue a man down from his error, by the strength and clearness of reason or
divine authority. So Levit. 19. 19. Thou shall not suffer sin upon thy
brother; thou shall surely rebuke him. Thou shall rebuke him, it is the word
here used, that is, thou shall bring such arguments, as may convince him of his
sin, and lay his wickedness open before him. This word is applied to
corrections and afflictions in Scripture, because with convictions, we feel
corrections frequently joined; The Lord argues the matter, and (as it were)
disputes with some very long, who yet will not let in divine truth, nor be
persuaded, though they are persuaded; What does he then? Then he sends
correction with his redargution, he clothes his words with blows, disputes
with a God in his hand, and brings an argument from feeling, when reasoning
prevails not. In this book of Job, Elihu shows it, Chap. 33. 16, 19. Then he
opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction, he is chastened also
with pain upon his bed.

Hence observe, First,

That afflictions to the children of God at sorest, are but corrections.

Blessed (or happy) is the man whom God corrects. You will say, but what is a
correction? And how (in a strict sense) differenced from judgments and
punishments, and wherein do they agree?

They agree first in the efficient cause. God lays his hand on man in both.

Secondly, They agree in the matter; the same evil, the same trouble to one
man, is a correction, to another a judgment.

Thirdly, they may agree also in the degree; A trouble or an affliction may
fall and lie as heavy, and be as painful to sense upon a child of God, as upon
the vilest wretch in the world; he may be as poor, as friendlesse, as sick,
as sorrowful in his outward man, as any wicked man; he may lie in the same
dungeon, and be bound with the same chain, he may be slain with the same
sword, burnt at the same stake, eaten up with the same famine. So that both in
the materiality, and likewise in the graduality of it, it may be the same on
both, yet, upon one it is a correction, upon the other, a judgment.

What then is this correction? And where will the correction and the judgment
part?

I conceive, that the infirmities of the Saints, and the sins of the wicked
differ, as judgments and corrections differ. Now look upon those sins, which
we call the infirmities of the Saints; they may be the same in the matter, the
same in kind, yea (possibly) the same in the degree (I mean respecting the
outward rule given by God, and the outward act committed by man) with the sins
of those, who know not God, or who, in sinning, go against their knowledge.

Then, where do they part?

Surely, where corrections and judgments part. And where is that? Especially
in two things.

First, in the manner how. 2. In the end why, they are inflicted.

First, the Lord never corrects his children with such a heart, as he carries
in laying trouble upon the loins of wicked men. The heart of God is turned
toward his children, when he corrects them, but his heart is turned from a
wicked man; when he punishes him. The Lord is even pained (that I may speak as
the Scripture often does in this point, after the manner of men) I say the Lord
expresses himself as pained, as grieved, as if every stroke went to his own
heart, when he strikes his children. When he is about to strike, he is (as it
were) unresolved whether he shall strike or no, and as soon as he has
stricken, he (as it were) repents that he did strike them. All which motions of
his heart the Lord shows us in the highest strains of passionate Rhetoric,
Hos. 11. 8, 9. But when he takes the wicked in hand to punish them, we read of
no passion ascribed to him, but these, delight or joy, and the effect of them,
laughter: hatred or indignation, and the effect of these mocking at them, Pro.
1. 26. I will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes. And when
he resolves upon the destruction of his enemies, he speaks as if then he had
unburden'd himself, and his heart were lighter then before, Isa. 1. 24. Ah I
will ease me of my Adversaries, and avenge me of my enemies.

Secondly, the difference is as broad about the end. When God lays the rod of
correction upon his child, he aims at the purging out of his sin, at the
preventing of his sin, at the revealing of a fatherly displeasure against him,
for his sin; The Lord would only have him take notice, that he does not approve
of him in such courses. When these ends are proposed every affliction is a
correction. But the afflictions of the ungodly are sent for other ends. First,
to take vengeance on them. Secondly, to satisfy offended justice; justice
cries aloud against them, and they have nothing to interpose, but their bare
backs or naked souls. The Lord comes as a severe Creditor, and bids them pay
that which they owe, or suffer and to prison, because they cannot pay.
Secondly, observe.

A child of God is in a happy condition under all corrections.

As man (in a natural or civil capacity) at his best estate is altogether
vanity, Psalm. 39. 5. So in a spiritual capacity, he is altogether happiness,
in his worst outward estate; Happy is the man whom God corrects, he is a gainer
by correction: If he loses any thing, it is but the dross of his
corruptions, By this therefore Isa. 27. 9.
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away
his sin: Corrections are not sent to take away his comforts, but to take away
his corruptions. That fire which God kindles upon his children, shall burn
only (as it did the material bonds of the three children in Daniel) the
spiritual bonds of their iniquity, that they may be more free to
righteousness. Again, Crrections are not manifestations of wrath, but an
evidence of his love, and of their sonship: Whom I love I chastise, Rev. 3.
21. And if ye endure chastning, God deals with you as with sons, Heb. 12. 7.
The love of God is better then life, and to be a son of God is the highest
privilege of his love. Where shall we be happy if not in that which assures us
of such love, and of love in such a relation? Hence the Apostle concludes (2
Cor. 4. 12.) So then, death works in us; death, that is, our daily sufferings
and endurings. He speaks (indeed) especially of sufferings for the truth, from
the cruel hand of man: but it is true likewise of all sufferings under the
correcting hand of God: Those strokes which are deadly to our bodies, may yet
work for us. And what work they? The seventeentth verse answers the question,
Our light afflictions which are but for a moment, work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. The sufferings of the Saints are
active, and their passions opperative: But how do they work? Not by way of
merit or earning (Our blood cannot oblige God) but by way of preparation. The
Lord sends afflictions, to fashion and cleanse our hearts, as fit vessels to
hold an exceeding weight of glory: Our bearing the heaviest afflictions does
not weigh so much as the least grain of glory, yet they fit our hearts for an
exceedingly excellent weight of glory. We cannot say properly, (...).
that they work any glory, but by an Hyperbole in speech, we say, they work
toward an Hyperbole in glory.

And if any doubt, can a man be happy when his outward comfort is gone?
Doubtless he may: For a man is never unhappy, but when he has lost that
wherein happiness does consist: The happiness of a godly man, does not
consist in his outward comforts, in riches, in health, in honor, in civil
liberty, or humane relations; therefore in the loss of these he cannot be
unhappy. His happiness consists in his relation to, and acceptance with God,
in his title to, and union with Jesus Christ, While he keeps these privileges
(and these he shall keep for ever) what has he lost, if he loose all besides
these? He has not lost any thing discerneable, out of his estate. Suppose a
man were worth a million of money, and he should loose a penny, would you think
this man, an undone man? No: His estate feels not this loss, and therefore he
has not lost his estate. If a man should buy a thousand measures of corn or
cloth, and should loose the given handfuls of the one, or inches of the other,
would ye say, that this man had lost either his corn or his cloth. All the
things of the world (and they only are looseable) which a godly man has, are
not so much to his estate as a penny to a million; They are indeed no proper
part of his estate, they are but an additionall overplus to his estate: As the
handful of grain, or inch of cloth, are no part of the measure agreed or
bargained for: Only so much that speech of Christ imports, Mat. 6. 33. Seek
first the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all other things
shall be added or ministered to you; your kingdom is whole and safe to you,
though you have not these: These things are extrinsicall and foreign to all
that, which I reckon upon as your estate: God having given us Christ, casts us
in the creatures, as not coming upon any account in that vast act of his free
love and bounty: And shall we account him unhappy, who has lost these things,
which were never brought to account as any part of his happiness? Then happy
still, though corrected. And which is yet more, correction takes nothing from
the stock, but it adds somewhat; correction brings in a revenue of profit
with it: They (says the Apostle, meaning our earthly parents) chastned us
after their own pleasurs, but he for our profit. What profit? do houses and
lands: gold and silver, blossom from the correcting rod? Surely they may: But
he means better profit then these, and a far more noble merchandise: Gold
and silver are poor and base, to the profit which comes in by chastnings;
grace and holiness come in this way: He for our profit, that we may be
partakers of his holiness, Heb 12, 10. We want nothing of the happiness in
heaven, but so much holiness, as we shall have in Heaven. Surely then,
whatsoever affliction takes away, it cannot take away our happiness, for as
much as it makes us greater sharers in, and partakers of holiness.

And the corrected children of God, are unhappy only in the opinion of other
men, not in their own; When did you ever hear any Quamvis sancti videantur
ignorantibus esse miseri, non possunt tamen esse aliud quam beati. Nemo aliorum
sensu miser est sed suo Nulli enim beatiores sunt, quam qui ex sententia sua
and voto agunt. Humiles sunt religiosi, hoc volunt: paupe res sunt, pauperie
delectantur: Lugent, lugere gestiunt, etc. Salv. de gub. Dei. l. 1.
of them say, they were unhappy, because they were corrected. I do not remember
that I ever read or heard any of them say, O unhappy we, who are thus
afflicted! Salvian answered this objection well, when he saw many scandalized
at the afflictions of the Godly, thinking theirs a very sad and pitiful
condition: Do you hear them complaining (says he) or did they ever complain
to you? No man is to be aceounted miserable in another man's sense, but in his
own: You make the complaint not they. The truth is, a holy heart can bear
trouble with more ease, then a carnal heart can see it. Paul (whose whole life
after conversion was but one continued affliction) was so far from
complaining and saying, O unhappy man that I am, that he rejoiced in
tribulation, and was but as sorrowing, yet always rejoicing I confess, it
becomes us to be more sensible of corrections, then of persecutions, the former
being usually, sufferings upon our defects in grace, and the latter upon our
highest actings and puttings forth of grace. It becomes the Saints to be
humbled under corrections; but who has heard them (when they were themselves)
complaining of corrections? I have often heard them blessing God for
corrections, I have often heard them say, it was, and it is good for us, that
we have been corrected; And while the Saints write their afflictions upon the
I^vrntory of their goods; we have no reason to put them to account or cast them
up among their evils.

Lastly, A godly man cannot be unhappy while he enjoyes God And he usually
enjoyes God most, when he is most afflicted. A wicked man is never unhappy in
his own thoughts, till he has lost his god, such a one as he is, his riches,
his pleasure, his credit, these he makes his god, instead of a better, indeed,
instead of Him, who is Best of all: These are looseable gods, and so his
happiness may soon be lost; but he that once enjoyes the true God, can never
loose him and therefore can never loose his happiness.

That of Saul, is one of the saddest speeches in all the book of God, 1 Samuel
28. 15. I am sore distressed, for the Philistines make war against me, and
God is departed from me. When trouble comes, and God departs, when sickness
and poverty make war upon a man, and God be departed from him O how unhappy I
what words can express the unhappiness of such a man? But they who can take
liberty, and estate, and life from us, cannot take God from us; and if God
should take all these from us; he will not, he cannot (because he has promised
he will not) take himself from us: L (says the Lord) will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee Heb. 13. 5. And if God forsake us not, happiness cannot, for
he is our happiness.

A Heathen could say, it was unbecomming a Roman spirit, to cry out (in his
losses) I am undone, while Caesar was safe: It is infinitely below a Christian
spirit, to say, I am undone, while Christ is safe; such language is grossest
barbarism in all the Churches. They who cannot loose either their souls or
their Savior in the worst condition, cannot be unhappy in any condition, much
less then under the fatherly correcting hand of God.

Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects, is a truth which no storms of
trouble shall ever shake or weaken.

Therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty. That Is the
inference.

The word which we translate [despise] has various significations, and they
will all be profitable for the clearing of this point: therefore I shall open
them distinctly, and give some brief notes upon every one in order.

First, It (...) Significat, spernere, fastid^re, reprobare vel rejicere
aliquid cum fastidio, tanquam vile and contemptum, Sept. Reddun^ aliquando per
(...) and hic per (...), ne renuas aut averseris.
signifies to reject a thing, or cast it off with loathing; when a man's stomach
turns against some meats, or they go against his stomach, loathing arises
from it. So the word is used, Numb. 11. 20. when the people murmured because
they wanted flesh, God threatens them with satisfying their desires; Flesh
would you have? You shall have flesh: it is a threat: But how shall they have
it? You shall not have it one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten
days, nor twenty days; but you shall have flesh even a whole month, until
it come out of your nostrils, and it be Vt sicut fastidio illu fuisset Deus
op^^mus, ita etiam fostidio illis sint creaturae, and suae ipsorum voluptates.
loathsome unto you, or till you your selves despise it. It is most just with
God, that they who loath his will, should at last loath their own desires. And
that the creatures should not long please them, who take no heed to please the
Creator. The least mixture of Gods displeasure, sowres our sweetest contents,
and makes our very pleasures loathsome.

Where also (by the way) we may observe the great difference between earthly,
and spiritual things: The best of earthly things, used too much or too often,
grow loathsome: Angels food (Manna or Quails) will not go down long with us.
But Christ, the spiritual Manna, and all heavenly things, the more we have of
them, and the longer we are dieted with them, the more we shall delight in
them: These will not loath us, after two, or five, or ten, or twenty days, or
after a whole months feeding on them: No, we shall feed on them days without
number, or the whole day of eternity, without any loathings; use and delight,
shall never cease or abate; appetite shall renew every moment, though our
enjoyment be but one and the same, Yea, the Saints shall be so far from
loathing the pleasant cup of glory, that they ought not to loath, and (Christ
strengthening them) they shall not loath the bitter cup of sorrow: Their
stomachs shall not turn, though dieted more then two, or five, or ten, or
twenty days with the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction. That is
the first sense of the word, in allusion to nauseating at the sight or long use
of meat: Loath not the chastning of the Lord.

Or the word may seem to carry a reference to physic* or medicines, as well
as meat, which you know is many times given in a better pill, or in a
distasteful potion; The sick man is apt to loath the potion brought him, and
turn his head away from it; what he take it? no not he. He had rather die then
drink such a draught, he is ready to through it against the wall, and spil it
one the ground rather then drink it: But then his friends or the Pbysitian
persuade with him; Be not angry, though it ^e loathsome to your stomach, yet it
is wholesome for your body: It is an enemy only to your disease therefore loath
it not. So here, Eliphaz (as it were) brings in God, standing like a Physician,
or a father, or a tender mother at the beds-side, where a sick child o^ friend
lies, using many entreaties and persuasive reasons to take a bitter potion; my
child, or my friend, do not loath, do not despise, no, nor distaste this
medicine, do not cast it away; though it ^e bitter in your mouth, yet take it
down, and the effects of it will be sweet to your whole body. We find in
Scripture, afflictions compared to a cup; Our Lord Jesus calls all his
sufferings for our salvation, a cup, and it was a cup tempered with the venom
and poison, with the gall and wormwood of all our sins; it was a loathsome
potion indeed; and such as would have turned the stomachs of all men and Angels
to have drunk it. So much of the first sense of the word, as it signifies
loathing, whether in respect of meats or medicines.

Now forasmuch as here is a charge given under this notion, not to loath
chastnings. We may observe,

There is, or possibly may be an averseness in the best of Gods children for a
time, from the due entertainment of chastnings.

He speaks as if most were loath to take them down, and therefore he exhorts,
not to loath them: Even the Lord Jesus Christ (so far as he was partaker of
our nature) seemed to loath the bitter cup of sufferings. Hence he prayed hard,
once, and again, ye a third time, Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from me, (Mat. 26. 39.) Yet at another time, he speaks as if he had been
a thirst for that cup, and angry with Peter who would have hindered his draught,
The cup which my Father gives me, shall I not drink it? Joh. 18. 11. and
shortly after, he indeed drunk it up to the bottom. Affliction is also a
bitter cup to the Saints, and they (as Christ) pray again and again, yea thrice
against it, because to sense, no chastning seems joyous but grievous, Heb.
12. 11. through grace persuades them to drink it, and faith gives them a taste
of much sweetness, when they have drunk it: As a sick man is backward to take
a distasteful medicine, till his reason has overcome his sense, so a godly man
is unwilling to bear afflictions, till his faith has overcome his reason; Nor
can he quietly endure the troublesome smart of the rod, till he is assured of
the peaceable fruits of righteousness which grow from it, to those who are
exercised by it. When the Apostle is carried up on those Eagles wings of
assurance, to see a house not made with hands eternal in the Heavens, then he
groans earnestly under the burden of his earthly Tabernacle, and desires to
die; yet looking upon death, he saw no form or comeliness in that, why he
should desire it; and therefore he seems to correct himself, at least to draw
his mind plainer with the next drop of his pen; Not for that we would be
uncloathed, but clothed upon, that mortality may be swallowed up of life. He
speaks somewhat like a man, who in a time of heat, hastily strips himself to
go into the water, but putting a foot in, and finding it cold, calls for his
clothes again. The Apostle in a true holy heat of spirit, had in his desires
almost stripped himself of his body, but putting a foot into the grave, he found
that so cold, that he had no great mind to it, and therefore had rather keep
on the clothing of his body, and have a suite of glory over it, then lay it
down. The Saints desire to live with Christ, but in it self, they desire not
to die: They had rather their mortality should be swallowed up of eternal
life, then their temporal life should be swallowed up of mortality. They that
have grace, like not the disunions of nature. Now, as it is in the case of
death (which i^ to the Saints the last and greatest affliction) so likewise in
the case of all afflictions, which are as renewed and lesser deaths, Though
they embrace and kiss them (both in a holy submission to the will of God, and
in an assured expectation of their own good) yet they have nothing pleasing in
them; much, which creates so much loathing, that the best do but need counsel
and encouragement to take and digest them.

And then if there be some averseness even in the best from these potions of
affliction, tempered with the mercy and goodness of God; no wonder if there be
an abhorrence in wicked men, from those deadly potions, mixed only with his
wrath and justice. The Psalmist presents the Lord to us, with a cup in his hand
(Psalm. 75. 8.) In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, the wine thereof is red
(which notes fierce wrath) and it is full of mixture: (This mixture, is of
judgments, plagues, and punishments, this is the portion of their cup, Psalm.
11. ult.) But what will the Lord do with this mixed cup? who shall sip, at the
top of the cup, he tells us not, but he is express, whose the bottom is, He
powers out of the same (some drops are spilt here and there) but the dreggs
thereof, all the ungodly of the earth shall wring them out and drink them;
Alas they loath it, their stomachs turn at it: They have not been brought up
to drink dreggs, they have had their wine well refined, and sparkeling with
spirits in Crystal glasses; and how can they get this down? They who have
drunk so willingly and freely of the cup of sin, shall be forced whether they
will or no to drink the cup of judgment. And it is not a sip or two shall
serve their turns, they must drink all, dreggs and all, they shall drink it
to the bottom, and yet they shall never come to the bottom; they have loved
long draughts, and now they shall have one long enough there is eternity to the
bottom: If a cup of affliction, which (in the effect) is a cup of salvation, be
sometime, or for a time, nauseous to the godly, how deadly sick will the
ungodly be, who must for ever drink a cup of wrath and death?

Secondly, The word which, we translate despise, notes the rejecting of a thing
as unprfitable, or unusefull: That which a man despises, he thinks he shall
have no good by it: Things which are unprofitable are despicable: So the word
is used (Psalm. 118. 22.) The stone which the builders refused or despised, is
become the head stone of the corner. There were master builders in the Church,
who (when they surveighed all sorts of materials or stones for their fabrique
of faith) looking upon the person of Christ, thought him fit only to cast out
among the rubbish, as altogether unusefull; They laid him by, as a
refuse-stone, who is the head cornerstone, both the strength and beauty of the
whole building Thus the word is very appliable to the present Text, refuse not
corrections, as unprofitable and useless: Say not (as the Jews of Christ, Can
any good come out of Nazareth? so) can any good come out of chastnings? Despise
not the chastning of the Almighty.

And from this Notion of the word, we may observe a second prejudice against
the rod: Even the Saints are ready to conceive afflictions to be unusefull, and
that they could well enough spare, and be without their troubles. A natural
eye never sees nor finds any thing but damage by affliction; and a spiritual
eye does not always see the advantage that comes by them Yea, he may sometime
say of an affliction, it will be my undoing, and the ruin of my house, and
yet, afterward find it as a corner stone, the choicest outward means, which
(through the blessing of God) has united the walls both of his spiritual and
civil building, the frame both of grace within, and comforts without. The
Apostle Peter, has a strange Parenthesis (1 Pet. 1. 6.) For having told them
of their rejoicing in the safety of their spiritual estate, being kept (or
secured as with a Garrison from Heaven) by the power of God, through faith unto
salvation. Though now for a season (if need be) ye are in heaviness through
manifold Temptations, or afflictions. Observe how he puts an If need be, or a
supposition of necessity upon the afflictions of believers. As if he had said,
ye who are the Candidates of eternity, and heirs of salvation, may judge your
selves past the rod or the ferula, and think, now ye have need of nothing but
comfort or rejoicing in the hope of that salvation, ready to be revealed; but I
tell you, you may have need of heaviness yet, before you come to Heaven: and
of manifold temptations, for the removing or subduing the corruptions of your
hearts, before you enter upon your incorruptible inheritance. We are apt to
conceive chastnings to be of no use, when they are as necessary as our daily
bread; Therefore despise not chastnings, as useless or unprofitable.

Thirdly, the word is applied often to the rejecting of a thing or person, as
low, dishonorable and disgraceful: In this sense also it is appliable here.
Despise not chestnings; That is, do not think thy self disgraced when thou
art chastised: the heart of man is naturally full of pride, Man is a proud
piece of flesh. Nor does he resent any thing more then his own dishonor; many
can bear the pain of the cross, better then the shame of the cross. It is
very observable to this purpose, how the Apostle describes the Lord Christ in
his sufferings, Heb. 12. 2. He endures the cross, despising the shame: as
noting, that his being above the shame of the cross, bore up his spirit under
the cross. To despise shame, is to look upon that, which the world counts
shameful, not only as despicable in it self, but as not hurtful to us: When
a man despises an enemy, as Goliath disdained David (1 Samuel 17. 42.) he presumes
himself above his enemies power to hurt him: So to despise shame is to make
nothing of it, or to think our selves no whit the worse for it; yea rather to
think our selves honored by it, And until in this sense we can despise
shame, we shall despise correction and the cross. Who is it almost, that finds
not this the hardest text in all the chapter of afflictions? Zedekiah was more
afraid to be mocked by the sugitive Jews, then to be a prisoner to the King of
Babylon, Jer. 38. 19. If a man be poor, presently he thinks he is disgraced:
If he be weak he doubts he shall be contemned: If he loose his estate, he
fears he shall loose his credit in the world; he was a man of place, some body
among his neighbors, but now he shall be slighted. Suffering for well doing is
our crown, suffering for evil doing is our shame, but it is our shame to
suffer.

Fourthly, To despise a thing, notes the slighting of it, as if we did not
think it worth while, to take any notice of it; and so this will be the sense,
Despise not thou the chastnings of the Lord; that is, do not slight the
chastnings, do not lightly pass them by, do not look upon them as
inconsiderable, as not caring what God does with thee or thine When God lays
his hand upon us, he would have us lay it to our hearts. As it is our duty to
be affected with mercies, so likewise with chastnings. If a malefactor should
say to the Judge, do what you will with me, I care not; or a child to the
parent, correct me as long as you will, I care not, how unnatural were this?
This is properly to despise afflictions. Some are like Leviathan in this sense
(Job 41. 27.) They esteem iron as straw, and brass, as rotten wood: They make
nothing of the acts or instruments of Gods displeasure. This is gross
dispising. But besides every undervaluing, or inadvertency of the correcting
hand of God, has a degree of this despising it. That exhortation ought never
to be forgotten, which speaks to us, as unto children, Hebr. 12. 5. My son,
despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of
him. The Greek word imports, the Litling; or thinking of them little. Do not
think the chastnings of God little, do not little, or slight them (...),
in thy thoughts. Neither faint when thou art rebuked, that is, do not think
thy afflictions so great, that thou must needs sink and faint under them.
These are the two extremes, into which our hearts usually run, when chastnings
are upon us. Some err by neglecting the hand of God, as light; and others by
fainting under it, as too heavy. As a good heart takes notice of, or will not
despise a little, the least comfort; So it will take notice of, and not despise
a little, the least cross. When a man has a small loss in his estate, if he
say, this will not undo me, I can bear this, I will fare as well, and go as
fine as ever for all this, such speeches or thoughts are a despising of the
chastening of the Lord. We are to observe the hand of God taking away, as well
as giving a penny. So when a man has a little fit of sickness; If he say, I
shall rubb out this well enough, this is to despise the chastning of the Lord;
We are to bless God for every hours health, and to be sensible of his hand in
every hours sickness, or aching joint.

Every affliction is a messenger from God, it has somewhat to say to us from
Heaven, and God will not bear it, if his messengers be despised, how mean so
ever: If you send a child with a message to a friend, and he slight and despise
him, you will take it ill. I remember what the story relates of Galienus the
Emperor, who, when the report came to him, that Egypt was lost, what then
(said he) cannot I live without the flax of Egypt? And when the report was
brought that a great part of his dominions in Asia was wasted: Cannot I live
(said he) without the delicacies of Asia? To speak thus from a principle of
mortification toward the creature, is the character of an excellent spirit; but
to speak thus from a contempt of the Providence of God, is the character of a
proud, or of a stupid spirit. When we hear of the loss of a child, of a
friend, or of a loss in our estate; To say, what then? I can bear that well
enough, I have more children, other friends, estate enough besides that, This
(I say) is a high despising of affliction.

There is one thing further, in the fifth place, observable in this word,
Despise not thou the chastnings of the Lord. The word is Extenuatio est, nam
plus signficatur quam dicitur, sc. maximi facito disciplinam Domini, nihil tibi
antiquius aut potius sit, quam ut illius correctionem aequo animo accipies.
an extenuation or a lessening of the sense. The holy Ghost intends more than
is expressed; for the truth is, when he says, Despise not, etc. his meaning is
this, show reverence, highly prize and esteem the chastning of the Lord. As
(for instance) when the Apostle says in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. Despise not
prophesying. Do you think, this is all that is due unto an Ordinance of God,
that a man should not despise it? Surely no, he means then, prize prophesying
highly, have it in great esteem: So in 1 Timothy 4. 12. and Tit. 2. 15 when he
says, Let no man despise thy youth, is that all the holy Ghost means? That
Timothy a godly Pastor should only not be despised by his people? No, his
meaning is, that they should honor, respect and reverence him, as one that
watched over them in the Lord. I might give you diverse other Scriptures, where
when the holy Ghost only forbids the sin, he intends the duty or grace in
strictest opposition to that sin. So here, Despise not thou the chastning of
the Almighty; lays this charge and duty upon us, highly to esteem the
chastning of the Lord, we must put afflictions amongst our comforts and rank
them with our blessings. Not to despise, is but the first step beyond sin, but
that includes the last and furthest step of duty, which becomes us under
chastenings. (...) aradi^e (...) Vincevit, ligavit, and per Metaphoram
cast^gavit, erud^vit verbis aut verberibus, ad disciplinam vel poenam
transfertu^ Sicut vox Lamad, quae doctrinam significa^ (...) all (...).


So much of the act forbidden, despising. Now, for the object, chastning. The
original verb fignifies to instruct, or to teach; so it is translated, Chap.
4. v. 3. Thou have instructed many. Instruction is both by words and blows.
The wisdom of God mixes a rod with his word, and chastening with teaching:
Therefore it is promiscuously used in Scripture, sometime for teaching, and
sometime for chastning. Chastning belongs properly to children, who are wanton
and ungoverned, who have a bundle of folly in their hearts, which the rod of
correction drives out. To be chastned has a double aspect upon us, first upon
our privilege. Secondly, upon our weakness. To be chastned notes our
privilege and relation, as children, unto God our father. He has revenges for
his enemies, but chastnings are a part of his childrens portion; yet in that we
are chastned, it taxes us of weakness; we are but children, foolish, unruly,
wanton, and therefore we go almost all our days, with a rod at our backs.
Though the Saints on earth com^^^d among themselves, are some Children, and
others men; yet (...) earth, compared with those in Heaven, or with what
themselves shall be in Heaven, are children, and therefore they have what fits
their state, chastening and correction. This chastening is sometime put for
revenge, or the exactest and severest retribution of justice; Thus it is said,
Prove. 7. 22. That the foolish young man caught by the subtle harlot, went
after her as a fool to the correction of the stocks; That is, as a wicked man
goes to punishment. And when the Prophet describes the sufferings of Christ
which were vindictive in the highest degree; he expresses it in this word, The
chastizement of our peace was upon him (Isa. 53. 5.) though Christ were the
infinitely and most entirely beloved Son of his Father, yet he did not chastize
him as a Son, but as an enemy or malefactor, for he chastened him in our
stead, and under the same notion, that we must have been chastened, who were
enemies and malefactors. So then, the word signifies sometime judiciary
chastening, but here fatherly chastening, which will yet appear more clearly,
in opening the last term of this verse, which shows us the efficient cause of
this chastening. The Almighty.

Despise not the chastning of the Almighty. The chastening rod is in the hand
of Shaddai, the Almighty. This is one of the glorious names of God.

And he is so called, first from his power, to go thorough with (...) Vary
derivatur. Primo a radice (...), Vastavit, spoliavit populatus est, perdidit,
quasi vastatorem dicas, ie invictum and potentem cui nemo resistere possit. Et
volunt non nulli Deum hoc nomen traxisse a vastatione mundi facta in d^luvio.
Graeci reddunt* (...)* and latini Omnipotens.
what he takes in hand: His work never sticks in the mid way for want of
strength to bring it to the end. Despise not the correction of an Almighty
hand. Further, the word notes not only power enough to correct, but power to
destroy, spoil and lay all waste before him. God has gained this Title or
Attribute, from destroying or wasting his enemies. Some of the Rabbis design
the Original of it, to that special act of his destroying power: The drowning
of the old world, he shows his Almighty power in destroying and pulling down,
as well as in making and setting up this goodly frame. To this the holy
Prophets are well conceived to allude, when they say that, Shod, scil.
Destruction, comes from Shaddai, The Almighty. We have it in two express
Texts, Isa. 13. 6. Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is at hand, it shall come
as a Destruction from the Almighty, It shall come as Shod from Shaddai. So
(Joel 1. 15.) Alas for the day, for the day of the Lord is at hand, and as a
destruction from the Almighty shall it come. It will be profitable for us to
consider, under what name God is expressed, when he is chastening his own
children.

Secondly, others derive this name from the conjunction of two Hebrew words,
whereof the one (Dai) signifies it Suffices, or is sufficient: And the other,
though it be but a letter (Shin) yet Nonnulli putat (...) compositu^ esse ex
verbo (...) sufficit and litera (...), quae supplet locum and sensum relativi
Ascher, and ita denotat Deum sibi sufficientem, and qui omnibus largitur
sufficientiam respo^dens Graeco (...). Drus. Alii dedurunt (...) a (...) Quod
Mammam significat, quasi mammosum dicas quod omnia alet. Drus.
it supplieth the part or place of the Relative (Ascher) which, and so the word
put together sounds thus much, Who is sufficient, or who is All sufficient,
Despise not the chastning of him that is Allsufficient. Thou art under his
correction, (who does not take from thee, because he wants himself; who does
not let thee want, because his own store is spent, out of which he used to
supply thee. He alone has sufficiency in himself, and he is at all times
Allsufficient for all others, and gives sufficiency to as many as he pleases.
That of the Apostle fills this signification of the word, Act. 17. 25. Neither
is he worshipped with men's hands, as if he needed any thing, for he gives to
all, life and breath, and all things.

Thirdly, the word is conceived to come from Shad, which in the Hebrew
signifies a breast, the mothers breast or pap, by which she suckles her child.
And answerable to this notion, in most of those places, wherein God is
expressed in that act of his providence, making fruitful and giving increase,
he has this name, Shaddai: as noting, that he has the Great milkie breast,
which nourishes and suckles, which feeds and strengthens all creatures: that is
the word of his blessing, not only makes fruitful and multiplies, but
preserves and keeps alive, Thus Genesis 49. 25. The Patriarch, old dying Jacob,
blesses his son Joseph in this form, And by the Almighty (Shaddai) who shall
bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lies
under, blessings of the breasts and of the womb. His Father Isaac had sent
him to Padan*Aram under the influences of the same blessing, almost in the same
words (Gen 28. 3.) God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful and
multiply thee. And the Lord himself speaks thus to Jacob, when be appeared the
second time to him, after his coming from Padan-Aram. I am (El-Shaddai) God
almighty, be thou fruitful and multiply, Genesis 35. 11. that is I can make thee
fruitful and multiply thy posterity, and I can feed them, as fast as they
multiply, and give thee fruit for thy family, as well as make thy family
fruitful, Thou shall not over-charge me with the greatness or numerousnesse
of thy house. Trouble not thy self, let thy children be my care, at my
finding, how many soever they are, let my purse pay for all: I am El-Shaddai,
God Almighty. ^o then as the justice and exact wisdom of God are set forth in
the former branch under the title Elohim, Happy is the man whom God (Elohim)
corrects; So (least we should think of God under that notion only) his power
and alsufficiency, his goodness and tenderness are set forth in the next
branch, Despise not the chastening of the Almighty. You are under the rod of
Shaddai, an All-powerfull, an Allsufficient, an All-nourishing God. The verse
following seems to joint in with, and suit this fully, He makes sore and he
binds up, he wounds and he heals; One part showing us God, as a Judge,
wounding and making sore, the other as an Allsufficient Friend, and father or
Physician healing and binding up. Take two or three Notes, from the
consideration of the name, under which God is here expressed.

First, The lightest chastnings come from a hand that is able to destroy. When
the stroke is little, yet a great God strikes. Although God give thee but a
touch, a strip, which scarce razes the skin: Yet he is able to wound thee to
the heart. Know, it is not because he wants power to strike harder, but because
he will not, because he is pleased to moderate his power; Thou have but such a
chastning, as a child of a year old may well bear; but at that time, know,
thou art chastned with a hand able to pull down the Pondus est ^n voce (...)
noli ^spe^nere clementiam ejus in quo vivis, qui te uno momento potest
comminuere. Coc.
whole world; The hand of Shaddai, The Almighty gives that little blow. Men
seldom strike their brethren, less then their power, they would often strike
them more, their will is stronger then their Arm. But the Lords arm is
stronger (in this sense) then his will. He does but chasten, who could destroy.
And this carries a mighty persuasion with it, not to despise the chastning of
the Lord, how little soever, for he can strike harder, if thou slightest this.
He can break thy bones, who has not yet broken thy flesh. Fear him (as our
Lord Christ argues, who, though at present he has made thy head only to ache a
little, yet) can kill thy body, and after he has killed, has power to to cast
into hell, Luke 12. 5.

Secondly, In that afflictions come from Shaddai, a God allsufficient, God
would have us conceive in all our troubles; That

When he takes away any or all created comforts from us, yet he is himself
Allsufficient for us.

When we are chastned by the loss of any good things, Shaddai does it, who
has the power of all good things in his hand. When he takes away riches, or
health, or relations, if he does not take away himself from us, we cannot be
comfortless, for Alsufficiency stands by us.

Lastly, He deals with us, but as a tender nurse, or mother, in all his
chastnings. The mother strikes the child a little blow with one hand, and gives
it the breast with the other, she gives it a little tap with one hand, and a
spoon with the other. Consider your chastnings, they are the chastnings of
Shaddai, who, as a tender mother, has a breast ready to nourish, and a spoon
to feed, while he chides or chastens. And if by greater afflictions, he wounds
or makes you very sore, you shall not want careful dressing and assured
healing;

Verse. 18. For he makes sore, and he binds up; he wounds, and his hands
make whole. This verse contains an exemplification of the former ground, why
we should not despise the chastning of the Almighty: For, if it should be
objected against the former assertion (Happy is the man whom God corrects)
Where is this happiness? Is there happiness in sores and wounds, in sickness
and weakness, in poverty and in wants? Who cannot easily want this happiness,
and not complain? Eliphaz seems to answer for God in this text. If your faith
cannot come up to believe this, stay but a while, and your sense shall teach it
you. Who would not be glad of a wound, when he knows he shall have Shaddai for
his Chyrurgion. If you will not allow a man is happy, when he is sore will you
not allow him happy, when his sore is bound up by such a hand? If you will not
grant a man is happy, when wounded, you cannot deny him happy, when he is thus
healed. The Almighty will not leave them in their sores, in their wounds: As he
has a rod, so he has a swath, as he has a sword, so a salve. His plaster is
ready for your wound, and his medicines for your diseases. It is true of God
above all others, One and the same hand smites and cures. Thus of the general
Vna eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit.
meaning and connection of this verse.

He makes sore. The word is used in the second Chapter of this book, ver 13.
of Jobs friends, that they stood silent, for they saw his grief was great, or
his soreness was very great. It notes the grief and (...) Do^uit anima vel
corpore.
soreness, either of mind or body; Some translate, He wounds: But the next
clause bears that distinctly, or we may join both, the one as the cause, the
other as the effect, He makes sore by wounding.

And binds up.] The word is appliable to any kind of binding. 1. To the
binding of captives in prison with chains. 2. To (...) Ligavit, colligavit.
the binding of ornaments upon the head, Ezekiel. 29. 9. 3. It is used,
metaphorically for binding to obedience or punishment, Job 34. 17. Shall even
he that hates right govern? The Hebrew is, shall he bind; because Governors
bind their subjects or servants, either to do what they command, or to suffer
what they inflict. 4. It is also applied by a metaphor to the binding up of
those civil breaches or ruins, which are upon a people, Isa. 3. 6, 7. A man
shall take hold of his brother, etc saying, be thou our Ruler, and let this
ruin be under thy hand In that day he shall swear, saying, I will not be a
Healer, or a Binder up. 5. It is used for the applying of ligatures, with which
the medicine or plaster is bound upon the wound or sore; And this word does
therefore also signify the healing of a wound, because the due binding of the
wound is one half of the patients cure, and a very great part of a Partim
quidem i^sa deligatio sanat, etc. Maxima deligationis vis est. Hip. in Offi^ina
Chyrurg.
Chyrurgions skill, as the learned Physicians observe in their Discourses about
wounds and chyrurgerie; Ligature contributes so much to healing, that the same
word serves, for both, or either. Now (Shaddai) the Almighty is admirable at
this, when he has made a sore, he can make an exact Ligature. We often find
these two together, Psalm. 147. 3. He heals the broken in heart, and binds
up their wounds. The Prophet Ezekiel (Chap. 34. 4.) complains of the false
Prophets, Because they did not heal that which was sick, and bound not up
that which was broken. They had neither skill nor conscience, either
spiritually to break hearts, or when they found them broken to bind them up.
They knew not how to fasten Gospel promises, and holy counsels upon the heart,
that the wounds of it might be closed, and were therefore, Physicians of no
value.

There are two interpretations given of these words, He makes sore, and he
binds up.

First, Some expound them by an Enallage of the Participle for the Verb, thus,
He makes sore, and he binds up, that is, He making sore, binds up; as if
the very act, by which God smites, had an influence upon the healing, and a
tendency to the restoring Vulnerat and medetur, i. e. vulnerans medetur,
vulnerando sanat.
of his afflicted ones, He making sore, binds up We find such constructions
frequent in Scripture, Isa. 65. 22. They shall not build, and another inhabit;
They shall not plant, and another eat: That is, They building, another shall
not inhabit, and they planting, another shall not eat. The negative is not
fixed upon their building, etc. but upon other inhabiting. And so, Deuteronomy. 22. 4.
Thou shall not see thy brothers Ass, or his Ox fall down by the way, and hide
thy self from them; That is, Thou seeing thy brothers Ass or Ox fall down,
shall not hide thy self from them: A man sometimes could not but see his
brothers Ass or Ox fall down, but he seeing must not at any time, hide
himself from them, that is, not succor them, so (by the way) that phrase of
hiding may be interpreted, by that of the Prophet (Isa. 58. 7.) Thou shall not
hide thy self from thy own flesh. But to the point here, we see, He makes sore
and binds up, may congruously to other Scripture speakings, be rendered, He
making sore, does bind up, as if the wound were a part of the cure, and the
sore a plaster. We know that a wound in nature is sometime a part of the cure:
It is a common and a necessary practice in Chyrurgery (and to that the holy
Ghost may allude in this place) When they perceive a wound or a sore, to which
medicines Illa est vox Domini, percutiam and ego sanabo, hoc faciunt medici.
Ferrum gestant and c^rare veniunt. Clamat secandus and seca^ur saevitur in
vulnus ut homo sanetur. Aug in Ps 50. Chyrurgus saepe vulnus infligit, and
ferro sibi spatium ad commodam curationem aperit.
cannot well be appied (and so unfit for healing) either to make a new wound in
the whole flesh, or to make the first bigger. The murderer wounds to kill, and
the Physician wounds to cure. He comes as it were, armed with instruments of
cruelty. The patient whose flesh is to be launced, cries out, but yet he
lances him. The patient whose flesh is to be seared, cries out, but yet he
sears him. He is cruel to the wound, while he is most kind to the wounded.

An ignorant man would wonder to see a Chyrurgion, when he comes for healing,
make the wound wider, yet so he must do, and he does it upon urgent reasons. As
when the orifice is not wide enough to let in the medicine, or to let out the
corruption, or cannot admit his searching instruments to the bottom; In such
cases, he says, Unless I increase your wound, I cannot cure it. Thus often
times the Lord is compelled to wound, that he may heal; or fit our wounds for
healing. Our wound is not wide enough, to let out the sinful corruptions of
our hearts, to let in the searching instruments and corrasives of the Law, or
the blame and comfortable applications of the Gospel.

We may observe from the sense of the words, That

The woundings and smitings of God, are preparatories for our cure and healing.

It is said (Isa. 53. 5.) of Christ, that with his stripes we are healed: and
it is in this sense a truth, that we are healed with our own stripes: We are
healed with the stripes of Christ meritoriously, and we are healed by our own
stripes preparatorily; the stripes of Christ heal us naturally, our own
stripes heal us occasionally; or his in the act, ours in the event. (Prove. 27.
6.) Faithful are the wounds of a friend, his wounds are faithful, because he
wounds in faithfulness: The healings of many are unfaithful, They heal the
hurt of the daughter of my people deceitfully, is the Lords complaint by the
Prophet; they skin over the wound, but they do not cure it. Let the righteous
smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an
excellent oil which shall not break my head, Psalm. 141. 5. Much more may we
say, Let the righteous Lord smite me, and it shall be a kindness to me; let the
righteous Lord reprove and correct me, it shall be as an excellent oil, which
shall not break mine head; it shall heal my heart: How healing then are his
salves, whose very sores are a salve?

Secondly, Take the words in the plain rendering of them, noting only thus
much, that God makes sore, and binds up: So we have two distinct acts, often
ascribed to God in a figure, to set forth judgment and mercy, the afflictions,
and deliverances of his people, (Hos. 6. 2.) Let us return unto the Lord, for
he has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up,
(1 Samuel 2. 6.) The Lord kills and makes alive, (Deuteronomy. 32. 39.) See now, that
I, even I am he, and there is no God with me, I kill, and I make alive, I wound
and I heal. Hence observe,

It is the property of God, to take care of all the sicknesses, sores or evils
of his peopls.

As God is the great correcter and instructor of his people, so he is the great
Physician of his people; If he make a wound, he will take care for the healing
of it; He does not make sores, and leave others to bind up. Mighty men wound,
but they take no care for healing; they can impoverish and spoil, but they
care not to repair; they can pull down and root up; let who so will build and
plant. Shaddai the Almighty God does both: If he break thy head, come to him,
humble thy self before him, and he will surely give thee a plaster, which
shall cost thee nothing but the asking. And whereas he does not willingly
afflict or grieve, he does most willingly comfort and heal the children of
men, Lam. 3. 33. He speaks of it as a pain to himself to make us sore, but to
make us sound is his delight and pleasure. Satan is the Abaddon, the destroyer,
and he only destroys; he makes wounds, but he heals none, he kills, but he
makes none alive.

The second branch of the verse [He wounds, and his hands make whole] is but
a repetition of the same thing, yet with some addition to, or heightning of the
sense. To make sore, and bind up, are not so deep either in judgment or in
mercy, as to wound and make whole.

The word used for wounding, imports a dangerous and a deadly (...) Transfodit,
transfixit vel cruentavit.
wound, or to make a man all gore blood. It signifies to strike quite thorough;
and it is diverse times applied, to note that stroke which God gives his worst
enemies. Psalm. 68. 21. But God shall wound the head of his enemies, or he shall
strike them quite through the head. Verse 23. He shall dip his foot, or make it
red in the blood of the ungodly. And Psalm. 110. 5. The Lord shall strike
through Kings in the day of his wrath. Hence observe, That

God sometimes makes very deep and great wounds in his own servants.

Such wounds, as by the sight of the eye, you cannot distinguish them from the
wounds of his mortal enemies. He strikes thorough both heads and hearts of his
own people: Or as Simeon said to the blessed Virgin Mary, Luke 2. 35. A sword
pierces through their soul also.

But then lastly note,

God never makes a wound too great for his own cure.

The power of God to save, is as great as his power to destroy, his healing
power and his wounding power, are of the same extent; His justice cannot
out-act his mercy, both are infinite.

And not only does he heal the wounds which himself makes, but he can heal
the wounds which men make; even all the wounds which the utmost power and
malice of man can make. He is able to do more good, to show more mercy than
all creatures are able to do hurt or mischief. We find the state and
condition of a people sometimes so wounded and sick, that men have despaired of
recovery; Being consulted, they may answer, your sore cannot be bound up, and
your wound cannot be healed, your estate is gangrened and past cure: So he said
as was touched before (Isa. 3 8.) In that day shall a man swear saying, I will
not be an healer, for in my house is neither bread nor clothing; Alas, I heal
you, I cannot heal you, your troubles are past my skill to remedy or redress.
Thus man is sometimes at a stand, he cannot heal what men have wounded; but
God is never at a stand, your old festred sores, and wrankled wounds which have
taken wind, discourage not his surgery. When a people are in such a pickle
or pitiful plight, as the Prophet Isaiah describes the kingdom of Judah, in
Chap. 1. 5 6. The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint, from the
sole of the foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds,
and bruises, and putrefying sores; they have not been closed, neither bound up,
neither mollified with ointment. When (I say) the case of a people is thus, and
they can get no healer: Yea though a people (like the woman, Mark 5 25*) have
had an issue of blood (in bloody battles, which is now almost Englands case)
many years; and have suffered many things of many Physicians, and have spent
all that they have, and are nothing bettered, but rather grow worse; yet if
Christ do but touch such a sick, diseased bleeding people in mercy, and they
touch him by faith, they shall be healed, and their fountain of blood will
immediately dry up. Or if their condition requires some longer operation, he
can effectually take such a course for their cure: He is abundantly furnished
with all instruments and abilities for the making of a perfect cure.

It is well observed, that three things are necessary for a Chyrurgion.

First, He must have an Eagles eye, one that is good at healing, had need be
good at seeing.

Secondly, He must have a Ladies hand, soft and tender to handle the sore
gently.

Thirdly, A Lions heart, a stout strong heart, for if he faint, how shall his
patient keep up his courage?

These three are exceeding necessary in Chyrurgery about natural bodies, but
much more in Chyrurgery about Civil and Ecclesiastical bodies, the healing of
Churches and Kingdoms. And where shall we find, whither shall we send for
Physicians, qualified with this Eagles eye, to look into all our sores and
sicknesses? with this Ladies hand, to deal gently and tenderly with our wounds?
with this Lions heart, stoutly and courageously without fears and faintings, to
go thorough with the work? Well, if men should not be found thus furnished, the
Lord is; He has an Eagles eye, an Allseeing eye, seven eyes of providence and
wisdom, to look through our sores, and into all our distempers: He has (as in
allusion we may speak) a Ladies hand, soft and tender, to deal gently and
graciously with a people; He can dress our wounds, and pain us little, scarce
be felt while he does it. And he has the Lions heart, infinite courage and
strength of spirit, to undertake the most ghastly wounds or swollen putrified
sores. Let us therefore rest our selves assured, that whatsoever our personal
or our national sores, our personal or our national wounds be, be they what
they will, or what we can call them, desperate, incurable, such as have
discouraged many from meddling with their cure, or shamed those that have; yet
our Shaddai the Almighty God, can bind them up and heal them, fetch the core
from the bottom, and close the skin upon the top, so tenderly dress, and so
perfectly cure them, that a scarre shall not remain, unless it be to mind us
of his infinite skill and goodness or of our own duty and thankfulness.

JOB, Chap. 5. Verse. 19, 20, 21. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in
seven there shall no evil touch thee.

In famine he shall redeem thee from death, and in war from the power of the
the sword.

Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue, neither shall thou be afraid
of destruction when it comes.


ELiphaz still prosecuteth his former Argument, to take Job off from despising
the chastnings of the Almighty spoken of at the 17th verse. And having showed,
first in general, that they are happy whom the Lord corrects: and secondly,
That the Lord heals as well as wounds, is as ready to bind up as to make the
sore; he illustrates this by giving,

First, An assurance of deliverance from evil, and that

1. In the general, at the 19th verse. 2. By an enumeration of particular
cases of greatest dangers and outward evils.
And secondly, to show the happiness of those whom God corrects, he gives an
assurance of positive blessings, which shall in due time be heaped upon their
heads, whom God had before wounded with sorrows, and loaded with afflictions.

The nineteenth verse is a promise of deliverance from evil; He shall deliver
thee from six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch thee.

To deliver, notes here, the snatching or pulling of a man out of (...)
Spoltavit, rapuit, eripuit tanquam ab host ^ut malo. Eripere praedam. (...)
Augustia, interdum significat hostem, quasi angustiatorem dicas
the hand of an enemy, out of the mouth of danger.

The Hebrew word for [Trouble] comes from a root, which signifies to straiten
or to narrow a thing up in a little compass; and so by a metaphor, to vex and
trouble, because they who are straightened in any kind, are pained and troubled.
And when we hear of any in trouble, we usually say, such are in straits. And
this word is often translated, a strait, (2 Samuel 24. 14.) I am in a great
strait, says David, when he was put upon that hard election, between sword,
pestilence and famine. So Judge. 11. 7. and 1 Samuel 13. 6.

The holy language, expresses an enemy or adversary by this word, because an
enemy puts us upon straits, and so, to much trouble.

And to raise the force of this word to the highest, it is used to signify the
pangs and throws of women in childbearing, in which the mother labors in
grievous straits, while the infant labors for enlargement. Troubles ever meet
us in, or bring us into straits, they may well change names, which are so near
in nature; I find the word so translated here in some books, He shall deliver
thee in six straits, and in seven, when thou art so encompast about, shut in
and incircled by evils on every side, that thou know not which way to move
or turn, much less to get out, then the Lord will give enlargement, and
either find a way out for thee, or make one, as he did for Israel at the red
sea, through those mighty waters.

In six, yea in seven.] This phrase of speech, is very considerable. Some
numbers in Scripture, have a kind of eminency or excellency in them: I intend
not any large discourse about numbers; only in brief. Those three numbers,
Three, Six and Seven, are applied to a special signification by the Holy
Ghost. A great number, a perfect number, is expressed by any one of these three
numbers; A threefold cord, (that is, a cord of many or sufficient folds) is
not easily broken, Eccles. 4. 12. Three times thou shall keep a feast to me in
the year, Exodus 23. 14. Three times in a year all thy males shall appear
before the Lord, ver. 17. The candlestick had three branches, Exodus 25. 32. and
three cubits was the height of the Altar, Exodus 27. 1. Three Cities of refuge
were appontinted for the manslayer, Deuteronomy. 19. 7. and the addition made, is of
another three. ver. 9. Three witnesses gave the compleatest evidence
requireable, as Two, the least admittable in the law, Deuteronomy. 17. 6. That
(besides a rule) there was a mystery in most of these, I think no man doubts,
though what the mystery was, may be presumption in any man to determine. Of
this we are sure, that the highest mystery, and perfection of all numbers and
things, is found in One Three. That Three in One, The sacred Trinity; And in
the common speech of most, if not of all languages, Thrice happy, Thrice great,
Thrice honorable, note a man advanced to the very pinnacle of Happiness,
Greatness and Honor, The number Three, or the Numeral Thrice, imply a
compleatnesse in all numbers.

That the number six notes perfection, may be seen in the work of Creation;
The Lord could as easily have made the world in six or in one moment, as in six
days: but the Lord saw it good, to take a complete number of days, for so
complete a work. God threatens Gog, his perfect and complete enemy, with a
complete punishment, or with judgment in perfection. (The justice of God can
be as complete in punishing, as the malice of man can be in sinning.) Ezekiel.
39. 2. I am against thee O God, the chief Prince of Meshech and Tubal, I will
turn thee back, and leave but the sixth part of thee, so we translate; yet in
the margin of our books, we find the Hebrew thus; I will strike thee with six
plagues, or, I will draw thee back with a hook of six teeth.

Seven is a famous number, implying, First multitude, Secondly perfection: The
barren has borne seven (says Hannah in her song, 1 Samuel 2. 5.) that is, many
she is a complete mother, she has a flourishing family, many children. And in
opposition to this (Jer. 15. 9.) She that has born seven languisheth, that is,
she that had many children, now has none. Seven devils were cast out of the
woman (Luke 8. 2.) that is, a multitude of devils: So the seven Spirits, the
seven Churches, the seven Trumpets, the seven Seals, the seven Vials, etc. in
the Revelation, speak the compleatnesse and perfection of each in their kind;
whether good or evil: and that is appliable to the particular sense of the
text, (Prove. 24. 16.) The just falls seven times a day; that is, he falls
often, almost continually into trouble, and yet he rises again, God delivers
him. The Hebrew word Shebange, is near in sound to our English seven; and to
note that seven is a complete full number, the same Hebrew word signifies
seven, and full, seven and satisfied or complete. And the word to swear, (...)
Septem (...) Saturatus, impletus, abundavit (...) Juravit, inde juramentem, a
Septenario numero ut quidam patant, quod juramenta fieri debeant multis
adhibitis and idoneis multumque confirmatis testibus et causis.
is of the same extraction in that language, with the word seven; the reason is
added, because in or about an oath, many and important causes and grounds are
required.

But to pass from single numbers, I shall consider them in construction or
conjunction, as here six and seven. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea
in seven there shall no evil touch thee: Some understand this strictly and
precisely of those two numbers six and seven; And expound the text by the
enumeration of those six or seven particular evils made by Eliphaz in the
following verses; For having said in general, that God will deliver his in six
troubles and in seven, he reckons up several troubles, and gives us (as it
were) a catologue, or a particular of those evils by name, amounting to six or
seven; As 1. Famine, 2. War, 3. Scourge of the tongue, 4. Destruction. 5.
Evil beasts, 6. Hurtful stones; here are six, and if a seventh evil come
upon thee, in seven no evil shall touch thee.

But I rather take this expression, six, yea seven, to be a fixed number put
for an unfixed, a certain number for an uncertain, and that uncertain number
to be a great number, the greatest number, any number imaginable. We find this
kind of speaking frequently in Scripture; In the thirty third of this book of
Job, v. 29. Lo these things God works twice and thrice; which we translate,
these things God works oftentimes, when numbers are doubled with an increase
in the latter, it notes a mighty growth of the whole number. Twice and twice
(we know) is but four times; but, twice and thrice, may be more then five
times, twice and thrice, is oftentimes, no man knows how often.

We find the number next above this in the same signification; Three, and
four, are put for many, very many; (Amos 1. 3.) For three transgressions of
Damascus, and for four: Some understand it of three or four special sins, of
which Damascus was chiefly guilty: namely, 1. Idolatry, 2. Incest, 3. Luxury,
4. Oppression: Or, Three may be taken for a Cardinal number, and Four for an
Ordinal; for the Fourth, as if some fourth sin were so sinful, and had such a
malignity in it as the Lord would not pardon. Thus Four is put for the fourth,
Prove. 30. 15, 18, 21, 29. Three things are never satisfied, yea four things
say not it is enough. That is, a fourth thing (sc. fire being the most
insatiable of all the rest) says not it is enough The copulative particle
(and) is often in Scripture taken comparatively; for much more. Psalm. 125. The
mountains are round about Jerusalem, and the Lord is about his people: So the
Hebrew; we translate by a comparative of similitude. As, So. But more
emphatically to the scope of the place by a comparative of excess. Thus, As
the mountains are about Jerusalem, sc, to fortify and defend it; so much more
is the Lord about his people fortify and defend them. In this sense we may
take the copulative And in Amos. For three transgressions, the Lord would not
turn, etc. but much more for a fourth, would he not turn away the punishment
thereof. The former, three were enough to provoke the Lord to destroy you; but
for this fourth, he is resolved to be irreconcilable, and will destroy you.
Others add Three to Four, which make seven, as if the Holy Ghost had said,
for seven (that is manifold) transgressions of Damascus, I will not turn away,
etc. But rather take the numbers distinct for Three and Four. that is, for the
many, for the multitude of transgressions committed in Damascus, I will not
turn away the punishment thereof. Not that the mercies of God are exceeded by
any number, or that because they had gone on to sin three and four times, that
is, very often times, therefore the mercy of God was at a stand, and could go
on no further; but these numbers three and four, note the boundless
impenitency of those Syrians, or their malicious persecutions of the people of
God, days and times without number. They turn not from their transgressions,
theirs are three and four, they will never have done; therefore I will begin
to punish. or I will never have done punishing, I will not turn away the
punishment thereof. Such forms of speech are frequent in Heathen O terque
quaterque beati. Virg. lib. 1. Aenead Terque quaterque manu pectus percussa Deo
rum. Id. l 4.
Authors, when they would enlarge, or multiply the sense.

Again, Vbiseptenario numero ^ctonarius adai ur ingentem exprimit and pro pe
infinitam multitudinem.
The numbers seven and eight, have a greater emphasis in Scripture (Eccles. 11.
8.) Give a portion to seven, and also unto eight. That is, give much, and give
to many, give (yet discreetly) to all comers: We must not stint nor bound our
charity; Give a portion to seven, give to many; and if there come more, give to
more, give also unto eight; Charity preferres some, but she refuses none, who
are meet objects of charity. And when the Lord would show what choice and store
of able men, both for counsel and action, his people should have in times of
dangers and invasions, He prophecies by Micah, that the people shall speak
thus (Chap. 5. 5.) When he, (sc. the Assyrian) shall tread in our palaces, then
shall we raise against him seven Shepherds, and eight principal men, that is,
we shall muster multitudes of wise, valiant, faithful men, every one of which
may be fit to command or direct in chief; Seven Shepherds and eight
principal men.

So then, He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven, etc. is as if
the Holy Ghost had said by Eliphaz, O Job, The Almighty Shaddai, of whom I have
spoken to thee, is of such power and has such an unwearied arm, that he is
able to deliver thee, not only in one, or two, or three, or many troubles, but
he can deliver thee in six, yea in seven, in all thy troubles, let the number
of thy afflictions be as great as thou can imagine. The power and malice of
men cannot multiply thy troubles faster, than the power and goodness of God
can multiply thy deliverances, yea, if he pleases, he could perfect seven
deliverances for thee, before they can lay the plot of one trouble against
thee. Observe hence in brief, first,

Deliverance it is of the Lord.

He shall deliver thee.] Whatsoever the instruments are, by which deliverance
is brought to you, or in whose hand soever deliverance is put: Know, that the
work and procurement of it, is from above: It is the privilege of God, and of
God alone to be a Deliverer. And he has deliverance at his command, Psalm. 44.
4. Command deliverances for Jacob. Man must humbly petition for, and beg
deliverance. But God stands not entreating the creature, or debating the matter
with Kings and Princes, with the strongest and most hard-hearted Pharoahs to
deliver his people, but he sends forth a writ of deliverance, and
Authoritatively commands deliverance, when it is his pleasure a person or a
people shall be delivered. Secondly, obseve;

The Lord can deliver as often as we need deliverance. In six troubles, yea in
seven.

This should bear up our hearts in the returns, the multiplied returns of
troubles Though (as Rheumatick old age is described, Eccles. 12. 2.) The clouds
return after rain: That is, though one evil follows upon or treads on the
heel, of another: though, as soon as one black cloud is dissolved, and we
begin to say (as in nature) this was a rainie day, but sure the next will be
fair, yet the next proves more over-cast and lowering then that; even in such a
case, know, God has a wind in his first, which he can let out to scatter those
clouds, before they dissolve; or if they dissolve, he has a Sun, at command,
to dry up the fallen rain. The Lord has a succession of mercies for our
succession of sorrows. Say not then, we have got off this trouble, but what if
another come? If another come, you have the same God, and he can give you
another deliverance. Have not our later experiences taught us this truth? Have
we not been delivered in six troubles, yea in seven: Our straits have not been
single; we may say (as she in Genesis at the birth of her son) Behold a Troop.
Enemies have not given over conspiring, and acting against us, and (we ought to
speak it to his glory) our God has not given our delivering and doing for us,
Not once only, but many a time, may our Israel now say, If it had not bin the
Lord, who was on our side, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us
up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. The waves and bilowes of
our Seas; The rocks and clifts of our Shores; the foundations and the pinacles
of our Parliament houses; the walls and gates of our Fenced Cities; the swords
and bucklers of our Mighty men in the high places of the Field, may all bear
this inscription, Shaddai delivers in six troubles, yea in seven.

The Lord spoke once to his people, as if he were weary of delivering, or would
not deliver (Judge. 10. 10.) There we read the people of Israel in a great
strait, crying to the Lord for deliverance, but he answers, ver. 11. Did not I
deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, and from the children
of Ammon; and from the Philistines. The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and
the Moabites did oppress you, and ye cried unto me, and I delivered you out of
their hand. Here are seven troubles in which they found deliverance. But, as if
six or seven deliverances (which we have expounded for boundless deliverances)
were now the utmost bound of deliverance, he resolves, v. 13. I will deliver
you no more, And at the 14. he turns them off to their Idols for help; Go
(says he) and cry unto the gods, which you have chosen, and let them deliver
you in the time of your tribulation; But what was the reason of this refusal?
The reason was this, not because God was weary of delivering that people, but
because that people were weary of their God. Ye have forsaken me and chosen
other gods, ver. 13. If we choose our selves another god; then we choose our
selves another deliverer; so long as we look upon God, as our God, so long we
may look upon God, as our deliverer; God would never have turned them off for
deliverance to any thing below (what was in their conceit) a God.

How sad will it be, now that we are in great troubles, and crying daily, Lord
deliver us out of these straights, for thou art he, whose name is, The
Deliverer in six troubles, yea in seven; How sad (I say) will it be, if we have
put God to read the Chronicle, and repeat the history of his deliverances
given us, as he did to Israel, and say, I delivered you in 88 from the
Spaniard; I delivered you in 1605. from the Gun-powder-Treason; I delivered
your Parliament, I delivered your City, I have often delivered your Armies; and
sometimes crown them with glorious victories, now I will deliver you no more;
Will not such speakings from providence, be a plain conviction, that we have
forsaken the Lord, and chosen other gods? God has sometime (what a miracle of
mercy!) chosen those, who forsook him, but he never (so steadfast is he in
faithfullnes) forsook any, who chose him to be their God. If he keep not such,
from, yet he will certainly preserve all such in trouble, as it follows.

Yea in seven there shall no evil touch thee. He says not, He shall deliver
thee from six troubles, and from Non dicit a sexsed in sex; non quod ab illis
non possit, sed quod cum acciderint ab illis liberet, ut in illis non succumbat.
seven: As if troubles should only threaten, but never come upon us; or as if
all our deliverances should be preventions, but he shall deliver thee in six
troubles, yea in seven, there shall no evil touch thee

[Evill] signifies sometimes the evil of sin, and sometimes the evil of
punishment. We may here take it either way. The Lord will so keep up thy
spirit, and direct thy way in trouble, that thou shall not defile thy self
with the evil of sin; thy troubles shall purge, not pollute thee. And he will
so keep thee, that thou shall not be annoyed by any evil of punishment; If
fatherly displeasure should appear against thee, wrath shall not. Love shall
be mixed with thy correction; with thy wormwood and gall (as the Church speaks
in the Lamentations) thou shall have a temperament of honey, and of sweetness
Ita eripiet, ut nullum malum attingat, e^tia^si tentari and conflictari s^na^
ad tempus, nocumentum tamen non capies. Coc. in loc.
though troubles press thee, yet evil shall not Touch thee.

Not touch thee.] This notes exact deliverance; we think ourselves well many
times, if we can come off from dangers with a scratch face, with a wound, or
with the loss of a limb: but to come off without the loss of a hair, or
which is less, without a touch, speaks a complete deliverance. It astonished
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. 27. to see the three children come out of the fiery
furnace, without a hair of their heads singed, without any change of their
coats, or the smell of fire. So much this imports, thou shall pass the pikes,
through six, yea seven, a whole army of troubles, and no evil shall touch
thee; When the woman told the tempting Serpent, God has said, ye shall not
eat of the fruit of the tree in the midst of the garden, nor touch it, Genesis 3.
3. She employed a charge of total abstinence. And when the Lord salth, No evil
shall touch thee, it implies a promise of total deliverance. In the first and
second chapters of this book (and it is the same original word) Satan begs
leave of God, that he might touch Job, and touch all that he had. Now here
Eliphaz seems to touch that string, No evil shall touch thee; as if he had
said God will not let his servants be overwhelmed (as thou art) with evils, no
evil shall so much as touch them. And the truth is though Satan obtained leave
of God, to afflict the body of Job with pains, and he made it all over as one
wound, yet no evil touched him, in the sense here intended: Though Job was all
over evil sores, yet there was not so much as the least scarre of an evil
upon him; Troubles touched him, but evils did not, And troubles may touch the
servants of God but evil shall not. Hence observe,

God saves and delivers his people from all evil, even while they are in the
midst of trouble.

He delivers as well in trouble, as from trouble, while trouble is continued,
good may be enjoyed. While his are in the water and in the fire, God is with
them, and his presence is more then deliverance (Isa. 43. 2.) If God be with
us, though all evils are upon us, yet no evil touches us. The presence of the
chief good, is banishment to every evil. As a wicked man may be loaded with
good things, and yet none of them touch him; that is, do him any good. So a
godly man may be loaded with evils, and yet none of them touch him, that is,
do him any hurt. And thus, we may understand that of the Apostle (1 Cor. 10.
14.) God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able, but will with the temptation also make away to escape; that ye may be
able to bear it. Temptation you shall have; but with temptation, even while
temptation is upon you, or while you are in temptation, The Lord will make a
way for you to escape the evil of that temptation. Thus with or in trouble, we
have deliverance. To be kept from the evil of trouble is a deliverance from
trouble, while we are in trouble.

Thus far of the general promise.

Now Eliphaz goes on to particulars in the 20 verse, etc. As if he had said,
Least thou should think, I deal only in general notions, that I may more
easily elude and deceive thee. Therefore Dolosus versatur in universalibus.
I will now give instance in the point, and name what troubles I mean: I will
ascend with thee to particulars, and reckon up the greatest outward evils, the
most pinching straits that befall the sons of men, or the children of God, and
out of all these, I affirm The Lord will deliver thee.

Verse. 20. In famine he shall redeem thee from death, and in war from the power
of the sword. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue, etc. Famine
Redimere est lucrari ex alterus potestate interposito precio velpotentia,
con^ravim detinen^ium, ad faciendum liberu^ aut suum (...) Redemit, liberavit
ex augustia, servitute, etc.
leads the Vanne of this great Army of Evils, here mustered up.

He shall redeem.] But what is it to redeem from Famine? To redeem properly is,
to take a man out of the power of another, by price or by greater power;
Redemption is an act of special favor, and it notes a special distinction by
favor. When God threatened Pharaoh and his people with swarms of flies and
promised that his own people should be free, I will sever in that day, the Land
of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of Flies shall be there,
verse. 22. This act of divine discrimination, is called Redemption in the next
verse. And I will put a division (Heb. a Redemption) between my people and thy
people; That is, those Armies of flies, which invade thy people, shall not
meddle with my people. To see one perish with, and our selves saved from the
sword, is redemption in war. To see others hunger-starved and our selves still
fed, is redemption from famine, though our selves were never in the hands, or
between the teeth of famine. A people divided from the troubles of others, are
redeemed from those troubles. Such redemption our Savior speaks of, Mat. 24.
40, 41. Two shall be in the field, the one shall be taken, the other left; two
women shall be grinding in the Mill, the one taken, the other left.

In Famine.] Famine is the want of bread, and bread is the stay and staff of
life (Lev. 26. 26. Isa. 3. 1. Psalm. 105. 16.) when this stay is gone, our lives
fall quickly or slip away. When this staff is broken, the thread of life
breaks too. Man goes by the bread in his belly, more than by the staff in his
hand; Except bread hold us by the arm, and stay us up, down we fall. Famine is
so like, or so near, or so certain a harbinger of death, that the text puts
them together. In famine he shall redeem thee from death. Famine is numbered
among the sore judgments of God, if it be not the sorest judgment, Ezekiel. 6.
11. Jer. 24. 10. And therefore redemption from it, is one of his choicest
outward mercies. We may collect how sore a judgment famine is by the effects
of it.

First, It causes faintness and madness, Genesis 47. 13.

Secondly, Hunger burns, Deuteronomy. 32. 24. That word is not used in the Hebrew,
except here. Famine kindles a fire in the bowels; When the natural heat has
no fuel put to it to feed upon, it feeds upon nature. Suitable to this, is the
description of lamenting Jeremiah in the famine of Jerusalem, Their faces are
blacker then a cole, Lam. 4. 8. and Chap. 5. 10. Our skin was black like an
Oven, because of the terrible famine. Both the coal and the oven contract their
blackness from burning heat.

Thirdly, It causes pining and languishment, Lam. 4. 9.

Fourthly, Shame and howling, Joel 1. 11.

Fifthly, Rage and cursing, Isa. 8. 21.

Lastly, It breaks all the bonds of nature, and eats up all relations: Read
that dre^dfull threatening, Deuteronomy. 25. 53, 54. and that dreadful example, Lam.
4. 10. Tender mothers eating their children. Famine eats up our bowels of
compassion, and then it eats our bowels by relation: And which comes yet
nearer, Famine is such a devourer, that it causes man to devour himself. The
Prophet describes a man in a fit of Famine, snatching on the right hand, and
yet hungry, eating on the left, and yet unsatisfied; when he cannot fill his
belly abroad, he comes home to himself, and makes bold with his own flesh for
food, Every man eating the flesh of his own arm, Isa. 9. 20.

We read of many great Famines in Scripture, and withal of Gods care to redeem
his people from them. Abraham, Genesis 12. who (at the call of God) denied
himself, and came out of his own, into a strange Land, was presently
entertained with Famine. One would have thought, God should have made him good
cheer, and have spread a plentiful table for him, causing his cup to
overflow, while he was in a strange Land, and a mere stranger there; yet he
met with a famine, but the Lord redeemed him from that famine, by directing him
to Egypt, that famous store house for his people* Jacob and his sons were
redeemed from famine, in the same Egypt, afterward their house of Bondage.

It is a precious comfort to have bread in such a promise as this, when there
is none upon the Board. God takes care for the bodies of his people as well as
for their souls, he is the father of both, and the provider for both. And while
we remember what sore afflictions have bin upon many Nations and people by
famine; While we remember Samaria's Famine, 2 Kings 6. Jerusalems Famine, Lam. 4.
and that storied by Josephus in the Roman siege of that City; While we remember
the late famins in Germany, and the present one in many parts of Ireland; While
we consider, that the Sword threatens this Nation with famine: Surely we should
labor to get under such a promise as this is, that we may plead with God in
the midst of all scarcity and wants; Lord thou have promised to redeem Thine in
famine from death: There is no dearth in Heaven: And whatsoever dearth is on
Earth, the plenty that is in Heaven can supply it. How sad would it be, if your
poor children should come about you, crying for bread, and you have none to
give them; How much sadder would it be, if your poor children should be made
your bread, and ground to pieces between your teeth, as in the famine of
Jerusalem: In such a time, to look up to God in the strength of this promise,
will be a feast to us, though we should perish in the famine.

But how does God redeem from famine?

First, The Lord can make the barrel of meal, and the oil that is in the
cruze, though but little yet to hold out and last, while the time of famine
lasts; Such a miracle redeemed the poor widow from death, in that great famine,
1 Kings 17.

Secondly, He can redeem by lengthning one meal, to many days. Elijah went
forty days in the strength of one dinner. Man lives not by bread without God,
but man may live by God without bread.

Thirdly, Not only are the stores of the creatures his, and the fruitfulness
of the earth at his command, but if he please he can open the windows of
Heaven; he can bring bread out of the clouds; he can make the winds his
Caterers to bring in Quails and abundance of provision for his people. Thus
also he can redeem his from death, in the time of famine.

Or fourthly, He can do it in a way of ordinary providence, by making the land
yield it is natural increase, and by giving strength to the Earth, to bring
forth plentifully, for the use of man.

Fifthly, While the common judgment lasts, he can make some special provision
for his; And make a redemption of division, as he did in another case for his
people, Exodus 8. 22.

And lastly, We may improve this promise, not only for redemption from death in
famine, but for plenty of consolation, though we should die in famine. When the
bread is quite taken away from your Table; your hearts may feed upon such a
word as this, as upon marrow and fatness. Christ can feast your souls, when
your bodies are ready to starve, he can fill your spirits with joy and
sweetness, when there is nothing but leanness in your cheeks; Thus the
Prophet Habakkuk triumphs in God (Habak. 3. 17.) Though the Fig Tree shall not
blessom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; The flock shall be cut off from the
fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord,
I will joy in the God of my salvation. He was feasting upon God, while he
imagines the world starving; he sees all things in God, though the world should
afford him nothing. That soul is well fed and taught, which can be rejoicing,
while it is own body is starving.

And in war from the power of the Sword. War is the second evil. Famine and
war go often together, yea they two seldom go without a third, the
Pestilence, 2 Samuel 24. Jer. 18. 22. And though in the order of the words,
famine (...) bellum a radice (...) vesci, edere, per Metaphora pugnare, quia
g^adius in bello devora^ hominum corpora. In bello se mutuo homines devorant
and obsumunt.
be set before war, yet usually war is the forerunner of famine. The sword
cuts off provision, and when it self has devoured much flesh, it leaves no
bread for those who survive. It is observable that the original word for war
here used, comes from a root signifying to eat or to devour, and so by a
Metaphor it signifies to fight, or strike with the sword. And the reason, why
the same word, which signifies war, signifies to eat, is because the Sword is
such an Eater or rather a Devourer, and it eats two ways.

First, the Sword eats up the bodies of men, drinks up their blood, dispeoples
a Land; And then

Secondly, It eats up and consumes the fruits of the earth, and hence War is
the mother of Famine. Therefore we find, that when the great peace and so the
plenty of the Church of Christ is prophesied of, and described, Isa. 2. 4. and
in Micah, it is thus expressed, They shall beat their swords into plow shares,
and their spears into pruning-hookes. As if he should say, while the sword is
abroad in the field, the plow shares will do little there; For the most part
Justice is silent in time of war (the sound of the trumpet Inter arma silent
leges.
and drum, is too loud for the Law) and when the Law stands still, the plongh
stands still; Therefore when the sword is in motion, both are at a stand. Hence
the promise, that Swords shall be beaten into plow-shares, and spears into
pruning-hookes, that is, with peace, you shall have bread and wine, which note
the abundance of all other things. The ancients embleam'd peace by Ears of
corn, and Concord by (a Cornu-copia) a horn of plenty; riches are the fruit
of peace: And safety is the privilege of the Saints in time of war, In war
they shall be delivered from the power of the sword.

The Hebrew is, They shall be delivred from, or out, of the hand of the sword:
Sometime in Scripture we read of the face of the sword, which notes the sword
coming and approaching to a people; And sometimes we read of the mouth of the
sword, which notes the sword come, devouring and eating up a people; And here
we have the hand of the sword, they shall be delivered out of the Gladius manu
apprehensus and elevatus, symbolum est extremi discriminis and praesentis
hostis: Quasi diceret etiam in ipsa pugna vel inter tot manus gladios agitantes
and contra te vibantes salvaberis.
hand of the sword, which notes (as we translate) the power of the sword: Or,
that form of speaking may be understood by an Hypallage, From the hand of the
sword, that is, from the sword in the hand, which phrase imports present
danger; when the sword is unsheathed and drawn out, when it is in the hand
ready to strike, then the enemy is ready to charge, and then the Lord delivers;
He shall deliver from the sword in the hand, or out of the hand of the sword.
So Psalm. 127. 4. Children of the youth, are as arrows in the hand of the
mighty, that is, as arrows ready to be shot. And Psalm. 149. 6. Let the high
praises of God be in their mouths, and a two edged sword in their hands;
noting actual revenges taken on the enemies of God, and actual praises given
to the name of God, at the same time.

So then, the meaning of these words, He shall deliver thee from the power of
the sword, or out of the hand of the sword, is this, suppose thou art in such a
condition that the swords are drawn about thy ears, and thou art in the midst
of a thousand deaths and dangers, in the very heat of a battle, yet then the
Lord God can and will deliver thee.

And this likewise is a comfortable promise, for us to lay hold on, in these
times. It is a time of war to us all, and there are many of our friends and
brethren (as it were) in the very hand of the sword; Desires are often sent to
the Congregation, by one for a husband, by another for a brother, by a third
for a servant, by many for their friends, gone forth to meet a sword in the
hand of an enemy skillful to destroy: Here is a promise, to comfort and support
such; The Lord in time of war, can deliver out of the very hand of the sword,
or, when swords are in hand; when thousands of swords are drawn together,
preparing for, or smiting in the day of battle; know, then God is a deliverer.
In the most present dangers, God shows the most present help. (Psalm. 23. 5.)
Thou shall spread my table and cause my cup to overflow, before the face of my
enemy, even then, when my enemy is nearest and looks on. As when the sword is
in the hand of the Angel, so when it is in the hand of man, A thousand shall
fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come
nigh thee, (Psalm. 91. 7.) Not nigh thee? what? when they die on this side and
one that side, on every hand of a man, does it it not come nigh him? Yes, nigh
him, but not so nigh, as to hurt him; The power of God can bring us nigh to
danger, and yet keep us far from harm: As good may be locally near us, and yet
vertually far from us, so may evil; The multitude thronged Christ in the
Gospel, and yet but one touched him, so as to receive good; so Christ can keep
us in a throng of dangers, that not one shall touch us, to our hurt.

Yet we are not to take this or the like holy writs of protection, as if God
would deliver all his people, from famine and from the sword; we know many
precious servants of his have fallen by these common calamities; The Lord knows
how to distinguish his, when sword and famine do not. Neither does this word
fall, though they do: If the servants of Christ are not delivered from these
troubles, they are delivered by them, and while they are overcome by one
trouble, they conquer all.

Verse. 21. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue, neither shall thou
be afraid of destruction when it comes* This verse contains a second pair of
evils: First, The scourge of the tongue. Secondly, Destruction.

Two things are here to be enquired into, about the former.

1. What is meant by the scourge of the tongue? 2. What it is to be hid from
it.
The scourge of the tongue.] Mr Broughton reads it thus, Quo tempore lingua
fl^gallabit homines. Drus. (...) In piel est detrahare vel nocere lingua.
Thou shall be delivered (or thou shall be hid) when the tongue whippeth. And
another to the same serce; At what time the tongue shall be scourging of men,
thou shall be secured from it. And that word (Leshon) the tongue, in Piel,
signifies to detract, to traduce or slander; the same word is used both for the
instrument of the tongue, and one of the worst acts of the tongue,
calumination; or we may render it according to the exact lettter of the Hebrew
elegancy, to Betongue a man: We use such a kind of speaking in our language, as
to strike a man with a cudgel or a Cane-staffe, is to cudgel or cane a man;
and if a man be shot with a pistol, we say he was pistol'd; so a man smitten
with another tongue, is said in the Hebrew, to be Betongu'd, or such an one
has betongu'd him.

We leave the Verb, and translate by the Nowne; From the scourge of the
tongue. In construction (Beth) In, is often rendered (...) Saepe redditur per
Min (...).
by (Min) From, as Grammarians know. Thou shall love the Lord thy God in all
thy heart, or from thy whole heart, or from the heart-root: So here, Thou shall
be hid in the scourge; that is, thou shall be hid from the scourge, when the
tongue is lashing and whipping, thou shall be hid from the lash and scourge of
tongues.

But what may we understand by this scourge of the tongue?

First, Some take it for public accusations before a Judge or Magistrate.
Many scourge their brethren at the Tribunal of Princes, Rev. 12. That accuser
of the brethren, that traducer, the Devil, is conceived to make those
accusations by his agents, in those times, before the heathen Emperors,
against the Christians; The Christians in that age, were extremely scourged by
malignant and malevolent tongues, tongues set on fire of hell, as the Apostle
James speaks, Chap. 3. 6. And so the scourge of the tongue, may be that
punishment, which they by false accusations obtained against the innocent;
their tongues got judgment against them sometimes to be scourged or whipped;
therefore also, that very work of the tongue is well called scourging. Our Lord
Jesus was crucified upon the tongues of the Jews, before he was crucified upon
the cross by the Romans. The Jews cried out first, crucify him, crucify
him, here was the cross of the tongue; The conspirators against Jeremiah,
advise thus (Chap. 18. 18.) Let us smite him with the tongue; that is, let us
accuse him to the King, that he may Accusemus eum apud regem and omni industria
and ratione efficiamus, ut publica sententia vapule^. Flagellum linguae est
poena in judcio constitu^a, and postulata fieri a calumniatoribus.
be smitten by a public sentence. In this sense a man is imprisoned by the
tongue, banished by the tongue, hanged and burned by the tongue, that is, the
tongue does all these virtually (or vitiously rather) by false accusations,
causing these things to be done actually and formally.

Secondly, Others interpret the scourge of the tongue, to be those terrible and
dreadful reports which amaze, lash and afflict the spirit about the approach
of dangers. As, when a report is rung in the ear, that an invading enemy,
spoylers and plunderers, armed with power and malice are at hand to take away
estates, liberties and lives. How many have bin beaten about the ears, and
scourged with such Alarums? (Jer. 50. 43.) it is said, The King of Babylon has
heard the report of them: what report was it? and of whom? A spy rides in, and
kills the King with his tongue, strikes him thorough with his tongue, before he
was touched with the sword of the Medes and Persians: How? He brought him a sad
report, that the enemy was upon his march, then it follows, The King of Babylon
has heard the report of them, and his hands waxed feeble, anguish took hold of
him, and pangs as of a woman in travel. We find the like expression, Isa. 28.
18, 19. They who had slighted the judgments of God, and said, when the
overflowing scourge shall pass thorough, it should not come near them, even
these (says God) shall be vexed, when they do but hear of a scourge coming
near: I will send a report, and it shall pass over morning by morning, and it
shall travel by day and by night; and what shall be the effect of it? It shall
be a vexation (says the Lord) only to understand the report. You shall not
only be vexed when the enemy is come, and thrusts a sword into your bowels,
and fire into your houses, but you shall be vexed at the noise of his coming, it
shall be a vexation to you to hear the report. It is a great mercy to be
delivered and hid from this scourge of the tongue, and this is promised him who
fears God, (Psalm. 112. 7.) No evil tidings shall make him afraid. A heart
which has trembled at the voice of God instructing him, shall not tremble at
the voice of men reporting evil to him. Many a man is more afraid than hurt,
and more perplexed with the hearing of evil tidings, then others are with
seeing or feeling the evil. The Lord threatens Ely, to do such a thing in
Israel, and against his house, that both the ears of him that hears shall
tingle, 1 Samuel 3. 11. But

Thirdly, Some translate thus. He shall be hid when the Quidam, cum v^g^bitur
Imguae ut sit (...) pro (...) Drus. Merc.
tongue wandreth or walks about; for the same word which signifies a scourge,
by the alteration of a point in the Hebrew, signifies to run to and fro. It is
the word used in the first Chapter, where Satan reports himself, A Goer to and
fro about the earth; There is an expression (Psalm. 73. 9.) suitable to this
sense, though the Original word be not the same; They set their mouth aagainst
the Heavens, and their tongue walks through the earth. The tongues of many
take long journeyes, while themselves sit still: Kings are said to have long
hands, but many of their subjects have long tongues, and strike their brethren
with them many hundreds of miles off; the tongue travels from town to town,
from City to City, and scourges one here, and there another. And, while these
men send their tongues about a wandering, to wound here and there, this and that
man's credit, He is a happy man that can be hid from them.

Fourthly, Some of the Hebrew Doctors, retaining the foregoing sense of the
Verb, say, that by tongue, is meant Nations and people: Sunt qui per linguam
hic intelligunt nationes q d. quum grassabuntur long lateque gentes and populi
omniaque depopulabuntur, etc. Drus.
When the tongue, that is, when a Nation shall go about, or march from place
to place to destroy and over-runne a Land, then, at such a time, thou shall be
hid: It is frequent in Scripture to put tongues for Nations, or tongues and
nations for the same, Rev. 7. 9. Chap. 17. 15. And there is a comfortable truth
in the matter of this interpretation; That when all tongues or nations shall be
gathered to destroy us, yet we shall be hid: As if it should be said (like
that, Psalm. 83. 6.) Though the Tabernacle of Edom and the Ishmaelites, of Moab
and the Hagarens, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines with the
inhabitants of Tire, be confederate against thee: or, to take modern names
and Nations, though Irish and Spanish, French and Danes, etc. should at any
time, wander from their own lands to invade thee; yet thou shall be hid when
these tongues rove and wander, spoil and pilla^e. The matter, I say, of this
interpretation is a truth, and a very comfortable one, but I would not charge
it upon this Text.

Fifthly, and most generally, and I conceive most truly, by the scourge of the
tongue, is meant all, and all manner of calumnies and slanders, cursings or
evil speakings, false witnesses and accusations; and from these (the promise
is) thou shall be hid. It is said, Prove. 14. 3 That, In the mouth of the
foolish is the rod of pride; not, that a foolish man will scourge pride, he
loves it too well; but, because the pride of a fool, sets his tongue a
scourging the wisest and the best: Maledicentia est famae hominis, quod
flagellum corpori, nam laedit eam and interdam accid^t, hinc Grae^e (...) Dius.
Evil words are the same to the credit of a man, that a scourge is to his
back; when slanderers speak openly, then their tongue is compared to a sword,
or an arrow by day; when secretly, then to a trap, or an arrow by night, to a
serpent which comes behind; Genesis 49. and, as here, to Flagellum dicitur quod in
scapulas impingitur, and a tergo laedit, ut non videas, -- Metuentes patruae
verbera linguae, Hor. 3. Cor. Od 11. Nam Patrui multo quam patres
inco^rup^iores esse so lent in judicandis and objurgandis fratris fili^^u^
peccatis;
a scourge which is prepared for the back, and is called in our language
backbiting: or we may call it back-beating. The scourge of the tongue, is all
that ill, which the tongue can speak: And the Verbera a verbis, aut verba a
verberibus dicta sun^: quod au^es vox verbe^^t. Nonius.
Latin word for a word, agrees well to this sense; being derived (as Critics
observe) from a word which signifies a stripe; or the word which signifies a
stripe, from that which signifies a word: And we find; that they who defame or
over-severely reprove others, are called (barely) Qui de^^actoriis verbis,
famam alterius verberant. percussore* appellantur, etiam suppresso nomine
linguae, Pined. Nec sermon inutili conscientiam pe^^utit, infi^morum, nec
centumelio suo and garrulus, perdat eum, quem potuit medestia, and lenitate
corrigere, Hier. in Titus 1. 7.
strikers. And this (as some of the ancients note) according to Scripture
language, in those two Apostolical directions (1 Timothy 3. 3. and Tit. 1. 7.)
where the Apostle gives the rule concerning a Bishop, that he must be no
striker; This may be understood of striking, not with the hand, (the Apostle
could hardly think that quarrelsome spirits and sons of violence should be so
much as admitted to a probation about that office) but striking with the
tongue, by an undue, an overhasty, or an angry reproof and censure. The great
instrument of a Bishop or a Minister, is his tongue: but he must use his
tongue, rather to heal than to wound; or if at any time, he uses it to wound,
it should be in tendency unto, or in preparation for healing: Therefore, Let
not a Bishop be a striker, a striker with his tongue in passion, much less in
spleen or for self ends.

Thus we see what we are to understand by the stroke or scourge of the tongue.
But what is it, to be hid from that scourge? A word of that. Thou shall be hid-

Not, as La^ebunt detractorem tua facta, de quibus possi^, detrahendi materiam
sumere, Aquin.
One, Thy actions shall be hid, which might be as matter for slander to work
upon; nor, as Deficient detractore^* firmae
Another, though such actions appear, yet slanderers shall want proof, or
sufficient witness shall not appear against thee. But*

First, We may take it thus; Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue,
that is, the tenor of thy actions shall be so fair, and probationes and
sufficientia indicia, Cajet.
thy life so blameless, that malice it self shall not find, where to fasten
an accusation.

Or secondly, When other men are slandered and reproached, thou shall be free.

Or thirdly, Thou shall be hid, that is, though occasion should be given to
malice (and that our noblest and holiest actions use most to give) yet
malicious men, shall not be able to come at thee, thy person shall be secured
in a chamber of secrecy, and covered with a mantle of providentiall darkness,
while the light of thy good works dazles and troubles the eye of the world.

But rather fourthly, Thou shall be hid, that is, Thou shall be patronized and
defended, thou shall be set right, and vindicated from all calumnies and false
aspersions, The Lord will so take care of thy credit and reputation, that
though many go about to blemish it with lies and slanders, yet thy honor
shall be saved, or the wounds of it healed, by causing thy righteousness to
break forth as the light, and thy just dealing as the noone day. Some
charitable medicinable tongue shall lick thee whole, after all the stripes of
those scourges or envenomed scorpion-tongues: Thus, thou shall be healed if
smitten, or else thou shall not be smitten, (Psalm. 31. 20.) Thou shall keep
them secretly in thy pavilion, from the strife of tongues. The words of the
Psalmist, are an allusion to Kings, who being resolved to protect their
Favorites, against all the clamours and accusations of men; take them, as it
were, into their own Pavillion, into their Bedchamber and bosom, where none
may touch Ad similitudine^ regiae defensionis loquitur, qua s^. illi qui
regibus chari sunt coram, in ipsis aulae penetralibus and in ipso regum
conspectu versantes defenduntur and securi vivunt, Muscul. in Psalm.
them. God also has a pavillion, a secret hiding place for his Favorites,
where he preserves their credit and reputation untoucht, against all the blots
and causeless blemishes of malignant spirits, Thus they are hid from the
strife of tongues. Hence his Saints and people are called, His stored, or his
hidden ones, Psalm. 83. 3. Observe; first.

The tongue is a scourge.

The tongue is a terrible engine: The Scripture gives us variety of comparisons
to set forth the evil, of an ill tongue. It is here called a scourge, and it
is a scourge of many lashes or knotted cords, or rather stinging scorpions;
scoffing is one, slander a second, false accusations a third. The former
strictly taken, is a lie told any neighbor, and the latter is a lie told the
Magistrate. The tongue (Psalm. 52 2.) is called a sharp rasor; Psalm. 57. 4. it
is compared to spears, and arrows, and a sharp Sword; and if at any time
with much using, this Sword be blunted in the edge or point, the Scripture
speaks of whetting the tongue, Psalm. 64. 3. It is as the sharp arrows of the
mighty man, and coals of juniper, Psalm. 120. 4. They bend their tongues like a
bow, Jer. 9. 3. Their tongue is as an arrow shot out; ver. 8. In a word, It is
a fire and a world of mischief, Jam. 3. 6. (Jer. 18. 18.) we read of smiting
with the tongue, and of devouring words, Psalm. 52. 4. As there are devouring
opinions, opinions, which not only hurt the judgments of men, but devour
their consciences, and eat up truth (as it were) at a bit, so there are
devouring words, words that eat up a man's reputation, and devour his good name
as bread. Slanderous mouths l^ve the whitest bread, the finest of the wheat;
A man's credit which has not a branne in it, how sweet a morsel is it to such
mouths? Though, the truth is, every name, by how much the more pure and
spotless it is, by so much the more deadly will it be in the stomachs of these
devourers. A good name swallowed by an ill man, will (as Jonas did the Whale)
make him (one time or other) Stomach-sick, if not conscience-sick, and he shall
be forced to vomit it out safe again.

It is a sad thing when (thus) the people of God are wounded and scourged by
the tongues of wicked men; but I will tell you of a sadder scourging, that is,
when the people and servants of God scourge one another with their tongues: I
beseech you leave this work to wicked men, take not the scourge of the tongue
out of their hands, let us, not only not slander, but, not speak hardly one of
another. The ancient Christians in the Primitive times, were deeply wounded by
the scourge of the tongue, what strange things did ungodly men feign and then
fasten on them? They reported them as black as hell, as if their holy meetings
were not to worship God, but to defile themselves with incest and uncleanness;
but among Christians themselves, we read not of this scourge, at that time.
No; Christians loved one another to the amazement of Heathens: They were so
far from this scourging or wounding of one another, that they were ready to
be scourged, to be wounded, to be burned, to die one for another. This caused
their Pagan persecuters to cry out, Behold how the Christians love one another?
We are scourged by wicked ones, as They, O that we could love one another, as
They. Sons of Belial have revived the ancient reproaches and accusations
against the brethren, O, that we could revive the ancient embraces and most
endeared affections of the Brethren Observe, secondly,

It is a great mercy to be delivered from the Scourge of the tongue.

The Apostle speaks of it, as a wonderful mercy, that he was delivered out of
the Mouth of the Lion (2 Timothy 4. 17.) Surely it is no ordinary mercy (though
lying be very ordinary) to be delivered out of the Mouth of a liar. This is
joined in one promise, with deliverance from the most deadly instrumenrs of
war, Isa 54. 17. No weapon formed against thee shall prosper, that is no
weapon of war, neither Sword nor Spear shall hurt thee. Then follows, And
every tongue that shall rise up against thee in judgment thou shall condemn.
This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord. The tongue of a Ziba or of a
Tertullus will devour and destroy, as bad as the Sword of a Caesar or a Pompey.
The holy story tells us, what woeful work the tongue had made upon Joseph and
Mephibosheth, if the good providenee of God had not spoken a good word for them.

Lastly, Let me add one seasonable word of admonition, to these tongue
scourgers; As the word is, They that smite with the sword, shall perish with
the sword; so, they that smite with the tongue, shall perish with the tongue.
The tongues of the Saints are in some sense, sharper and sorer scourges, then
the tongues of wicked men. The word of God in their mouths, is a Two-edged
Sword, yea sharper then any Two-edged Sword. A Prophet or a Minister of Christ,
can strike as hard with his tongue, as (and infinitely harder, then) any
Profane wretch, or railing Rabshakeb in the world. Truth well set home, will
wound deeper, than slander can. I (says the Lord, Hos. 6. 5.) have hewed them
by my Prophets, and slain them by the words of my mouth. In the 11th of the
Revelation, it is prophesied, That fire shall go out of the mouths of the two
Witnesses, and devour their enemies, verse. 5. That is, the word of their
mouths, shall be as a fire to scorch and consume the gain saying world; and
with this instrument their tongue (for that only is suitable for the work of
Witnesses) they are said to have tormented those that dwell upon the earth,
ver. 10. Some indeed are Sermon-proofe, and Word-proofe; They at present do
even laugh at all our spiritual Artillery, Let whole volleyes of threats be
discharged upon them, let them be hackt and hewed all day long with the Sword
of the Word, they feel it not, it may be they jeer at it, at least they regard
it not. As they, Jer. 18. 18. conspiring against the Prophet, Come let us
devise devices, etc. let us smite him with the tongue. And least any should
say, if we smite him with the tongue, he will smite us again; For these
Prophets are notable at that weapon. To secure themselves, they resolve thus;
Let us not give heed to any of his words. As if they had said, we know he will
speak big words, and threaten us terribly, with Sword, and pestilence, and
famine, and hell, etc. But let us arm our selves against him, and make no more
of all, then of a Squibb or a pot-gun, then of a stabbe with a wooden dagger,
or a charge with a Bull rush. Let us not give heed to any of his words. But let
these know, though now they are hardened against the spiritual scourge and
sword, in the mouth of Christ's Ministers, yet at the last Christ himself will
smite them with the rod of his mouth; and with the breath of his lips shall he
slay the wicked. Isa. 11. 4. He once made a Scourge of cords, and whipped the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, he will at last make a Scourge of words,
which shall whip all impenitents and unbelievers out of his presence into hell,
where they shall gnash their teeth, and gnaw Those tongues, which have scourged
his faithful servants, with many stripes, only for doing or speaking his,
their Masters, will.

Neither shall thou be afraid of destruction, when it comes. The word
Destruction signifies a confluence or meeting together (...) a radice (...)
more praedonum and impetu Hostili vastari and de populari.
of all kinds of evil; when evils break in together, as thieves and robbers
into a house to spoil and take away all, Isa. 60. 18. Jer. 48. 3.

When such destruction comes, thou shall have this privilege, Not to be afraid
of it. Not afraid, the word signifies any kind of fear, holy fearing as well
as natural; here it is used for excessive, distracting fear. It is not meant,
that a man shall be secure or senseless, when destruction comes, So to be
fearlesse, is worse then to be reasonlesse. But this is the meaning, Thou shall
not be afraid; That is, thou shall not be dismayed with fear, thou shall not
be amazed or astonished with fear, thou shall not be at thy wits end, much
less at thy Faiths end, when destruction comes. Fear is good in it is kind,
yea it is an excellent grace; Some fear in time of destruction is the daughter
of faith (Heb. 11. 7.) By Faith, Noah, being warned of God, of things not seen
as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his house; He fears
destruction savingly, whose fear moves him to prepare due means of safty. Such
preparatory fears are holy fears, and well become the Saints, when destruction
comes. (Exodus 9. 20.) He that heard of the destruction coming, and feared the
word of the Lord, made his servants and cattle flee into the houses; God would
not have his people, when they hear destruction is coming, stand at the door
in a daring manner to meet it, and lay themselves open to it, no he would have
them flee into the house, and enter into the chamber, and shut the doors about
them, hiding themselves, as it were for a little moment, until the indignation
be overpast, Isa. 26. 20.

The fear which God promises his people protection from, is unbelieving
frare, or fear which is the daughter of despair: Such as that, Isa. 7. 2.
where, when a report came of destruction coming, it is said; That the heart of
the King, and the heart of his people was moved as the trees of the wood are
moved with the wind. They were so afraid, so unsettled and disordered within,
that they knew not how to settle and order their affairs without. Such a fear
the Prophet Jeremy threatens upon Pashur, Jer. 20. 3. The Lord has not called
thy name Pashur, but Magor-missabib; For thus says the Lord, behold I will
make thee a terror to thy self, and to all thy friends; Fear round about,
and fear within, this fear God promises to deliver his people from, in times
of danger.

Observe hence.

The power and presence of God is able to uphold his people in the face of
dangers, and in the presence of destruction.

They shall not be afraid of destruction, when it comes: Suppose God does not
keep the destruction off from them, yet he will keep finking fears off from
them. How terribly soever men look upon them, they shall not be a terror to
themselves, neither will God be a terror to them. Many a man is his own
Bugg-bear. And there is nothing can be so terrible to us, (except an angry God)
as we may be to our selves. But he, to whom God is not a terror, and to whom
himself is not a terror, will not be afraid of the King of Terrors. So long
as we are at peace with God and our selves, destruction cannot come so fast, as
consolation will. And destruction cannot carry that away, wherein consolation
lies. The best part of the Saints estate, is out of the reach of destroyers.
They can destroy houses and goods: They can carry away gold and silver, but
they cannot destroy faith and hope; shey cannot carry away, grace or holiness;
They may burn your writings, and the evidences of your Lands and Tenements,
but they cannot burn your evidences for Heaven, or weaken your tenure and
interests in Jesus Christ. Upon the wings of this assurance the Saints are
carried beyond the borders of fear when destruction comes into their borders,
or death is breaking open their doors, and climbing up unto their windows.
Yea this assurance, (which carries them beyond the confines of fear) sets them
down in a very comfortable place, in the Land of joy, or upon the mountains of
delight. It is too little to say, They shall not be afraid, when destruction
comes, for at destruction they shall laugh: As Eliphaz undertakes with his next
breath.

Verse. 22. At destruction and famine, thou shall laugh; neither shall thou be
afraid of the Beasts of the Earth.

23. For thou shall be in league with the stones of the field; and the Beasts
of the field shall be at peace with thee.

In the former words, we had a promise of redemption from famine and from fear
at the coming of destruction. Here both the mercy and the promise are
heightened, or the promise is made yet more merciful; At destruction and famine
thou shall laugh. It is a high privilege to be redeemed from famine, and not
to be afraid of destruction; but to laugh at these is the highest privilege.
But is it not a sin to laugh at these? And if so, how will it be any privilege
at all? I (says the wise man, Eccl. 2. 2.) said of laughter it is madd, and of
mirth, what does it? And is not this madd laughter, to laugh at destruction,
and to be merry in famine? The Prophet vehemently reproves joy in sad times,
(Isa. 22. 12, 13.) and brands it for an iniquity, that shall not be purged from
them, till they die; And can it then be commendable to rejoice in famine, etc.
It is comely for man to be merry, when God is angry? And to be rejoicing, when
the Lord is destroying? To clear this I shall open the sense of the Text, and
show, that this Laughter is neither (...) ^ae^ quod (...) Sumitur in bonam vel
in malam partem, pro loci ratione: risus gaudij, risus contemptus.
sin nor madness, but the holiness and sobriety of the Saints.

At destruction and famine thou shall laugh. The word is ordinarily used for
laughing; whence Isaac has his name, The son of the promise was called
Isaac, because Abraham laughed, or because he rejoiced at the promise or birth
of his son, especially at the promise of His birth, who was to be the joy and
desire of Nations, the Lord Jesus Christ, who, referring to this act of
Abraham, tells the Jews, Joh. 8. 56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my
day, he saw it and was glad. To laugh in Scripture is taken two ways.

Sometimes in a good sense; and

Sometimes in an ill sense,

In a good sense, and so, To laugh is an outward expression of sound inward joy
and true comfort; To laugh is an act proper to man. There cannot be true and
solid joy (and so, not this effect of it, laughing) where there is not true
solid reason. Even passion (strictly taken) is founded in reason. In the 29. of
this book ver. 24. Job describing the great prosperity of his former days,
says, If I laughed on them, they believed it not. Job was a man of that esteem
and veneration, that though he expressed in his gesture or countenance, a kind
of familiarity, and how well he was pleased, yet the people did so much
reverence him, and his piety and unspotted justice did so overawe them, that
they suspected still he might observe somewhat amiss in them.

Secondly, to laugh, is used for scorning and deriding. In the 39 of this book
v 7. Laughter is ascribed unto the wild Ass, improperly; He (sc. the wild.
Ass) scorns (or laughs at) the multitude of the City. And (Psalm. 2. 4.) when
the Princes and the people gather themselves together, to take counsel against
the Lord and against his Christ; He that sits in heaven shall laugh, and the
Lord shall have them in derision. That is, the Lord (in a most holy manner)
scorns or derides the counsels and practices of wicked men, Man is never in so
sad a condition, as when God laughs at him.

Again, Laughter proper to man, is either sinful and reprooveable, or holy and
commendable. Sinful laughter is that which arises.

First, from unbelief or weakness of faith: Such was the laughter of Sarah
(Genesis 18. 12.) when the Angel brought his message that Sarah should have a
son, Sarah, heard it, as she was in the Tent*doore, and the Text says, Sarah
laughed: The ground of her laughter was unbelief, she thought it an impossible
thing, for her to have a son (as a man will laugh at a thing you tell him. when
he thinks it impossible to be done. That her laughter was from unbelief, is
plain, from the Angels reproving question in the next words; Wherefore did
Sarah laugh, saying, shall I of a Jurety bear a child, which am old? Is any
thing too hard for the Lord? As if he had said, surely Sarah thinks the Lord
has out promised his own power to perform.

Secondly, Sinful laughter arises from contempt, or slighting of counsel,
and carnal security in times of danger (2 Chronicles. 30. 10.) when Hezekiah sent
messengers to Ephraim and Manasseh to warn them to come up to the house of the
Lord, to keep the Passover, it is said, That they laughed the messengers to
scorn and mocked them; they laughed, slighting and contemning this admonition,
thinking themselves safe and well enough, though they came not up to that
solemn Passover.

Thirdly, Sinful laughter arises from pride and selfe-confidence, (Hab. 1.
10.) The Prophet describes the proud Chaldeans, invading Judah; thus, They
shall sc^ffe at the Kings, and Princes shall be a scorn unto them, and they
shall deride every strong-hold. They shall come up with such an army, with such
an arm of flesh, as all flesh must fall down and yield unto.

Lastly, There is a sinful laughter, springing from sensuality, and excess of
creature contentments. Such laughter Christ threatens, Luke 6. 25. Woe to you
that are full, woe to you that laugh now: That is, woe to you that laugh,
because of your creature-fulnesse.

Laughter, which is good and commendable, has such roots, as these.

First, it springs up from faith, such was the laughter of Abraham (Genesis 17.
17.) when he heard the promise, that he should have a son, the text says,
Abraham fell upon his face and laughed: That the laughter of Abraham was from
faith, is clear from the Apostle, Romans 4. 19. affirming, that, He not being
weak in faith, considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an
hundred years old, neither yet the deadnes of Sarahs womb, he staggered not at
the promise of God through unbelief, etc. Abraham laughed out his faith, not
(as Sarah) his unbelief. Therefore also Christ says (as was touched before)
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, he saw it, and was glad: In the promise of his
son, he saw the Promised se^d, in whom all the Nations of the earth should be
blessed. This sight of the day of Christ, in that prospective of the promise,
drew it ^eare to the old-mans heart (though it were far off) and made him
glad.

Secondly, Commendable laughter comes from holy courage, and well grounded
confidence; well tempered magnanimity, and Christian heroicalnesse of spirit,
lifts us so far above dangers and fears, that we laugh at them.

And then, there is a laughter in dangers grounded upon assurance of
deliverance from, or support in dangers. A man that sees a great Ridehis ventos
hoc munere tectus. and imbres. Mart.
storm coming, laughs at it, knowing where to go to shelter presently, where
to get a warm house over his head, The Pilot knowing he has a strong Ship,
and good Tackling, laughs at the winds. In that sense [not to feare] is used
(Prove. 31. 21.) where it is said of the wise woman. She is not afraid of the
snow for her household; If the snow and cold weather come, she does not fear
it, she can laugh at the snow; Why? For all her household are clothed with
scarlet, or double cloth, she has made such provision against cold weather,
that she fears neither frost nor snow.

Now, the text, (when it is said, At famine thou shall laugh,) is not meant of
laughter, springing either from unbelief, or pride or self-confidence, or
sensuality or senslesnesse; as if he should not care what God did in the world,
let God do what he would, he would laugh. As that proud Emperor said (not
only as one before (...)
him, when I am dead, but) while I live, let heaven and earth be mingled
together, I care not, scorning and contemning what could come. But this
laughter comes from strength of faith, from holy courage, and well grounded
confidence; from an assurance of shelter, safeguard and protection from, or
support in, the greatest dangers, even in famine and destruction: He fixes on
such a promise In vastitate ita eris munitus, ac de tua salute securus, ut
ridere possis, etiam s^ famescas, non te enecabit fames, verum Deus sue te
consolationi^ papulo ita reficiet, ut ridere possis. Ipsa te fames red^et
saturum; and ca^^abis, non secus ac si tibi plenus esset venture. Pined.
as this, Psalm. 37. 19. They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, and in the
days of famine, they shall be satisfied. The soul of a believer sees
salvation in destruction, food in famine, he has wine well refined to drink,
marrow and fatness to feed upon, when the world knows not how to give him (or
will not give him) a dry crust, or a cup of cold water. He sees a hiding place,
when all others lie open to the danger, he sees a place of refuge, a covert
from the rain and from the storm, when others stand naked under them. The
sum of all is; A godly man sees himself so protected in dangers, so provided
for against all wants, he sees in the promises such a Magazin of arms, such
stores of bread, that he fears no weapon formed against him, and feeds, when
no table is spread for him; Danger secures, destruction saves, and famine
fattens him, that is, in danger, destruction and famine, he knows whither to
go for food, salvation and safety, even unto God, who is all this to him, and
will be more, if he need it Upon these grounds it is, that the text says, At
famine and destruction he shall laugh. Observe hence,

A godly man, a true believer, is not only not afraid of outward evils when
they come, but through faith he is above and triumphs over them.

Not to be afraid of faime and destruction when they come, is too low for his
spirit, He shall laugh when they come. Hence the Apostles exulting language, We
glory in tribulation, we are exceeding joyous in all our tribulations. And to
this sense we may interpret that of Peter speaking of the sufferings of the
Saints, 1 Epi. 4. 14. The Spirit of glory rests upon them; that is, a spirit
of glorying and holy rejoicing, whereby the soul is carried up (as it were)
upon Eagles-wings, above and beyond reproaches. All evils lie below a
believer, when he is lifted up with this spirit of glory. This spirit of glory
resting upon us through him that loved us, makes us more then conquerours over
tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril or sword, Romans
8. 35. More than conquerours? Who can express, how much that is? No tongue can
tell what it is to be more then a conqueror; when Christ would advance the
exceeding greatness of that reward, which Givers shall receive, Luke 6. 38. He
says not barely, Give, and it shall be given you good measure; but you shall
have it pressed down, and yet more, shaken together; that is not all neither,
but you shall have it running over. Now a measure will run over, as long as
you will pour, there is no stint, no bounds to that gift, which shall be given
running over; A vessel will run over continually, pour as long as you will:
So here, you shall not only have a conquest, but more then a conquest, and
what that is, is as much and more than all our thoughts are able to comprehend.
Hence also the Apostle speaking of that great enemy, the last enemy Death (1 Corinthians. 15. 55.) brings in the believing soul in a kind of holy triumph,
laughing at, and even jearing death, in the sense of the Text, O death where is
thy sting? As if a man having disarmed his enemy, should say, now Sir, where is
your sword? where is your pistol? Christ has disarmed death, taken away its
sting; now the believer may laugh in the face of death, Oh death, thou
thoughtest to make us all smart, where is thy sting? thou thoughtest thy self
a conqueror, able to devour and subdue us all, but where is thy victory? Such
is the laughter here meant. And in the same sense, Leviathan the mightiest of
living creatures, that sea monster (to whom upon the earth there is not the
like, he is made without fear, Chap. 41. 33.) is said to laugh at the shaking
of the spear (Job 41. 29.) He is so armed with impenitrable scales, that,
shake a spear at him, he laughs at you; it is an allusion to those, that are
armed with proof, they fear neither sword nor shot: The truth is, a believer
is shot-free, shake the spear at him, shake famine, shake destruction at him,
threaten him with this or with that, he laughs at all, because he has armor
of proof, wherein he may safely trust; He has a shield, a shield of faith,
which will quench even the fiery darts of Satan, much more then the fiery
dangers of the world.

The Histories of the Primitive Church, are full of this holy laughter, and
heroical magnanimity of the Saints, grapling with the greatest evils. How did
those renowned Martyrs, even baffle death, and deride their torments (from this
principle of faith in Christ) conquering them, not slighting them (from a
principle of selfe-neglect) When Polycarpe was threatened to be torn in pieces
with the teeth of wild beasts, let them come, says he, and grind me, I shall
make very good bread, so that the very tormentors were more tormented with the
holy scorn and laughter of suffering Christians, than the Christians were with
the torments which they suffered. In 2 Samuel 2. 14. When Abner and Joab, the two
great Generals met, Abner says unto Joab, Let the young men arise and play
before us; the sport was to fight, and fighting unto death, and yet these stout
Soldiers being above fear, call it playing one with another; It is the word
here in the text (let them come and laugh together before us) As if these young
men were of such courage, that they could laugh at death, and go to killing
one another as if they were to go to play with one another. Surely there is
little reason for such courage; killing of men is no laughing matter, no matter
of sport; for, as Abner said unto Joab, not long after (verse. 26.) shall the
sword devour for ever, know thou not, that it will be bitternsse in the
end? There is little cause to account the beginning of that a sport, which will
be bitterness in the end: But when the Saints are to join in the deadliest
battle, or to meet with the deadliest death for Christ, or from the chastning
hand of Christ, they have reason enough to account it a sport, and to laugh at
destruction (in this sense cleared) because they know it will be sweetness and
comfort in the end: Valor sometimes laughs at danger, much more may faith,
(Psalm. 68. 12, 13.) Though ye have lain among the pots, yet shall we be as the
wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold: This is
the confidence of the Saints, when they lie among the pots, or among the
pot-ranges (as some interpret it) where the scullions lie, and are besooted and
black'd over, at the fire of afflictions till they look like very scullions,
that yet, they shall be gilded over soon after. Or it may be understood of the
bounds and limits of the enemies Country: and so it is a description of great
danger, for they who lie upon the borders of an enemies Country, are in
continual fear of an assault; This the Greek seems to favor, rendering it
thus; Though we have lain between the inheritances, or the lots, sc. our own
and the enemies; either (...). Sept. Ainsworth.
way the sense reaches this point fully; Though Believers lie among the pots,
or ncarest dangers, yet they are assured that they shall have wings, as the
wings of a Dove, which are covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow
gold. There is gold and silver in the eye of faith, while there is nothing but
blackness and death in the eye of sense; yea, faith assures them, that, they
shall be white as snow in Salmon (as it follows in that Psalm) that is, they
shall have whiteness after blackness, or light in the midst of darkness;
Salmon signifies dark, duskish or obscure: for, it was a hill full of pits,
holes, and glins, very dark and dangerous for passengers; but when the snow
was upon it, it was white and glistering; now says he, they shall be like
Salmon in the snow, though black in themselves, yet white, lightsome and
glorions, either through pardon of sin, or victory over their enemies, to both
which, whiteness has reference in Scripture.

Again, In that it is said, At destruction and famine thou shall Non solum
singulas arumnas superabit, sed omnium illarum in unum coeuntiam agmen.
Integrum ex omnibus ex^rcitum f^gabi^.
laugh; as from that word, laughing, we see what spirits the Saints have in
troublesome times, So, inasmuch as he gathers together and rally's all the
scattered troops of afflictions, to charge at once upon a believer; and yet
concludes, At destruction and famine thou shall laugh; Observe, That

A godly man laughs at, or is above all evils, though brought against him at
once.

It has been said, That Hercules could not match two: here are two,
Destruction and famine, overmatcht by one; bring whole legions and armies of
troubles to encounter a Saint, he overcomes them all: He famishes famine, and
destroys destruction it self. The Apostle, Romans 8. 35. musters up (as it
were) all evils together into a body, and dares any or all to battle, with a
believer, Who shall separate us from the love of God? shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or perrill, or sword?
which of these shall undertake the challenge, or will you bring any more? then,
come life, or death, Angels, or principalities, or powers, things present, or
things to come, height, or depth, or any other creature: none of these single,
nor all of these joined, shall be able to separate us from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Every heightened Saint is a spiritual
Goliath, who in the name of the living God, bids defiance to this huge host, and
they all run and tremble before him. Rejoice (says the Apostle, James 1. 2.)
when you fall into diverse tempatations; A believer has joy, not only when he
grapleth with a single temptation, but let there come many, diverse temptations,
variety of temptations, variety for kind, and multitude for number, yet he
rejoices in the midst of all.

Neither shall thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth. Having thus lifted a
godly man above the afflicting reach of those two great evils, famine and
destruction, want of good things, and spoiling of their goods; he proceeds to
instance another great evil, wherein a godly man is exempt from, and set above
fear; Neither shall thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth.

Beasts of the earoh.] (...) a radice (...) vita, vivents, bestia fera.
The root of that word signifies life, and so any living creature, especially a
wild beast; because they are so active and full of life, therefore they are
named from life.

And these are called, the beasts of the earth.

First, Because beasts are produced from the earth, and the earth received a
charge to produce them, Genesis 1. 24, 25. And God said, let the earth bring forth
the living creature, after his kind, and God made the Beast of the earth after
his kind.

Or secondly, Because Beasts have nothing but earth to live upon; as men whose
portion is only in creatures, are called men of the world, or men of the earth.

The word for ( (...) Complectitur totum terrarum orbe^ tum habitabilem, tum
qui non est habitabliis, deductum volunt a verbo (...) curra^e, vel quia coelum
perpetuo rotatu circa terram currit, vel qu^d omnia animalia current super
faciem terrae.
earth) signifies the whole earth, habitable or inhabitable; And though the
earth stand still, yet this word is derived (say some) from running: either,
because the heavens run round aboui the earth, with a continual rotation or
motion; or because all creatures, men and beasts, move or run upon the face of
the earth. Though others deduce it from a word which signifies to desire, Alii
a verbo (...) i. e. volui^, con^upivi^ deductum voluat eo quod terra jugiter
appetat afferre
wish, or will a thing, because the earth is perpetually desirous of bringing
forth fruit, for the use and help of man. But it is not agreed on, what we are
to understand, by the beasts of the earth.

First, Some take the words improperly, and so the beasts of the earth, are
interpreted men; A company or society of men, and these in a double sense. For
the word notes sometimes a company of men in a good sense, and sometimes a
company of men in an ill sense. I shall give you an instance of both, for the
clearing of this text-

It signifies men, or a company of men in a good sense, Psalm. 68. 10. where
speaking of that rain of liberalities, (that is, blessings of all sorts) which
God sent upon his inheritance, to confirm and refresh it, he says, Thy
Congregation has dwelt therein, Thy camp or leagure, thy host or troop dwelt
there; (so 2 Samuel 23. 13.) which the vulgar translates, Thy beasts, and the
Greek, Thy living Animalia tua habitabunt in ijs, Vulg. Sept. (...).
creatures dwelt therein: The same word is used (and some apprehend in allusion
to this Psalm) Rev. 4. 6. Chap. 5. 8, 9 in those mystical descriptions of
Christ and his Church: In this sense it suites not at all with the promise of
the text, These beasts are not to be feared, but honored and loved; man's
greatest spiritual comforts on earth, are found in the society of these beasts.

But commonly this word, referred unto men, signifies an association of wicked
men; men of the earth, worse (many of them) then the beasts of the earth: These
are spoken of in the same Psalm, ver. 30. Rebuke the company of spear men,
(or Archers) (...)
The rout or crew of the Cane, that is, men that bear reeds, or canes, whereof
spears and arrows were wont to be made; therefore the company of speare-men
or archers, are called a company with reeds: The word by us rendered company,
is, the beasts of the reeds, those men that are like beasts, savage, cruel and
bloody, these are as bruits and beasts of the earth; so they are descipher'd in
the next verse, The multitude of the bulls, with the calves of the people. And
we find the word signifying, a company of wicked ones, and a company of Saints
in the same verse Ps. 74. 19. O deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove unto
the multitude of the wicked; The Hebrew is unto the company of the beasts;
Forget not the Congregation (or the beasts) of thy poor for ever; there the
same word is taken (as in Psalm. 68. 10) for a company of Saints, or the poor
people of God. In the Scripture of the new Testament, it is frequent to shadow
wicked men under the names of beasts, beasts of the earth: so that of Paul has
been taken (1 Cor. 15. 32.) If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the
manner of men, with beastly men, cruel men, men like unto beasts in their
qualities and dispositions: though others understand it of his being cast unto
the beasts, to fight with them, which was a cruelty those persecuting times
exercised against the Christians. So (1 Timothy 4. 16.) Paul says, he was
delivered out of the mouth of the Lion: Nero that cruel tyrant, is supposed to
be the Lion, the beast of the earth he aims at. And the Apostle, Tit. 1. 1.
gives this character of the Cretians, they are evil beasts. If we take it here
in this sense, it is a truth, and a very comfortable truth, that godly men
shall be delivered from the fear of beastly and cruel men, or as the Apostle
calls them, unreasonable or absurd men; who have not faith.

But rather understand here beasts of the earth properly, for those fierce and
cruel creatures hurtful to man. Once man had power and dominion over all the
creatures; the wildest beasts were tame to him in his state of innocence; till
he rose up and rebelled against God, the creatures were subject unto him; but
man rebelling against God, the creatures rebelled against man: hence it is,
that man naturally is surprised with fear at the approach and sight of strong
and cruel beasts; and therefore it is here spoken as a special mercy and
privilege of the godly, that they shall not be afraid of the beasts of the
earth.

The beast of the earth are hurtful to us three ways;

First naturally, many beasts by nature are very dreadful to man, as the Lion,
the Bear, the Wolf, and such other fierce, strong and bloody beasts.

Scondly, Tame beasts, such as we daily use and subdue to our service, are
often by accident hurtful to us; The Horse and the Ox, have many times been
destructive to their owners.

Thirdly, (which I conceive is the thing chiefly aimed at here) beasts hurt
judicially, in a way of wrath from God; There are diverse places in the book of
God, wherein God threatens to arm the creatures, against those who sin against
him, and that when his people should forget their duties, the beasts should
forget their subjection. Deuteronomy. 32. 24. I will send the teeth of beasts upon
them. And Jer. 15. 3. I will appoint over them four kinds, says the Lord, the
sword to slay, and the dogs to tear, and the fowls of the heaven, and the
beasts of the earth, to devour and destroy. You see God can have an army any
where if he pleases, an army of dogs to destroy, an army of fowls of the
air, an army of the beasts of the earth, to subdue a rebellious people. And
Ezekiel. 14. 21. This is one of the four sore judgments that God denounces
against Jerusalem, The sword, and the famine, and noisome beasts, and the
pestilence. Thus in a judicial manner they were very terrible and dreadful,
and so were numbered among the sorest evils or judgments which God sent upon a
Nation, for their wickedness. To all or any of these ways, this promise may
be enlarged. Thou shall not be afraid of the natural cruelty, the casual
hurtfulnesse, or the judiciary rage of beasts, when sent by God with commission
to punish the beastliness of men.

How this comes to pass, that beasts of the earth hurt not godly men, is said
down in the next verse, which I shall a while open, and then give you some
Notes and Observations from both together.

Verse 23. For thou shall be in league with the stones of the field, and the
beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. This verse contains the
reason, why he should not be afraid of the beasts of the field; and here is
somewhat more got into the reason, than was before in the promise; the ground
of the promise is higher, and carried farther than the promise it self. The
promise was, to be delivered from the fear of beasts; and that thou may be
certain of it, know God will not suffer so much as a stone to do thee hurt;
thou shall be at league not only with the beasts of the earth, but with the
stones of the field.

Thou shall be in league] The word is frequently used in the (...) a radice
(...) ^^legii quia elegamur personae inter quas and res and conditio^es propter
q^as foed^s initur. Buxt.
old Testament, to signify, that solemn gracious covenant of reconciliation
between God and man, established in the blood of Christ.

A league or covenant is a very solemn act, an act of reason and of the
highest reason, an act of judgment and deepest deliberation: therefore it may
be doubted how a league can be entered with stones, which have no life, or with
beasts which have no reason. We read (Genesis 31. 41.) of a league or covenant
made at or upon an heap of stones, between Jacob and Laban; but this is very
strange and unheard of, to make a league with a heap of stones.

For the claring of this, we must enquire into two things;

1. What these stones are. 2. What this league with stones does import.
First, For the Stones: There are diverse opinions about them, and many
Interpreters have exceedingly stumbled at these stones: Some change these
stones into men, strong men, or the strongest of men. That of Job in the next
Chapter, has some allusion to it, ver. 12. Is my strength the strength of
stones? A strong man is strong, as a stone.

The Chaldee Paraphrast, understands by stones, the Law, which was written in
stones. Thou shall be in league with the stones, that is, the Law written in
tables of stone shall never hurt thee. But that (as to this text) is a meare
conceit, though (in it self) a great truth, and our greatest comfort, that
believers are at league with those Law-stones, which left in power and
hostility, would have broken all mankind to pieces, and ground them to power.
Christ has made peace for us with the Law; The Law had a quartell at us, and
the Law would have been upon us with an everlasting war, if Christ had not
settled our peace by satisfying the Law; Stoning to death, had been the death of
us all, if Christ had not made a league for us with these stones.

Thirdly, Others interpret these stones by a Metanomy of the continent for the
thing contained, Thou shall be at league with the stones of the field, with the
rocks or rocky places, that is, thou shall be at league with those creatures,
or with those beasts, which lie among the stones, and have their dens about
hollow rocks: and so they make the latter branch [and the beasts of the field
shall be at peace with thee] to be exegeticall, giving us the exposition of the
former, or showing what is meant by being at league with the stones of the
field; Thou shall be at league with the stones of the field, that is, with the
beasts who make their dens, and their holes, and their hiding places anomg the
stones of the field. This is a good sense of the words.

But leaving the former, with some other apprehensions about these stones, I
shall take these stones properly, and so they will fall under four
considerations, all which give light to the clearing of this text, and the
manner of our league with stones.

First, As naturally scattered upon the face of the earth, so hindering
travelers, or endangering a man in have upon his way. One part of Arabia, was
called Arabia Petraea, or the stony, because it was full of stones, and so
uneasy either for tillage or travel.

Stones are so dangerous to the foot, that the Latin word is derived from
hurting the foot; Hence those Scripture-expressions, Lapis a laedendo pede
nomen habet.
A stumbling stone, and a rock of offense, because men are so apt to stumble at
stones. And both these are applied to Christ in a figure, he is called A
stumbling stone, and a rock of offense. Christ in himself is the most precious
and elect foundation-stone to build on, but he is the most sore and dangerous
stone to stumble on: To be in league and covenant with that living stone, is
the highest mercy.

Secondly, These stones as they lie naturally hidden in the bowels of the
earth, or under the earth, are a trouble to the Husbandman in tilling the
ground, in plowing and sowing, and they often endanger the breaking of his
plow, and hinder the rooting and growth of the seed sown.

Thirdly, consider these stones as artificially laid together for the making of
a wall or mound to fence and part field from field, or both from the common
fields and highways.

Fourthly, Consider these stones as artificially and industriously placed for
marks and boundaries, to distinguish private men's lands, or the precincts of
such and such countries, which are commonly called Lapides terminales.
Mark stones, or Boundary-stones; as also stones set in roads or highways, for
the direction of Travelers, pointing which way to go to eminent Towns or
Cities. Of such a stone we read (1 Samuel 20. 19.) when Jonathan bad David stay
at the stone Eziel, that is, as we put in the Margin of our Bibles, the stone
that shows the way, or the Lapides viatorii.
way-stone. These boundary-stones, or way-stones to direct travelers, were
famous in antiquity; Insomuch that among the Romoni Deum habeban^ quem
Terminu^n vocabant. Is Deus finum erat, Pig. l. 1 de Civ. Dei cap. 23. Lact. l.
1. c. 20.
Heathen, They were worshipped as a God, or Numen, as diverse of the Christan
Fathers have observed in their learned reports of Heathenish idolatry. Which
also their own Termini, sive lapis sive es defossus in agro, Stipes, ab
antiquis, ^u quoque numen habes. Ov. primo Fast. -- Omnis erit sine
^eli^igiosus ager --
Poets have elegantly described, both in their constitution and uses; giving
those stones a charge faithfully to testify, Et seuve meribus, seu te pull
sabere rastris, Clamato tuus est hic ager, ille tu us.
This is your land, and this is yours. And they break out into the commendation
of the integrity of these witnesses, whom no threats could terrify, or bribes
corrupt to speak a lie, or conceal the truth.

Now consider the other term, what it is to be in league with stones, in any
of, or in all these acceptations.

In general we know, that to be in league with stones, is an improper or
allusive speech: Stones are not capable of the formalities of a league, when we
are in league or covenant with God or man, so with stones; these two things are
made out to us.

1. That God or man will do us no hurt; A covenant or league takes off the
actings of hostility. Whatsoever a man is in covenant with, he fears no damage
from. Presumptuous sinners having made a covenant with hell, and an agreement
with death, build their confidence of indemnity upon the strength of it. When
the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come near us, Isa.
28. 15. A man that is in league with the devil, believes the devil will do
him no wrong.

2. A league imports, that we may expect to receive good, protection, benefits
and blessings either from God or man, according to the Articles of covenant
agreed to, and sealed respectively. These two assurances we have by a league.
And when it is said here, that a godly man is in league with the stones of the
field, both these are to be understood. It is as much as to say, The stones of
the field shall not annoy him; yea, the stones of the field shall be a benefit
or a friend to him. Man is said to be in league with stones, when he receives
the effect of a league from stones. Taking it in this general sense, we may
apply it unto those four particular senses of senseless stones before mentioned.

First, As stones are naturally scattered upon the face of the earth, the
promise imports thus much; that such stones shall not hurt or annoy him in his
walks or travells. This promise we have expressly (Psalm. 91. 11.) He shall
give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, they shall
bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. This is
the league with stones, Stones shall not annoy thee in thy way, thou shall not
stumble or fall to break thy bones, or bruise thy body upon these stones. The
devil in his combat with Christ, misapplyeth this promise of a league with the
stones (Mat. 4. 6.) Tempting him to cast himself down from a pinnacle of the
Temple, for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and
in their hands they shall bear thee up, least at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone; As if he had said, a godly man has this assurance from his
league with the stones, that he shall receive no harm from them, therefore trust
God, and in confidence of this promise, Cast thy self down. So here is the
first sense, Thou shall be at league with the stones of the field; that is,
thou shall not be hurt by those stones, as thou travellest or walk.

Secondly, Take the stones as they lie hidden in the earth, then to be at
league with them, has this sense. First, that in tilling the earth, stones
should not trouble or hinder that work. God shall so order it, that though thou
plowest among stones, yet thou shall till thy ground successefully. The stony
ground shall be fruitful ground. In that Parable of a vineyard (Isa. 5. 1) God
is pleased to manifest his care of making it fruitful, by this act among
others, I gathered out the stones thereof, ver. 2, noting that stones are
naturally great impediments to fruitfulness. We rea^ (Mat. 13. 5.) how the
seed, which fell upon the stony ground, sprung up quickly and withered as
quickly; Stony ground naturally cannot feed or bring forth fruit to maturity.
It is then a great privilege, thus to be in league with the stones of the
field, that though we sow among stones, yet we shall have a plentiful Harvest.
When Job described the days of his prosperity (Chap. 29. 6) he says, The Rock
powered him out rivers of oil: To have oil out of rocks, is like having corn
out of the stones, both noting things succeeding Justo mollescu^t saxa, im^iis
vero te^rae pulvis mollissimus lapidescet.
beyond their natural principles, and our common expectation. When the Baptist
would show how God can work beyond all the possibilities of nature or reason,
he says to the Jews, Even of these stones God can raise up children unto
Abraham, (Mat. 3.) There is somewhat of a miracle in it, to raise up bread to a
man out of stones; that is, to make rocky land, a fertile soil. God threatened
his people, that he would make the earth to be iron under them; that is, the
earth which was ordinarily fruitful, shall yield you no more fruit, then iron;
And on the other side he promises, That they shall suck honey out of the rock,
and oil out of the flinty rock, Deuteronomy. 32. 13. Honey out of the rock; That is,
honey of Bees, hiving themselves in rocks; or (as others) honey fruits, as
Dates, etc. which grow on Palm trees (as oil on Olivetrees) in rocky places.
Hereby, the Lord assured his people of abundant Aisnw. on Deu.
plenty; For whereas rocks and stones are usually barren, he would make those
places fruitful to Israel. They should have oil out of the rock in Canaan, as
well as water out of a rock in the wilderness. We are surely in league with
those rocks and stones of the fields, which send us such Presents as these,
bread and water, honey and oil.

Thirdly, Take these Stones, as artificially laid together, and so, Nunquam
dissolvetur macria, non dissiliet lapis ex sepe, nemo furabitur, ne no Insiliet
in agros tuos.
Thou shall be in league with them, is thus to be understood, Those walls and
mounds of stone, shall be as the keepers and watchmen of the field; they shall
preserve thy corn and thy cattle from annoyance. To this sense some join the
former words with these, Thou shall not be afraid of the beasts of the earth,
for the stones of the field, which lie in the walls and fences, shall be-friend
thee, and keep them out. When God would show his intendment to destroy and lay
waste his vineyard; he expresses it by pulling down the wall, as before he had
expressed his care to protect it, by building of a wall, Isa. 5. 2. I fenced
it, and gathered out the stones thereof; which we may understand thus, I
gatherd out the stones (and as it is usual) made a fence of them; and had the
vineyard brought forth fruit, it had also been in league with these stones,
that is, the stones of the wall had kept out the wild-beasts, or any annoyance
from them; but being fruitless, the league with those stones was broken: I
(says the Lord, ver. 5.) will break down the wall thereof, and it shall be
trodden down. So that, in this sense, to be at league with the stones of the
field, is as much as to say, the stone-wall or the stone-fence which is made
about thy field, shall stand to protect and maintain thy land, thy fruits and
cattle, from the incursions of wild beasts, from spoiling and treading down
Facere pactum cum lapidibus agri, est pacifice vivere cum proximo, item securus
esse, quod nullos terminos agri sui transiliturus sit, ac si cum lapidibus
Terminalibus pepigisset: ipsique lopides pactum ini^um servarent, nec aliter ac
si ratione valentes incursores, aut transgressores etiam verbo fugarent, Pined.
Termini ag^oru^ tuo^um a nemine violentur, nemo transgredietur.
by any.

Fourthly, take these Stones for landmarks or for way-marks, for
boundary-stones, or for directory-stones; and then the sense may be thus
conceived, Thou shall be at league with the stones of the field; that is, no
man shall come within thy bounds, none shall remove thy landmarks, or invade
thy estate, those Stones shall firmly distinguish thine inheritance, thou shall
have no controversy arising, which is thine, or what is thy possession. As if
an agreement had formally bin made with these stones, to keep off all
intruders upon their Masters inheritance, and accordingly the stones in
pursuance of that agreement (like so many hired servants) should faithfully
witness for their Master, and chide away all who would do him wrong. (1 Samuel
7. 12.) Samuel set up a stone as a boundary of the conquest and victories,
which the Lord had given the children of Israel against the Philistines, He set
up a stone, and called it Eben-Ezer, or the stone of help. Adding the reason,
Hitherto has the Lord helped us; As if he had said, here is a Stone of
remembrance, how God has helped us, and that stone seemed to speak thus much
to Israel, Keep and hold what ye have gotten, let not the Philistines set a
foot (unrevengd) over or beyond this stone. So then, in this sense, to be in
league with the stones of the field, is a promise of keeping our inheritances
free from invasion and confusion, that we shall know what is ours, and that no
enemy shall take it from us.

It was a great sin to remove the landmarks and boundaries, and a great
punishment was threatened against any, who should alter or remove them, Prove.
23. 11. Deuteronomy. 19. 14. Deuteronomy. 27. 17. And when the Prophet Hosea would show, how
extremely wicked the Princes of Judah were, he says (Chap. 5. 10.) The Princes
of Judah were like them that remove the bounds; as if he had said, we account
those the worst of men, who remove landmarks; how vile then are these Princes,
who are as bad as they. Just as the wickedness of the people is aggravated,
Chap. 4. 4. This people are as they that strive with the Priefl. To strive with
the Priest, is to strive with God, that is a sad strife. Strivers with the Prist
are the worst of people, how vile then are this people, who are as bad as they.
But to the present point, if it be so great a sin to remove the land-stones, it
must needs be a great mercy to have those stones preserved. So then, to be in
league with the stones of the field, may have this good sense also, the
boundary-stones shall be preserved, none shall remove them, and they shall
preserve thy estate, that none shall invade or wast it.

Hence Observe,

God can do us good by any thing, if he pleases, and nothing can do us good
without God.

Though we have carefully set up bounds, though we have made strong fences, yet
these will not keep out evil or annoyance, unless there be a league, a league
of Gods making for us; And God can produce our comforts out of improbables, yea
impossibles to nature: He can fetch us bread and a blessing from stones. It was
a temptation upon Christ, when he was hungry to make bread of stones. If thou
be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. Mat. 4. 2. But it
is our comfort, that God can turn stones into bread, that he can make those
things which are most improbable to do us good, very good unto us. It is a sin
for us to turn stones into bread, or to expect stones to be turned into bread,
that is, to put God upon miracles from us, when means or endeavors may help
us; but God out of the superaboundance of his power and goodness, always can,
and sometimes will work miracles, turning stones into bread for us. Then, we
turn stones into bread, when we live upon sin, whosoever eats a bit of
bread, out of bread out of the hand of sin, turns stones into bread. Then,
God turns stones into bread for us, when out of his infinite power and
goodness, he gives us supplies by unusall means, and comforts us by that,
from which, we can expect no more comfort, then we do bread and water out of
stones.

Further, when stones seem to be most angry with a godly man, then he is in
league with them. Stones (in a proper sense) flew about the ears of Steven,
and killed him, yet Steven was in league with the stones, even while they took
away his life: God turned these stones into bread for him: and every stone, was
as a glorious Diamond in his Crown of Martyrdom.

There are two Interpretations of this league with stones (which some make
great store and treasure of) different from all these; Pineda. Crimen hoc
appellabant (...) cujus rei admissum, tale est: plerique inimi^orum so^ent
praedium inimici (...), id est lapides ponere indicio futuros, q^od si quis eum
agrum coluisset, malo letho periturus esset insidiis eorum, qui scopulos
posuissent. Quoe res tantum timorem habet, ut nemo agrum accedere audeat
crudelitatem timens eorum qui scopelismon fecerunt. Idem ex Vlpiano.
The former is grounded upon a custom in Arabia, where, or near which it is
supposed Jobs friends dwelt It was (says the learned Author) a very capital
offense in that country, if any man did cast or carry heaps of stones into his
neighbors ground; For that action had this signification or meaning in it, The
man, who afterward ventured to plow or till that ground, should surely dye by
the hands of those, who cast in those stones. So that, the sight of such stones
was terrible and ominous to the owner of the Land, as speaking death and ruin
to him, if he meddled with it. Hence it was often left unused and untilled.
Against this barbarous custom (it being an occasion of murders and blood shed)
a very severe Law was made; That whosoever should be discovered to have cast
such Stones into his neighbors ground, should have judgment of death by the
Magistrate. In allusion to this Law or custom, the interpretation of this
promise (Thou shall be in league with the stones of the field) is made out
thus. The ordinary Stones of the field shall be so far from hurting, that,
even those Stones, which speak anger and malice shall not hurt thee. God will
reconcile or subdue the rage of thine enemies, and though they have cast these
Stones of defiance into thy Land, yet they shall desire a league of peace with
thee, or fall before thee.

The second is grounded upon a custom, in war; of which we read (2 Kin. 3.
25.) that, when the Moabites fled before Israel, The pursuing Israelites beat
down their Cities, and on every good piece of Land, cast every man his Stone,
and filled it. etc. Eliphaz might have an eye to this, as if he had said, Thy
land shall not be buried under the heaps of stones, thrown there by a
conquering hand; that is, thou shall have a league of amity with, or victory
over all that are round about thee.

And the Beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. That is, they shall
(through the power of God) be made peaceable to thee. To be at peace with the
Beasts, is the same in proportion, with being in league with Stones. It was
man's privilege by creation to have power over the Beasts of the field, and it
is the privilege of Redemption, To be at peace with them. This is the ordinary
privilege of every Believer. But there is a more transcendent privilege of
the Church, in the most flourishing estate of it here on the earth, represented
under this notion, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb,
and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calfe, and the young Lion,
and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them, etc. And the
sucking child shall play on the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child shall
put his hand on the Cockatrice den; They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy mountain. This Peace with Beasts, is within a degree of glory with God,
whether we understand it in the letter, of beasts in kind, or in the Allegory,
of men symbolizing in rage and fierceness, in power and poisons, in stings and
teeth with beasts and Serpents.

The Text before us, goes lower then this promise; And to be at peace with the
Beasts of the field, is, only a gracious assurance that they shall not hurt us,
or that they shall be useful to us. In the firmness of this promise of peace
with the Beasts, the fearlesnesse of a godly man is founded, He shall not be
afraid of the Beasts of the earth, for the Beasts of the earth shall be at
peace with him. Hence observe,

The courage and fearlesnesse of a godly man, is grounded in divine reason, not
on humane presumption.

When we see a man stout in the midst of danger, fearles amongst wild beasts,
we may wonder where the spring of this courage lies: This promise shows you
the springhead, He is at peace with them; It is not conceit and fancy, or
desperateness of spirit, that causes him to deride and slight danger; but he
has a solid ground there is a peace and league ratified in heaven, for him
even with the Stones and Beasts of the earth. As a godly man can give a reason
of the hope that is in him; so he can give a reason of the courage that is in
him; he knows why he is so stout and venturous.

Secondly, Observe from both, in that man is here said to be in league with the
stones, and at peace with the Beasts; That

Every creature by sin is made dangerous and hurtful unto man.

For, in that there is a league and peace made with these, it notes, that they
were in a state of hostility, ready to rise up against us and annoy us. As the
creature by reason of man's sin is subject unto vanity; so man is subject unto
fear, by reason of the creature. Sin has made the creature vanity in it
self, and sin has made the creature vexation unto us. When the Beasts
rebel against us, we should remember how we have rebelled against God, And,
that until God renewes a league, and makes peace for us with the creatures,
there is not a creature upon the earth, but may quickly be destructive to us.
If God speaks the word, and gives a call or a commission to a fly, against the
strongest, the swiftest man; flight shall perish from the swift, and power from
the strong, neither of them shall escape.

Thirdly, Thou shall be in league with the Stones, and with the Beasts; he
reckons up all those ways, by which evils may come in upon us. And assures a
man, to whom God is reconciled, that these evils shall not come. Hence
observe; That

When God is once a friend to us, he can quickly make all other things friendly
to us also.

Every godly man (of such Eliphaz here speaks) is at peace and Qui Dominum
habet adjutore^, habebit and omnes creaturas adjutrices, ille si favet, favent
omnes: ait, aiunt: negat, negant: Qui Dominum babet custode^ habebit and
lapides campi custodes. Brent. in loc. Tranquillus Deus, Tranquillat omnia.
in league with God, therefore God makes all creatures at peace and league with
him. Though usually, they who are in nearest league and covenant with God, are
most warred with, and opposed by the world, yet this stands sure, that when God
is our friend, he can make our enemies our friends, or their enmity shall
be-friend us; Stones and savage beasts shall be helpful to us. When God is at
peace with us, he makes all things at peace with us. Daniel was at peace with
God, and he was at peace among the Lions. The Apostle (Romans 8.) gives it in
general, If God be with us, who can be against us? No creature has power in
it self to maintain war and emnity against those, on whose side God
appears. If God loves us, All things work together for good to us. He that
has help from God, shall not want help from any creature; for all creatures
are at the call and command of God; If he says, go, they must go; if he
says, come, they must come; if he says to a stone do such a man good, the
Stone must do it; if he says to a Raven, go carry Elijah his dinner, the
Raven will hasten; if he says to a wild Beast, save such a man, deliver such a
man, spare such a man, he must go of Gods errand. In our friendship and league
with God, we have a vertuall league of friendship with the most unfriendly
creatures.

And if God please, he can make men, who have as little sense as Stones, and
less reason than Beasts; to be helpful and useful, and peaceable to his
people. There is a generation amongst us, a stony generation, a hard-hearted
generation of men, you may as well move a stone, as move them with what you
say; a beastly generation of men, when you deal with them, you deal with
Beasts; yet the great God, (if he please) can make a league for us with these
stones, he can make these Beasts of the earth, brutish and unreasonable men, To
be at peace with us, Further observe,

It is from special providence, that the Stones, and the Beasts of the earth
do not hurt nor destroy us, but specially that they help and do us good.

There is providence toward all, but a special providence to the people of
God, that the creatures hurt them not. If God did not bridle the rage and
restrain the power of Beasts, man could not comfortably subsist with them. The
reason is given (Deuteronomy. 7. 22.) why God destroyed the Canaanites by little and
little, before his people, namely, Least the Beasts of the earth should
increase upon them. Here was a special providence, as all leagues, and
peacemakings are. All the leagues and peace which believers have, are branches
of that great league, of that grand Covenant, which God has made with Christ
on our behalf. And therefore (Hos. 2. 18.) this promise is made in special to
the Church. And in that day I will make a Covenant for them, with the Beasts of
the field. Fifthly, note,

A godly man enjoyes common comforts from special favor.

Wicked men are seldom hurt by the beasts of the field but they are never at
peace with them.

Lastly, observe,

Peace is a great mercy. By how much God makes more peace upon earth, by so
much, man has more of Heaven upon Earth. Man should desire peace with Beasts,
much more with men, most of all with God*

JOB Chap. 5. Verse. 24, 25, 26, 27. And thou shall know that thy Tabernacle
shall be in peace, and thou shall visit thy habitation, and shall not sin.

Thou shall know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine off spring as the
grass of the earth.

Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes
in, in his season.

Lo this, we have searched it, so it is, hear it, and know thou it for thy
good.


AT the 19th verse of this Chapter, we had a promise of deliverance from evil,
in six troubles, and in seven, In the verses following, we had a specification
of six or seven troubles, from which deliverance is promised. In these words,
we have the result of all, A well grounded security, in assurance of a fourfold
blessing. First, of a quiet and happy life. Secondly, of many prosperous
children, v. 25. Thirdly, of a long life. Fourthly of a sweet and comfortable
death, v. 26. every one confirmed and ratified as a truth in it self; a^^ by
way of application brought home to Job, in the 27th or last verse of the
Chapter.

Verse. 24. And thou shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace. Thou
shall know it.] Knowledge is sometime put for present sense; He that keeps the
commandment, shall feel (Heb. shall know) no evil: and so, Job is promised to
know, his Tabernacle shall be in peace, that is, he shall see and feel it to
be in peace. And

Secondly, Knowledge is put for experience; As we say of a rich man, he never
knew poverty; And in that sense, Christ is said not to have known sin, 2 Cor.
5. 21. Thus, also, the godly man knows his Tabernacle shall have peace, even by
the peace which he has had; From the former dealings of God, he gathers
conclusions, what God will do with him, for the time to come; Thou shall not
find me a false Prophet, or that I have fed thee with wind: Thou shall know
from experience, that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace.

And there is a third way by which this might be known, sc. by debate and
reasoning: Thou shall know it; If thou do but consider, what the estate of a
godly man is, and what God has spoken about that estate, thou may make out
such a conclusion, that certainly thy Tabernacle shall be in peace.

There is a fourth way of knowing, and that is, upon the testimony or word of
another, this is properly called Faith: Thou shall know it, that is, by looking
into the word of God, or considering the promises made to godly men, thou shall
assent to and believe this thing, that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace.

Fifthly, To know, is as much as to be assured, or certain of a thing; And to
know so, is opposed not only to ignorance and opinion, but it is opposed to the
lower degrees of faith; I know that my Redeemer lives, etc, (says Job Chap.
19. 25.) that is, I am sure he lives. And the Apostle 2 Cor. 4. 14. Knowing
that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus.
Knowledge is often put for assurance, and it may rise to that pitch here, Thou
shall be assured that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace.

Thy Tabernacle.] Tabernacles were of two sorts. There were Tabernacles for
civil uses, and the Tabernacle for church uses. They dwelt in Tabernacles, and
God was worshipped in a Tabernacle, And therefore (Ezekiel. 23. 4.) Israel and
Judah, are called Aholah and Aholibah. Israel, the ten Tribes, is called
Aholah, that is, a Tent, or a Tabernacle, noting, that they had been the Tent
and the Tabernacle of God, wherein he was worshipped; But Judah is called
Aholibah, that is, my Tent is in the midst of her, because God at that time
continued the outward Ordinances of his worship to Judah, though the ten Tribes
had been long in captivity. That only by the way. Here by Tabernacles we are to
understand civil Tabernacles, for in those Eastern Countries their ordinary
habitations and dwellings were in moveable Tents or Tabernacles, because of
their frequent removes. And hence afterward amongst the Latins, the word for a
Tent or Tabernacle, signified a house, or any place wherein men dwell and
frequent. Further, by a Trope, a Tabernacle signifies all a man's estate, or all
his goods; so that, when it is said, thy Tabernacle shall be in peace, the
meaning is, thy whole estate and family, what ever thou have, shall be in peace.

Shall be in peace.] That is, it shall be peaceable or in safety; Solent
frequentissime abstracta ob Emphasin pro concretis praedicari.
Peace may be considered two ways; either strictly or largely: Strictly, and
so peace is opposed to war; either first, foreign, or secondly, civil, or
thirdly, domestical war (as we may call it) namely strife and contention in
families. Thus, Thy Tabernacle shall be in peace, may take in all these; thou
shall neither be invaded by foreigners, neither shall thou have any
insurrection and sedition in thy own borders; neither shall thou have unkind
contentions, in thy particular family, or within thy private walls.

Secondly, Take the word more largely (as it is very frequently in Scripture)
and then peace signifies all manner of blessings and good things, the
confluence and gathering together as it were, of all comforts: And peace in
this large sense, is opposed to any kind of trouble or adversity; and to say
such an one has peace, is as much as to say, he prospers. Peace and prosperity
are terms of the same signification: And then the meaning is this, Thou shall
know that thy Tabernacle shall be in Peace, that is, that thy whole estate
shall prosper, and that thou shall have good success. Note hence First,

Peace is a choice and a special blessing.

Outward peace is the choicest of outward blessings, and inward peace is the
choicest of spiritual blessings. Peace gives sweetness and beauty to all our
blessings: without peace, riches are but gilded thorns; honor is but higher
misery; health but stronger affliction.

So without inward peace, grace gives no present comfort; And therefore in the
wishes of perfect spiritual mercy, to the Saints, we find these two in
conjunction, Grace and Peace. The highest promises made to the church, are
promises of settled peace in the Church, Isa. 32. 18. My people shall dwell in a
peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places:
There Is the top of their outward felicity. Again, in the the thirty third of
that prophecy, ver. 20. Look upon Zion the City of our solemnities (that is,
where the worship of God was solemnized) thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet
habitation; a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the stakes
thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be
broken; Pure Ordinances, and a peaceable habitation, are Jerusalems perfection
on earth; yea some look upon it as a perfection too perfect for earth, and
therefore interpret the prophecy of the heavenly Jerusalem,

Secondly, He says not only, thou shall have peace in thy Tabernacle, but thou
shall know it. Hence observe,

To be assured of a mercy, is better than the enjoyment of a mercy.

Doubts of loosing a mercy, eat out the heart of a mercy; and a man in that
case, is as much troubled with the fear of wanting, as he can be comforted
with the sense of enjoying.

There are three steps of blessedness. To be delivered from evil, is but a
part of blessedness, negative blessedness: To receive good, is the better part
of blessedness, positive blessedness. But to be assured that we shall hold
and retain all this, is the perfection of blessedness. The first part of that
great blessing we receive by Christ, consists in our deliverance from evil, or
in a freedom from perishing. The second consists in the conveyance of good to
us, as pardon of sin, grace and glory. But the third (which is the height of
all) consists in our everlasting assurance to enjoy all this: Adam had a good
estate, but he was not assured of it: The blessings we have by Christ, are
built upon a foundation, which can never be shaken. In this method, temporal
mercies are promised in this Scripture: First, deliverance from sword and
famine. Secondly, peace with the creatures. Thirdly, an assurance that this
peace shall be continued. Lastly observe,

All outward blessings are in themselves fading and perishing.

Though a man be assured that he shall enjoy outward blessings, yet he can
enjoy them but in the nature and condition of outward blessings. Though he be
sure to use and enjoy them, yet he looks upon them as perishing in the using.
All outward things are here (as frequently in other Scriptures) implied under
the notion of a Tabernacle; a Tabernacle is a moveable habitation. It is a
piece of a miracle if a Tabernacle stand long; that promise (Isa. 33. 20.)
imports somewhat extraordinary: A Tabernacle that should not be taken down,
not one of the stakes thereof removed, nor any of the cords thereof be broken;
It is as if the holy Ghost should say; Thou shall be a Tabernacle priviledg'd
above all Tabernacles: They are moveable, unfixed, easy to be taken down; but
it shall not be so with thee. The Apostles conclusion takes in all creature
comforts, The fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7 31. The scheme, the
beauty of the best earthly things pass, while we enjoy them, and moulder away
between our hands while we are using them.

And thou shall visit thy habitation, and shall not sin. This clause of the
verse compleats mercy yet higher; It is better not to sin in our habitation,
then to be assured of a habitation. To have quietness in our habitation is
very good, but to have holiness in it, is best of all. Thou shall visit thy
habitation, and shall not sin.

The word which we translate habitation, signifies not only a house, but a
wife, or a housewife; Hence some render, Thou shall (...) Habitatio and in
soeminino genere significat* Habi^atricem mulierem, sc. habitantem in domo, and
exornantem eam Moller. in Psalm. 68 13.
visit thy beauty, or thy fair and beautiful wife, and shall not sin; The
reason is, either because a good wife is the beauty and ornament of the house:
or because the knowledge, wisdom and diligence of the wife, is a means to
furnish and adorn the house; or lastly, the business of a wife is so much in
the house, that she shares names with the house: she is, or ought to be like a
shaile, living with her house upon her back. The Apostles rule also being, I
will that the younger women marry, bear children, guide the house, 1 Timothy 5,
14. And exhort them to be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, Tit. 2. 5. Hence
also probably, the same word in Hebrew, signifies a beautiful wife, and a
beautiful house. We read it in that sense (Psalm. 68. 12.) Kings of armies did
fly apace, and she that tarried at home divided the spoil. She that tarried at
home, or the beauty of the house (sc. the wife) divided the (...)
spoil. The meaning is, such victory shall be obtained over the enemies of the
Church, that the wives and weak women, shall be filled with those spoils,
which theit triumphant husbands shall bring home to them.

But here, we may rather take the word in the ordinary sense, only with this
emphasis, signifying (not bare walls, or a numerous family) but a beautiful, a
well furnished, a well ordered house. And so we have the word, at the third
verse of this Chapter, where Eliphaz says, I saw the wicked taking root, and
presently I cursed his habitation, or his goodly, beautiful, flourishing
house: So here, thou shall visit thy habitation, that is, thy house in all the
beauty, order, riches and furniture of it.

Thou shall visit. The word signifies more, then to see and look upon buildings
and furniture: To visit, notes in Scripture these (...) Visitavit
three or four things.

1. To overlooke or take care of the house; To visit the house, is to provide
for the house. Psalm. 8. 4. Lord what is man that thou visitest him! that is,
that thou take so much ear of him, and have such waking thoughts about him.

2. To visit the house, notes an inquiry of what is done in the house, how
things go in the family.

3. It imports a calling of all to an account and reckoning, about what is done
in their discharge of family duties.

4. To visit, is to order and direct, to command and give precepts for what
shall be done. Hence frequently in the old Testament, the Commandments of God
are expressed by this word, his precepts. So then, thou shall visit thy house,
or thy habitation, may take in all these; thou shall as a Master, view, and
over-see, direct and call to account thy house and family. In this sense, the
word is commonly used amongst us; That act of the Bishops calling their
Diocesses to an account, and over-looking them, was called their Visitation.
And over Colleges, Hospitals and such public foundations, Visitors are
appointed, to see and take an account, how the rules and statutes of those
places are observed. Thou shall visit thy habitation, and shall not sin.

But how is it said he shall do this, and not sin? Does not sin mingle with
all we do?

The word here used, signifies, 1. Tropically, to err, fail or miscarry in
the general. 2. Properly, to miss a special mark or way, to shoot awry, or
wander instead of walking; as (Judge. (...)
20. 16.) it is said of those seven thousand Benjamites, that they Erravit a^
via, vel scopo.
could shoot at an hairs breadth, and not sin, so the word is, or not miscarry,
not miss the mark. And because every transgression, is a wandering out of the
way of Gods commandments, or a shooting beside the mark of his word;
therefore that word in Non afficieris poena pro peccato^ P^gn. Non laede^is,
non accpies damnum aut detrimentum, Targ. Curabis res tuas and domum tuam, at
eas procurans, non f^ustrabe^is spetua, cedentibus tibi rebus omnibus pro voto
and ex animi sententia, Mer. Non aberrabis sc. a^ scopo and fine desiderij ^ui.
Coc
Scripture, is commonly used for sinning.

Here the word admits of a twofold interpretation.

First, For the fruit or effect of sin, thus, thou shall order and over look
thy family, with such wisdom and discretion, that thou shall not err or do
things beside the rule of prudence, and so bring miscarriages and troubles upon
thy affairs by sin. Mr Broughton translates to this sense, Thou shall visit
thy habitation, and shall not misprosper. And so Eliphaz may hint at Jobs
former losses, at the overthrow of his estate and family; as if he had said,
heretofore thou did visit thy habitation, and did not prosper, but if thou
shall now humble thy self, thou shall visit thy habitation, and all shall
prosper, things shall go well with thee, thou shall not labor in vain, or
loose thy end in the care thou take about thy family.

Secondly, the sense may be this, thou shall order and visit thy family, with
so much justice, equity and holiness, that thou shall not sin. Not that
Eliphaz undertakes his absolute freedom from sin, but he should not sin as (he
supposed he had) before, thou shall not run into such errors, or split thy
self upon such rocks as have wrackt thy former greatness And thus he secretly
reproves Jobs former carriage in his family, as irregular and sinful.

There is a further exposition joining both these together, Thou shall visit
thy house, and shall not sin, namely, by conniving or winking at the sins and
disorders of thy family, and yet thou shall have peace: thy strict and
faithful carriage in over-seeing thy family, shall not provoke either
servants, or children to contention and complainings, to anger and passion; Thy
holy severity shall not fill thy house with quarrels and troubles; but God
shall so Domestici correpti non succensebunt^ V^tabl.
over awe the spirits of those under thee, that they shall willingly and
cheerfully submit to thy purer discipline. Observe hence, First,

It is a great and a special point of godly wisdom, well to order and visit a
family.

Families are the principles or seeds of a Commonwealth. As every man is a
little world, so every house is a little Kingdom. A family is a Commonwealth
in a little volume. And the rules of it, are an epitomie of all Laws, by which
whole Nations are governed. The Apostle makes it a special character of his
Bishop, That he must be one who rules his own house well; and subjoynes the
reason, For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care
of the Church of God? 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5. And therein wraps up this truth, that he
who knows how to rule his own house well, is in a good posture of spirit for
public rule. The same wisdom, and justice, and holiness for kind, only more
enlarged and extensiue, acts in either sphere, and will regularly move both.
Secondly,

A family well visited and ordered, is usually a prosperous family.

Sin spoils the comforts and cankers the blessings of a family.

Sin brought into a house, rots the timber, and pulls down the house; or it
undermines the foundation, and blows up the house. The sin of families, is the
ruin and consumption of families. Hence thirdly observe,

To be kept from sin, is a better and a greater blessing, than all outward
blessings.

When Eliphaz had reckoned up all the comforts, which repenting Job is
promised; Thou shall be delivered in six troubles and in seven: Sword and
famine shall not hurt thee, peace and plenty shall dwell within thy walls, and
lodge in every chamber: Yet (says he) I will tell thee of a blessing, beyond
all these, thou shall not sin: It is more mercy to be delivered from one sin,
then from sword and famine; grace is better then peace, and holiness then
abundance; riches, and honor, and health, are all obscured in this one
blessing, A holy, a gracious, an humble heart.

There is more evil in one sin, than in any or all troubles; therefore, there
must needs be a greater blessing in being kept from sin, than in protection
from any or all troubles. Sin is the greatest evil, therefore to be kept from
sin, is one of the greatest goods. Christ took upon him all sorts of outward
evils, he became poor for our sakes, he had not so much as an house to lie in:
he came in the form of a servant for our sakes, and he was a man of sorrows,
He was acquainted with grief all his life, at last with death and a grave; Yet,
he would not admit of the least sin: he was content to bears all our sins, but
he abhord the thought of acting one. Not to sin, is the next privilege to God,
and the utmost privilege of man. When in a full sense, man shall not sin, man
will be arrived at fulness of joy; and as we daily empty of sin, so we
proportionably, fill with joy.

Verse. 25. Thou shall know also that thy seed shall be great, and thy off
spring as the grass of the earth. From the present bessings upon the family,
he descends to those which concern posterity; as if he had said, thy comforts
shall not be confined to thy self, neither shall they be shut up within the
limits of one generation; Mercies shall be transmitted to thy children, thy
heirs shall inherit blessings.

Thy seed shall be great. The word Great, signifies both multitude and
magnitude: Thou shall have a great seed, that is, a numerous (...)
seed a multitude of children; and thou shall have a great seed, that is,
honorable and wealthy children; Job himself was called, Chap. 1. 3. (though
by another word, yet in the same sense) the greatest man in the East; This
greatness is promised his children, and thy shall receive additionall further
blessings: For the word [Rab] signifies greatness, in a continual motion to
more eminent greatness: And therefore it is sometime translated by increasing;
So (Isa. 9. 6.) where the Prophet sets out the flourishing glory of the
kingdom of Christ; Of the increase of his Kingdom and peace, there shall be
no end; or, of the greatness and greatning of his kingdom, there shall be no
end. So that, to say thy seed shall be great, notes, not only some standing
greatness, but growing greatness: they shall ever be upon an increase, till
they come to their full in glory.

And thy offspring as the grass of the earth. Both clauses of the verse mean
the same thing. The word which we translate offspring, signifies properly that
which goes forth or issues, because children spring or go forth from their
parents, (...) Germina sicut ex vite palmites.
and are therefore called their issue. And the word is used for the bud of the
Olive or of the Vine; hence the Psalmist puts them both into a similitude. Thy
children shall be like olive plants round about thy table, They are as the
olive bud in their birth, and as the olive branch in their growth.

Thy offspring shall be as the grass of the earth. To be as the grass of the
earth, is a proverbiall speech; and it Proverbiale multitudinis, talia sunt
sicut arena maris, ut stellae coeli, Drus.
arises to the sense of those proverbials spoken to Abraham concerning his
seed, thy seed shall be as the Stars of Heaven: And thy seed shall be as the
sand upon the seashore. The grass of the field is as innumerable, as the
Stars, or the sands; Thy off spring shall be as the grass of the sield. Thou
shall not only have a numerous, but thou shall have (as it were) an innumerable
off spring.

Man kind in general is compared unto grass, Isa. 40. 6. All flesh is grass;
Grass in regard of its sudden withering, he is suddenly cut down, the
goodlinesse of man is as the flower of the field. Wicked men are compared to
grass, not only because they wither, but because they wither suddenly, or are
cut down by some hand of justice. The offspring of a godly man, are compared
to grass, but in another reference. To grass, first, because of their
multitude, and secondly, because of their beauty, they shall flourish and be
green as the grass, which is very pleasant to the beholders eye.

And in this also Eliphaz aims at the death of Job's children; Thou have lost
thy children, they perished miserably, but if thou Hoc dicit quia. Job filios
amiserat. Merc.
return, that blessing shall return, thy seed shall be great, and thy off
spring shall be as the grass of the earth.

The blessing of children has been showed in the first Chapter, therefore I
shall but name a point or two now. First, That

The posterity of godly parents. stand nearer then others, under the influence
of heavenly blessings.

As grace does not run in a blood, so neither do blessings infallibly run
in a blood, yet the children of those who are blessed, are nearest a blessing:
And their possibilities for mercy are fairest. Many promises are made to them,
they are heirs apparent of the promises in their parents right; others to
appearance, are strangers from the promises. Though, we know free grace chooses
often out of the natural line; The mercies of God are his own, and it is his
prerogative, to have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardneth.

Secondly, When he sums up the blessings of a godly man, the blessings of his
children are cast into the account. Whence note,

That the blessings of the children, are the blessings of the parent.

As the parent is afflicted in the afflictions of his children, so he is
blessed in their blessings. Relations share mutually both in comforts and
crosses. Children are their parents multiplied, and every good of the child, is
an addition to the parents good. A flourishing and a numerous posterity is a
great outward blessing. Some have the choicest of spiritual blessings, who
want this (Isa. 56. 3.) God comforts those that have no children, Do not say
that thou art made a dry tree; for I will give thee in mine house, a place and
a name better than of sons and daughters; As if he had said, the name of sons
and of daughters, is a very great comfort, but it is not the greatest comfort,
the best biessing: thou shall have a name and a place, better than of sons and
daughters.

Verse. 26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn
comes, in his season. From personal present blessings of this life, and the
blessings of posterity, Eliphaz descends to show the blessing of a godly man in
death. A happy death is the close of temporal happiness, and the beginning of
eternal. A happy death stands between grace and glory, like the Baptist
between the law and the Gospel, and is the connection or knitting of both. And
as it was said of John, That among them who are borne of women, there arose not
a greater then he, nevertheless, he that is least in the kingdom of heaven,
is greater then John: So we may say, that among all the blessings of this life,
there is none greater then a blessed death, nevertheless that which is least
in eternal life, is a greater blessing, then a blessed death. It was an
observation among the Heathen, That no man is to be accounted blessed, until
he die. But when life is shut up with a blessing, then man is fully blessed; As
in reasoning, so in living, the conclusion lies in the premises. A happy death
is the result of a holy life.

Thou shall come to thy grave.] That phrase notes two things.

First, A willingness and a cheerfulness to die. Thou shelt come, thou shall
not be dragged or hurried to thy grave, as it is said of the foolish rich man,
Luke 12. This night shall thy soul be taken from thee. But thou shall come to
thy grave, thou shall die quietly and smilingly, as it were, thou shall go to
thy grave, as it were upon thine own feet, and rather walk, then be carried
to thy Sepulcher.

Secondly, it notes the honor and solemnity of burying. Thou shall come to thy
grave with honor; as it is said of Ahijah the son of Jeroboam, 1 King. 14. 12,
13. When Messengers were sent to the Prophet to enquire whether he should
recover, the Prophet tells them, The child shall die, and all Israel shall
mourn for him, and bury him: For, he only of Jeroboam shall Come to the grave,
because in him there is found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel, in
the house of Jeroboam. He only shall come to thy grave, the rest shall be
thrust into the grave, or lie unburied, but he shall come, that is, he shall be
buried with honor; others shall have reproach cast upon them, when the earth
is cast upon them. Thou shall come to thy grave.

In a full age] So we translate. The word is expounded two (...) Senium
senectutis tempus.
ways.

In a full age, that is, in an age, when thou shall be full: full of estate,
full of wealth and honor, thou shall have abundance when thou die. And so it
points at Jobs present poverty: though thou have nothing now, scarce a ragge to
thy back, or a sheet to wind thee in, if thou should die, yet seek unto
God, and thou shall die in a full age, in a golden Age, thy wants shall be
supplied, and thy losses repaired to the full.

But rather a full Age, notes here a sulnesse of days, though the other
(fulness of estate) be not excluded. The Prophet puts the same difference,
between aged men, and men full of days, as is between children, and young men
(Jer. 6. 11.) I am full of the fury of the Lord, I will power it out upon the
children abroad, and upon the assembly of young men together, The aged, with
him that is full of days. That is, all ages shall feel the fury of the Lord.
A full age, is an age full of days or complete to the utmost time of (...)
life. Some of the Jewish Writers observe that the numerall letters of this
word (Chelad) make up threescore, which they conceive is In numeris notat 60 ea
prima senectus est, non matura. Quidam Hebrae orum vi^idem senectam nomine
(...) putant significari, ut Caph sit similitudinis (...) ^u^e virtutem and
humidum sonat. (...). Senctutem itaque pollecetur-non quidem m^lestam and
morbosam sed vegeta^ and paelicem.
the age here meant; but threescore is not a full old-oge, it is rather the
beginning of old age. Therefore fullness of age, is by others interpreted, to
be strength of age; thou shall die in an old age, yet thou shall have strength
and comfort in thy old age; thine old age shall not be a troublesome age, thou
shall not be weak and crazy, distempered and sick, a burden to thy self, or
friends; thou shall die (as some translate) in a good old age, or as Mr.
Broughton, thou shall die in lusty old age; Time shall not wither thee, nor
drink up thy blood and spirits, Thou shall have a spring in the Autumn, and a
Summer in the winter of thy life. As it was with Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 7. who died,
when he was an hundred and twenty years old, yet says the text, His eye was
not dim, nor his natural force abated; This is to die in a full old age,
full of days, yet full of strength and health. It is a great blessing, when a
man is (in this sense) youthful in old age: when others see with four eyes,
and go with three legs, he uses neither staff nor spectacles, but renews his
strength like the Eagle.

Or, we may take the sense more generally, for any one that lives long, and
lives comfortably; as it was said of Abraham, Genesis 25. 8. That he died in a
good old age, an old man, and full of years. He died in a good old age; The
young man is counseled, To remember his Creator in the days of his youth;
before the evil days come, Eccles. 12. 1. What are those? Those evil days
are the days of old age: The words following being an Allegorical, elegant
description of old age. Old Age in it self is the evil day: The lives of many
old-men are a continual death. They live as it were upon the rack of extreme
pains or strong infirmities; therefore it is a special blessing for man to be
old, and yet to have a good old age, that is, a florid comfortable old age; To
have many years and few infirmities is a rare thing. In some old age
flourishes, and in others old age perishes, Job gives us this difference in the
use of this word, Chap. 30. 2. Yea whereto might the strength of their hands
profit me, in whom (Chelad) old age was perished, As if he had said, some
old-men are active and strong, but these, who were faded and flatted in all
their abilities, in what stead could they stand me? They were a trouble to
themselves, and therefore could be no comfort unto others.

This full old age is explained further, by way of similitude, He shall die in
a full age, lie as a shock of corn comes in, in his season. When a young man
dye, he is as green corn. The Psalmist imprecates that some may be like the
grass or corn on the housetop, that withers before it is cut down,
whereof the mower Psalm. 129. 6, 7.
fills not his hand, nor he that binds up the sheaves, his bosom. The life
of a man sometimes is like corn growing upon the house top, that withers: Or
(as it is in the parable of the sower, Mat. 13.) like the corn that fell on
the highway side, or among stones and thorns, which came not in, in it is
season, it never staid the ripening or reaping, but was eaten up or dried or
choked before the harvest. Now here, man is compared unto corn, sowed in good
ground, well rooted and continuing out it is season, and is brought in ripe at
harvest. Old Age is the harvest of nature.

Some divide man's life into seven parts, comparing it to the seven planets;
Some into five, comparing it to the five acts of an interlude; but commonly the
life of man is divided into four parts, and so it is compared to the four
seasons of the year. And in that division, old age is the winter-quarter, cold
and cloudy, full of rheumes and catarrhs of diseases and distellations. But
here, old age is the harvest; though, thou art a very old man, thou shall not
die as in winter, but thou shall die, as it were in harvest, when thou art full
ripe and ready, as a shock of corn that is laid up in the barn; The general
judgment of the world is compared to a harvest, and death (which is a
particular day of judgment) is a harvest too.

Those words, He shall come to his grave as a shock of corn, are (...)
Ascendere significat ^vanescere, velut in auras tolli vele medio tolli.
further considerable, the Hebrew is, He shall ascend as a shock of corre; and
that referring to death, is sometimes translated by cutting off, or taking
away, Psalm. 102. 25. Cut me not off in the midst of my days; The letter is,
Let me not ascend in the midst of my days: Whether it have any allusion to
that hope or faith of the Saints in their death, that, they do but ascend,
when they die; or to their disappearing to the eye of sense, when they die,
because things which ascend, vanish out of sight, and are not seen; In either
sense, when the Saints are cut down by death, they ascend (...) Proprie
significat acervum frugum, qui in
And they are elegantly said, To ascend as a shock of corn, because that is
taken from the earth, and reored or stackt up; and so by a Metaphor it
signisies a Tomb or a monument errected or high-built over a dead corpse, much
after the manner of a shock of corn; area erigitur. Metaphorice tumultum ceu
currulum te^rae vel monumentu^ sepulcro imposi^um.
So the word is used, He shall remain in the tomb or Heap. Job 22. 32.

So then, the sum of this verse, is a promise of comfort and honor in death:
He shall die in a full age, when he is ready and ripe for death. Yet this is
not to be taken strictly, that, every godly man dies in such a full old age, in
an age full of days or full of comforts. Many of Gods best servants have had
evil days in their old age; their old age has had many days of trouble and
sickness, of pain and perplexity. But thus it is with many in old age, and
this is especially to be looked upon as an Old Testament promise, when the Lord
dealt more with his people, invisible external mercies. Yet, in one sense it
is an universal truth, and ever fulfilled to his people, for whenever they
die, they die in a good age, yea though they die in the spring and flower of
youth, they die in a good old age; that is, they are ripe for death, when ever
they die; when ever a godly man dies, it is harvest time with him; though in a
natural capacity he be cut down, while he is green, and cropped in the bud or
blossom, yet in his spiritual capacity, he never dies before he is ripe. God
ripens his speedily, when he intends to take them out of the world speedily. He
can let out such warm rays and beams of his Spirit upon them; as shall soon
maturate the seeds of grace, into a preparedness for glory: whereas a wicked
man living an hundred yeaers, has no full old age, much less a good old age,
he is ripe indeed for destruction, but he is never ripe for death; he is as
unreadie and unripe for death, when he is an hundred years old, as when he was
but a day old. He has not begun to live, when he dies; or he is at the end of
his natural race, before he has set one step in his spiritual. Gray hairs
are the shame, and should be the sorrow of old age, when they are not found in
the way of righteousness. From the former branch of this verse, observe; First,

To have a comely burial, to come to the grave with honor, is a great
blessing.

It was threatened upon Jehojakim, the son of Josiah, as a curse, That he
should have the burial of an Ass, and be dragged and cast out beyond the gates
of the City, Jer. 22. 19. That man surely had lived like a beast, whom God
threatened by name, that when he died, he should be used as a beast: though we
know the bodies of many of the servants of God, have been scattered, and may be
scattered upon the face of the earth, like dung; The dead bodies (as the
complaint is, Psalm. 79. 2.) of thy servants have they given to be meat to the
fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy Saints to the beasts of the earth. Yet
to them (even then) there is this blessing reserved, beyond the blessing of a
burial, they are ever laid up in the heart of God, he takes care of them, he
embalmes them for immortality, when the remains of their mortality, are trodden
under foot, or rot upon a dunghill.

Secondly, observe, A godly man, is a volunteer in his death; He comes to the
grave: A wicked man, never dies willingly, Though he sometime die by his own
hand, yet he never dies with his own will. Miserable man is sometimes so
over-prest with terrors, and horrors of conscience, so worn out with the
trouble of living, that he hastens his own death. Yet he, Comes not to his
grave willingly, but is dragged by necessity. He thrusts his life out of doors
with a violent hand, but it never goes out with a cheerful mind. He is often
unwilling to live, but he is never willing to die. Death is welcome to him,
because life is a burden to him. Only they come to the grave, who, by faith
have seen Christ lying in the grave, and perfuming that house of corruption,
with his own most precious body, which saw no corruption. Observe thirdly.

To live long and to die in a full age is a great blessing. Old Eli had this
curse pronounced upon his family, 1 Samuel 2. 31. There shall not be an old man
in thy house.

Gray hairs are a crown of honor, when they are found in the way of
righteousness. It is indeed infinitely better, to be full of grace, than to be
full of days; but to be full of days, and full of grace too, what a venerable
spectacle is that? To be full of years, and full of faith, full of good works,
full of the fruits of righteousness, which are by Christ, How comely and
beautiful beyond all the beauty and comeliness of youth, is that? Such are
truly said to have filled their days. Those days are filled indeed, which are
full of goodness. When a wicked man dies, he ever dies empty and hungry; he
dies empty of goodness, and he dies hungry after days. That place before
mentioned of Abraham (Genesis 25. 8.) is most worthy our second thoughts, He dies
in a good old age, an old man, and full, so the Hebrew, we read, full of
years; As a man, that has eaten and drunk plentifully, is full; and desires
no more. So, he dyed an old man and full, that is, he had lived as much as he
desired to live, he had his fill of living, when he died. And therefore also,
it may be called a full age, because a godly man has his fill of living, but a
wicked man (let him live never so long) is never full of days, never full of
living; he is as hungry and as thirsty (as a man may speak) after more time
and days, when he is old, as he was when he was a child, feign he would live
hill; He must needs think it is good being here, who knows of no better
being, or has Impij quamvis diu vivant. tamen non implent dies suos, quia spem
in rehus temporarijs collocantes perpetua vita in hoc mundo pe^frui vellent.
no hopes of a better, It is a certain truth, He that has not a taste of
eternity, can never be satisfied with time. He that has not some hold of
everlasting life, is never pleased to let go this life; therefore he is never
full of this life. It is a most sad thing, to see an old man, who has no
strength of body to live, yet have a strong mind to live. Abraham was old and
full, he desired not a day, or an hour longer His soul had never an empty
corner for time, when he died. He had enough of all, but (of which he could
never have enough and yet had enough, and all, as soon as he had any of it)
eternity. In that great restitution promised, Isa. 65. 20. this is one
privilege, There shall be no more there, an infant of days, nor an old man
that has not filled his days. There is much controversy about the meaning of
those words; The digression would be too long to insist upon them. Only to the
present point thus much, that there is such a thing, as an Infant of days, and
an old man that has not filled his days.

An infant of days, may be taken for an old child, that is, an old man
childish, or a man of many years, but few abilities. A man whose hoary head ann
wrinkled face speak fourscoure, yet his foolish actions and simple carriage
speak under fourteen. An old man that has not filled his days, is conceived
to be the same man, in a different character. An old man fills not his days.
First When he fulfils not the duty, nor reaches the end for which he lived to
old age; That man who has lived long, and done little, has left empty days,
upon the record of his life. And when you have writ down the days, the
months, and years of his life, his storie's done, the rest of the book is but
a continued Blanke, nothing to be remembered that he has done, or nothing worth
the remembrance.

Now as an old man fills not his days, when he satisfies not the expectation of
others: so in the second place his days are not filled, when his own
expectations are not satisfied, that is, when he having lived to be old, has
yet young fresh desires to live, when he finds his mind empty, though his body
be so full of days, that it can hold no longer, nor no more. He that is in
this sense, an infant of days, and an old man not having filled his days,
though he be an hundred years old when he dies, yet he dies (as the Prophet
concludes in that place) accursed; he comes not to his grave under the blessing
of this promise in the text, in a full age. Lastly observe.

Every thing is beautiful in its season.

He shall come to his grave like a shock of corn that is brought in in his
season. Even pale death has beauty in it, when it comes in season. Eccles. 7.
17. Be not wicked over much, why should thou dye before thy time? No man can
dye before Gods time, but a man may dye before his time, that is, before he is
prepared by grace, and before he is ripened in the course of nature. Those two
ways a man dies before his time; First, when he dies without any strength of
grace; Secondly, when he dies in the strength of nature. In this sense the
Prophet describes the hand of God upon him, Psalm. 102. 23. He weakened my
strength in the way; ^^ shortened my days: and therefore prays in the 24th
verse, I said, O my God take me not away in the midst of my days: That is, in
the strength or best of my times according to the line and measure of nature A
godly man prays that he may not dye out of season; but a wicked man never dies
in season: That threatening is ever fulfilled upon him, in one sense, if not in
both (Psalm. 55. 23) The bloodthirsty and deceitful man shall not live out
half his days. A wicked man never lives out half his days; for, either he
is cut off before he has lived half the course of nature, or he is cut off
before he has lived a quarter of the course of his desires; either he lives
not half so long as he might, or not a tenth, not a hundredth part so long as
he would; and therefore let him dye when he will, his death is full of terror,
trouble and confusion, because he dies out of season. He never kept time or
season with God, and surely God will not keep or regard his time or season.

Verse. 27. Lo this, we have searched it; so it is, hear it, and know thou it
for thy good. As Eliphaz began his dispute with an elegant preface, so he ends
it with a rhetorical conclusion; as if he had said* Job, I have spoken many
things unto thee, hear now the sum and upshot of all; Lo this, we have
searched it, so it is, hear it, and know it for thy good.

Two things he concludes with, First with an assertion of the truth of what he
had spoken, So it is. Secondly, with a motion for his assent to what was
spoken, Hear it.

Or the words may fall under a threefold consideration.

As the 1. Conclusion of his speech.
2. Confirmation 3. Application

And this application is strengthened by a threefold Motive.

By a motive, first from experience, Lo this, we have searched it, we have
found the thing to be true.

Secondly, By a motive from the truth of the thing in it self, so it is: we
have searched it, we have experience of it, so it is, the thing is certain.
And then

Thirdly, From the fruit and benefit of it, if he submit unto and obey the
truth delivered, know it for thy good, thou shall reap the profit of it. These
are three motives, by which he strengthens his exhortation, in applying the
truth he had beaten out, in his former discourse.

We have searched it.] As if Eliphaz had said, we have not taken (...)
Scrutatus, perscrutatus est, remota aut abstrusa.
these things upon trust, or by an implicit faith; we have not received them
by tradition from our fathers, but we have searched, and tried, and found out,
that thus the matter stands in Gods dispensations, both to a wicked man, and to
a godly man, in all the particulars run thorough in this Chapter. Or we have
searched, that is, we have learned these truths by experience; That, God
punishes not the innocent, that, man cannot compare in justice with God, that,
hypocrites shall not prosper long, and that, man's afflictions are the fruit of
his transgressions. The word signifies a very diligent and exact scrutiny,
(Deuteronomy. 13. 14.) Thou shall enquire and make search, and ask diligently; it is
to search as Judges Diligenti inquisitione and verita is scrutatiene nec non
reconditorum divinae providentiae judiciorum consideratione rem ita se habere
compe^im^^.
search and enquire about any crime, or question in Law determinable by their
sentence; and as we search to find the meaning of a riddle. (Judge. 14. 14.) The
word is also applied to the searchings and enquiries of a Spy (Judge. 18. 2.)
sent to bring intelligence; A spy is an exact inquisitor, into all affairs,
given him in charge for discovery. So here, we have searched out, we have spied
out and tried this thing to the utmost, we have as it were, read over all the
records of divine Truths, we have examined all experiences and examples, and
this is the result, the sum of all, Lo thus it is.

A question arises here, how Eliphaz can say, we have searched it, when as Chap.
4. he says, A thing was secretly brought to me? It seems these were matters
attained and beaten out by study, not sent in by divine revelation; and so are
rather the opinions of men, then the oracles of God. Men inspired by the Holy
Ghost, speak another language; As, Thus says the Lord, or this we have
received, not this we have searched. Scripture is given by inspiration from
God. not by the disquisitions of men

Some have hence concluded this speech of Eliphaz Apocryphal, Ex quo
intelligimus hanc Eliphae dissertionem non or aculi fuisse, sed studij, nec ad
Dei revelantis responsa, sed ad humani ingenij inventa pertinere. Janson. in
loc.
as being rather matter of humane invention, then divine inspiration: Or the
work of man's wit, rather then of Gods Spirit.

But I answer. First, The Apostle Paul has sufficiently attested the Divine
Authority of this discoruse, by alleging a proof out of it, 1 Cor. 3. 19.

Secondly, That which was secretly brought to Eliphaz, was that one special
Oracle, Chap. 4. 17. Shall mortal man be more just then God? shall a man be
more pure then his maker? The other part of his discourse, to which these words
(Lo this we have searched) refer, were grounded upon the experiences which
himself and his friends had observed in, and about the providence of God in
all his dealings both with the godly and the wicked, all agreeable to that
grand principle received by immediate revelation. And therefore as he told Job
before, that the general position was brought him in a vision, so all ages and
the records kept of them (in all which he had made a diligent inquiry) came up
fully to the proof of it; As if he had said, The Lord told me so, and all he
has done in the word proclaims that it is so. His word is enough to assert
his own justice, but his works witness with it. Lo, this, we have searched,
so it is.

We have searched. He speaks in the plural number; he begun his speech in the
fourth Chapter, and he concluds it here in the plural number. Yet we are not
to think, that, this was a discourse penned by them all together; or debated
first in private conference, and agreed on, that thus Eliphaz should speak,
because he says, we have searched it. But the meaning is only this, I suppose
I have spoken the sense of my two friends, who stand by, and I believe they are
ready to subscribe to, or vote every word I have now uttered, therefore behold
we have searched and thus it is.

Hear thou it. To advise thee, was our part; to hear and hearken is thy part;
therefore hear it.

But had he not heard them all this while, why does Eliphaz now bid him hear
it?

It is true, he had heard; but there is more required, then the hearing of the
ear, when such a Sermon as this is preached. To hear, is more than the work
of the ear. It is

First, To believe and give credit to what was heard. (Joh. 9. 27.) I told you
before, and you would not hear (says the blind man) wherefore would you hear
it again? that is, I have told you already, but you would not believe, nor
give credit to what I spoke.

Secondly, To hear is to hearken, that is, to yield and consent to what is
spoken. (Genesis 3. 17.) Forasmuch, as thou have hearkened to the counsel of thy
wife: Barely to hear a temptation to sin, is no act of sin; as barely to hear
an exhortation to good, is no act of grace. Therefore because thou have
hearkened, is, because thou have yielded and consented to, that which she has
spoken.

Thirdly, To hear, is to obey. Isa. 55. 3. Hear and your soul shall live. It
is not every hearing af the ear, that brings life to the soul, obedient
hearing is enlivening hearing.

So here, we have searched it, so it is, hear it, that is, believe what we
have spoken, submit unto, and consent to what we have spoken, obey and practice
what we havespoken.

To hear, is both an act of sense, and an act of reason, an act of nature, and
an act of grace. To hear one requesting and praying is to grant: and to hear
one counselling and commanding, is to obey. When God hears man, he grants; and
when man hears God, or hears men speaking in the name of God, he yields and
obeys.

It follows, And know thou it for thy good. The Hebrew is, know it for thy
self. Now, because that which a man knows for (...)
himself, is for his profit, therefore we translate, know it for thy good;
that is, know it as that, whereby thy self may receive good. The meaning
of, know it for thy self, is not this, know and keep it to thy self, let none
partake with thee of it; It is against the use of knowledge, that a man should
so know for himself, though a man's self has or may have good by all he
knows. So we must understand that of Solomon, Prove. 9. 12. If thou be wise,
thou shall be wise for thy self; that is, thou shall be advantaged by thy
wisdom; Wisdom brings in a fair revenew; though many know much and seem very
wise, who know nothing for themselves, and are not wise at all, for their own
good.

There are three sorts of knowing men.

First, Some know only to know. They know, but the propose no end to
themselves, beyond knowledge: They know not for the good of others, no nor for
their own good. As it is with riches and honor, so with knowledge: covetous
men gather riches that they may be rich, they propose not any other end of
having riches, but only to be rich. An ambitious man, desires honor, that he
may be honorable, he proposes to himself no other end of his desiring honor,
but to be honorable. So many are covetous and ambitious of knowledge, they
read from book to book, and from point to point, from science to science, and
what do they with all this knowledge? only this, that they may know; to know
thus, is not to know for good, To know only to know, is no better then not to
know.

Secondly, Others know, that they may be known, to know this is their end,
that other men may know that they are knowing men, that they are great
Scholars, great read-men, men of great abilities and boundless studies. Even
as some desire riches, that they may be accounted rich, and honor, that they
may be famed for honorable. To know only that we may be known, is worse then
not to know.

But thirdly. That which is the right way of knowing, is to know that others
may know, or, to know that our selves may practice. These are the true ends of
knowing, to communicate knowledge and to obey knowledge. The great end of
knowing should be our own profiting in holiness and obedience. And so here,
Know it for thy good, is, to know it so, as to make an advantage of thy
knowledge. To know for our good, is the only good knowledge. Hence observe,
first,

Truth deserves our most diligent search.

We have searched it (says Eliphaz) The promise of finding truth, is only to
such as search for truth (Prove. 2. 4.) Thou shall find wisdom, etc. If thou
seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures. There are
two places, two veins especially, where truth is to be found; There is the
book of Gods word, and the book of Gods works: The book of Scripture, and the
book of providence; In these two books, we are to search, in them to study out
truth, for our own practice, and for advise to others.

Secondly Observe,

That which we offer to others for truth, we ought diligently to make trial of
our selves; or we should make truth our own, before we distribute it to others

We have searched the thing out (says Eliphaz) we know the truth to be thus,
we are masters of what we teach. They who hear aright, search (as the Bereans)
those things, which are taught them; and they who instruct aright, ought to
search the things which they teach; If there must be after-searching of those
things we hear, certainly there must be fore-searchings of the things we teach.
Truth (ordinarily) is not worth the having unless it be come in by our own
searching. They who receive that for truth which they never searched, will not
hold any truth when themselves are searched. Truths merely borrowed and taken
upon trust, are no stock, no abiding treasure of knowledge; And yet most can
only say of all the truth they have, as he of his axe head, (2 Kings 6. 5.)
Alas master, for it was borrowed; they snatch up one truth from this hand, and
another from that, they take it upon the credit of this and that learned man;
very few are able to say (as Eliphaz here) Lo this, we have searched it: The
more pains we take to find truth, the more pleasure we take in it; That is
sweetest to us, which we sweat most for, in praying and studying: Morsells of
Truth dipped in that sauce, fatten and strengthen the soul most.

Observe thirdly,

What a man knows by search and disquisition, he is confident of.

We have searched it; and what follows? so it is; He speaks with authority, not
timerously, as if he doubted whether it were so or no; but, so it is, we will
bide by it, we have it upon enquiry and diligent search. Observe fourthly,

The truths we know our selves, we should communicate unto others.

Here it is, we have searched it, but we will not put the light we have found,
under a bushel; we will not hide the talent we have in a napkin: Here it is,
make what use of it thou can, know it for thy good. Observe fifthly,

Truth may challenge credit, and command the ear.

Hear thou it* Truth needs not stand begging audience, or creep upon the ground
with flattering insinuations, or humble submissions to gain acceptance. Truth
is a great Prince, and may speak in the language of Princes; We will, We
require; It commands rather then entreats, or all its entreaties commands,
every word a law or a charge: Hear thou it. Observe in the sixth place, That

It is needful to make special application of general doctrinall truths.

Eliphaz had delivered a doctrinall truth, and here he makes application; And
though he failed much, in the application of it to Job, yet there were general
truths very appliable, in the things he delivered. Therefore he stays not in
generals, nor leaves his doctrine hovering in the air, but brings it home to
the heart, and lays it close to the conscience; Hear thou it, and know it
thou, for thy good. And not only are national and speculative truths to be
brought home and applied, but even common experimental truths, such were these
discussed, and handled by Eliphaz. Observe seventhly,

A man may know much, and yet get no good by it.

Know this for thy good. The Devil is a great Scholar, he knows much, but he
knows nothing for his benefit, but all for his hurt. Many a man knows almost
all that is knowable; but he knows nothing which is (to him) profitable:
Nothing gains by his knowledge but only his pride, he is puffed up with
knowledge, not built up, and that knowledge which puffes up, will at last puff
down, or cast us down. Eighthly Observe,

A godly man, may make a profitable use of any Truth.

You see what truths Eliphaz spoke; many of them ordinary, common Doctrines,
and many of them sore threatenings and judgments upon wicked men, yet know thou
this for thy good. There is no vein of Doctrine in the book of God, but a man
may make use, yea treasure of it. All truth is so symbolical to the regenerate
part, that it cannot but more sublimate and spiritualize a spiritual heart,
though it self be a truth about things earthly and temporal.

Observe lastly,

All truths, especially truths contained in the promises, are the portion of a
godly man.

Know thou it for thy good, says he; As if he should say, if thou art a godly
man, then all the good things I have here spoken of, belonging to godly men,
belong to thee, they are thy portion also. While a believer reads the book of
God, he sees great riches, many precious things in the promises, and whatsoever
good he finds there, there is nothing of it too good for him; he may know it
all for his own good; those sweet delicious promises of the pardon of sin, of
the love of God* of the freeness of grace, of the glory to come, the promises
of Christ, and of all that is Christ's, all these things are his, when he reads
them, he may set his mark upon them, and know them for his goods, know them as
his own proper goods. Unbelievers are strangers to the promises, and the
promises are as strange to them, they know not the promises, and the promises
will not know them: They know not a letter of Scripture for their good. The
very promises are threatenings to them, and the very blessings of the book of
God, are their curse. As the clouds pass over this and that piece of ground,
and then dissolve upon a third, by the directing and all disposing providence
of God: So the promises (which are full of blessings, full of comforts, as the
clouds are of showers) pass over a wicked man's head, and let not down one drop
of mercy or comfort upon him, but leave him like the dry hearth, or barren
wilderness, which sees not when good comes, Jer. 17. 6. But when the cloud
moves a little farther, and meets with the family or person of a godly man,
there it dissolves and powers out a plentiful rain (both of temporal and
spiritual blessings) to refresh and confirm that inheritance of the Lord,
Psalm. 68. 9.

And so much for this fifth Chapter, wherein, with the fourth, we have handled
the first part of the dispute undertaken against Job, by Eliphaz, the first of
his three friends. The whole discourse consisting of diverse arguments, to
convince and humble him under the hand of God: of diverse counsels and motives
to persuade and direct him to seek unto God, and submit to his correcting hand:
All he was to speak, being let in, by a loving preface, and all he spoke, being
ratified, with an assuring conclusion, that all he had spoken was for his good,
if he would hear, believe and obey. In the next Chapters we shall hear Job
making his defense, scattering the charge thus brought against him, stiffely
maintaining, and importunately renewing his first complaint.

JOB, Chap. 6. Verse. 1, 2, 3. But Job answered, and said.

O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances
together.

For now it would he heavier than the sand of the sea, therefore my words are
swallowed up, etc.


THis sixth Chapter begins Jobs replication, which is continued to the end of
the seventh. He replies exactly to the several parts of the charge, given by
Eliphaz, who in the two foregoing Chapters, undertook both to reprove the
impatience of Job, and to advise him a more holy and better tempered carriage,
toward God, under his afflictions. In this reply, Job shapes and forms up
answers unto both. I shall endeavor to give you a brief of the whole, and
then to particulars.

First, Job enters with a refutation of those reproves of impatience, which
Eliphaz had heap't upon him; and with that subjoyns a refusal of the counsels
(in his sense) which he had given him. In this work, seven verses of the
Chapter are spent.

Secondly, We have a renovation or a re-inforcement of his grief and desire to
die, from the 8 to the end of the 13 verse, O that I might have my request,
that God would cut me off, etc. As if he had said, I am so far, from being
satisfied, with what thou have spoken against me, or from recanting and
recalling, what I have spoken, in those my breathings after death, that I will
be bold to make the same suit to God again, O that I might have my request,
and that God would cut me off! etc.

Thirdly, He proceeds to a charge of rash censure, of uncharitable, yea of
deceitful dealing upon his friends, from the 13 unto the 24 verse. To him that
is afflicted (says he) pity should be showed from his friend, my brethren have
dealt deceitfully, as a brook, etc.

Fourthly, He yet submits himself to their judgment and direction, if they
would speak reason to him at last, and come home to his case indeed; or, if
they could fully and heartily discover to him any error, he was willing to be
rectified; This he professes (and it is a most ingenious profession) in the 24.
and 25. verses, Teach me (says he) and I will hold my tongue, and cause me to
understand wherein I have erred, etc. As if he had said, All that you have
spoken hitherto, does not reach my condition, ye have quite mistook my case;
yet, you shall see, I do not stand out against you, because I will stand out,
it is not my will that opposes what you have spoken, but my understanding;
therefore, if you can show me better reason, I lay down the bucklers, and yield
my self a prisoner to your selves, and unto truth. I delight not to lengthen
out contentions, nor am I resolved to have the last word, Teach me, and I will
hold my tongue.

Fifthly, He adds an expostulation, mixed with an aggravation. An expostulation
about, and an aggravation of their high jealousy, and low opinion of him, in
the 26. and 27. verses, Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of
one that is desperate, which are ^^ wind? As if he had said, Do you think,
that you have had to deal with a man, that only makes a noise, or speaks a
great many words, which have more sound then sense: do ye think I am out of my
wits, and in stead of arguing with you, do only rave like a mad man at you?
Ye have not had vain, windy words from me, but words full of weight and
matter, words of truth and soberness, wherefore then do you speak thus? Do
ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate? Do ye
think I speak like one, who knows not what he speaks? Or that, I have at once
lost my hope, and my understanding?

Sixthly, He gives them advice and admonition to take better heed, to what they
should after say, if they intended to to say any more, or to continue their
counsel and discourse with him; in the three last verses of this sixth
Chapter. Now therefore be content, look upon me, for it is evident to you, if
I lie, return I pray you, etc.

In the 7th, (which concludes his speech) he offers three things, especially to
be observed.

First, A renewing of many arguments and considerations, by which he confirms
the equity of his request, to have his life cut off; upon which sad subject he
insists, from the beginning of the Chapter, to the end of the 17th verse. Is
there not an appointed time to man upon the earth? Are not his days like the
days of an Hireling? etc.

Secondly, After all his high strains of contest with man, we have an
abasement of himself, as unworthy that God should take notice of him, either
by mercies or judgments, in the 18. and 19. verses. What is man, that thou
should magnify him, and that thou should visit him every morning? etc. A
godly man will stand (when he sees cause) upon his terms with men, but he ever
falls low before, and has not a word to reply against God. He is sometime
angry, when men vilify him, but he ever admires, why God should magnify him.
What is man, etc.

Thirdly, He concludes his speech with an humble acknowledgement of his own
sinfulness, and with an earnest request for the pardon of his sin. Lord (says
he) I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O, thou preserver of men, verse.
20, etc. After all this heat and passion, after all these complainings, Jobs
heart lay level before the Lord, yea he abases himself to exalt and give
glory to God, with humble confession, and an earnest supplication for the
pardon of his sin. Thus we have the general parts and substance of his answer
to that charge of Eliphaz, in the two former Chapters.

But Job answered and said, etc. In these words, and the three following
verses, Job gives us the refutation or rejection of that reproof, given him by
Eliphaz; And he refutes it by showing the reason why Eliphaz (as he supposed)
was so sharp and bitter in reproving him. And further, he shows cause why he
rejects his counsel or consolation. The reason upon Amicos taxat, quod
antequam ipsum reprehender ent, non expendissent suam miseriam. Coc.
which he puts off those reproofs is this, because Eliphaz had not duly
considered his sorrows, or was not so sensible of them, as a man should be,
that undertakes a friend in his condition. The sum of his argument, against
what Eliphaz had spoken, may be thus formed;

He cannot duly reprove or convince another of impatience in complaining, who
has not fully weighed those calamities, which are the cause and ground of
those complaints.

But Eliph. z, thou have not fully weighed and considered my case and
condition, my troubles and calamities, which are the ground and cause of my
complaints.

Therefore thou can not duly reprove or convince me of impatience. The
Assumption or second Proposition of this argument, is couched in the second
verse, O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and that my calamity were laid
in the balances together! As if he had said, I had never received such harsh
censures, such a judgment or reproof, if thou had duly weighed my sorrows;
if thou had faithfully studied my case, thou had never rebuked me thus.

The weight of his calamity, himself expresses two ways.

First, Comparatively, at the third verse, by putting it into the balance with
the sand of the sea; For now (says he) it would be heavier than the sand of
the sea.

Secondly, He sets forth the greatness of his calamity, demonstratively, by
declaring in what manner he had been afflicted, My affliction is not an
ordinary affliction; I am wounded with the arrows of the Almighty, and those
poisoned arrows, and those arrows drinking up my spirits. I have not only some
single great affliction, or many small ones upon me; but, I have terror, and
terrors, yea I have an army of terrors, yea an army of terrors always
incamping about me, and charging me continually, why Eliphaz thou did never
clearly consider these things, much less have thou had a sympathy or
fellow-feeling of them. Thou have not bin afflicted in my afflictions: Thou
have not sorrowed my sorrows, nor wept my tears; Therefore it is, that thou
have so sharply reproved me, and put so much gall and wormwood into thy
discourse.

So then, the sum of this first part may be thus given, taking it out of
those high and hyperbolicall strains, in which his passion was carried; as if
Job had thus answered Eliphaz, It is an easy matter to slight that which a man
does not know, and to think others complain too much, when we our selves feel
nothing; but is it any wonder to hear a man groan, that has a burden upon
his back, as heavy as the sand of the Sea? Is it any wonder to hear a man cry
out, whose flesh is filled with poisoned arrows, shot from a bow, bent and
drawn by the arm of omnipotency? Is it any wonder, if that man fear, who is
incompast about with terrors? Is it any wonder, if that man be troubled, who
has the terrors of the Almighty incamping about him? Why Eliphaz, thou
would not think, that an Ox or an Ass were reprovable, if the one should
low when he has no grass, and the other bray when he has no fodder; if it be
so, that the very irrational creatures do according to reason, when they
complain upon their wants, do thou think me desperate or irrational in
complaning of mine? Alas all my fodder and my grass, all my comforts and
refreshings are taken from me: Do thou not see, how, upon a due consideration
of my estate, all thy reproves may be wiped off from me, or retorted upon thy
self? what great matter is it, if thou do not complain, who sit at ease
and know no sorrow? Thou art in green pastures or full barns, thou have
grass and fodder in abundance, and therefore have no cause of complaint. Thus
in the general.

But Job answered and said. To answer, is here taken properly: he answers to a
charge, reproof, or argument. At the third Chapter; verse the first, when Job
began to speak, it is said, Job answered and said. In Scripture language
answering is often put for speaking, though none have spoken a word or made any
proposal before. But here answering is taken in a strict sense, as it notes a
reply to somewhat before spoken; Job answered and said. Note this from it.

It is the duty of a man to answer, when he is questioned or charged. It is the
Ahostles rule (1 Pet. 3. 15.) Be ready always to give an answer to every man,
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. As a man in duty ought to
give a reason of the hope that is in him; so in duty he ought to give a reason
of the sorrows that are in him, and of the complaints that proceed from him; We
must answer for our passions, as well as for our speeches; we must answer for
our sorrows, and for our joys, and for our fears; as well as for our hope, or
for our faith. These must all be answered for, and when any shall charge us
about any of these, we must be ready to give a reason of them (as the Apostle
advises there, in the case of our hope) with meekness and fear.

It is our duty to answer thus, both in reference to our selves and others.

First, It is our duty in reference to our selves, that we may vindicate that,
which should be more precious to us, then the gold of Ophir, our own credit or
sincerity, No man ought to despise his own integrity or reputation, so, as not
to stand up for it. Therefore Job grows resolute in that point, professing
that he would hold his integrity, till he died, he would never let that go,
but answer stiffely for it: It is justice to dis-asperse our selves, and give
witness to our own wronged innocence. A man is more bound in duty to stand up
for himself, then for any other, by how much he is nearer to himself, then to
others.

Secondly, It is our duty to answer in respect of others; (and that Job might
have an eye unto) namely to satisfy those, who are scandalized, by what we
have either done or spoken: Suppose, it be not a scandal given, suppose, it be
only a scandal taken, as this of Job was: Job did nothing purposely to
scandalize them, nor any thing, which upon a due consideration, was a scandal,
but his friends had taken scandal at what he spoke, his impatient
complainings: therefore he was bound in duty to satisfy them, and to show
further grounds, wherefore he so complained. Silence when we Si accusatus non
respondeat aut criminis convictus aut certe suspectus videatur. Pined.
are charged, either makes a full conviction, or strengthens suspicion; And in
this case, if Job had held his peace, he had either yielded the cause, and
confes'd himself guilty, or at least his friends should have had cause to grow
higher in their jealousies of his sincerity. To right our selves is not a point
of indifferency, but of duty. Self-love is the rule of our love to others. He
who neglects his own wronged honor, will not be very careful (which yet he
ought) of his neighbors.

O that my grief were thoroughly weighed! Grief may be considered two ways,
either Passively or Actively. Grief taken Passively is the thing which we
suffer, or, which is grievous to us; affliction it self is called grief. Take
grief Actively, and then it is the sorrow we express, under the pressures of
grievous afflictions. The word in the Hebrew is translated sometimes anger,
sometimes indignation, sometimes wrath. (...) Ira, indignatio hoc loco, ira est
que^ imonia valde iracunda vel molestia, quam ex morbi and ulcer is gravitate
concipiehat. Merc. Notat dolorem quem quis capit ex re adversa and displicenti.
Coc.
It is the same which Eliphaz uses, Chap. 5. v. 2. where he says, Wrath
kills the foolish man; Eliphaz began his speech with that word, hinting at
Job, as if his wrath and impatience toward God had discovered him for a fool,
or a wicked one: Now Job returning answer, begins with the first word of
Eliphaz his speech; As if he had said, You told me that wrath kills the foolish
man, but O that my anger, or the wrath which you conceive to be in me, that
grief which I have expressed, were fully weighed, you would quickly see, that
it is not the anger or wrath of a fool, you would find reason for my passion,
and that, not the want of wisdom, but the plenty or weight of my grief has
wrought out these complaints. Therefore my desire is, O that my grief, O that
my sorrows powered forth in my former lamentation were thoroughly weighed, you
have but guessed at them yet, you have not weighed them; or if weighed them,
yet not thoroughly weighed them, you have not weighed them (which you ought) as
you would weigh gold, to a grain, or to the turning of the scale: or if so,
your beam is not a true one, nor your balance the balance of the Sanctuary,
you have weighed me, but, by a common beam, or (I fear) by false balances,
and a bag of deceitful weights.

O that my grief.] The Vulgar Latin translates, O that my sins, namely, for
which I am thus afflicted were thoroughly weighed; Vtinam peccata mea. Vulg.
As if the meaning of Job were to lighten his sin, and to aggravare his
suffering: But doubtless, that was none of Jobs mind or meaning, neither will
the original bear such a translation; when our sins are put into the balance
with our sufferings, all our sufferings, the heaviest we can feel or go under
in this life, are but as a feather to a talent of lead. As all the afflictions
of this life are light, in comparison of that exceeding weight of glory,
prepared for us in the next life. So all the suffering of this life are light,
in comparison of the exceeding weight of one sin, committed by us. Therefore Job
makes no such comparison here, as if he had bin afflicted more than he
deserved; That of Ezra concerning the Church of the Jews (Chap. 9. 13.) Thou
our God have punished us less then our iniquities deserve, is true of every
punishment; put any punishment of this world, spiritual or temporal, in one
scale, and the least sin, in another, that lightest sin out-weighs our heaviest
punishment. Only in hell sins and sufferings shall be of equal poyse. God will
then power and measure our punishments, which shall come up to the proportion
and demension of our sins, and what the creature cannot bear at once in weight,
shall be weighed to him in eternity. But to pass that rendering, as unsafe.

O that my grief were thoroughly weighed. Our English word, scale, which is the
instrument, by which we (...) Libravit, ponderavit, olim moneta libraebatur and
ex pondere habebatur summa pecuniae. ut mini ex numero nummoru^, Ulpian.
weigh, is well conceived to come from the Hebrew word here used (Shakal)
signifying to weigh any thing, but especially to weigh coin or money, to weigh
gold and silver; As Genesis 23. 16. Abraham upon the purchase of that field, which
he bought of the children of Heth, for a burying place, weighed to Ephron the
silver, which he had named. It was the custom of those times, in stead of
telling, to weigh their money, and that was the most exact and ready way of
payment: And from that word (Shakal) signifying to weigh money, comes the
Hebrew word for one special sort of money, the Shekel, because they weighed by
the shekel, that being as their standard or a special coin, of such a known
weight and value, that all their coin was weighed and valued by it. So in
Siclus moneta certi ponderis and omnium ponderum regu^a.
the Latin and likewise in our English, we call one special sum of money, A
pound, which is a weight, and by which money is commonly accounted and paid. And
hence by a Metaphor, this word signifies to judge or to consider of a thing
exactly* and fully, because of all matters that men weigh, they will weigh gold
and silver most exactly; if a man weigh gold, he weighs it to a grain, if
gold want but the turning of the scale, more then due weight or allowance, it
will not pass, Isa. 33. 18. Where is the Scribe, where Vil begis verba
ponderant. Sanc. Quaestor praefectus aeratio militari. Jun.
is the Receiver; The Hebrew is, Where is the weigher; that is, either the
spiritual weigher; He that uses to be so exact in weighing every tittle of the
law. Or, the Civil weigher, because they used to weigh all the money, they
received. So then, O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, is as if he had
said, O that my grief were weighed, as gold and silver is weighed, weighed
exactly, to the least, to the utmost, that you might fully know what it is.

The word single by it self, notes an exact examination by weighing, but when
(as here) the word is doubled, or (by an Hebraisme) repeated, O that my grief
in weighing were weighed, it heightens and increases the sense exceedingly:
Hence we translate O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, weighed so, as that
there might be a clear discovery, how much my sorrows weigh. The doubling of a
word, to this sense, is very frequent in Scripture, I shall not need to
instance. Take only that (Genesis 2. 17.) Of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, thou shall not eat of it, for in the day that thou eatest thereof, in
dying, thou shall die, (that is) thou shall surely die; So here, O that in
weighing it were weighed, that is, O that it were thoroughly and exactly weighed

Lay all together, and it imports thus much; as if Job had said, I would not
have my sorrows weighed at a vulgar beam, or in ordinary balances, I would
not have the sound or letter only of what I have spoken considered, but I
desire that you would take my complaints together, the words and the matter,
and that you would weigh all impartially, that you may come to a full
understanding, what my condition is; and then surely you would give up a better
judgment, and make a fairer interpretation of my words, then as yet you have
put forth: Thus he speaks also Chapter. 31 6. Let me be weighed in an even
balance, that God may know my integrity. Uneven balances will not make a
perfect discovery: That which is false, cannot give a true report: Things and
persons act as they are; therefore Job desires to be weighed in an even
balance, such a beam will speak the truth of my estate, both to God and man;
God needs no means to make him know, he knows all immediately, and he weighes
by his eye, not one thing by another, but all things in themselves; Job speaks
of God after the manner of men

And my calamity laid in the balances together. My grief and my calamity.
Grief caused by my calamity, and calamity the cause of that grief.

My calamity. The word signifies any troublesome evil, sad event, (...)
or accident, vulgularly called a misfortune; O that this sad a radice (...)
estate and condition wherein I am, were put into the balance.

The Original for balances, is very observeable; As there is fuit, eventus
malus, infortunium. (...) Trutina, statera quod duas sc. habeat lances, velvt
aures Pagn.
much elegancy, in the word by which the action, so, in this, by which the
instrument of weighing is expressed. It is found only in the plural, or duall
number, as many of that nature are; The same word in Hebrew, signifies also the
ears, which are the organ of hearing; and the reason of it is thus given,
because as the tongue of the balance stands like a judge between the two
scales, inclining to neither till the weight be laid in; so should the ear of
a Judge by office, or of any man, by deputation, called to hear and determine
of things in difference, stand indifferent to both parties, till he hear the
matter debated, and the reasons brought forth on either side. The Moralists
emblem this, by the place of that Sign in the Zodiac, which they call the
Virgin, standing (according to the doctrine of Astronomers) between the Lion
and the Bellances; The Lion bids Virgin Justice, be stout and fearelesse; The
Balances advise her to weigh the matter on both sides, with moderation, (...)
and be cautious, inclining neither one way nor other, but as the merit of the
cause, fully heard, shall sway her judgment. a radice (...).


Job desires, that his calamity might be laid thus in the balances, Levavit,
sustulit, nam qui appendit ali quid tollit lances in altum, Drus.
before his sentence; Laid; The word is, O that my calamity might ascend in the
balances; And that manner of speaking is used, either because in weighing, the
lighter scale of the balances does ascend, or because when things are weighed,
the balances ascend or are lifted up: A man takes up the balances in his hand
to weigh; So it is, as if he had said, O that these, might be poised together
and lifted up, to see which way the scales will turn.

Together. There is some difference in opinion about that word (...) Pariter
vel potius similiter. Nulla ejus part praeter missa.
Together, whether he means thus; O that all my grief and calamity were
weighed, you consider things to halves, and leave out those points which are
most weighty and material; you should take in all together, Or whether his
desire be, that his grief and calamity, both together, might be put into one
balance, and the sand of the sea into another, and so an experiment be made,
whether his grief and calamity, or the sand of the sea were heavier. Or
thirdly, Whether thus, that his grief should be put into one balance, and his
calamity into another, and then trial be made which of those two were heavier,
his grief and sorrow, or his calamity and trouble. A learned interpreter
conceives, that Job Mercerus.
wishes his grief and calamity might both together be put into one balance,
and all the sand of the sea (if it were possible) in the other, supposing that
his grief and calamity would outweigh that vast ponderous aggregated body.
His opinion is chiefly strengthened by some difficulties in the Gramatical
construction, unless this be admitted; and yet if it be, a greater difficulty
is showed by a second, and therefore I rather take it thus; O that Bolduc.
my grief and calamity were laid in the balances together, that is, O that my
grief were put, one into one balance, and my calamity into another; or, O
that my grief might be weighed with my calamity, and it would appear
(notwithstanding your judgment of me) that yet, there is nothing so much
weight in my grief, as there is in my calamity, that is, I have not yet
grieved or complained up to the height or weight of those calamities, which are
upon me: So that if my sorrow were laid in one balance, and my affliction in
another, my affliction would outweigh my sorrow, and it would appear, that I
have complained, not only, not without a cause, but not so much, as I had cause.

And to prove that his calamity was heavier then his grief, he adds in the
next words; It, (namely his calamity thus weighed) would be heavier then the
sand of the sea: As if he had said, it is possible that in trying all heavy
things, somewhat might be found heavier then my grief or my complaint has
been; but I am sure nothing can be found of equal weight with my calamity, for
my calamity (which is the immediate antecedent) would be heavier than the sand
of the sea, then which, nothing can be found more heavy.

That of David, Psalm. 62. 9. is parallel to this expression in Job, Surely men
of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; To be laid in the
balances, they are altogether lighter then vanity. The meaning is, That if men
of all degrees, high and low were put in one scale, and vanity in the other,
vanity it self would be weightier then the gravest and most weighty men: Hence
some read, They together are lighter then vanity; Others to this sense, Men
and vanity being weighed together, vanity will not be so light, as vain man.
As David, to show man's lightness, makes him lighter then the lightest thing,
vanity. So Job, to show the heaviness of his calamity, makes it heavier then
the heaviest thing, the fand of the sea. Observe hence; first,

That it is a duty, to weigh the sad estate, and afflicted condition of our
brethren thoroughly.

But (you will say) what is it to weigh them thoroughly?

I answer, It is not only to weigh the matter of an affliction, to see what it
is, which aman suffers; but to weigh an affliction in every circumstance and
aggravation of it; The circumstance of an affliction, is often more
considerable then the matter of the affliction. If a man would confess his
sins, and confess them thoroughly, he is to confess, not only the matter of
them; as sins are the transgressions of the Law, and errors against the rule,
but he must eye the manner, in which sin has been committed, the circumstances
with which it is clothed, these render his sin out of measure, and out of
weight sinful. Likewise would a man consider the mercies and favors received
from God, would he know them thoroughly, and see how much they weigh? let him
look not only what, but how, and when, and where, and by whom he has received
them. There may be (and often is) a great wickedness in a little evil
committed, and a great mercy in a little good received. As relations, so
circumstances have the least entitie, but they have the greatest efficacy.
Now, as there is often more in the circumstances, than in the matter of a sin,
or of a mercy so, there is often more in the circumstance, than there is in the
matter of an affliction, therefore, he that would thoroughly weigh the
afflictions of another, must consider all these accidents, as well as the
substance of it. As namely, the time when sent, the time how long endured,
whether a single affliction, or in conjucture with other afflictions, the
strength of the patient, and the dependencies that are upon him.

Secondly, He that would weigh an affliction thoroughly, must put himself in
the case of the afflicted, and (as it were) make another grief, his own. He
must act the passions of his brother, and a while personate the poor, the
sick, the afflicted man. He must get atast of the wormwood, and of the gall,
upon which his brother feeds. In a word, He must lay such a condition to
heart: The Prophet Malachy threatens a curse upon those, who laid not the word
and works of God to heart (Chap. 2. 2,) I will curse your blessings (says the
Lord) because ye do not lay it to heart; that is, ye do not consider, what I
say or do, thoroughly: God cursed them thoroughly, because they would not
thoroughly consider His Laws and judgments: So then, to weigh the affliction of
another thoroughly, is to put our souls, as it were, in their souls stead:
Hence, that we may be assured, Christ has thoroughly weighed all our
afflictions, He is said to be afflicted in all our afflictions; He does not
only intuitively consider or contemplate them, but he is (though above
enduring) as, actually enduring them. He is afflicted in all our afflictions,
that is, he considers our afflictions as his own, and is affected with them,
as if himself were pained with all our pains: and therefore it is said, that
himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses, Mat. 8. 17. the
meaning is, he weighed the grief of his people fully. In these two points,
this holy art of weighing grief consists, consideration of circumstances, and
simpathy of the smart. Mere speculation moves little. We have no feeling of
another suffering, till we have a fellow-feeling. The bare Theory of
affliction, affects no more, then the bare Theory of fire, heates.

Secondly, When Job says, O that my grief were thoroughly weiged; we may
observe,

That it is an addition to a man's affliction, when others are not sensible of
his affliction. For it is, as if Job had said; This makes me cry out so much of
the weight of my sorrows, because my friends weigh them so little. The Church
(Lam. 1. 12.) complains thus, Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by?
behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow. Is it nothing to
you? as if the Church had said; My affliction is something to me, and this
aflicts me, above all my affliction, that passengers and beholders slight my
calamities, and think my affliction no affliction; that is, not so great, as
indeed it is: Or, it is nothing to them, (they are not touched with it) how
great soever, they see it is to me: That which wounds and breaks my heart,
does not prick their little fingers. And because, man is so ready to afflict
his brother with this negative affliction, a not being sensible of his
afflictions, therefore the Apostle assures us (Heb. 4. 15.) That we have not an
High Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was
in all points tempted like as we are. This is spoken to comfort the Saints in
their extremest sufferings; what though men will not take notice and be
sensible of your condition? what though men will not weigh your grief? yet
Christ will; our High Priest, is none of your senseless Priests, who care not
what weather the People endure, so they be warm and at ease. Thirdly observe;

We can never rightly judge, till we thoroughly weigh the condition of an
afflicted brother. For Job conceived that Eliphaz proceeded to judgment,
before he had been in consideration. This is the reason why thou have judged me
uncharitably, because thou have not weighed me seriously. To show, that
consideration must go before judgment, God himself is expressed to us, in
Scripture considering the state of things, before himself judges. So Genesis 11th
in the case of the builders of Babel, and Genesis 18^h in the case of the men of
Sodom, it is said, that the Lord came down to see, whether they had done
altogether, according to that cry, which was come up unto him; Not, as if the
Lord moves from one place to another, from Heaven to earth, for he fills all
places; not that the Lord needs come down to receive information, or to examine
his own intelligence, to see whether things are, as they are reported; but, it
is only an allusion to the manner of men, or, to show, that he does not censure
or judge any man, or men, or Nations, till he has taken a full cognizance of
their condition. Now if God, who is infinite in knowledge and wisdom,
represents himself coming down, and by degrees deliberating about and
weighing the estates of men, before he censures them, what need then have
blindfold men, ignorant men, men, who at best have much darkness mixed with
their light, what need (I say) have they to examine, weigh and try every man's
estate, before they sentence or determine it? Fourthly observe;

A man, who has not been, or is not afflicted himself, can hardly apprehend,
what another endures, who is under affliction.

As there are comforts, especially spiritual comforts, which no man knows or
can know, but by the enjoying of them: The white stone (promised, Rev. 2. 17.)
has a new name written in it, which no man knows, saving he that receives
it; A man that is a stranger to Christ and his ways, is not able to make any
judgment what the comforts and refreshings of a Christian are. He admires to
hear men speak of spiritual comforts and consolations, he knows not the
meaning of those things. The natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. It is so
(proportionably) in all sorrows and afflictions, especially in spiritual
sorrows and afflictions, which lie off from sense, yea, which lie quite beyond
the reach and borders of reason: spiritual sorrows, the hidings of Gods face,
the withdrawing of assistance, few pity in others, because few have had
experience of these things, in themselves. They think men are mad, when they
complain of such afflictions; when they cry out of their sins, of the want of
the favor of God, and the shining of his love, of deadness and coldness in
duty, of unbeleefe and hardness of heart, etc. And therefore our Lord Jesus,
to assure our hearts that he has a full sense of all our sorrows, tasted
himself of our sorrows. There is not any sorrow that can be upon any soul, or
any affliction that can be upon the body, but our Lord Jesus has had (some way
or other) an experience of it: This makes him (to our apprehensions) most fit
to judge and compassionate the distresses of his people. As all the sins of his
people were laid upon him, so all their sorrows were laid upon him too;
therefore the Prophet Isaiah describes him thus, Chapter 53. 3. A man of sorrows
and acquainted with grief; Grief and he were no strangers, while he was here
upon the earth, grief was his acquaintance and Familiar (as it were) that went
up and down with him, all the while he traveled here below. Therefore seeing
it is so, the whole church and every particular believer, have strong
consolation in their sorrows, that the Lord Jesus Christ does thoroughly weigh
their condition, and knows fully what it is, We have not (as was touched
before) an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities; why, what assurance have we of this? it follows, He was tempted
in all things like unto us, yet without sin. Christ had temptations unto sin,
yet without sin, therefore he knows how to succor us, when we are tempted
unto sin; Christ was tempted by manifold sorrows, therefore he knows how to
succor us, when we are under manifold sorrowful temptations: If we had a
Mediator in Heaven that had not been tempted on earth, we might doubt whether
he would be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, whether sinning
infirmities, or sorrowing infirmities. And were it not, that some of the Saints
have been tempted and tried, they, who are under trials and temptations, would
find none on earth, to succor them. As God does comfort some in all their
tribulations, that they may be able to comfort them, which are in any trouble,
with the same comforts wherewith they themselves are comforted of God, 2 Cor.
1. 4. So he afflicts them, that they might pity and help others, as being
under the same troubles, with which themselves have been afflicted. A man that
has only traveld in Geographicall books and Maps, is not able to give you such
lively descriptions of, or directions about foreign Countries, as he that
has traveld to, and been upon the places; so, they who have read and studied
much about afflictions, can never give such enlivening, strengthening,
heartning counsel, as they, who have been afflicted, and have dwelt sometime
upon the Land of sorrows, To pass on.

For now it would be heavier than the sand of the Sea. That is, it would be
most heavy. Who can tell how heavy that is which is heavier then the heaviest?

If my calamity (says Job) were weighed, it would have been found heavier,
than the sand of the Sea, that account would be given of it; though you (my
friend Eliphaz) seem to account it as light as a feather.

The sand of the Sea is applied three ways in Scripture,

First, to set forth an exceeding great number, (Genesis 22. 17.) I will multiply
thy seed as the Stars of the Heaven, and as the sand which is upon the Sea
shore. That is, I will exceedingly multiply thy seed, thy children shall be not
only numerous, but numberless; Though a book of Numbers be written concerning
Abraham's posterity, yet their total number is not written. So (Psalm. 78. 27.)
He rained flesh upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like as the sand of the
Sea, that is, he rained abundance of feathered fowls.

Secondly, The sand of the Sea, is used to express the largnesse, the mighty
extent or capacity of a thing; The sand of the Sea, is of a vaster extent, then
the Sea it self, as being the outward line or bound of it; therefore (Jer. 33.
22.) it is spoken of, as a thing impossible, for the sand of the sea to be
measured; As the host of Heaven (sc. the Stars) cannot be numbered, neither
the sand of the Sea measured, so will I multiply the seed of my servant David.
Measure is taken both of the content, and extent of things; The sand of the Sea
is immeasurable both ways, it cannot (as we speak of humane impossibles) be
measured by the pole or by the vessel. And in 1 King. 4. 29. it is said, God
gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart
as the sand of the Sea, that is, as the sand incompasses and takes the Sea in
its arms, so Solomon had a heart, comprehending all the depths and oceans of
knowledge; he had the compass of all learning in his understanding. Hence,
when a man attempts a thing impossible, we say to him proverbially. Thou
measurest the sand. Are^am metiris.


Thirdly, The sand of the Sea is applied in Scripture, to note the exceeding
weight and heaviness of a thing: that instance is pregnant for it (Prove. 23.
7.) A stone is heavy, and the sand is weighty, but a fools wrath is heavier
than both; when Solomon would Stulti mores ^ntolerabiles.
show us, how intollerably burdensome, the manners of a wicked man are, he
compares them to a stone and to the sand; The wrath of a wicked man is very
weighty, but (by the way) the wrath of God is incomparably more weighty: Wrath
proceeding from extreme folly, is weighty, but wrath proceeding* from infinite
wisdom, is infinitely weighty; The wrath of a fool upon his brother, is
heavier then a stone, or then the sand; How heavy then will the wrath of the
most wise God be, upon that fool?

It is further considerable, that, he says not barely, heavier than Triplex
est a^enae genus foss^^ia, flavialis and Marina, Plin. lib. 3 na^ hist. cap. 23.
the sand, (any sand is very heavy) but heavier than the sand of the Sea:
Rivers have sand, and dry pits have sand, but sea-sand is the vastest and the
heaviest sand.

Again, He speaks not in the singular number, Heavier then the sand of the
Sea; but (the Hebrew is plural) heavier than the sand of the Seas; as if Job
had said, if thou should shovell up all the sand, that is upon the shores of
all the seas together on a heap, it would not be so heavy, as my calamity; In
such Hyperbolies or high strains of eloquence, Job rhetoricates about his sad
condition, as if he resolved to put more weight into his expressions, as he
found more weight put into his afflictions. Hence observe,

Afflictions are heavy burdens. The judgments of God upon wicked men, are
frequently in Scripture called burdens, and they are heavy burdens; Isa. 15.
1. we read of the burden of Moab, that is, the judgment and calamity that
should fall upon Moab; And Isa. 17. 1. The burden of Damascus. And Isa. 19. 1.
The burden of Egypt. And Isa. 21. 1. The burden of the desert of the Sea. And
afterward, The burden of the valley of vision, that is of Jerusalem; And (2
King. 9. 25.) when Jehu had killed Jehoram, he said to Bidkar his Captain:
Take up and cast him in the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite, for
remember, how that when I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the
Lord laid this burden upon him; That is, that he should be slain and thrown
out in this manner. As afflictions upon wicked men are burdens; So, afflictions
upon the godly are burdens too, they are also heavy burdens: Their sins are
burdens upon them, My sins (says David) are gone over my head, they are a
burden too heavy for me to bear, Psalm. 38. 4. Their sins are burdens and
their sorrows are burdens. Sin does not only burden man, but it burdens God,
I am pressed under your sins, as a cart is pressed, that is full of sheaves,
says God, Amos 2. 13. As man, by sin burdens God, so God, by affliction
burdens man. But of all afflictions, inward afflictions are the greatest
burdens: As the spirit of a man is stronger then his flesh, so the afflictions
which are upon his spirit are weightier then those that are upon his flesh: The
spirit has wonderful strength, all spirits are strong: Angels are mighty in
strength, One good Angel is an over-match for all men. And the devils (who are
spirits) are called not not only Principalities but powers, because of their
strength. Proportionably, the spirit of man has a mighty strength in it, and
so the afflictions, which are upon the spirit, may have a greater weight in
them. The affliction which Job complains of, as heavier then the sand, was not
so much the calamity that pressed his flesh, or the pain that tormented his
body (as is plain in the next verse) but it was the calamity of his spirit,
the affliction lying there, A man can sustain his infirmity, but a wounded
spirit, (that is, when a man has got a blow, a wound, an affliction upon his
spirit) who can bear? Pro. 18. 14. As if Solomon had said, I challenge all the
world to find me out a man, that can bear a burdened wounded spirit; unless
Christ put under his hand, no strength of man's spirit can bear the burden of a
wounded spirit; A spirit has no weight at all, only fleshly and material
substances are ponderous; but a wounded spirit is heavier then wounded flesh.
The spirit is strong enough to bear the burdened flesh, but nothing in flesh
can bear a burdened spirit.

In the close of the verse, we have the effect of this heavy weight of
affliction, both spiritual and corporal.

Therefore (says he) my words are swallowed up. That is, I want words to
express my grief. Verba deficiunt quibus mognitudinem doloru^ exprimam: Nulla
possum oratione ^^nsequi, quanto infester dolor. Merc. Vix satis esse queant
tanto ja^ verba dolori.
All language is too narrow for the vastness of my sorrows.

Some read it, Propterea verba mea ama^a, Symmach.
Therefore my words are bitter, or therefore my words are steeped in
bitterness, as if he had said, I my self feed upon bitter things, I feed upon
gall and wormwood, therefore no wonder, if my words taste of them.

The Vulgar goes farther from the letter of the Text, rendering, Proptereaverba
mea sunt dolor plena. Vul.
Therefore my words are full of sorrow; as if he had said, the sorrows which
are in my mind, flow out upon my tongue. The Septuagint yet further off. (...),
Sep.
Therefore it seems my words are evil, or ill taken. My grief renders my
words more liable to exception or mis-interpretation.

M Broughton translates, Therefore my words come short, there is a weight upon
me heavier than the sand of the sea, Therefore my words come short, or my
expressions come not up to my intention. We translate near that sense and
answerably to the original, My words are swallowed up.

The Hebrew word signifies to lick up, or to swallow down, and (...) a radice
(...) Lambit absorbuit per Metaphoram perdidit corrupit.
by a Metaphor to destroy or to consume; in the prophecy of Obadiah, verse. 16.
The word is used to that purpose, They shall drink and they shall swallow
down; And Prove. 20. 25. It is a snare to the man, who devoureth that which is
holy, or who swalloweth down that which is holy: So here, Therefore my words
are swallowed up, that is, when I would speak, my words are, as it were,
halfe-eaten before spoken, or my words are snatched down in the Verba semesa.
Jun.
speaking, by the sharp teeth and devouring stomach of my grief and sorrows.

Others from the letter read, Therefore my words are corrupted, Verba mea
corrupta sunt, aut pe^dita R. Levi deleta R. Moses intercisa, Theod Lasta.
Chald. Verbum per^in^t ad pronunciationem corrupt^m and ad ^albuti^m,
wearied, l^st, blotted, blubbered, so cut off, that I cannot speak distinctly,
alluding unto those that stammer. A stammerer is in such haste to speak, that
he eats his words, and (as we use to say proverbially in our language) he clips
the Kings English, he swalloweth up half his mind, when he would bring it out
in words; such is the meaning of Job, My words are swallowed up, I cannot speak
all: my grief takes me off, and cuts me short. And so he seems to excuse
himself.

First; in case he had spoken abruptly and brokenly, my pain has been so
great, that I can hardly speak, therefore take no advantage Vix loqui possam,
vox faucib^a haeret, Vat.
of the abrupt language and broken sentences, which have fallen from me, for
the truth is, my grief has swallowed up my words. I have rather sighed then
declared my mind; real sorrow as well as poetical passionate imitation of
sorrow makes many an (Ap siopesis or) sudden stop and breach, when the tongue
is upon the swiftest speed, and quickest motion.

And secondly, he seems to excuse himself for the matter of his speech, I
have not yet spoken all my mind, I have not given you my full sense, about my
condition: for through grief I was forced to swallow up my words, and to
suppress what I had further to say Therefore suppose my speech has been
imperfect, yet be not scandalized at it, for if you will have patience to stay,
I shall anon bring up the words again, which my sorrows have snatched from me
and swallowed down. Stay a while, and you shall hear more, you shall hear
all, I will speak more largely and more distinctly than I have done. One of
the Rabbis takes the Rab. Kimchi.
words actively, and referrs the act of swallowing to Jobs friends; as if he
had said, Ye my friends have swallowed down my words. Ye have not leasurely
fed upon and digested them, but swallowed them in such have, that ye have not
tasted them. As a man that swallows down a morsel greedily without chewing,
never tastes either the sweetness or the bitterness of it. It is a usual
Metaphor. to express hearing by eating; and we have it (as many interpret) at
the sixth verse of this Chapter, Can that which is unsavory be eaten without
salt. It is a truth, that when words are thus swallowed or gobled down, we
take not out the strength or intent of them. But I stay not upon this
exposition, because it strains too hard upon the grammatical construction, and
other circumstances, of the Text.

Observe out of the former meaning.

First, Great grief interrupteth speech, and makes broken language; Therefore
my speech or my words are swallowed up. As sometimes our words devour so
sometimes our words are devoured; some men speak swallowing words, and others
swallow their words, (Psalm. 57. 4.) Thou love all devouring words, or thou
love all swallowing words, O thou deceitful tongue. There are swallowing
words, as well as swallowed words. Malice makes a man swallow the integrity of
another with his words; And grief will make a man swallow down his own words,
so that he cannot speak to maintain his own integrity.

Secondly, observe, That some afflictions exceed all complaints and are too
big for expression. That note reaches M Broughtons sense, my words come short
of what my condition is, there is no language large enough, no Oratory eloquent
enough to describe or make known my sorrows.

Lastly, observe, Not to be able to express our grief is an increase of our
grief. Therefore my words are swallowed up. This is an addition to my
sorrows, that I cannot make known my sorrows. It is a great part of my
trouble, that I can tell you but a part of my trouble. Let a man be hindered
from expressing his grief, either through want of power, or through the
restraint of power, both ways grief increases. Some, who have been dying Apud
Sophocle^ electra faelicem vocat Niobem, cui lugere filiorum inter^tum
permissum est, cum id sibi matris crudelitas negaverita
upon cruel rackes, or under bloody tortures, have yet esteemed this, beyond
all their tortures, that, they might not freely speak out their minds and
sorrows: to have their mouths stopped, was worse to them, then to have their
breath stopped. It is a pain to be kept from speaking. To command a man to
swallow or eat down his words, is next to the command of eating and swallowing
down his own flesh. The cruelty of a disease, may gagge a man, as well as the
cruelty of a Tyrant. Such is my grief that my words are swallowed up.

JOB Chap. 6. Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. For the arrows of the Almighty are within me,
the poison whereof drinks up my spirit: the terrors of God do set
themselves in array against me.

Does the wild Ass bray when he has grass? Or loweth the Ox over his fodder?

Can that which is unsavory be eaten without salt? Or is there any taste in the
white of an Egg?

The things that my soul refused to touch, are as my sorrowful meat.


JOB continues his reply and his complaint. He had expressed the greatness of
his calamity, by comparing it with the sand of the sea for weightinesse; now he
proceeds in the same sad aggravation by comparing it to an arrow for
sharpness, and to an army for terriblenesse: For the arrows of the Almighty
are within me: The terrors of the Lord set themselves in array against me.

We are in this verse to open a quiver full of poisoned arrows, and to
marshall an army full of divine terrors, The arrows of the Almighty, etc.

An Arrow, is a deadly engine, so called in the Hebrew, from its (...) Sagitta
a (...) dimidiavit, discidit, qaod scindit rem percussa^.
effect, cutting or wounding. Being taken properly, it is an instrument shot
out of a Bow, of wood or iron, either for sport or fight. But here
figuratively. And arrows in Scripture are taken in a figure diverse ways.

First, For the word of God, Psalm 4. 5. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart
of the Kings enemies, whereby the people fall under thee. That is, thy words
are sharp and peircing, whereby thou convincest and beatest down sin and
sinners, either converting or destroying them. The Rider on the white Horse,
going out conquering and to conquer (who, is conceived to be, Truth, or the
word of God triumphing) is described, with a Bow in his hand; Rev. 6. 2.

Secondly, Arrows are put for the bitter and reproachful words of men, Ps. 64.
3. 4. and Ps. 120. 4. They bend their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter
words.

Thirdly, For any evil or mischievous purpose, which a man intends or aims to
the hurt of his brother, Psalm. 58. 7. When he bends his bow to shoot his
arrows, let them be as cut in pieces. Bending of the bow notes the preparing
and setting of mischief; The arrow shot out of this bent bow, is the
mischief acted and finished (Psalm. 2.) The wicked bend their bow, they make
ready their arrow upon the string; they prepare mischiefs against their
neighbor.

Fourthly For any kind of affliction, judgment or punishment, Zech. 9. 14. And
the Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the
lightning. Particularly,

1. For Famine, Ezekiel. 5. 16. When I shall send upon them the evil arrows of
famine.

2 For Pestilence, Psalm. 91. 5. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by
nigbt, nor for the arrow that flees by day. What the terror and the arrow
are, is explained in the next verse, which is not an addition of other evils,
from which safety is promised, but an explication of the same. The pestilence
that walks in darkness, and the destruction (being the same pestilence)
wasting at noonday. The meaning of all is, Thou shall be kept or antidoted
against the plague both night and day.

3. Those thunderbolts and haile-stones, which God sends out of the Magazine
of heaven, and discharges in his wrath against wicked men, are called the
arrows of his indignation, 2 Samuel 22. 15. Psalm. 144. 6. and Hab. 3. 11.
compared with Josh. 10. 11.

Further the arrows of God signify inward afflictions, troubles of the mind
and spirit, God often shoots an arrow, which pierces into the very soul. It
was said of Joseph, The iron entered into his soul. And it is (in this sense)
very usual for the arrows of God to enter into the souls of his people
(Psalm. 38. 1, 2.) O Lord rebuke me not in Thy wrath, etc. For Thine arrows
stick fast in me: Where stuck they? He means it not of his body, happily, the
skin of that was not razed. There is an arrow, which touches not the sides, but
sticks fast in the soul of a child of God.

Understand it here, of the arrows of affliction; and those either external,
outward calamities, fastening in the flesh of Job; or internal, galling him to
the soul and spirit. Therefore he says, The Haret lateri Le^halis aru^do.
arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirit.

These arrows are described in the text two ways.

1. From the Efficient cause The arrows of the Almighty. They drink up my
spirit.
Effect

2:
They are the arrows of the Almighty, Shaddai; Of which word we have spoken in
the former Chapter, verse 17th at large, it being one of the names of God,
noting out his power and omnipotence: There he calls them the chastnings of
(Shaddai) the Almighty: And here, The Arrows of (Shaddai) the Almighty,

1. Because, they are sent out from him. His arm bends and draws the bow. And

2. Because of the mighty force and strength, in which they are sent home to
the mark. The strength in which those arrows come, and the depth of the wound
which they make, speak an Almighty arm drawing the bow. None but an Almighty
arm can shoot an arrow thus deep, up to the feathers in the soul and spirit.
It is not in the power of all the tyrants in the world to strik or shoot thus
deep. The soul of a Saint has such armor upon it, as no bodily weapon can
enter. And therefore the Martyrs, when all was wound in their flesh, spoke and
triumphed, because their spirits were whole, and untoucht. Only a spirit can
shoot arrows into our spirits.

We find it frequent among heathen Poets and others, to describe Poetae deos
arcu, ja^ulis, sagittisque armant, intelligentes quas inserunt mortalibus
clades, quae feriunt eminus quod propri^m Dei videtur, Bold.
their gods armed with bows and arrows. And in that they shadowed their power
to wound the minds of men; and to wound them suddenly and secretly. The
Scripture describes the true God thus, furnished with his Quiver of arrows,
and his bow, (Psalm. 7. 13.) He ordains his arrows against the persecutors.
God ^ath an arow for the wounding of his enemies, and an arrow for the wounding
of his friends: He has arrows for both; and both are wounded; and both are
wounded with poisoned fiery arrows; yet with a vast difference; these are
wounded and poisoned, that they may be healed, and they are wounded and
poisoned, that they may be destroyed.

Arrows are 1. Swift instruments.
2: Secret 3. Sharp 4. Killing

I will make mine arrows drunk without blood (Deuteronomy. 32. 42.) They are
instruments drawing blood and drinking blood even unto drunkenesse; afflictions
are like arrows in all these properties.

1 Afflictions often come very speedily, with a glance, as an arrow, quick as a
thought.

2. Afflictions come suddenly, unexpectedly; an arrow is upon a man before he is
aware: so are afflictions. Though Job says, The thing he feared came upon him,
he looked for this arrow before it came; yet usually afflictions are unlooked
for guests, they thrust in upon us, when we dream not of them.

3. They come with little noise: an arrow is felt, before, or as soon as it is
heard: an arrow flies silently, and secretly, stealing upon and wounding a man,
unobserved, and unseen.

Lastly, all afflictions are sharp, and in their own nature killing and
deadly. That any have good from them, is from the grace of God, not from their
nature.

The poison whereof drinks up my spirits. There Is the effect of his
afflictions. Some read it, The fury Quarum indignatio. Vulg. Furor. Sept.
Fervor, T^gur: plu^i^^ Venenu^
or anger whereof drinks up my spirit. It may be called the fury and anger of
an arrow, because the arrow is often sent in fury and in anger. We read also
of the fire of an arrow or of a fiery arrow, (Ps. 76. 4.) There brakest thou
the arrows of the bow. Arrows even firing themselves by the swiftness of their
motion. (...) Sagitta, ignita, incalescens motu.


The word of the Text is derived from a root, signifying to wax very hot, and
in the Nowne heat. Hence by a Metaphor it signifies anger, because angry men
wax hot, Anger is breathed (...) a radice (...) Caluit, incaluit, ira sic
dicta quod ira^^ inca ^escunt.
fire. (Isai. 42. 25.) Therefore he has powered upon them the fury of his
anger, and the strength of battle, and it has set him on fire round about.
Fire and fury, are near in name, and in nature. When fury burns within, fire
quickly burns without: and so by a Metonymie the same word signifies poison;
the reason is, because poisons heat and inflame; poisons inflame the flesh, and
(as it were) set the body on fire, or because an angry man (like an angry
Serpent) seems to breath out fire, or spet poison. Paul before his conversion,
breathed threatenings, fire and sword against the Church Act. 9. 1. And
therefore, either way, the word is well rendered, The anger whereof, or the
poison whereof drinks up my spirit. And in the Greek the same word signifies
anger and Psalm. 58. 4. (...) pro (...) Sept.
poison; because of that inflammation, which is about the heart of a man
thoroughly angry.

In these words, Job seems to allude to the custom of cruel savage men, who,
when they pursued their enemies with deadly Venenatis g^avida sagit^is, --
pharetra, Hor. Qui mortis saevo gem nent ut vulnera causas, Omnia vipereo
spicula Fell linunt, Ovid. l. 1. de ponto. Mos erat persarum ut ponant venenum
serpentis in sagittis suis; R. Solo. (...)
hatred and would wound them to death, used to dip the head of their arrows,
the top of their spears, or the point of their swords, or whatsoever weapon
they fought with, in poison, that so every wound might be a death; The poison
of such an arrow, spear or sword, drinks up the spirit, and corrupts the blood
presently. Some poison strikes the heart, almost, as soon as the weapon strikes
the arm. Job compares the arrows, which God shot into him, not to ordinary
arrows, which kill only by piercing, but to poisoned arrows, which kill by
insecting; As if God had set himself to the utmost, to power out the
fierceness of his indignation upon him; not only shooting an arrow, but an
arrow dipped in poison, such an arrow, as the most barbarous and cruel men shoot
at their most professed and mortal enemies.

Drinks up my spirit. Poison gets quickly to the spirit, and there drinks:
poison is subtle and spiritfull, and therefore (if I may so speak)
incorporates with that which is most subtle in man, his spirit. Flat, pal'd,
gross or dreggish liquor, will not quench the fiery thirst of poison, it
drinks nothing, but pure spirits; yet some read, It drinks up my blood; but
this amounts to the same senc^, for the spirit of a living creature is in the
blood; the spirits swim in the blood.

There are different opinions about this spirit, or what we are to understand
by it.

First, Some take spirit here, for the breath, or for the act of To^ confossus
vulne^ibus ^ix respi^are valeo. Aquin.
breathing; As if he had said, I have received so many wounds, by these
poisoned arrows, that I begin to faint, and cannot draw my breath, These
arrows sup up my spirit, and by wounding, stop my breath.

Secondly, Others understand it more generally, taking spirit for his strength
and vigor; spirits are so strong, that they are put for strength* The
Egyptians are men and not God, and their horses flesh and not spirit (Isa. 31.
3.) that is, they are not strength, but weakness. So here, it drinks up my
spirit, that is, the strength that is in me, all the powers and abilities of
body and Dolores mei ^^c penitus enervant, atque exhausto robore de^iciunt.
Pined.
soul, are wasted and consumed: These calamities spend upon my spirit, where
the stock of my strength is laid up, or which is the lock wherein my strength
lies.

A third apprehends, that by spirit, he means his judgment, reason and
understanding, as if he had said, showers of arrows and troubles come so thick
upon me, that they even darken my mind, and drink up the strength of my
understanding; Hence I may seem to speak distractedly, unadvisedly, weakly; I
have not that spirit to quicken, that strength of reason to judge, which
formerly I had: the pains of my body, disable and distemper my mind; And
therefore if I have spoken any thing below what I ought, it is, because I am
cast below what I was.

The terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. Arrows and
terrors, are the same thing, in a different clothing of words: Or the arrow is
the affliction it self, and the terror is the effect or consequent of it. The
word here used for Terror, (...)
notes the most terrible terror or affrightment. Terror is the extreme of
fear, or fear confused, into amazement and astonishment: Death is therefore
called the King of terrors, because there are so many powerful terrors in
death, Psalm. 55. 4. That vexation which Saul felt, when God sent out an evil
spirit with commishion to vex him, is expressed by this word, 1 Samuel 16. 14. An
evil spirit from the Lord, troubled, or terrified him; Such terrors, for the
matter, such for the manner and present workings of them, seized upon
upright-hearted Job, and false-hearted Saul. A believer, a child of God, an
heir of Heaven, may feel himself haunted and pierced with hellish terrors.

These are called the Terrors of God, either first, by a common Hebraisme;
because great, and strange terrors. In that language, God is often put as an
Epithet, to show exceeding greatness, himself being the greatest. So Chap.
1. ver. 16. Fire of God, etc. Secondly, Terrors of God, because he sent and
commanded that Army of Terrors. When Jacob journeyed with his little Army,
Genesis 35. 5. It is said, The terror of God was upon the Cities round about, and
they pursued them not; that is, the Lord sent an Army of terrors to oppose the
Cities, least they should arm against Jacob. The terror of man is very
terrible, and therefore the Apostle arms the Saints against it, 1 Pet. 3. 14.
Be not afraid of their terror. The terror of God is infinitely greater; and
thereupon the Apostle argues, 2 Cor. 5. 11. Knowing therefore the terror of
the Lord, we persuade.

Those terrors of God, may be taken two ways: Either actively, or passively:
Actively, for that work of God, in terrifying and troubling. Thy terrors, that
is, the terrors which thou did afflict me with; Or passively; for those
afflictions which oppress Nomen terroris fr^quenter, in Scripturis sumitur,
pro flagellis malisque gravissimis a Deo missis.
the mind; when God leads that army against us, sets it in array to charge, and
commands it to encampe about us, in either sense we may take this of Job, as
also that of Heman, Psalm. 88. 15. While I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted.

Further, There is a twofold terror: First, caused by outward imminent
danger. Secondly, caused by inward guilt. Or, Terror coming from the wrath of
man; and terror coming from the wrath of God. Thus it was threatened, Levit.
26. 16. I also will do even this unto you, I will appoint over you terrors.
Deuteronomy. 32. 25. The sword without and terror within, shall destroy both the
young man and the virgin. That is, fear shall kill those who escape the sword.
A people cannot stand before the Army of men, who are once surprised with an
Army of terrors: Hence Josh. 2. 9. Your terror is fallen upon us, says Rahab
to assure the spies, that the Canaanites could not stand before the people of
Israel.

Again, The terrors of God afflict the soul; First, When sin is set openly
(to the eye of conscience) in array against us. An army of sins, are an army of
terrors. The Church is called, Terrible as an army with banners; Cant. 6. 10.
when she is strengthened and armed for the exercise of all that power, which
Christ has given her; and when our sins stand before us, in all that strength,
which the law has given them, they also are terrible as an army with banners.

Secondly, When God hides his face from us, an army of terrors quickly faces
us; Though an army of sins come out in array against us, yet if God appear to
us, in the fullness and freeness of his grace; if Christ our Captain will but
lead us on against this army, we shall quickly overcome them, or they will
will fly before us; But an army of sins is exceeding terrible, when Christ
appears not in the field for us, or when God hides his face from us, and leaves
us in the dark: It is usual in Scripture, to set forth terrors, as the effect
of that darkness, and the hidings of the face of God; Naturally, terror
accompanies darkness; children are afraid in the dark; and not only children,
but men: Histories tell us of great Emperors who durst not be in the dark, for
fear. And as natural terrors meet us in natural darkness, so spiritual
terrors in spiritual darkness; When the light of Gods countenance is
clouded, and (as it were) benights the soul. then terror takes hold upon us.
Under either of these notions, we may understand the terrors of this text, The
terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. It was true in respect
of outward troubles, they were very terrible: But especially in regard of
inward troubles; when God set his sins in array before him, or hid his face,
and obstructed the course of his wonted communion.

Set themselves in array against me. The Original imports, a very exact,
curious, artificial ordination (...) Ordinavit, ratione and proportione,
disposuit, instruxit.
and disposal of things; As if the Lord had even studied to be exact and
exquisite in afflicting Job; he puts his sorrows into a method, and his
troubles into order. The providence of God observes a rule, and is harmonious
in those things which appear to us, a chaos, a heap of confusion. The word is
applied;

First, To the ordering of speech, or disputations; There is a kind of
embattailing in disputation, when it is regular and artificial (Job 32. 14)
Now he has not directed his speech against me, says Elihu concerning Job; as
if he had said, Job has not marshalled his arguments against me, but all the
charge has been upon you.

Secondly, I find the word used in reference unto prayer: Prayer ought to be
full of holy order and composedness (Psalm. 5. 3.) In the morning will I direct
my prayer to Thee, and look up. In the morning will I put my prayer in array,
I will posture my prayer in a gracious order, my heart in order, and my words
in order, every petition shall (as it were) keep rank and file, when I am
seeking unto God: Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty,
to utter any thing before God, is the counsel of the Holy Ghost by Solomon,
Eccles. 5. 2.

But, properly, the word is applied to the marshalling and imbattailing of an
Army (Jer. 50. 9) Lo, I will raise, and cause to come up against B^bylon, an
assembly of great nations from the North country, and they shall set
themselves in array against her, etc.

So then, whereas Job says, The terrors of God are set in array against me,
he would intimate, that God afflicted him, both orderly and resolvedly. It was
not some confused terror, or sudden surpti^al, but the Lord God, like some
great Commander or General, mustered and marshaled his army, and led it up
exactly formed, to a pitched battle against him. Observe from hence, first,

Afflictions come sometimes by multitudes.

You shall have a whole Army of them together; Sometimes we see a duel or
single combat, one man matched with one trouble; Bellum atque virum.
Here a man and an affliction; there a man and an affliction; but another time
we may see a man and an army (as he spoke in the story, when one made good a
pass against a whole host of the enemy) in the spiritual war, one soul
grapples with a multitude of troubls, and conflicts* with a thousand
temptations: As there are legions of evil spirits, so legions of spiritual
evils assaulting at once. Secondly Observe,

God sometimes appears as an enemy to his own servants.

The terrors of God, and the arrows of God (says Job) God shootes the
arrows, and sets the terrors in array. Job expected favor and succor from
God, but he finds terrors and arrows: Those wounds make our hearts bleed
most, which we apprehend given us from his anger, whom we have chosen as our
only friend. The Church had that apprehension of God (Lam. 3. 3.) Surely
against me is he turned, he turns his hand against me all the day. The Church
speaks, as if God were quite changed, as if he having been her friend, were
now turned enemy. So Job; I that was wont to have showers of sweet mercies,
shot and darted into my soul, now feel deadly arrows there, shot from the
same hand; my spirit was wont to drink in the pleasant influences of Heaven;
but now poison drinks up my spirits. I was wont to walk safe, under the guard
of divine favors, but now divine terrors assault me on every side. Thirdly
observe:

When God appears an enemy, man is not able to hold out any longer.

See, how Job (poor soul) cries out as soon as he found, that these were Gods
arrows, and Gods terrors. Job was a man at arms, a man of valor, and of an
undaunted courage; A man that had been in many ski^ mishes with Satan, and had
often, through the power of God, foiled him, and come off with victory.
Chaldeans and Sabeans, were (indeed) too hard for his servants, and conquered
his cattle, yet the spirit of Job beat those bands of robbers, and triumphed
over them; but, he was never in battle with God before, and perceiving now God
himself to appear as an enemy in the field, he cries out, O the terrors of
God, O the arrows of the Almighty. When God is angry, no man can abide it. (2
Cor. 5. 11.) Knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men: We (says the
Apostle) who have felt by experience, or by faith have understood the terror
of the Lord: we knowing it experimentally, or knowing it beleevingly; we, being
fully persuaded that the terror of the Lord is most terrible, persuade men; O
take heed you put not your selves under the terror of the Lord, or provoke the
terror of the Lord against your selves. Those terrors of the Lord which come
from pure wrath, are altogether intolerable: And those which come from love,
and are set in array by the infinite wisdom, and gracious providence of God,
ordering all things for good (to his) in the issue, even those are very
dreadful, no man, not the holiest of men (and they are the strongest in this
war) are able to stand before them. Psalm. 38. 2. Thine arrows stick fast in
me, and thy hand presses me sore, there is no soundness in my flesh by reason
of thine anger: that is, I am as a man, who has not a whole piece of skin all
his body over, all is a wound: or I am as one, whose flesh is all rotten by
reason of his wounds. As Ely speaks to his sons, 1 Samuel 2. 25. If one man
sin against another, the Judge shall judge him, but if a man sin against the
Lord, who shall entreat for him? So, we may say on the other side, if man
contend with man, some one may help him, he may have a Second to releeve him;
but if once a man be contending with God, who will be his Second? who will
undertake for him? who can come in, to the rescue; when God is fighting and
contending with us? We wrestle not against flesh and blood, (says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 6. 12. when he would show, what a terrible thing it is to wrestle with
the Devil) but against principalities and powers, against spiritual
wickednesses in high places. Flesh and blood is no match for a spirit, though a
created spirit, though an unclean spirit, a Devil: how then shall flesh and
blood be able to wrestle with the creating Spirit, with him, who is a most holy
Spirit, with God, who is The Principality, The Power, The High, the Srong, The
Almighty Shaddai. In other battles it is man with man, or at worst, man with
Devils; but here it is man with God, weakness and frailty, contending with
omnipotency: and therefore when once God appears against the soul, the soul
can hold out no longer, His anger, who is The Spirit, quickly drinks up our
spiirts. Fourthly observe.

Inward wounds and terrrours are most terrible.

Do not think that the soars upon Jobs body, fetched all these complaint from
him. He shows you now, what it was that made him complain indeed, The arrows
of the Almighty are within Tanto poena intolerabilior, quan^o spiritus corpore
subtilior.
me, the terrors of God set themselves in array against me. As the joys and
exultations of the spirit do infinitely exceed all the pleasures which come in
from the senses, all bodily pleasures: so the troubles and afflictions which
are upon the spirit, infinitely exceed all the troubles and afflictions which
fall upon the body. As God has such comforts, such joys to bestow upon his
people, as the world can neither give nor take away; so likewise, he has
terrors and troubles, which all the world is not able to remove or mitigate:
There are no medicines in the whole circuit of nature, that can heal a
wounded spirit; All your friends, all your relations, all your riches, yea all
your natural wisdom, will be but as the white of an egg to your taste, in the
day when God smites the heart with these terrors.

These arrows and terrors are often preparatorie to conversion; when some men
are overcome to receive Christ, an Army of terrors is sent out, to take them
captive, and bring them in. There are many (I grant) whom God wounds with love,
he shootes an arrow of favor into their hearts, and overcomes them with
Troops of mercies. Again, An army of terrors, is sent out to try the holy
courage of those, who are converted, as well as to conquer the unholy enmity of
person: unconverted. That was Jobs case here; and these second armies may be as
terrible to the soul as the first, and often are more terrible. And (we have
such cases) a man that was converted without an army of terrors, may have an
army of terror, sent against him after conversion. The dispensations and
methods of God are various, though both his rule and end be ever the same; But
whether this army of terror comes before conversion, or after conversion;
whenever it comes, it must needs distress the soul exceedingly. A broken
spirit is very comfortable, but a wounded spirit is very dreadful: Of a
wounded spirit we may say, as I remember the Moralist speaks, concerning those
barbarous naked fights, among the Romans, when men fought naked with men; or
naked with beasts; Surely (says he) all the former fights and battles, were
sports and Quicquid ante pugnotum est miserico^dia fuit, Sen.
mercy to these: So all other troubles, all other terrors, are pleasures and
recreations to these; When you come to this bout, when God sends these arrows
and arrayeth such an army of terrors against you, fire and sword, stone and
gout, are, yea, Hell it self (to present apprehension) is a pleasure. Many
under those assaults have thought they should gain by the exchange, and have
wished to be in Hell, so they might be out of those terrors.

Few believe this, but they who have had experience of it. As the joys of the
spirit, so the terrors of the spirit, are secrets unto most; As the Prophet
speaks concerning those carnal ones in his time; If one prophecy unto them
of wine and strong drink, he shall even be the Prophet of this people. To
prophecy, or to speak unto some of riches, and of honor, and of pleasure,
they find some taste in these things, this is wine and strong drink unto them.
There is some relish in these things, they understand what you mean; but if
you speak unto them of joy in the holy Ghost, of peace of conscience, of the
refreshings which are had in communion with Christ; they understand not the
language, they know not what is meant. So, on the other side, if you would be a
Prophet, or speak, or preach to some of fire and sword, of spoiling and
plundering their estates, preach to them of plague and pestilence, preach to
them of the gout, and of the stone, of burning fevers, and languishing
consumptions; they understand these and are afraid, they even tremble to hear
you speak of these things: but preach to them of the arrows of the Almighty,
shot into the spirit, of the terrors of God set in array against them; preach
to them of trouble of conscience, and the hiding of Gods face, they smile at
these things, they wonder what you would have, they know no such matters.
Spiritual good or evil, is seldom known till felt, yea neither of them is
known (to purpose) till it is felt: Spiritual troubles are as little known,
till felt, as spiritual joys are: The natural man perceives none of the
things of God, he cannot know them, because they are spiritually discerned: And
there is as much spiritualnesse evidenced in discerning spiritual sorrows and
afflictions (our own or others) as there is in discerning our own or others
spiritual joys and consolations.

I shall add a word here to those, who live securely, in, or dally with, their
sins; Surely, if Job here in the text; if David often in the Psalms, and Heman
(Psalm. 88. 15.) cries out, While I suffer thy terrors I am distracted; If
these cried out thus of the terrors and arrows of God, then, (I say) Sinners
and Secure ones, what will you do, when God bends his bow, and opens his
quiver, and shoots his arrows at your naked breasts? What will you do, when
God shall bring up armies of terrors to charge upon you? When you hear a Job
thus crying out of terrors? How sad will it be to you, who will be a terror
to your selves, M^gor missab^b.
as Pashur was threatened, Jer. 20. 4. and God a terror to you likewise? What
will you do, when there is a fear round about, and fear within? The sinners
of Zion are afraid, fearfullnesse has surprised the Hypocrites; who among us
shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who amongst us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? Isa. 33. 14. If they who have a shield of faith to keep
off these arrows, and a rock of salvation, Jesus Christ, to hide themselves
in, when these armies come to battle against them, are thus afraid; what will
become of you, that are unarmed, of you, naked ones, of you, who have no
shield, no shelter, no faith, no Christ?

One thing more. Forasmuch, as there are such arrows and terrors sent by God,
even against his own, for their trial; Take heed of making arrows against
your selves; Take heed you be not found to raise and prepa^e an army of
terrors, against your own souls. All the while men sin, knowingly and
presumptuously, they shoot arrows against God, and God may take those arrows
and shoot them back into their breasts, he can make their sins recoyle upon
themselves, and pierce their own hearts with the works of their own hands.
Men muster (as it were*) whole armies of terrors, and levy a bloody war
against themselves by wilful sinnings. That text, Psalm. 50. 21. tells us,
that God will bring Significat quasi distinctio ordine bellico* apparatu
catalogum omnium scelerum proponere.
the sins of wicked men, as an army against them, I will reprove thee, and set
thy sins in order before thine eyes: It is the same Hebrew word, we have in
the text, I will set thy sins in array before thine eyes; as if he should say,
thou thoughtest all thy sins were scattered and dispersed, that, there was not
a sin to be found, that they should never be rallyed and brought together; but
I assure thee, I will make an army of those sins, a complete army of them, I
will set them in rank and file, before thine eyes, and see how thou can
behold, much less contend with such a host as they. Take heed therefore you
do not levy war against your own souls; that is the worst of all civil or
intestine wars. If an army of divine terrors be so fearful, what will an army
of black, hellish sins be? When God shall bring whole Regiments of sins
against you, here a Regiment of oaths, there a Regiment of lies, there a third
of false dealings, here a Troop of filthy actions, and here a Legion of
unclean, or profane thoughts, all at once fighting against thy life, and
everlasting peace.

Lastly, you that have never felt these arrows, nor seen any of these armies,
and yet God has been pleased to discover to you his love in his Christ, see
what cause you have to bless God; Or, if you have at any time felt them, and
are now again at peace, and if those terrors are removed, and the poison of
those arrows sucked out, and the heads of the arrows drawn out; bless God. Do
you not hear how Job complains of arrows and of terrors? The arrows of the
Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirit; the terrors
of God do set themselves in array against me.

Verse. 5. Does the wild Ass bray, when he has grass? Or loweth the Ox over
his fodder? etc. The three verses following contain similitudes, taken from
nature, by which Job tells on the story of his sorrows, and justifies his
complaint. The sense in General is this, as if he had said, I do not cry out
without cause; I should be more unreasonable then bruit beasts in so doing, The
wild Ass does not bray, when he has grass, etc. Or thus, We blame not
beasts, if they complain, when they have cause: take away grass from the
Ass, and fodder from the Ox; Pinch them with hunger, and they will tell you
of it, in their language; they will low and bray, till you understand they want
meat; Therefore surely you have no reason thus to find fault with me, or to
charge me so heavily, because I have complained, when my grass and fodder, my
comforts and my necessaries are taken from me: Nor is it any wonder, if you
complain not, who have contentments to the full, and know not (by experience)
what sorrow means.

Does the wild Ass bray, when he has grass? The (...) Fera, onager a (...)
Fructisicavit, fructum fecit, quod ferae Domesticis anima^^ibus sint foecu^dio
res. Shin.
Hebrew word for a wild Ass, comes from a root, signifying, To bring forth:
and the reason is given, because wild beasts usually are more fruitful, and
bring forth more plentifully than the tame. The word also notes wild in
general; and is applied to wild and savage men, who delight in wild beasts, or
wild places forests and wildernesses. So (Genesis 16. 12.) God speaks of
Ishmael, whom Hagar bare unto Abraham, that he should be A wild man, that is,
wild among men; or as a wild ass among (...) Onager inter homines subaudito
(...) erit inter homines sicut Onager, robore praevalens.
men, strong and active, delighting in fields and forests.

Does the wild Ass (says Job) bray, when he has grass? When the ass has
meat he is quiet; You hear not of him: but if he want g^affe, he brayes and
makes a dismal noise (Jer. 14. 6.) The wild asses did stand in the high
places, they snuffed up the wind like dragons, their eyes did fail, because
there was no grass, speaking of a time of drought and famine; The wild ass is
very impatient, both of hunger and of thirst. And therefore the rivers are (by
name) assigned to them for drink, Psalm. 104. 10, 11. He sends the springs
into the valleys, which run among the hills; they give drink to every beast
of the field; the wild Asses quench their thirst. Hence wild asses are
observed by natural Historians to delight in, and frequent rivers and springs.

To which that profane fiction of the Roman Historian (in abuse Cornelius
Tacitus, l. 21.
of the Jews) has relation; who speaking of the travels of the Israelites,
through the wilderness, tells us (to obscure the miracle. which God wrought for
them) that they being ready to die with thirst, at last espied a company of
wild asses upon a rock: which advantage Moses took, and presently followed
them, knowing that they would lead him to the waters, if any were to be had in
those parts. In pursuance of which lie, Plutarch affirms, that the Jews
worshipped an ass, as a Deity, which they had in special Plutarch. l 4.
Convivalium Questionum. quest. 5.
honor and veneration, for that famous deliverance. Upon this stock of lies,
the Heathen grafted that usual scorn against the Christians, That they
worshipped the head of an ass. As that great Assertour of the Christian.
honor against Heathenish cavils and hellish imputations has observed. Tertul.
advers. Gentes cap. 16.


But, that is a harmless and a witty observation (how solid I leave the
Reader to judge) which has been hinted from this natural thirstiness of the
wild ass: namely, that the Lord gave Sampson water out of the jaw bone of an
ass, Judge. 15. 19. thereby advancing the miracle, that a dead bone of that
thirsty creature should be made a spring of water to revive him, who was ready
to die with thirst.

The intendment of this digression, is only to clear up the text, by showing
that the wild ass is most fitly instanced in, to show the great cause which
Job had to cry out, as he did of his afflictions; forasmuch as the wild ass
(who is so greedy ^ grass and thirsty after the waters) will not bray for
either till he is afflicted with the want.

Or loweth the Ox over his fodder? This carries the same meaning with the
former instance; that being in wild creatures, and this in tame: as if Job had
said, look amongst all sort of cattle, wild or tame, you shall find they are
content, when they have food convenient for them. And hereupon grounds his
argument, that if bruits led only by sense and appetite complain not without
reason, then surely he, at least a reasonable creature, had reason to
complain, or else he had not complained. Hence, Observe;

First, Bruit beasts complain not without cause.

They complain not till want provokes them. Surely, men are more then brutish,
who complain when they have no want: But most of all, They, who are not
content with abundance. Some are discontent, not only, though they have daily
bread, and (as the Apostle speaks) Food and raiment (wherewith all should be
content) but though they have store of bread and clothing laid up for many
years. Shall not the ox or ass condemn these, who bray and low, when they have
grass and fodder plenty, when they stand continually at rack and manger. By
whom shall these men be accused think you? We shall not need to send for the
Angels out of heaven, to witness against them; No, we may call the wild
beasts, and bid them be witness: we may empannel, A Jury of asses and oxen to
pass a verdict upon such men. As God upbraides his people in case of their
ingratiude for mercies, The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters
crib; and (Jer. 8. 7.) in case of their neglect of judgments. The Storke in
the heavens knows her appointed times, and the crane; and the turtle, and the
swallow observe the time of their coming, but my people does not know the
judgment of the Lord. As if the Lord had said, whither shall I go to fetch
witness against this people; shall I go up to heaven for Angels, or call in
men out of other Nations? No I need go but to the air for birds, for the
turtle, the crane and the swallow; any thing in nature will serve to condemn
them, who act against, or below the dictates of Nature. Men are worse then
beasts, when they do worse. Their pre-eminence of constitution is lost in the
baseness of their actions: and they put themselves by so much inferior to
beasts, by how much they were placed above them. The Psalmist charges it sadly
upon himself, that he walked in the sphere of a beast, So foolish was I and
ignorant, I was a beast before thee (Psalm. 73. 22) How sadly then shall they be
charged, who walk in a sphere below beasts, who are more foolish and ignorant
then a beast. Take heed of complaining without cause; if beasts are satisfied
with what is agreeable to nature, man should be so much more, When Nature has
not enough, Grace has all. Grace will not bray or low, when there is no
grass, no fodder: surely then they have a scarcity of grace in their hearts,
who bray and low over their grass and fodder. Spiritual accommodations will
make a good heart forget temporal incommodities; and it is reason they should
God promises (Isa. 30. 20.) Though I give you the bread of adversity and the
water of affliction, yet thy teachers shall no more be removed into a corner,
but thine eyes shall see thy teachers. As if he had said, though your bodies
are coursely fed, yet your souls shall be feasted; Good cheer shall daily be
served into them, both at your eyes and ears, Thine eyes shall see thy
teachers and thou shall hear a voice behind thee. Thy sight and thy hearing
shall be refreshed with heavenly Messengers and good news from heaven Now
besides this promise expressed, there is a duty employed in the text, namely, that
because their spirits were so well fed, therefore they must not complain, though
their flesh come short in feeding. The bread of affliction should be pleasant
to us, while we eat Gospeldainties. In these times God gives more plenty of
spiritual food than formerly, yet many complain, because their natural bread
is shortened; Remember beasts complain not, when they have what is suitable to
nature, then let not Christians complain, when they have what is suitable to
grace, though nature have but spare diet, and short commons.

Verse 6. Can that which is unsavory be eaten without salt. He proceeds to
another similitude. It is, as if Job had said, Nature will complain, when it
wants meat, yea oftentimes nature will complain, when it wants pleasant meat.
Nature is not pleased, if it want a grain of salt, if it have not sauce, it is
not satisfied. Therefore, surely I am to be borne with, and not to be charged
thus deeply, who complain; when you offer me that which is unsavory, when you
give me meat without salt, without sauce, without any thing to render it,
either pleasing to my (...) Est quod debito condimento and temperamento caret,
sive in defectu, sive in excessu. Sales, pro facetijs, quod sint quasi
condimentum, sermonis Literae Sparsae sale humanitatis. Gicer, ad Artic. (...)
b Est prepositio absque fine. Sed quidam accipiunt pro nomine composito ex Min,
quod est, ex and beli, a Balab, quod est, ve^^st^s. H^nc locam reddunt;
Infaluatum ex vetustate salis, potius quam insipidum absque salae. Bold. Job
rem prae horrore prorsus impossibiliem vult significare; Numquid comodetur?
etc. At impossible omnino non est comedere insipidu^ sine sale, carnes autem
corruptae ex vetustate salismanducars nulla tenus possunt. Bold.
palate, or easy to my digestion: Unless I were senseless like a stock or a
stone, how should I not disrelish and disgust saplesse, saltlesse, how much
more, bitter things.

Can that which is unsavorie. The word, which we render unsavorie, is the same
used, Chap. 1. ver. 22. which we there opened at large; Job did not charge God
with folly or foolishly, or he spoke not unsavorily of God.

There is a threefold application of that word in Scripture.

1. To unpleasant meats.

2. To untempered mortar.

3. To indiscreet speeches, which want the seasoning either of wit, wisdom, or
of truth, Lam. 2. 14. Thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for
thee; Lying visions without truth, vain words without wisdom. So here, Can
that which is unsavourie be eaten without salt?

Seasoning makes unsavory things sweet; As salt gives a relish to meat, so
wisdom and wit to words. And therefore the Latins express wise, witty
speeches, pleasant discourse, a good grace in speaking, and a salt, by the same
word.

There is another Interpretation of that word, which we render b without: for
some understand it, not as a Preposition, governing the word Salt, but as a
compound word, noting the oldnesse or stalenesse of meat, wherein the very salt
it self is putrified; and so whereas we say, Can that which is unsavory be
eaten without salt? They translate thus, Can that which is unsavory through
the corruption of salt be eaten? Or, can that meat be eaten, which having been
salted, is now putrified? Salt which keeps meat from corruption, may in time be
overcome with the corruption of the meat. And a learned Interpreter gives the
reason why he rather chooses this interpretation of the word, because (says
he) it carries a stronger Emphasis with it; Job speaks as of a thing (in a
manner) unpossible to be done; Now it is very possible to eat unsavory meat,
without salt? A good appetite will down with unpleasant food, and hunger will
dispense much with Cookery. But when seasoned or salted meat corrupts and
putrifies, whose stomach does not loath and abhor it? Therefore it is a
fuller, and a more flat denial to say, Can that which is unsavory thorough
the corruption of salt, be eaten then? Then to say, Can that which is unsavory
be eaten without salt?

Or is there any taste in the white of an Egg? These words are much obscured,
by most Translators, and have (...)
found almost as many expositions, as Expositours. Some translate thus, Is
there any taste in that, which being taken brings death? So the Vulgar;
Doubtless a man has but little pleasure to taste An potest aliquis gustare
quod gustatum affert mortem. Vulg.
that, which tasted, will be his death: So the words are an aggravation of the
unsavourinesse of those things, which were offered him by his friends; to touch
or take them, was to take poison, or to drink in a deadly cup.

To clear up this Exposition, they make the Hebrew word (Challamuth) which we
translate, Egg, a compound, from Muth, signifying to die, whence Maueth,
death; and Chala, signifying froth or foam, or from Chali, signifying
infirmity: As if the word having these parts put together, had this sense, The
froth and foame of death. Or, The infirmity of death: That is, deadly froth,
on deadly infirmity. As if he had said, is there any pleasing taste, in the
spettle of dying men, who we know often foam and froth at their mouths, when
they lie drawing on.

Others thus, Is there any taste in the spettle of a healthy man. (...) Sanus,
confortatus, convaluit*
The word (Rir) which we translate white, signifies spettle or froth; As when
David acted the madman before the King of Gath, it is said, that he let his
spettle fall down upon his beard, 1 Samuel 21. 13. And the word which we
translate, Egg, signifies Health, and the verb, to be healthy. Chap. 39. 4.
of this book, Their young ones are in good liking. So, Isa. 38. verse. 16. But
I leave this, as a very diseased and sickly Interpretatiion.

I shall therefore pass from these, to our own rendering, Is In albumine
vitelli.
there any taste in the white of an Egg? The word signifies strictly, but the
yolke of the Egg, so Mr Broughton, Is there any taste in the white of the
yolke? And in the root to wax fat or strong; and it is therefore taken for the
yolke of the Egg, because that is the fatter, grosser, and more condense part
of the Egg. As the white being the thinner, and much like spettle, is
therefore expressed by a word, which also signifies spettle.

The white of an egg, is an embleame of things, without taste or savor. And
so the sum of all is, that Job in this place by a Proverbiall speech (for so
I take this to be) intends only thus much, that he had very infipid tastlesse
things presented to him; such as he found to relish at all in, such as no way
raised his appetite or quickened his stomach to receive them, all were
unseason'd and flat. In the next words he goes yet higher, even to the highest
Antipathy against them.

Verse. 7. The things which my soul refused to touch, are as my sorrowful
meat. Here is the application and explication of both the former similitudes.
The things which my soul refused; that is, the things Anima. (...), partem,
scilicet animae qua concupiscimus no^at hoc loco.
which I exceedingly refused or abhominated, (The soul is here taken for the
appetite) As to desire with the soul, notes a strong intension of desire,
(Isa. 26. 9.) With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my
spirit within me will I seek thee early That is, I have most vehemently
desired, and in my most retired* thoughts sought the Lord, When the soul is
expressed to do that which nothing can do but the soul, it imports the
highest actings of the soul in doing it. To desire with the soul, implies the
sweetest delight, and so to refuse with the soul, implies the bitterest
aversation, a refusal to the uttermost. The word, refuse, is proper to the
nauseating of the stomach; at the sight of any filthy thing, (Isa. 30. 22.)
Thou shall defile the covering of the graven images, etc. Thou shall cast them
away as a menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto them, get ye hence. So here,
the things which my soul refuses, as a man refuses a filthy clout, or, as he
should refuse that which is most loathsome, then any filthy clout, an Image or
an Idol.

These things (says he) are now my sorrowful meat, or, the meat of my
sorrow; The terms of the latter clause are at farthest distance from, and
opposition with that which went before. Not to touch a thing, notes the
greatest aversation from it; and to have a thing given us as meat, notes our
greatest communion with it. That which a man will not touch with his finger,
how far is he from chewing it between his teeth, or letting it down into his
stomach, and digesting it into himself? So that Jobs meaning seems to be
this, that, what he desired to be the greatest stranger from, was now offered
to his nearest familiarity and acquaintance. He was now (as it were) to eat,
what before he would not touch, This we call sorrowful meat. Psalm. 127. 2. We
read of the bread of sorrow, that is bread gotten with sorrow, bread eaten
with sorrow or course bread, As bread of pleasure (Dan. 10. 3.) is fine bread:
here sorrowful meat is either unpleasant meat, or any meat eaten in that
time of his sorrow.

That relative (the Things) is not in the Hebrew, and so we may render word for
word thus, my soul refused to touch them as my sorrowful meat. Or as
another, My mind refuses to touch them; these are plainly, the very sickness
of my meat. As if he had said: I am so far, from being refreshed with these
that (the truth is) they make my very meat, and so my whole life unpleasant to
me.

Mr. Broughton varies the latter clause: Those things which I have loathed to
touch, are now the very sickness of my flesh. The word (Lechem) which we
translate meat, or prepared flesh, signifies also living flesh, in the Syriacke
and Arabique languages, as the learned Grammarians observe: Besides, we render
the word (Lechem) flesh, Zeph. 1. 17. Their blood shall be powered out as dust,
and their flesh as dung, Hence he translates, These things are to me as the
sickness of my flesh; That is, the things which my soul refused to touch, are
now brought very near, and laid close upon me, as sickness or soars cleave
unto, and are in the flesh, or they trouble me as much as the sickness of my
flesh.

The right application of these words, is as difficult as the translation of
them; there are diverse ways to make out the sense; I shall reduce them unto
two: Either, first, That all these unsavory, tastlesse, sorrowful meats;
which Job speaks of, are but the shadows of his afflictions and troubles,
received from the hand of God. Or, Secondly, That they are shadows of the
counsels and reproves, which he had received from the mouth of his friends.
Nauseabam ego quondam ad hujusmodi aerumnas, movebant mihi stomachum, squ^lor,
paupertas, vilior^cibus, ulcerna, sanios, verss nunc vero his ipsie abunde
pascor, Pined.


First, Some refer and apply all to the troubles, which were upon Job: and so
these words are a fuller justification of himself, that he had great cause to
complain, because his grass and fodder, that is comforts suitable to man's
nature (as they to a beasts) were taken from him, and he was now fed and dieted
with unsavory meat, meat without salt, the white of an egg, distasteful
grievous afflictions, very gall and wormwood; The things which heretofore my
soul refused to touch, are as my meat; I am put (as it were) to feed upon
that, which I would not willingly come near: poverty and soars, sorrows and
worms are my companions, and my cates.

From that sense note, What at one time we loath, at another time may be our
diet. We have a saying, what is one man's meat, is another man's poison; but it
may fall out to the same man, that what he disgusted and avoided as poison he
shall be constrained to receive for his meat and portion. Lam. 4. 5. They that
did feed delicately, are desolate in the streets, they that were brought up in
scarlet, embrace dunghils: When those gallants were in scarlet, how did their
souls loath to touch a dunghill? they loathed to touch it with their feet, but
now they must hug it in their arms, and lay it in their bosoms; they
embrace dunghils. How many have been brought from faring deliciously, from
wearing purple and fine linen every day, to scraps and rags, to hunger and
nakedness every day. The Lord threatens the nice delicate dames of Jerusalem
with such things, as their proud spirits and naughty souls refused to touch,
Isa. 3. 24. It shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell, there shall be
a stink; and instead of a girdle, a rent; and in stead of well set hair,
baldness; and instead of a stomacher, a girding with sackcloath; and burning
instead of beauty. Take heed of coyness and curiosity: many a dainty tooth
has been taught by hunger, to know bones, and water for a crust of bread.

Observe secondly, That which makes afflictions most grievous to us, is the
unsuitablenesse of our spirits to afflictions: Delight and content, consist in
suitableness of the object to our affections and desires. God offers
spiritual food to the natural man, but his soul refuses to touch it; he
loathes Angels food, and is weary of the manna of the word; The precious
Gospel, the bread of life, is an affliction to him, because his heart is
unsuitable to it; how will such be afflicted at the last, when they find, That,
as their sorrowful meat for ever, which their souls will for ever refuse to
touch. They, who loath Christ and his ways, shall find nothing in the end to
feed upon but what is most contrary to their appetite, even fire and brimstone,
and an horrible tempest, these shall be the portion of their cups, and the
meat in their dish for ever. How sorrowful will that meal be?

But we may rather apply all to the words of Eliphaz, in the two former
Chapters: And Jobs ready submission in the first and second Chapters, to the
afflicting hand of God, argues for him that afflictions, how grievous soever,
were not the things which his soul refused to touch. And the apprehension of a
learned interpreter, atisfies me in it, This sense (says he) is too low for a
man Sensus humilior est, quam hominem deceat gravioribm malis exagtiatum.
Pined. (...).
afflicted with troubles, far above these, which concerned his outward man.
The Septuagint are expressly for this opinion, who translate those words, Is
there any taste in the white of an egg? thus Is there any taste in vain words?
they are so far off the judgment that these unsavory things, the things
which Jobs soul refused to touch, and the white of the egg, in the Text, are
all meant of vain words, that they put it into the very text. It is a usual
boldness with them, and a very unwarrantable one, to vary so from the words of
the Original, and make their gloss the text, but it shows us, how strongly
they were engaged to that sense; Most of the Greek writers concur with them
in it, viz. that Joh aims at the counsels and speeches of Eliphaz, which
wanted the seasoning of wisdom and prudence, yea of truth and soundness, as
applied to the spirit of so sick a man, as Job was.

And besides, many modern writers are clear in the same apprehension, giving
the sum of all plainly to this effect, as the mind of Job in those fore going
passages; I would not have complained of the things which ye have spoken, if
they had been meat for me, but I assure you, your counsels are not nourishing:
I can find no food, much less any sweetness or fatness in them; Your
counsels want the due seasoning of wisdom, and the right temperament of holy
zeal: They are either unsavory or tastlesse, Taneum abest ut sermonibus
vestris recreet, aut little condimento reficiatur vita mea, ute contra ^^bum
ipsum mihi amariore^ vitamque injucundiorem redd^t. Jun. Absit ut vir s^nctu
aliquando amicorum suorum dicta despexerit, qui and humilio servut fueris. Greg.
saplesse stuff; Such, as I am so far from being refreshed with, that indeed
they are a burden to me; and the remedy you prescribe me, is worse then my
disease. How can you expect, that I should submit or subscribe to what you have
spoken, or that I should rest and acquiesse in your reproves or advices,
seeing I assure you, they are not for me, they hit my state or spirit no more,
then unsavory meat does my palate; or that which I abhor to touch, can
please my taste: And therefore, with my soul, I refuse and reject what you have
spoken; And you have not only not satisfied me all this while, but you have
vexed or tired me, and instead of mitigating my sorrows, have added to them.

But an objection arises against this; and one of the Ancients is very angry
with those, who make this application to the counsels of Eliphaz, as if Job had
rejected them, as unfit food, and unsavory meat. Let no man (says he) think
that this holy man despised the counsel of his friend, who himself was
humble, as a fervant.

To which I answer, That the counsels of Eliphaz, are to be considered, either
in the doctrine, or in the use. His counsels, in the doctrine of them; were
good and savoury, he spoke wholesome food; but as to Jobs case, he was quite
mistaken in their use: and so instead of easing, troubled him. A Physician may
give his sick patient; that which is good in it self, very cordial and
sovereign, and yet it may kill him instead of curing him, if it be not proper
for his body, and his disease. Thus it is also in giving counsel what we
speak, must be fitted to the person, and to the season; There are many good
counsels, of which we may say, as Hushai did of Achitophels, ill ones, 2 Sa.
17. 7. They are not good at this time. That which is good counsel to a man at
one time, may be, or might have been, ill, to the same man at another, I have
many things to say, says Christ, but ye cannot bear them now, Joh. 16. 12.
And that which one man can bear, another cannot at the same time. And
therefore the Apostle was made all things to all men, 1 Cor. 9. 2. And
accounted himself debtor, both to the wise, and to the foolish, to the learned
and unlearned, to the weak, and to the strong; that is, he looked upon it as
his duty, to speak truths, suiting the state of every degree and sort of men;
which is the meaning of his rule to all the dispencers of holy mysteries, that
they divide the word aright: The rightnesse respects, not only, or not so much
the subject or word divided, as the object, or persons ^ Tim. 2. 15.
to whom the division is to be made, in giving every one his portion, or food
convenient for him. One man may surfeit with that which another digests kindly,
what fattens a second, may sicken or starve a third. This plainly is the
meaneing of Job; what Eliphaz had said, was not savoury food for him, nor
dressed for one in his condition: His soul did even refuse to touch, what he
spoke, because his soul was not of that temper, for which Eliphaz had fitted
his speech; He was a Physician of no value to him, because he brought a wrong
potion, and mistook his case; his was good searching physic for the foul
stomach, and gross spirit of a hypocrite: but it is enough to kill the heart
of an upright-heart, when God seems angry with him, and appears against him,
when he is smitten without. and smitten within, by sore afflictions of mind and
body; then for his comforters to smite him with their tongues, to lay at him
with hard words, and wound him with their unreasonable jealousies, then for his
counselors and helpers to be angry with, and opposite against him too. Observe
hence;

That not only words untrue, but words misapplied, are unsavory, and may be
dangerous. They are no food, and they may be poison. Prudence in applying, is
the salt and seasoning of what is spoken. As a word spoken in the right season
is precious, and upon the wheel, so is a word right placed: When that faith
full Prophet (Ezekiel. 13.) reproves the false prophets, he says, They dawbed
with untempered mortar; ver. 10. it is the word of the text: and why was theirs
untempered mortar? even, because they applied the word of God wrong. They made
sad the hearts of those, whom God would have refreshed, and they cheared the
spirits of those, whom God would have sadned; they slay the souls that should
not dye, and save the souls alive, that should not live; This was untempered
mortar: The Apostle advises all, Col. 4 6. Let your speech be always with
grace, seasoned with salt. And speech must be seasoned, not only with the falt
of truth, but with the salt of wisdom and discretion: and therefore the
Apostle adds, that ye may know how to answer every one; that is, that you may
give every man an answer, fitting his case, and the present constitution of his
spirit. Of some have compassion (says the Apostle Jude, ver. 22.) making a
difference, and others save with fear. This shows the holy skill of managing
the word of God, when we make a difference of our patients, by our different
medicines, and not serve all out of the same box. Hence our Lord calls those
great Teachers of the Gospel, and dispensers of his Oracles, Light, and Salt;
You are the Light of the world, and you are the salt of the earth, because they
were to speak savoury things to every person, to every palate, as well, as to
enlighten them with knowledge, and prevent or cure the corruption of their
manners, and keep their lives sweet. As there is an unsavourinesse in persons,
when they are mis-employed, so there is an unsavourinesse in speeches, when
they are mis-applied. The history of the Church, speaks of one Eccebolius, who
changed religion so often, and was so unsettled, that at last Conculcate me
salem insipidum Niceph.
he cast himself down at the congregation door, and said, Trample upon me,
for I am unsavory salt. And that word (though in it self a truth) which is
unseasonably delivered, or unduly placed, may be cast at the doors of the
Congregation, to be trampled on, for (in this sense) it is unsavory salt; Such
corrupt the word, and their's is, but corrupt communication, such as cannot
minister grace unto the hearers, and often grieves the holy Spirit of God.
These workmen, for their ill division of the word of God, have reason enough
to be ashamed; and the Lord may justly reprove them, as he did Jobs friends,
Chap. 42. 7. Ye have not spoken of me (nor of my ways) the thing that is right.

JOB Chap. 6. Verse. 8, 9, 10, etc. O that I might have my request! and that God
would grant me the thing that I long for!

Even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose his hand
and cut me off.

Then should I yet have comfort, yea, I would harden my self in sorrow; Let
him not spare, for I have not concealed the words of the holy One, etc.


IN the former part of this Chapter, we have had Job defending his former
complaint of life, and his desire of death. In this context, from the 8th
verse, unto the end of the 12th, he renews and reinforceth that desire. He
not only maintains and justifies what he had done, but does it again; begging
for death as heartily and importunately, as he did in the third Chapter, O that
I might have my request! and that God would grant me the thing that I long for!

The request it self, is laid down in the 8^h and 9^h verses: and the reasons
strengthening it, in the 10, 11, and 12, verses. So, these 5 verses are
reduceable to these two heads;

1. The renewing of his desire to dye. 2. An enlargement of reasons confirming
that desire.
O that I might have my request! It is such a vehement desire, and so expressed,
as David's was, 2 Samuel 23. 15. And David longed, and said, Oh that one would
give me drink of the water of the well of Bethlem, which is by the gate. David
did not long more to taste a cup of that water, then Job did to taste the cup of
death.

The sum and scope of Jobs thoughts in this passage, may be conceived thus.
He would assure his friends, that his faith was firm, and his comforts flowing
from it, very sweet; That, it was not impatience under the troubles of this
life, but assurance of the comforts of the next; which caused him so often to
call for death. That, these comforts caused his heart to triumph and glory in
the very approaches of the most painful death, and made him despise, and
lightly to esteem all the hopes of life. That, he was gone further then the
motives which Eliphaz used, from the hopes of a restitution to temporal
happiness: he now was pitched upon, and lodged in the thoughts of eternal
happiness. That, he called for death, not, as that, with which he had made any
Covenant, or was come to any agreement with, but only, as that, which would
bring him to his desired home, The one Thing he desired. That his comforts had
not a foundation in a grave, where all things are forgotten, but in the
Covenant of God, who remembers mercy for ever; and therefore, it should not
trouble him, to die, before he was restored to health, riches and honor (which
his friends proposed to him, as a great argument of comfort, and of patience)
For in death he should have riches and glory; and hence it was, that he had
rather endure the extremest pains of death, then stay to receive any outward
comforts in this life. His desires to be dissolved, were not so much, from the
sense of his present pain (for he would harden himself to endure, yet more)
as from the apprehension of future joy; This, was not a fancy or a dream, but
he had good proof, and real evidence of it in the whole course of his life
which had been as a continued acting of the word of God, and to a fitting him
for nearest communion with God. This in general.

The letter of the Hebrew runs thus, Who would give me, that my request, or
that my petition might come. He had sent up a request, a prayer, a prayer for
death, and he thought his prayer too long gone upon that message; Prayer was
not quick enough in its return from Heaven, every hour was a year till he
heard of it, therefore (says he) O that some body would give me, that my
request might come back again unto me! The word whereby (...)
he expresses his request, notes a very strong desire, a strong cry, a strong
prayer; implying, that Job had sent up mighty requests, or strong cries about
it. As it is said of our Lord Christ, Heb. 5. That in the days of his flesh,
he sent up strong cries unto God, who was able to deliver him; Christ sent up
strong cries to be delivered from death, and Job sent up strong cries for
death. A word of the same root, signifies the grave; the grave is a craving, a
begging thing; the grave is never satisfied, as it is in the Proverbs, The
grave says not, it is enough: And the grave is therefore expressed by a word
that signifies to desire, or request, or to ask a thing importunately; because,
the grave, has a mouth, as it were, continually open to ask, and beg, and cry
out for more morsells, it consumes all, and is never full; such a desire Job
put forth for death.

And that God would grant me the thing that I long for! It is a repetition of
the same desire, in other words. What it is to long, has been opened in the
third Chapter, ver. 21. Who long for death: Here Job renews the same suit
again, O that I might have the thing that I long for! or the thing which I
expect with great expectation and vehemence of affection. I shall not stay upon
it: But only give you the general sense a little varied.

In this passage, Job shows himself assured, that his comforts should not
end, though his life ended, before he was restored to earthly comforts. And he
thus seems to answer Eliphaz, who had made large promises of outward felicity.
I am not stayed at all in Job expecta^ionem proximam facit mortem tanquam eam,
quae patiendi ultimam and quietis ac faeli ^itatis primam representet li^^^^.
my desires to die, because I may possibly live in greater worldly honor and
fulness, then ever I enjoyed: All that is in the creature, is below wy
longing, I have not a sweet tooth after worldly dainties: I shall not envy any
who cut-live me to enjoy them, let them divide my portion, whatsoever it may
be, among them also: The thing which I long for, is death (not for it self)
but as that, which will bring me to the last of my ill days, and the first of
my best. Jobs thoughts were in a higher form then his friends: They thought a
golden offer of riches, would have made him a gogge to live. But Jobs heart
lived above these, even upon the riches of eternal life; To enjoy which, he
even longs for temporal destruction, and cutting off.

I have spoken at large in the third Chapter, concerning the lawfulness of
such a request, and how far Job might be approved in it; therefore I need not
discuss it here; Only observe in general, That

A praying soul, is an expecting soul.

Job had prayed, and prayed earnestly, and though it was but a prayer to die,
yet he lived in the expectation of an answer. When prayer is sent up unto God,
then the soul looks for it is return. Prayer is as seed sown: After this
spiritual husbandry, the soul waits for the precious fruits of Heaven. Psalm.
62. 1. My soul waits upon God; and (Psalm. 85. 8.) I will hearken what the
Lord God will say; Job had sent up his request, and now he was hearkening for
an answer. O that I might have the thing that I look for! Habbakkuk in the
second of that prophecy, verse 1. having prayed about the great concernments
of those times, resolves, I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the
Tower, and will watch to see, what he will say unto me. They who send
Ambassadors to foreign Princes, wait for a return. Thus it is with the
soul, having put up it is request and sent an Embassy to God.

Observe, Secondly.

Answer of our prayer is the grant of God.

Nothing stands between us and our desires, but his will. If he sign our
petition, no creature can hinder us of our expectation.

Observe, Thirdly,

God often keeps the petitions of his servants, by him unanswered.

Observe, Fourthly,

The return of prayer is the souls solace and satisfaction.

As cold water to a thirsty soul, so is good news from that far Country,
Prove. 25. 25. O that my request might come; and O that I might have the thing
that I long for!

Would you know what his request was? He explains that in the 9^h verse, and a
man would wonder, that one should be so very earnest to have such a request.
Many have prayed to God to save and deliver them, but how unnatural does this
prayer seem, to be cut off and destroyed? Yet the thing which Job does more
then pray for, long for, is this, That it would please God to destroy him. and
that he would let loose his hand and cut him off.

That it would please God to destroy me. Some read, That he who has begun,
would make an end in destroying of me; For the word signifies both to be
willing to do a thing, and likewise to begin to do a thing; therefore they
(...) Significat li^ere velle, inchoare; acquiescere in re quapiam, eamque tota
voluntate amplecti.
make out the sense thus, That he who has begun thus to destroy me, to tear
and consume me, would finish his work, and make an end of me; As if Job had
said, I am already near unto destruction, a borderer upon the grave. God has
begun to destroy me, I would have him to go on and perfect that work. As in
works of mercy, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. He is the Rock, and his work is perfect. When
he begins to deliver, he will make an end. So likewise, when he begins to
destroy, he can make an end too; Job desires, that his afflictions might be
perfected, to the destruction of his dying body, and that mercy might begin in
the triumphs of his soul.

But rather take it in the other sense, as we render it, To be willing to do a
thing; Even that it would please God, or, even that God would be willing to
destroy me! As if he had said, I find as it were a kind of unwillingnesse in
God, to make an end of me, his bowels seem to yerne over me, he seems yet to
be upon the dispute, whether to cut me quite off, or no: now I even desire that
God would lay aside that his tenderness and compassion, that he would
determine and resolve to destroy me, that he would acquiesce, and fully rest
satisfied in that resolution.

The word here used, to destroy, notes to beat a thing to powder, (...)
Contudit, contrivit, comminuit.
or to beat a thing to pieces, Psalm. 143. 3. He has smitten my life down to
the ground, that is, He has beaten me as it were to dirt: So Job here, I would
have the Lord even beat me to dust or dirt. The word is used for contrition of
spirit, Isa. 57. 15. I dwell with him that is of an humble heart, and of a
contrite spirit: That is, with him, that has a spirit beaten to powder, or all
to pieces, as any hard thing is with a hammer or pestle; A hard heart, is a
heart all in a lump, condensate and closed together; but an humble, a
repenting heart, is a heart beaten small and ground to powder; Thus Job desires
here, O that it would please God to beat my life down to dust, and break me
all to shatters; that he would crush me (as Eliphaz spoke in the 14th Chapter,
ver. 19.) as a Moth.

Observe then in how sad a condition, Job was, who not only makes, but renewes
such a request, as this. Some upon a sudden pang wish to die, and hastily
call for death, yet are willing it should take it is own time, and come
leisurely: and as soon as death appears, they are crying, as hard for life. It
is rare for any man's second thoughts, to keep up, to such desires. Job spoke
once, and he speaks it over again; O that I might die, yea he wooes
destruction, and is an importunate suitor for the grave. How sad is a man's
outward condition, when he has only this complaint left, that he cannot die?
when a man has no help, but in destruction, or healing but in a deeper wound?
Job in this appears like a man (that is to be pressed to death) lying under a
heavy weight, yet the weight not heavy enough to crush him to death, he cries
out, more weight, more weight. It will be a kindness to crush out my breath
and bowels; the greatest favor I expect in this world, is, but to have more
weight laid upon them, that I may die. Some of the Martyrs, when the fire was
scant, have cried out, more fire. The cruellest flame was their friend, and the
more the fire raged the more merciful it was to them. The book of our Martyrs
reports of reverend Latimer, that when he was giving witness to the truth, and
glorifying the name of Christ in the fire; he cried out, Oh, I cannot burn,
the fire came not fast enough upon him. Such this expression of Job seems to
be, Oh, I cannot die, I cannot be destroyed, I cannot perish yet; O that the
hand of God would lay more weight upon me, that I might die. He seems to ask
such a courtesy, as that Amalekite* said, King Saul craved of him, 2 Samuel 1. 9.
Stand I pray thee upon me, and slay me: for anguish is come upon me, because my
life is yet whole in me. This is the favor, the only favor, that remains for
me. I am capable of no worldly comfort, but a quicker dispatch out of the world.

And that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off. Here is the same
Petition, though other language, That he would (...) Loco movit, evulsit,
excussit.
let loose his hand. That Is an elegant expression; The word signifies to loose
the bond, that a man may have use of his hands or feet. As prisoners are
loosed, Psalm. 146. 2. The Lord loses the prisoners: So that it is, as if Job
had said, Lord thou have been smiting and wounding me, but I see thou have not
given thy hand the full scope, thy hand is as it were bound or tied behind
thee: As you know, a man that has great advantage of another, or is much his
over-mach, will say to him, I will fight with thee with Translatio ab his qui
manum vinctam habent
my hand tied behind me. The truth is, God is able to contend with all the
creatures, with his hand bound behind him, with his hands fast bound, that is,
without putting forth the least part (to speak on) of his power; He can
overcome with speaking; Job observing here, that God contended with him (as it
were) with his hands bound or tied up, desires now that, God would give
himself full scope, and put out his strength, and not strike, as if his hand
were a prisoner. And he may have a respect in speaking thus to the Non se gera^
erga me, instar hominis colligatam habentis manum.
restraint or binding up of Satan's power, In this work Satan was Gods hand;
God put power into the hand of Satan, All that he has, is in thy power, or in
thy hand, Chap. 1. 12. First, God loosened Satan's hand, to take away his
estate. Next, he let loose his hand a little further to the afflicting of his
body; but says God, spare his life, there he bound up his hand again. Now Job
alluding (probably) to that restraint: Lord (says he) loosen thy hand a third
time, do not only loosen it, to take away my estate, to take away my health
and strength, but O that thou would loosen it, to take away my life too,
enlarge I pray thee Satan's Commission, who is thy hand, let it quite loose,
that he may make an end of me, and cut me off.

The word here used to cut off, comes up to heighten Jobs sense (...)
Inexplebilem cupiditatem atque immanem aviditatem vulnerandi, and humani
sanguinu perfundendi sign ficat.
still, signifying to cut off, with an unsatiable appetite of revenge; As if he
should say, Cut me off, spare me not, spare not my blood, do it, as they, who
are most greedy of blood, and thirst most vehemently after revenge. Let Satan,
that blood-sucker, come with as great revenge (thy hand being loosened from
restraining his) as ever the greatest Tyrant hastened with, to suck the blood of
innocents; Let him greedily cut me off, even, as if he were to have some great
gain, or get some rich booty by my blood; What profit is there in my blood?
(says David, Psalm. 30. 9.) Let him make what profit he can of my blood, says
Job The word signifies to covet or desire gain; And it notes the worst kind of
covetousness, covetousness of filthy lucre, or covetousness of bloody
lucre. Hence Job says: Let God cut me off, as if he were to have profit, or
raise Avide me absumat, quasi ex mea morte ingens lucrum reportaturus, Pined.
himself a revenew out of my blood; or let Satan come upon me, and take his
penny-worths out of my blood, let him murder me, as if he were to find all
manner of treasure in my bowels, and could thence fill and adorn all his
chambers of darkness with spoils. We may note from hence;

First, That God dispenceth and acts his power as he pleases. He loses his
hand gradually, as to him seems good.

First, To the estate, then to the body, and when he wills, he can reach the
life. Secondly observe;

If God put out his power, no creature can stand before it. If God do but let
loose his hand, man is cut off presently; It is but as a little twigge, or as
grass before the since, or before a sword, there is no more in it. As when God
opens the hand of his mercy; he satisfies the desire of every living thing,
Psalm. 145. 2. So when God loses the hand of his judgments, he takes away the
life and comforts of every living thing. God has a hand full of blessings and
mercies; if he please but to open that hand, all things are filled with
comfort: God has another hand full of judgments and afflictions; if he open or
loosen that, all creatures fall before him, like a withered leaf. The reason
why the enemies of God live and are mighty, is because God does not fully
loosen his hand against them: if he would but unprison his power, and let out
his hand, he can with ease destroy, and cut them off in a moment. Therefore the
prophet prays but for this one thing, Psalm. 74. 11. That God would pluck his
hand out of his bosom; why with drawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand?
pluck it out of thy bosom: Lord (says he) this is the reason, why enemies yet
prevail, thy hand is tied up, that is, Thine owe act has tied up thy hand, thy
will stays thy power, or thy power is hid in thy will. Gods power kept in by
his will, is his hand in his bosom. Among men, a hand in the bosom, is the
emblem of sloth, Prove, 19 24. Man hides his hand in his bosom, because he
will not be at the pains to work: God is said to hide his hand in his bosom,
when it is not his will and pleasure to work: therefore he says: Lord, if thou
would but let loose, and put out thy hand, all mine enemies shall be
consumed. And that is the reason, why there are such various dispensations of
providence in these times; when the enemy prevails, God with draws his hand,
he keeps his hand in his bosom. And when at any time his servants have
victory, it is, because his hand has liberty. If God holds his hand, men
stretch forth theirs in vain.

Observe; Thirdly,

Assurance of a better life will carry the soul with joy through the sorrows
and bitterest pains of death.

It was not any Stoical apathy, or ignorant regardlessenesse of life which
raised the heart of Job to these desires. He did not invite his end, like a
Roman, or a philosopher, or by the height and gallantry of natural courage,
set the world at naught, and bid defiance to destruction. But he had laid up a
good foundation against this day; upon this he builds his confidence. He knew,
as Paul, that he had Christ, while he lived, and should have gain when he
dyed; The joy which was set before him made him overlook the cross which was
before him. So much of his request, now he tells us the consequence, or effect
it would have upon him, in case it were granted.

Verse. 10. Then should I yet have comfort, yet I would harden my self in
sorrow; Let him, not spare, for I have not concealed the words of the holy One,
Then should I yet have comfort. If I had but this suit granted, I were
refreshed, notwithstanding all my sorrows, the very hope of death would revive
me. Nothing does so much refresh the soul, as the hearing of a Prayer, and the
grant of a desire; when desire comes it is as a tree of life (says Solomon)
therefore Job might well say, when my longing comes, I shall have comfort; and
lest any should think, that as David would not drink the water he so longed
for, when it was brought unto him: So when the cup of death should be brought
to Job, he might put it off somewhat upon those terms which David did, and
say, I will not drink it, for it is my blood, my death: therefore he adds,

Yea, I would harden my self in sorrow. As if he had said, though some call
hastily for death, and repent with as much haste, when death comes, yet not I,
I would harden my self, etc.

The Hebrew (to harden) has a threefold signification among the Jewish
writers, though it be used but this once only in all the (...) Significat. 1.
Solidare and roborare, 2. Calefarere, urere. 3 Orare, suppliciter praecari.
Scripture. And hence there is a threefold interpretation of these words, I
would harden my self in sorrow, It signifies,

1 To Pray or to beseech. 2 To heat or to Warm, yea to scorch and to burn. 3 To
harden or to strengthen, strengthening is hardening in a metaphor.
According to the first sense, the text is rendered thus, Then should I yet have
comfort, yea, I would pray in my sorrow, that is, I would pray yet more, for an
increase of my sorrow, that I might be cut off: If I had any hope, that my
request should be granted, this hope would quicken my desire, and I would pray
yet more, that I might obtain it.

Secondly, as the word signifies to warm or to heat, the sense is given thus,
Then should I have comfort, yea I would warm my self in my sorrow: And so it
refers it to those refreshings, which his languishing soul, his soul chilled,
as it were, with sickness and sorrows, should receive, upon the news of his
approaching death. This news (says he) would be as warm clothes to me, it Hac
spe certissin a moriendi incalescerem, refocillarer.
would fetch me again, out of my fainting, to heart of dying. But, besides a
warming or a refreshing heat, the word also notes scorching, burning heat. Mr.
Broughton takes that signification of the word; I shall touch that, and his
sense upon it, by and by.

We translate according to the third usage of the word. I would harden my self;
and so the construction is very fair, I should yet have comfort, yea, I would
harden my self in sorrow, that is, I would now set my self to endure the
greatest sorrows and afflictions, which could come upon me, for the destroying
and cutting off the thread of my life. And so, he seems in these words to
prevent an objection before hinted; Why Job, do thou desire to be cut off,
and to be destroyed? thou have more pain upon thee already, then thou art able
to bear; thou cryest out of what thou have: thou must think, when death comes,
thy wound will be deeper, and thy pain sharper? Job seems to answer, I have
considered that before, I know there will be a hard brunt at parting, I prepare
for it, and am thus resolved I would harden my self in sorrow; that is, I would
set my self to bear the pangs and agonies of death; if I had but this hope,
that my misery were near expiring. The Apostle uses that phrase (2 Timothy 2.
3.) in his advices to young Timothy. Thou as a good soldier of Jesus Christ,
endure hardness, or bear evil. As if he had said, thou do not know, what
hardship thou shall be put unto in thy ministry, I who am a veterane, (...)
an old beaten (though never conquered) soldier, in this warfare of Christ,
have been put to much hardship in my time; and from my own experience, I
advise thee, to inure thy self to hardship to lie hard, to fare hard, to work
hard, to hear hard words, and receive hard usage, A tender spirit and a
delicate body, which must have warm, and soft, and fine, and sweet
continually, is unfit for the warfare of the Gospel. Such a sense is here, I
know I must endure more, than now I do, but I would harden my self against
that time, and resolve to endure it, let come, what could come, I am resolved
and have forethought the worst.

Further, for the clearing of these words, it is considerable, that some
learned Interpreters put the two middle expressions into a parenthesis, and
read the whole thus, I should have comfort (though I should scorch with pain,
and though God should not spare me) for I have not concealed the words of the
holy One. One, thus, This yet is my comfort, even while I scorch with pain
Iunius.
and God does not spare me, that I have not concealed the words of the holy
One. Mr. Broughton (as I touched before) comes near this sense and translation.
So I should yet find comfort: though I parch in pain: when he would not spare;
For I kept not close the words of the most Holy. That is, when the long
expected hour of my death shall come, though God, to take away my life, should
heat the furnace of my affliction seven times hotter then hitherto, so that I
must parch in pain, yet I should have comfort. Or, take it in Master
Broughtons own gloss, in all these pangs; if God would make an end of me, it
should be my comfort, and I would take courage in my sickness to bear it, by
my joy, that I should die, because I professed the Religion of God. So that the
strength of Job, to bear the hand of God, was from the conscience of his former
integrity, in doing the will, and maintaining the truth of God.

Let him not spare. Job having taken up his hope, that he should have comfort,
(...) Pepercit clementia usus fuerit.
and this resolution, that he would harden himself in sorrow, speaks now, as
if he were at a point, let God do what he pleases, let him not spare; as if
he had said, what course soever the Lord shall see good to take for the cutting
me off, I am content he should go on with it, Let him not spare. The word
signifies to indulge or show mercy to him, whom, by all right a man might
justly destroy (Ezekiel. 5. 11.) Because thou have done thus and thus, says God
therefore will I also diminish thee, neither shall mine eye spare, neither will
I have any pity. Job seems to invite, what God threatens others, Let him not
spare, let him not have any pity, let him take his full swing in destroying of
me.

In this sense it is said, Romans 8. 32. That God spared not his own son: That
is he abated not any thing, which justice could inflict. Christ therefore saves
to the uttermost, because he suffered to the uttermost. He was not spared one
blow, one drop, one sigh, one sorrow, one shame, one circumstance of all, or
any one of these; which justice could demand, as a satisfaction for man's sin.
Yea though (in a sense) he cried to his father, that he might be spared yet he
was not.

There is a threefold mercy in God. There is a preventing mercy, mercy that
steps between us and trouble. And there is a delivering mercy, mercy that takes
us out of the hand of trouble: There is a third kind of mercy, coming in the
middle of these two, and that is called sparing mercy: and that is twofold;
First; sparing for the time, when God delays and stays long ere he strike.

Secondly, sparing for the degree, when the Lord moderates and mitigates,
abates and qualifies our sufferings, not letting them fall so heavy upon us,
as they might: This sparing mercy, stands (I say) in the middle of the two
former; it is not so much as preventing mercy, stopping trouble that it come
not; neither is it so much as delivering mercy, removing it, when it is come.
Now Job did not only, not ask delivering mercy, that he asked not sparing
mercy; Let him not spare me in the time, let him not delay or loose time, let
him come as soon as he will. And let him not spare me in the degree and
measure, let him strike me as hard, and lay his hand as heavily upon me, as he
will. David (Psalm. 39. 13.) makes this his request, O spare me that I may
recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more; That is, abate and
mitigate my sufferings that I die not, but Job desires not to be spared at
all. He rather says, take away all my strength, that I may go hence, and be
seen no more. Observe hence,

That the hope troubles will end, comfort, yea hardneth in bearing present
troubles. Then will I comfort my self then will I harden my self, let him not
spare, if I may have my request, and die. The sharpest sting of trouble, is,
that it is endless, and it is next to that, when we can not look to the end of
it, nor see any issue or way out of it; That which discourages the damned, in
bearing their sorrows, and softens both their flesh and spirits, to receive
home to the head, every arrow of wrath, and dart of vengeance, is, they see no
end, and are assured there will be none. They know, they cannot be cut off, and
therefore they cannot harden themselves in sorrow; no, that very consideration,
makes their hearts, which have been hardened to commit sin, tender to receive
punishment, and exactly sencible of their pains; could they see, that at last
they should be cut off, even they would be hardened to bear the torments of
Hell, in the mean time, though that time should be very long, yea as long as
time can be, only not endless. The pain it self, does not afflict so much,
as the thought that they shall be afflicted for ever: As the assurance, that
the glory of Heaven shall never end, infinitely sweetness it; so the assurance
that the pains of hell shall never end, infinitely sharpens them: And not to
see the ending of worldly troubles near, puts us further off from comfort, then
the bearing of those troubles. Therefore says Job, if I might be assured, that
God would cut me off I would harden my self in sorrow, and let not God spare;
I would not desire him to hold his hand, to mitigate or abate my pains. E^
haec mihi merces esset ejus seu pro eo, quod n^n occultavi unquam, sed
diligentis^ sime observavi and quam commendatissima habui verba Domini, Opin.
Nonnullorum Hebraeorum apud Merc.
Yea I would account every blow an embrace, and every wound a reward.

For not concealing the words of the holy One. In these words, Job gives the
reason, or an account of his renewed prayer and request to die. As the desire
of Job was strong and passionate, so likewise it was well grounded. He had a
very high reason, an excellent ground, upon which he bottomed this request to
die: His reason was spiritual, and therefore strong. He beggs to be delivered
from the troubles of his life, though by a painful death, because he was clear
in himself, that he had led a blameless life. That which set him above the
pains of bodily death was the tranquillity of his spirit in this testmony of
his conscience, I have not concealed the words of the holy One; As if he had
said, You may wonder why I should be so forward and ready to die, why I seem
so greedy after the grave, why I am such an importunate suitor for my
dissolution; The account I give you is this, I have the testimony of a good
conscience within me, notwithstanding all the troubles which are upon me,
notwithstanding all your harsh unfriendly accusations, jealousies and
suspicions of me, yet my own breast is my friend, my heart speaks me fair,
and gives me good words, even these, It tells me, that I have not concealed the
words Mirum est ut mihi non parcat quum illius verba non celarim neque
dissimulaverim. Aben Azr.
of the holy One: That I have not smothered any light he has sent me, that I
have not refused any council he has given me, that I have not wilfully
departed from any rule he has prescribed me, that I have been faithful to
God, to his cause, and to his truth, that I have declared his will, and spoken
his mind to others; that I have not hidden any thing he has given me in
charge to declare, or committed to my trust; the word of God has appeared in
my life and therefore I am not afraid, yea I have boldness to die, and to
appear before God.

I have not concealed] The word signifies to hide a thing, so as (...)
Significat, abscondere ne vidleatur vel audeatur, ne amplius appareat.
it be neither heard of or seen.

But may not we conceal the words of the most high? it is said of Mary, that
she hid the words of Christ in her heart and of David, that he hid the
commandments of God in his heart, Psalm. 119. 11. Did not the wise merchant
hide the treasure, namely Gospel truth (Math. 13. 44.) as soon as he had found
it? It should seem all these concealed the word of God; how then is it that Job
improves this, as a special point of comfort, that he had not concealed the
words of the holy One?

There is a double hiding, or concealment of the truth. There is first a
hiding from danger; Secondly a hiding from use. There is a hiding to keep a
thing safe, that others shall not take it from us; and there is a hiding to
keep a thing close, that others may not take the benefit of it, with us. When
it is said, that Mary, and David, and the wise Merchant hid the word of God, it
was, lest they themselves should lose it, lest any should deprive them of it,
they hid it from danger: They laid it up as a treasure in their hearts; but
they did not hide it from the knowledge, or use of others; and that is it which
Job affirms of himself, I have not concealed the words of the holy One.

And there are four ways by which the word of God is sinfully hid or
concealed, from all which Job seems to acquit himself.

The first is, when we conceal the word of God by our own silence; when we know
the word and truth of God, and yet we draw a veil over them, by not revealing
them: The Apostle Paul (Acts 20. 27.) acquits himself in this, to the Church of
Ephesus, I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole counsel of God; and
verse. 20. You know how I kept back nothing, that was profitable unto you*
Silence to what is spoken, is consent: and silence when we should speak, is
concealment.

There is a second way of concealing the word of God, and that is by silencing
others: Some conceal the words of the holy One themselves, and they cannot
endure that others should publish them: The chief Priests and the Rulers (Acts
4 18.) charged Peter and John, that they should not speak at all, nor teach
any more in the name of Jesus: They would stop the Apostles mouths from
speaking the words of the holy One: These keep the truth locked up (as Christ
charges the Lawyers, Luke 11. 52.) by taking away the key of knowledge.

Thirdly, There is a concealing of the word of God, under false glosses and
misinterpretations, or a hiding of it under errors and misconstructions; This
is a very dangerous way of concealing the words of the holy One: The Pharisees
made the law of God of none effect, by their expositions, as well as by their
traditions, by the sense they made of it, as well as by the additions they made
unto it.

Fourthly, The word of the holy One, may be concealed in our practice and
conversations. The Apostle exhorts (Phil. 2. 16.) To hold forth the word of
life in a pure conversation. The lives of Christians should publish the word of
life. The best way of preaching the word, is by the praictse of the word. The
wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness, that is, who,
by their unrighteous practices and ungodly conversations, imprison, fetter,
restrain and keep in the word: Man's holy life is the loudest Proclamation of
the word of God. And a sinful life is the concealment of it.

Job here acquits himself from all these concealements; I have not e^ncealed
the words of the holy One, either by my own silence, or by imposing silence
upon others, I have not concealed the word of the holy One, by my own corrupt
glosses and interpretations, nor by a corrupt practice and conversation: I have
desired and endeavored, that the whole word of God might be visible in my
actions, and audible in my speeches, that I might walk clothed, as it were,
with the holy counsels and commandments of my God.

There is a reading of the words, different from this. Whereas we Malo
potentialiter exponi omnia: utinam, inquit, non parceret: Nequenim occultarem
dicta sancti, sed ejus in me sententiam praedicarem and laudarem. Merc.
say, I have not concealed the words of the holy One, that gives it thus, I
would not conceal the words of the holy One, and so the word of the holy One,
is taken, not for the truths of God in general, but for that special word of
decree or sentence which God should pass out against him; A if he had said.
Let not God spare me, let him write ^s bitter a sentence against me, as he
pleases, for my part, I would not conceal the, word of the most High, but I
would publish his judgment and sentence against me, yea I would praise him and
extol him for it. The vulgar Latin to this sense, I would not contradict the
word of the holy One; Let him not spare me, for as for my part, whatsoever God
shall determine and resolve, whatsoever word God shall speak concerning me, I
will never withstand or open my mouth against it. This is a truth, and carries
in it a high frame of holiness, when we can bring our hearts to this, that let
God write as bitter things against us, as he pleases, we will never contradict
his word or decree, but our minds and spirits shall submit wholly and fully to
his dispositions of us, and dispensations toward us: It is as clear an
evidence of grace, to be passive under, as to be active in, the word of God.
Not to contradict his writ, for our sufferings, as not to conceal what he
speaks for our practice. But I rather stick to the former interpretation, Job
giving this as a reason of his great confidence in pursuing his petition for
death, because he had been so sincere, holding forth the word of God both in
doctrine and in life.

And so we may observe from it. First,

That the testimony of a good conscience, is the best ground of our
willingness to die. That man speaks enough for his willingness to die, who
has lived speaking and doing the will of God; and he is in a very miserable
case, who has no other reason why he desires death, but only because he is
in misery. This was one, but not the only reason, why Job desired death, he had
a reason transcending this, I have not concealed the words of the holy One, and
I know if, I have not concealed the word of God, God will not conceal his mercy
and loving kindness from me. David bottoms his hopes of comfort in sad times,
upon this, Psalm. 40. 9, 10. I have preached righteousness in the great
Congregation, I have not refrained my lips O Lord thou know (he was not
actively or politickly silent) I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart
(if lay there, but it was imprisoned or stifled there) I have declared thy
faithfulness: and thy salvations I have not concealed thy loving kindness and
thy truth, from the great Congregation. Upon this he falls a praying with a
mighty spirit of believing, verse. 11. Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from
me, O Lord, let thy loving kindness and thy truth continually preserve me: for
innumerable evils have compassed me about.

The remembrance of our active faithfulness to the truth of God, will bear up
our hearts in hoping for the mercy of God. He that in David's, and in Jobs sense
can say, I have not concealed the words of the most high, may triumph over
innumerable evils, and shall be more then a conqueror over the last and worst
of temporal evils, death. God cannot long conceal his love from them, who have
not concealed his truth.

Secondly observe, positively;

That the counsels of God, his truths, must be revealed.

God has secrets which belong not to us, but then he puts them not forth in a
word, nor writes them in his book; he keeps his secrets close in the cabinet of
his decrees and counsels; but, what he reveals either in his word, or by his
works, man ought to reveal too. It is as dangerous, if not more, to conceal
what God has made known, as to be inquisitive to know what God has concealed.
Yea, it is as dangerous to hide the word of God, as it is to hide our own sins.
And we equally give glory to God, by the profession of the one, as by the
confession of the other. Paul with much earnestness professes his integrity
about this, as was even now touched, Act. 20. Fourthly observe;

That the study of a godly man, is to make the word of God visible. I have not
concealed, that is, I have made plain, I have revealed, or I have published the
words of the holy One; Much of Jobs mind is concealed under that word, I have
not concealed. For in this negative there is an affirmative; as if he had said,
this has been my labor and my business, my work in the world, to make known
so much of the will of God, as I know. This was the work of Christ here below,
Father I have glorified thee upon earth, I have finished the work, which thou
gave me to do, Joh. 17. 4. What this work was, he shows, verse. 6th, I have
manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world. Lasty
observe;

That it is a dangerous thing for any man to conceal the word of God, either
in his opinion, or in his practice. For it is, as if Job had said if I had ever
concealed the words of God, I had bin but in an ill case, at this time; God
might now justly reveal his wrath against me, if I had concealed his word from
others; or God might justly hide his mercies from me, if I had hid his word
from men* Smothered truths, will one time or other set the conscience in a
flame, and that which Jeremiah spoke once, concerning his resolution to
conceal the word of God, and the effect of it: will be a truth upon every one,
who shall set himself under a resolution to do, what he under a temptation
did; Jer. 20. 9. Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any
more in his name: what follows? Then his word was in my breast, as a burning
fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing. If a gracious heart
has taken up such a sudden resolution to conceal the word of God, he quickly
repents of it, or smarts under it: He finds that word, as a burning fire in
his bones, he is not able to bear it. I was weary with forbearing (says the
prophet) Nothing in the world will burden the conscience, so much as concealed
truth: and they who have taken a meditated resolution, that they will not
reveal the word of God, may be sure, that word will one time or other reveal
it self to them, in the Light and heat of a burning fire, seeding upon their
consciences.

I have not concealed the words; whose words? The words of the Holy One. Who is
that? The Holy One, is a periphrasis, for God, When you hear that Title, The
holy One, you may know who is meant. This is a Title too big for any but a
God; All holiness is in God, and God is so holy, that properly he only is
Holy; Hence the Scripture sets God forth under this, as a peculiar attribute;
The Holy One; The Prophets often use this addition or style, The Holy One of
Israel.

The Holy One; Is One separate or set apart from all filthiness (...)
Seperatus.
and uncleanness; No evil dwells with God, none comes near him. Therefore he
is The Holy One, He is so separated from evil, that he cannot behold evil, or
look on iniquity (Hab. 1. 13.) except with a vindictive eye. Sin never got a
good look from God, or ever shall.

Further, God is called The Holy One, in three respects. First, Deus vocatur
Sanctus Israel vel Sanctus simpliciter, vel quod sancte a nobis colendus est,
vel quod ipse solus vere* sanctus est.
Because he is all holy in himself; Secondly, Because we receive all holiness
from him: Thirdly, Because we are to serve him in holiness and righteousness
all our days. A Holy God must have a holy Service. God is The Holy One;

First, In his Nature; his essence is purity. Or, he is essential purity.

Secondly, he is holy in his Word; those are frequent adjuncts of the word of
God; holy, pure and clean.

Thirdly, He is holy in his works: There is not the least imaginable stain or
defilement upon any thing he has done.

These three put together, lift up the glory of God in this title The Holy One.
He that is holy throughout in his nature, holy in his word, holy in his works,
is the Holy One; Yea, he is, as Moses styles him in his triumphant song, Exodus
15. Glorious in holiness, A glorious holy One.

Or again, We may consider God The holy One;

First, Radically and fundamentally, because the Divine nature is the root and
original, the spring of all holiness and purity; All holiness is in God, and
there is no holiness to be had, but in God alone.

Secondly, God is The holy One, by way of example and pattern, or in regard of
the rule and measure of holiness: (1 Pet. 1. 16.) Be ye holy, as I am holy;
the Holiness of God, it is the exemplar and pattern of all the holiness,
that is in the creature.

Thirdly, God is The holy One, by way of motive; He is, as the rule of
holiness, so likewise the reason of our holiness; therefore another Scripture
says, Be ye holy, for I am holy, I am The holy One, and that is the reason,
why you must be holy too.

Fourthly, God is, The holy one, effectively, because he works, conveies and
propagates all holiness, to, and in the creature. Nothing can frame a heart to
holiness, but the finger of God. Man can no more make himself, or another holy,
than he can redeem another or himself.

Fifthly, He is called, The holy One, by way of eminency or super-excellency;
because his holiness is infinitely beyond all the holiness of men and Angels.
Angels are holy, and God is pleased to say of men, that they are holy, but not
man, nor Angel, can be called, The holy One. His supereminency in holiness
shines forth in such beams and rays, as these.

First, Holiness in God it is not a quality, but, his essence. Holiness in
Angels is a quality, the essence of many Angels continues, though their
holiness be lost and vanished; the lapsed Angels, who are now devils, keep
their nature, but their holiness is gone; therefore holiness was but a quality
or accidental to them; So, in the Saints, holiness is an infusion, a quality, a
grace; most men never had any holiness, and the man would remain, though his
holiness should be lost. But in God, his essence and his holiness are the same;
The holiness of God, It is the holy God, as the wisdom of God, it is the wise
God: and the power of God, it is the powerful God. The attributes of God, for
our learning, are distinguished from his nature, but, in him they are the same.

Secondly, God is The holy One eminently, above men and Angels, because he is
absolutely perfect in holiness. Absolutely perfect: first, because he is holy,
extensively (if we may so speak of God) in all parts, he is holy throughout;
and then, he is holy intensively, as he is holy in all parts, so he is
altogether holy in every part. Holy men have holiness in every part, yet they
are holy but in part; and though Angels be holy in every part extensively, and
have also a perfection of holiness, yet they have not an absolute perfection
of holiness; therefore Angels themselves are chargeable with folly, compared
with God, Chap. 4. 18. God is so light, that in him there is no darkness at
all, he is so holy, in him, that, there is no unholiness at all. But men, the
best of men, all the saints upon earth, have darkness with their light, and
unholiness mixed with their holiness.

Therefore in the third place, the eminency of God in holiness appears in
this, that, God is ever equally holy, ever in the same degree and frame of
holiness: Angels are so too, because they are confirmed; and though at the
present, the Saints are not, yet, when Christ shall set them up, in that
glorious estate, they shall keep the same frame for ever. But the Saints upon
earth are unequally holy; For, first, they are growing, their estate here is an
increasing estate, they are more holy one year than another, as they grow more
in knowledge, so in every grace: And then, in regard of the exercise, they are
more holy at one time, than at another; which of the Saints has not found, or
does not find much variety in his spirit. Now a heart enlarged in prayer, and
anon straightned, now a heart believing, and anon doubting; now humble, anon
lifted up with pride, etc.

But as the holy One, is, perfectly and absolutely holy, so, he is ever equally
in the same degree, and tenor of holiness, not the least variety or shadow of
turning in him. Put all these together, and the title is clear, How God by an
excellency is called, The holy One. As he is so strong, that all the power of
the creature, compared with his, is weakness, and so wise, that all the wisdom
of the creature compared with his, is folly: So he is so holy, that, compared
with him, all holiness, is unholy, and he alone, The holy One. Observe, hence,

First, That the holiness of man consists in his conformity unto God.

Holiness is our likeness to God, or the application of our minds and actions
to God, as the Scholles define it. God, the holy One, Sanctitas dicitur per
quam men's seipsum and suos actus applicat Deo,
is, (if we may so speak) the standard, the pattern, and the object of all
holiness. There is a twofold conformity to God in holiness.

First, a conformity to the nature of God.

Secondly, a conformity to the will of God, or to that which God wills. These
make up the total holiness of the creature.

First, Holiness is our conformity to the nature of God. And therefore
believers are said to be partakers of the divine nature (2 Pet. 1. 4.) This
participation, is our analogical resemblance unto the divine nature: First, in
his attributes. Secondly, in his affections. In his attributes, when we are
patient, merciful, just, faithful, true-loving, as God is. These are the image
of God in us, and by these God becomes (as it were) visible in man. As those
invisible things of God, even his eternal power and Godhead are seen in the
things which are created, so those, other invisible things of God, even his
eternal holiness and purity, are seen in those, who are sanctified. And in the
same sense that God speaks of Magistrates in regard of his power deposited in
their hands. I have said ye are gods, we also may say of all the faithful, in
regard of his holiness infused into their hearts, ye are gods; and as to live,
or do sinfully, is (as the Apostle phraseth it) to walk ((...)) as men, so to
live and do holily is in our sphere to walk ((...)) as God. And as this
holiness arises from a resemblance of God in his Attributes, so in his
Affections; when we love what God loves, when we hate, what God hates; when,
what, pleases God pleases us also; when, what provokes his Spirit, provokes
ours. This is holiness.

Secondly, Holiness is our conformity to the will of God. That is, to
whatsoever God wills us, either to do, or not to do. The will of God is the
rule of holiness, as his nature is the pattern of it. His internal will,
called by the Schoolmen, The will of his good Voluntas benepla^iti. Voluntas
signi.
pleasure, is the firstly-first rule (as they speak) His external will, or
his will expressed and signified by his word, is the secondly-first rule of
holiness. Every action of man is holy or unholy according to it is conformity
with, or variation from this will. There is no more holiness in any work,
then there is of the will of God in any work; to do holily and to do the will
of God are the same David a holy man is described by both these, Act. 13. 22. I
have found David, the son of Jesse, A man after mine own heart, there is
conformity to the will of God: which shall fulfill all my will, there is
conformity to the will of God, the result of both is holiness. Sicut impuritas
nascitur ex nonactu inferiorum, ut cum facies aut vestis luto aspergitur vel
cum anima per affectus inferioribus inordinate inhaeret; I a puritas oritur ex
contactu superiorum cum affectus ad sublimiora and nobilicra assurgit, and ijs
inhaerit. Less de perfect. Div. lib. 8. c. 8.


Unholinesse and impurity arise from our conformity or adhesion to those
things, which are unclean and unholy. In externals and corporals if a man's hand
or his garment touch an unclean thing he has the mark or impression of that
uncleanesse upon his hand or upon his garment; and this likeness to an unclean
thing, makes his hand or garment unclean. So for inward uncleanness or
defilment, when the soul inordinately cleaves, and the mind drenches it self
in filthy things, or drinks in filthy objects, when our thoughts are steeped
in puddle waters, this defiles the mind, and makes our thoughts unclean; Our
thoughts are such, as the things they are familiar with: If they converse with
filthy and unclean things, with wordly and base things, the image and
impression of such things is sealed upon our thoughts, and the spring of them
our spirits. On the other side, by our conversing and reverend familiarity with
Christ; in holy Ordinances, we receive stamps and impressions of holiness from
him. When our hearts and affections are raised up and pitched upon God, this
makes them holy. Summa puritas consistit in adhaesione cum Deo; nam Deus est
ratio objectiva and mensura sanctitatis Less. ubi ante.


God is the Objective cause of holiness, looking upon him, we become holy (2
Cor. 3. 18.) We (says the Apostle) all with open face, beholding as in a
glass, the glory of the Lord (that is, we looking upon that glory, holiness
and excellency, which is in the Lord) are changed into the same image: That
is, we are made conformable unto him: we receive (as it were) the engravings of
holiness upon our souls by beholding the Holy One. The eye of faith (as well,
yea more, then the eye of sense) affects the hearts. Labans sheep conceived
according to the color of the rods, which lay before them in the water
troughes. Vision assimilates both in nature and in grace, yea and in glory too.
In heaven we shall be perfectly holy, because we shall perfectly (in Christ,
who is the express image of his person) see God, and so be like him, that is
the Apostles argument, 1 John 3 1. We shall he like him, for we shall see him
as he is, And proportionably here, such as our visions of God are, such is our
likeness unto God. Secondly, observe.

They who want holiness, must go to God for it; for he is the holy One. Are
any of your hearts unholy? Whither will you go? To what Coast will you trade
for holiness? Or where shall you find the merchandise of it? Go whither you
will, go to what holy Ordinance, to what holy duty, to what holy Minister you
will, your vessels will return unfraight and empty of holiness, if you tread
not to the holy God. We must deal with Ordinances and by Ordinances; but, if
we only have to do with them, neglecting to meet with God, we shall make
nothing of them, we shall not traffic in them to any spiritual enriching or
advantage. Ordinances have a relative holiness or a holiness passing through
them; but they have no inherent holiness, or holiness passed by them; They
are Conduit-pipes, not springs, or the wellhead. Therefore as when you would
have mercy, you go to the merciful God; As, when you would have pardon of
sin, you go to the sin pardoning God; As when you would have wisdom and
light to direct your way, you go to the wise God and the Father of lights. So
when you would have holiness, and be made pure, whither will ye go, but to
the pure and holy God? Be diligent in holy duties, and holy Ordinances, but
stay not in them, pass through them, and never rest till you come to God in
Christ, who is, The holy One, and he only can, and he has said he will make
you holy.

Observe; thirdly,

All sin and unholiness are contrary to the very name and nature of God.
Contrary to the name of God, He is called holy; and contrary to the nature of
God, He is the holy One. And in this, we see the reason, why God hates sin with
a perfect hatred; man hates that, which is contrary to his nature, and contrary
to his name. And in this also we see the reason, why God is such a severe
avenger of sin, He is the holy One: Can he (think you) take part with, or spare
that which is contrary to himself? Sin, as much as in it lies, puts God out of
the world, therefore sin is called God-murther, as being that, which would
murder God: Deicidium.
Sin would not allow him a being in the world, who gave the world it is being.
Sin (in the nature of it) is, The unholy thing, and God is, The holy One; These
two must contend for ever: so far as things or persons are unholy, they
directly strike at the Being of God; Sin would put down all rule and all
dominion, but it is own.

Observe, Fourthly,

They who despise holiness despise God himself. They who despise holiness,
despise the very glory of God, God is glorious in holiness, and this is his
glorious Name, THE HOLY ONE. Some of the Profane wretched Jews, derided and
blasphemed God, under this title; the Prophet had long threatened judgment, and
had told them, that the holy God would be avenged of them for their filthiness
and profaness for their hypocrifie and idolatry. But when these wretches saw
God delaying to come out, and bring forth the treasures of his wrath against
them, they fall a jeering, and they jeer at God, under this title (Isa. 5, 19.)
Let him make speed and hasten his work that we may see it; as if they had said,
God is too slow let him make more have, and let the counsel of the holy One of
Israel draw nigh, and come that we may know it; him, that you have so often
told us of, The holy One, let him make have and bring on his work. Without
question God came speedily upon those, and he will come speedily upon all those
unclean spirits and tongues who blaspheme that holy Name, The holy One.

Lastly, Hence we learn, Why none can see God, why none have any fitness for
communion with God, but holy Ones, holy persons; the reason is, because God is
the holy One. That great Law is gone out from the mouth of God, Levit. 10. 3. I
will be sanctified in those that come near me; why sanctified? Because God is
the holy one; Unless we sanctify God, we cannot draw nigh to God. As
holiness is a separation from evil, so i^ is an approximation to the chiefest
good. But some may demand, how can man sanctify God? God sanctifies us, but
can we sanctify him? We cannot sanctify God, as he sanctifies us. We do not
sanctify God by adding or communicating any holiness unto him; but we
sanctify God by acknowledging his holiness, or by acknowledging that he is,
The Holy One; drawing nigh unto God with a holy heart, with holy affections is
the sanctfying of God. For this is the language of such preparation, I have a
holy God to go unto, therefore I must have a holy heart to come unto him with;
this is sanctifying God; And that is the reason why none can see God, but they,
that are holy, Heb. 12. 14. Without holiness, no man shall see the Lord;
because God himself is holy, therefore they cannot see God, who are unholy.
There must be an inward holiness, holiness in the Organ: to take in the
holiness of the object; God first works holiness in us, and then we behold him,
the holy God: And that was the reason, why the Prophet (Isa. chap. 6. when the
voice proclaimed that thrice holy Name of God, Holy, Holy, Holy,) cried out, I
am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, I have an unclean heart, and how
shall I stand before this holy, holy, holy God; This made his spirit recoyl,
though he was a holy Prophet: If the remainders of unholinesse in him, made his
spirit faint, when there was an appearance of the holy God: How will they that
are nothing but corruption, or a lump of uncleanness, lying still in the dregs
of nature, be able to stand before God, The holy One, the holy, holy, holy One!

This is the sum of the first reason, upon which Job grounds his request to
die, it was not the misery he suffered, but the integrity in which he had
lived. He had not concealed the words of the holy One, therefore as his
affliction made his life troublesome to him, so the goodness of his cause and
conscience, made death welcome to him.

JOB Chap. 6. Verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. What is my strength, that I should hope?
And what is mine end that I should prolong my life?

Is my strength, the strength of stones? Or is my flesh of brass?

Is not my help in me? And is wisdom driven quite from me?

To him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his friend; but he
forsakes the fear of the Almighty.


JOB (as has been showed) in this context from the 8th verse, renewes his
former request and desire of death, confirming it by diverse arguments, some of
which were opened in the 10th verse, especially, that, from the clearness, and
integrity of his own conscience, in that, he had not concealed the words of the
the holy One: He had dealt faithfully in the cause of God, and therefore he was
not afraid to appear before God. And his desire did not hang about his lips, as
if it would return and deny it self: therefore in this 11th verse he puts forth
two reasons further, why he moves or re-enforces his motion to die. The first
is grounded upon the small hope, he had to live long, if he should desire it,
What is my strength, that I should hope? The second is grounded upon the strong
hope, yea, assurance which he had, that it should be well with him in death, or
that death, could be no damage to him. And what is my end, that I should
prolong my life? Put these two together: And then consider, is it any wonder,
that a man in much misery desires to die speedily, when he has no hope, no
ground of hope, that he can live long, and when he has no fear, no ground, no
nor shadow of fear, that it shall be ill with him, when he dies? This I
conceive is the sum and strength of his reasoning, contained in the 11th verse.

I shall now open the words distinctly.

What is my strength, that I should hope? Some render it, What is my strength,
that I should bear? that I should be able to sustain this weighty burden, this
mighty load of affliction, pressing my wounded soul, and wearied body. Thus it
refers to his present sufferings, to the enduring and standing under which, he
found his own strength altogether insufficient. And so the [My] in the text,
What is [my] strength, seems to be His sustinendis impar sum, haec mea vita
miseriis obnoxia sustentatur, non meis viribus, sed divina gratia, fide,
dilectione in filium Dei. Pined.
opposed to some other strength; As if Job had said, Eliphaz you advised me (in
the former Chapter, verse. 8.) to seek unto God, and to commit my cause unto
him, to seek help at his hands. Why do you think, I have not done that, all
this while? Do you believe that I have stood out these assault in My own
strength? What is My strength, that I should bear? That I should bear this
burden so long, as I have born it? Surely I have been held up by the power of
God and prayer all this while: God has put his everlasting arms under me,
otherwise I had fallen before this day, hid I not prayed in aid from heaven, I
had not lived thus long upon the earth; for what is my strength compared to
these burdens, which are upon me?

This is a good sense; For, as the Apostle speaks (Gal 2. 10.) The life which
I now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God, So Job seems to say, the
life which I have lived, ever since these afflictions have encompassed me, I
have lived by the power of God, and the strength of faith in him. What i^ my
strength, that I should bear? We have this treasure (says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
4. 7.) in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power, may be from God,
and not from us; As he speaks there, respecting the burden of the Ministry:
So we may, in respect of any burden of trouble, or weight of affliction. We
have these afflictions laid upon our earthen vessels (and one would wonder,
that an earthen vessel should not crack (...) Moratus, praestolatus. Vel
significat anxia spe potiendi voto rem aliquam expectare, and aegre far
protractionem rei expectatae. Chemnit. Spes, est, cum praeparatio ad boni
futuri and promissi susceptionem, tum patientia morae ex intuitu illius boni.
Coc.
and shatter to pieccs under them) but it is, that the excellency of the power
might be from God, and not from us; when we are weak, then we are strong,
strong in God, and in the power of his might. God loves to show the world, what
his strength can do in a weak creature, as well, as what his grace and mercy
can do for a sinful creature.

This (I say) is a good sense, but the word rather signifies to hope; and yet
these two are not at any great odds: for hope is the strength, the
bearing-strength of the soul: What is my strength, that I should hope? That I
should wait and tarry, that I should expect or stay for such and such changes,
as thou have promised? Psalm. 130 5. we have these words put together, I wait
for the Lord, my soul does wait; and in his word do I hope. The soul which is
in a hoping condition, is also in a waiting condition; waiting and hoping ever
attend the same thing. No man will wait at all for that of which, he has no
hope, and he who has hope, will wait always He gives not over waiting, till he
gives over hoping. The object of hope is some future good, but the act of
hoping is a present good, and that is present pay to bear our charges in
waiting. So then the word implies both a patient writing, and a hopeful
trusting. So Christ expoundes it, Mat. 12. 21. rendering that of the prophet,
Isa. 42. 4. The isles shall wait for his Law, thus, In his name shall the
Gentiles trust. Noah (after the strength of the deluge was spent) Gen 8. 10, 12.
opened the window of the Arc, and sent forth the Dove, and she returned; then
says the text, He waited seven days, and again he waited, yet other seven
days, hoping at last the flood would be dried up, and the waters return into
their ancient channels. Now (says Job) what is my strength, that I should hope
or expect deliverance, and therefore, why should I wait for it. The waters of
my afflictions are so deep, and swollen so high that I have no hope to see dry
ground again.

And in this passage he seems to answer, what Eliphaz speak in the 5th
Chapter, verse. 16. and 25. (for doubtless Job applies himself exactly to what
Eliphaz had spoken, and the truest interpretation of his answer will be in
finding out and suiting the references to what the other Propounded) Eliphaz in
the 16. verse of the fifth Chapter (where he makes a report of the wonderful
works of God) had said, So the poor has hope, and iniquity stops her
mouth: And at the 25, verse, he tells Job that a godly man (notwithstanding all
his afflictions) may know that his tabernacle shall be in peace, and that his
seed shall be very great. Job in answer to those words, replies, What is my
strength that I should hope. As if he had said, Eliphaz you speak of great
hopes that the poor may have, and you speak of a peaceable Tabernacle, of a
flourishing offspring; Alas my condition is such, I am so worn out with
pain, with sicknesses, with diseases, with distempers with griefs that I have
no hope left in regard of any strength in me, ever to enjoy such promises. What
is my strength, Quae fortitudo mea, ut sperem liberos. Vatab. Quid in longiorem
spem me adducitis quum sperando non fim, jam prope^. mortuus videat Hoc a lobo
dicitur, ut consil^j importunitatem, expresso sensitivae partis affectu
retunderet, non quod de divina potentia diffideret.
that I should hope? What is my strength that I should expect to live to see
such good days, as you speak of, that my Tabernacle should be in peace, that I
should have plenty, that I should have a numerous issue? Alas my strength is
gone; what is my strength that I should look after these things. Not that Job
measured all his hope by his own strength; but here he expresses the grief
and pain, which was in his sensitive part, or upon his outward man, thereby to
answer the sour reproofs and sweet promises of Eliphaz: For we find Job
himself in the thirteenth Chapter, verse. 13. resolving thus: Though he kill me,
yet will I trust (or hope) in him; he would trust and hope in God though he
died, therefore he did hope, while he lived. And it is the property of that
grace (and where it is in strength, it sh^wes as much) to hope against hope:
Romans 4. 18. Who against hope believed in hope; When there was no strength in
Abraham, no possibility in nature, yet against hope, he believed in hope: So at
this time there was such a grace in Job, he had a hope, by which he could hope
against hope; but when he looked into his own stock of strength, What is my
strength, that I should hope? I know the strength of God, is a rock sure enough
for my hope to anchor in: Abraham, said in effect, what is my strength, that I
should hope to have a child? for he looked upon himself as a dead man, but,
says he, there is power in God; he knew his own weakness, but he considered it
not, waxing strong in faith, and giving glory to God. So here, while Job says,
What is my strength that I should hope? my strength is dried up and withered,
and so is my hope in my own strength: The strength of God is vigorous and
green, and in him my hope also is green and vigorous: Though all the earth
about us, be like a dry heath and barren wilderness, yet our hope buds and
blossoms like a plant, while it is rooted by the springs of heavenly promises,

And what is mine end, that I should prolong my life; The letter of the Hebrew
is: That I should prolong or lengthen out my soul, that my soul should inhabit
longer in the tabernacle (...)
of my body: The word prolong, is differently joined to life, or days, Deuteronomy.
5. 16. Honor thy father and thy mother as the Lord thy God has commanded
thee, that, thy days may be prolonged, etc Ezekiel. 12 22. Son of man, what is
that proverb that you have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are
prolonged, and every vision fails? To prolong days, and prolong life, are
the same. Yet hear the word (Nephesh) soul, which we translate, life, may be
taken for, desire, which is a vehement act of the soul. The soul expresses it
self, so much in desires, that the same word may express both. And so we may
render Jobs sense, thus, What is my end that I should lengthen out, or extend
my desires any further after the things of this world: or that I should defer,
and put off my desires after the things of the world to come: Is there any
thing in this life worth my staying for it, or any thing so worthless in the
next, that I should not wish presently to enjoy it? In this sense the word
(Nephesh) is often used, as Genesis 23. 8. Abraham speaks to the children of Heth,
If it be your soul or your desire, we translate, if it be your mind, that I
should bury my dead. So Prev. 23 2. If thou be a man given to thy appetite, or
whose desires are thy Lord and master, as the elegancy of that place bears.
And again, Psalm. 27. 12. Psalm. 41. 2. Eccl 6. 9. The word is applied, to
signify the will or desire. So here,

What is mine end, that I should prolong my life, or my desire of life? His
[End] may be considered two ways.

First, His end, may be taken for the latter part of his life, which Eliphaz
promised would be very comfortable, Thou shall come to thy grave in a good old
age, as a shock of corn comes into the flore; As if Job should say, you are
promising me good days, and a happy old age, but, what is mine end? what is the
latter part of a man's life, that he should desire to prolong his days, to take
it out? why should I desire to prolong my life, I am now well stricken in
years, and as for the end, the latter part of a man's life, it is nothing (for
the most part) but trouble and sorrow? As old Barzillai (2 Samuel 19. 35.) when
David offered him the pleasures of the Court) answers, I am thus old, and can I
taste my meat, and taste my drink, or hear music? What is the Fagge-end of
man's life, that one should hunger after it? The sweetest comforts of this life
are in the forepart of life, in the spring of youth, in the strength and
flower of age. As for the winter of life, what is that but wet and cold, but
clouds and darkness? What is my end (of old age) that I should desire my life
to be prolonged or eeked out to that.

But rather, we may take this End; First, For the end of his troubles; As if he
had said, What end so gainful or comfortable can I have of these evils, that
should recompense my pains in bearing them, till I receive it? No worldly
comforts can answer my sorrows; and therefore why should I desire to prolong my
life for them?

Secondly, Take End, for the very last term of life, not that latter part or
condition of a man's life, troublesome old age, as before; or a renewed estate
as here. But take End, for the ending* the termination, the period of life;
What is my end, that I should prolong my life? and so, End is as much as death,
what is my death that I should desire to live? I know no evil in death, that
should make me afraid of the end of my life; I know no such trouble in dying,
that I should be desirous to spinne out this troublesome life longer, surely
the trouble and pain of death, is not so much as the present trouble and pain
of my life, and as for any other trouble, I fear none: then, What is my end,
that I should prolong my life, that I should not desire death, or that you
should be so angry with me for desiring it? Hence observe, first,

There is no strength in man, that may give him assured hope of long life; What
is my strength that I should hope? No, though man be in the flourish of his
age, the greenesse of his years: yet what is youth, or strength, or beauty?
what all those fair leaves and fruits, which hang upon and adorn this goodly
tree, that he should hope to hand long? Man in his best estate, is altogether
vanity, Psalm. 39. 5. He that hopes to live upon any of these things, hopes in a
vain thing, and trusts, but in a shadow. Our hopes to live this natural life as
well as the spiritual, and eternal, must be in the living God. The Image of
death sits upon the best of our strength and beauty; while we grow, we decline,
and while we flourish, we wither. The lengthening of our days, is the
shortning of them, and all the time we live, is but a passage unto (and should
be but a preparation for) death. We are most miserable, if in this life only we
have hope; and we are most foolish, if our hopes of this life, be in our own
strength.

And because there is no strength in nature, which may give us hope to live
long; It is our greatest wisdom, to consider what provision we have in grace,
to maintain our hopes, that we shall live for ever. They are in an ill case,
who when they cannot hope to live long, care not to settle their hopes of
living eternally. It is a most sad spectacle, to see a languishing body, and a
languishing hope meet in one man. Some have a Calendar in their bones, showing
them, they have but few days here, and many distempers upon the whole body,
crying in their ears with a loud voice, what is your strength, that you should
hope to live? who yet prepare not at all to die. They are both unready and
unwilling to be dissolved, when they see no hope to keep up their tabernacle
from desolution.

Secondly, (taking the word in the last sense, which I conceive rather to be
the mind of the holy Ghost in this place) observe,

That there is no evil in the death of a godly man, which should make him
unwilling to die, or which should make him linger after this life. What is the
end of a godly man, that he should prolong his life? All the bitterness of
death is removed, or sweetened by Christ. Death the King of terrors, is made a
servant, to let us in, to our comforts, by the power of Christ, that prince of
life who has abolished death and brought life and immortality to light by the
Gospel. A believer buries all his fears of death in the grave of Christ. He
looks upon death as the funeral of his so rows, and the resurrection of his
joys. When the Psalmist had described the troubles and stormy conflicts of a
godly man, together with the flourishing outward pomp of the wicked, he
concludes with this advice, Mark the righteous man (observe him well, take
special notice of him) the latter and of that man is peace; if his end be
peace, there is nothing in his end, which can make him afraid of it, or put it
off. All desire peace, they especially, Pacem te poscimus omnes.
who are wearied out with war. The life of the holiest man is a warfare, and
his end is peace. Then what is his end, that he should prolong his life.

When a worldly man looks upon his end, he says, O what is my end, that I
should desire to die? His end is such, as makes him justly afraid to die. There
is nothing in the end of a wicked man, but matter to feed the fear of death,
and the desire of prolonging life, as long as he can. This is the reason, why,
when God calls him to die, he is deaf at the call; yea, that call is death to
him, before he dies. Lot had a mind to prolong his time in Sodom, it was a
goodly City, and he was not well assured, whether to go, or how he should be
lodged next night. This caused him to linger so long, till the Angels came and
thrust him out: Natural men have all their portion and estates in the Sodom of
this world. And if they hear a message of departing or going out, they linger
and make excuses, they run behind the door or hang about the posts, till God
thrusts them out of the world, and pulls from them their pleasures, by head and
shoulders, as we say. They would never leave the world, if they might enjoy it,
because they have nothing to enjoy beyond it.

A worlding groans, because he must be uncloathed of his house of earth, and
the Saints groan earnestly, that they may be clothed upon with their house
from heaven; Who would not be willing to exchange a suit of flesh, a suit of
sackcloth, and sorrow, for a suit of glory, for a clothing of immortality and
garments of everlasting praise.

Ver. 12. Is my strength, the strength of stones? Or is my flesh of brass?
These words may refer to the former part of the eleventh verse, What is my
strength, that I should hope? What is it? Let us seriously Deficio, Saxeus aut
Calibe us non sum. Lapides corpora sunt, non solum gravia, sed robusta and dura
quae non facile cedunt aliis corporibus, unde robur lapidum pro duritie.
examine and consider what my strength is, Is my strength, the strength of
stones? or is my flesh of brass? Am I made of such hard mettle, think you, that
I am able to endure any thing? Only a body of brass and sinews of Iron, are
strong enough to endure this trial. Stones and brass are hard bodies and heavy
bodies, they can bear blows and knocks without breaking; They yield not easily
to the hammer; It is hard to make an impression upon them, with many, and those
violent strokes. To say a man is as strong as stones, or that, he has a body
of brass, is to give him strength, which is not man's, and to set him two
degrees below himself. Beasts are stronger, and can endure more hardship then
man. Trees are stronger, and can endure more than Beasts. Stones are yet
stronger, and can endure more then Trees. Therefore, while he asks, whether his
strength be not only, like that of beasts, who have no reason, or like that of
trees, which have no sense; but like that of stones and brass, which have no
vegetation or growth, he puts it to the utmost, as if he had said, If a man had
as much strength as a Beast, or a Tree, he must needs fall at these strokes and
troubles, but it seems, ye put me lower then senseless beasts or trees, and
that I can stand it out against all storms and batteries, like a stony rock, or
a brazen wall. I confess, though the ox loweth, when he wants fodder, and the
wild Ass brayeth, when he has no grass, yet the stone complains not, when
you give it no food, nor does brass cry out, when you melt it in a Furnace:
unless you can find, that I am in nature, like stones or brass, you have no
reason to find fault with me. Allow me to be either man or beast, and you must
allow me to be sensible of my sorrows, and destroyable by them. Only stones can
be thus trampled on, and brass thus hammered without pain and dying.

As when man (in his spiritual capacity) is said in Scripture to have a heart
of stone, an iron sinew, a brow of Brass. It notes him resolved, against all
threats, and strong, against all oppositions of the word, to commit the evil of
sin. So in his natural capacity, to say his strength is the strength of stones,
notes him a man able to bear all the evils of trouble, and to stand against all
the storms of tribulation.

Such kind of speaking is frequent among the ancient Writers, Homines
Adamantini, ferrei, saxei, nati e scopulis. ^li robur and aes trip ex circa
pectus. Hor. Graeci vocant. (...) and (...).
who when they would express a man of undanted courage, a man whose strength
would not easily be broken, or his spirit be taken down; A man insuperable,
whom no difficulties could overcome. Of such an one they say, he has, An heart
of brass and a back of steel, he is a man made up of stones, born of a rock; He
is a man of Adamant, he has Treble brass about his breast; as he was
described, who first ventured in his ship to sea. The comman use of the word
has made it proverbial in all languages; for a man of more strength then is
commonly found in man, or for a Master of dangers and extremities.

Jobs question denies, Is my strength, the strength of stones? Or is my flesh
of brass? No, it is not: As if he had said, I am made of flesh and blood, as
well as others, I must shortly yield to these strokes, I am not able to hold
out and to contend everlastingly with afflictions, I cannot stand against these
assaults and batteries for ever, I am made of the same mould, whereof your
selves are, I am sensible how it is with me. I feel what I endure, and I cannot
long endure what I feel, My strength is not the strength of stones. Note hence,

First, Man's natural constitution makes him sensible of affliction, and
subauable by it.

Man's body is no impregnable Castle. We are not made of stones and brass, but
of flesh and blood; I will not contend for ever (says God, Isa. 57. 16.)
neither will I be always wrath. For the spirit should fail before me; etc. The
spirit of a man (that is his courage and resolution) are far stronger then
his flesh (namely his natural temper and constitution) and yet that cannot hold
cut for ever. The Spirit will come down, whether we will or no, if God contend
long with us: how then must the flesh wither like a leaf before him? And
therefore, the bodies, the flesh and blood of the damned, who are to bear the
wrath and contendings of God for ever, their flesh and blood (I say) are (in a
sense) made spiritual, that is, they have more strength given them, then flesh
and blood yield naturally, otherwise it were impossible for them to hold out
for ever under the wrath of God, and the torment of their accursed condition.
Their strength is made the strength of stones, and their flesh as brass, they
are made immalliable: their sense of pain shall be admirably quicked, and yet
they shall continue, as if they had no sense at all: they shall be for ever
wounded, and never die of their wounds. As it is in reference to that
everlasting misery, so in proportion to these temporal miseries; There is no
^^rength of man, no flesh and blood, able to endure and hold out, if God lets
out his hand, to afflict, and puts not under his hand to support.

Verse. 13, Is not my help in me? And is wisdom driven quite from me? This and
the verse following, are of a very difficult construction and understanding,
which caused a learned Interpreter to say, If Locus difficilis siquis a lius in
hoc libro, and quem ego adbuc non intelligo. Drus.
there be any hard text in the whole book, this is one; and after all his
thoughts about it, he concludes with this ingenuous acknowledgment, I do not
yet understand the meaning of it.

First, as we read it, The text seems to carry a harsh connection with the words
foregoing. There Job queries, Is my strength, the strength of stones? And yet
immediately to say, Is not my help in me? sounds incongruous. For if he had
help in him, he had strength in him, and such as might well be called, the
strength of stones, extraordinary strength. So then, Job having said with his
last breath, that he had no such strength, how is it, that here he should say
and more, strongly affirm, that he had such strength, so much this question
implies, Is not my help in me? As if he had said, do not I know which way to
help my self? How to extricate my self out of this condition?

Besides, how is this a truth? For there is no man, that has his help in
himself, not help enough in himself for any natural work, much less for any
spiritual work, and most of all, less for the holy carriage of the heart under
affliction, or to deliver himself from it. Man has no help in himself. The
voice of the Church is, Our help stands in the Name of the Lord; and the
voice of David, was, The Lord is my helper; how then does Job say, Is not my
help in me? Man's ruin is in himself, but how unlike is this to the voice of
truth, to say, My help is in my self? We can undo our selves fast enough, but
we cannot repair and make our selves up again.

Nor can any creature be our help, no man, no Angel can be our help. God
reproves the Jews, Isa. 31. For going down to Egypt for help, though they
were a strong people: Certainly it is as bad, for a man, to make himself his
help, as to make another man his help. How then shall we give a wholesome
understanding of these words, Is not my help in me? And is wisdom driven quite
from me?

For the clearing of it consider the diverse readings. Some thus, Was not my
help in me? And so they make the meaning to Nonne auxilium meum in me? sc.
fuit. Vatabl. Nonne quoad potui me juvi? minime fui pusillanimus, me quoad
fieri potest and erigo and fussento.
be this; Did not I help my self, as much as I could? Was I faint-hearted and
cowardly? Did I sink as a man of a poor spirit under the burden? Did not I put
my self forth to the uttermost, that I could, to stand under these troubles and
afflictions? There is much in that, for some men do not help themselves, as
they might, but their own spirits sink, and their hearts fail, yea, their
hearts fail before their strength fails. Job disclaims this, I did not so, I
helped my self while I was able, I put out the utmost of my power, to bear and
set a good face on it, as long as ever I could, Was not my help in me?

The Septuagint, with the Greeks in general refer these words to God, making
Job speak thus, Did not I trust in him? But Nonne in ipso considebam, sed
adjutorium a me recessit, negavit me misery ordia and visitatio Domini
despexit. Sept.
my help is departed from me, and the mercy of the most High has withdrawn it
self from me: As if he had said, I never put my trust in my self, nor did I
promise my self great matters, as from my self, for, alas! What is my strength?
I am acquainted well enough with mine own frailty, but that which I only
trusted to, has left me; I trusted unto God, and unto his help; now he seems
to forsake and withdraw his assistance from me; But I leave this with the
Authors, it has little authority with me, or sutableness to the course and
tenor of Jobs spirit under these afflictions.

The Vulgar translates the whole verse negatively, and so it makes a plain and
a good sense. Whereas we read it interrogatively, Is not my help in me? etc. He
reads it thus, Behold my Ecce non est a uxilium mihi ^^n me and necessarii
quoque mei recesserunt a me? Vulg.
help is not in me, and my friends who should help me, are departed from me;
That which we translate wisdom: Is wisdom departed from me? He translates,
friends: my friends, who should be my helpers, are departed from me. And so the
meaning of all is, as if Job had said, I cannot help my self, and they who
should, have deserted me: And so connects or joins it with that, which went
before; What is my strength that I should hope? my strength is not the strength
of stones; there is no help in me, and they who should help me, are departed
from me; I was once an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame (Chap. 29. 15.)
When a man has no help in himself, he may have it in another; If a man want an
eye, he may have an eye of his neighbor, and if he want a hand, his friend may
be a hand to him; but (says Job) they that should be eyes and hands, helpers
unto me, are gone and departed from me.

There is yet another rendering, which makes a very clear sense; What though I
have no help in me, is wisdom driven quite from me? Though I have no strength,
and so no help in my self, wisdom is not therefore driven quite from me. As if
he had said, will you conclude that I am a wicked man, an hypocrite and a fool,
because I am not able to help and deliver my self out of these troubles?

Fifthly, consider the words as we translate them, with which most of the
Rabbis and Jewish writers concur, only they usually express the text
affirmatively, we interrogatively, yet both equivalent, and meet in the same
meaning. Our Question, Is not my help in me? is to be resolved into this
affirmation, my help is in me; and the latter branch, Is wisdom departed from
me? into this negation, wisdom is not departed from me: my help is in me, and
my An non auxilium meum in me, quo me tueri possum ac defendere? innuit
innocentiam suam ac vitae integritatem qua nunquam destitutus fuit: aut rectam
ratienem and sapientiam quam postea Tusiah Appellat, Drus. An judicio and
ratione destituor ut dignoscere nequeam recta ab insulsis, qualia sunt verba
vestra, non sum mentis inops.
wisdom is not departed from me: Jobs sense may be taken thus; Have I not that
in me, which is, and will be a help unto me, notwithstanding all the objections
and assaults which you make against me? Have not I that in me, which may
furnish me with wisdom to answer all the exceptions which you have taken at my
complaints? Master Broughtons translation favors this sense very much, have
not I my defense? and is judgment driven away from me? Though I thus complain
and desire death, yea renew my desire? Have not I my defense? have I nothing to
say, why I made that request? have I no argument to help my self and bear up
my spirit under the weight of these calamities? Is wisdom quite departed from
me? Do you take me for a man deserted of God, deserted of his spirit, and
deserted of my own wisdom and understanding too, because I am deserted of the
world, and destitute of outward comforts? And so the help which Job knew he had
in store, was the Innoceney and integrity of his heart, Is not my help in me? I
have no help, no strength, no comfort in my flesh, what is my flesh; my flesh
is not of brass, but have I no help in me neither? my outward man is
destroyed, my house of clay is almost battered down, tottering, failing it is,
but have I nothing within, to help at a dead lift? have I no grace, no hope, no
testimony of a good conscience, no witness in my self? Do you think me clean
dis^obed and stripped, and emptied of all wisdom and comfort? Has the Devil,
think you, robbed me of my grace? have the Sabeans plundered and spoiled me of
my understanding? Is not my help within me, notwithstanding all the troubles
that are upon me? Thus the interpretation is fair and clear, that, when all his
outward comforts were gone, when the strength of his flesh could hold no
longer; yet then he had help within him; and his spirit could bear, though his
flesh could not Grace can hold out beyond nature; and when bodily strength can
do no more, wisdom comes in with her Auxiliaries.

Is not my help in me, and is wisdom departed from me? The word [wisdome] in
the Hebrew, is of various significations, (...) Significat ^egem, sapientiam,
subsistentiam Et lex ^epulsa est a me? Pagn, N^nquid officium impulsum fuit a
me? Vatab. Number subsistentia impulsa est a me? Regia. Quid facult as subsistendi
me destituit? Tygyr.
as was touched, Chap. 5. 12. Here one renders it, The law is not departed from
me. As if his meaning were; I never forsook the law of God. Another thus; Was
my duty driven from me? As if his meaning were, I ever kept close to the rule
of my place and calling. A third; Is my subsistence driven from me? So a
fourth; Is my ability of subsisting gone from me? As if he had said, cannot I
live, because I have not the world to live upon? To which sense, those words of
Christ are appliable, Luke. 12. 15. The life of man consists not, in the
abundance of the things which he possesses; All which interpretations meet to
make up a complete Apology of Jobs piety, constancy, patience and flourishing
resolutions, in his dying, withering condition. The Sabeans drove away his
cattle, but they could not drive away his understanding; They offered violence
to his substance, but his reason and his graces were untoucht. Hence observe,
first,

That when all outward helps depart from a godly man, he has somewhat abiding
in him, to help and stay up his heart. As when the outward glory and strength
of the Church is utterly decayed, Yet (the Prophet tells us, Isa. 6. 13.) in it
shall be a Tenth, as a Teyle*tree, and as an Oak, whose substance is in them,
when they cast their leaves, so the Holy seed shall be the strength thereof.
Thus also, when the outward glory and strength of any true member of the Church
is utterly decayed, even then, he shall be as an Oak, his substance shall be in
him, the seed of Holiness shall be his substance. Is not my help in me? I
know my estate is gone, my beauty is gone, my strength is gone, the strength (I
mean) of my flesh, yet I have invisible supports, somewhat unseen to trust
unto. It is the comfort of believers, that they have an estate, riches and
possessions, lying as far beyond the reach of men's power, as their eye; and as
far beyond the reach of Satan's malice, as either. When they feel nothing but
pain in the flesh, when nothing but weakness inhabits the house of clay, the
outward man, then the inward man is renewed with sweet refreshings, and strong
consolations day by day. The spirit of a man (of a godly man) will bear his
infirmities, when his body cannot. The strength of nature is not as the
strength of stones, nor is the flesh of brass, but the strength of grace, is
stronger then the strength of stones, and the spirit is more dureable then
brass: Grace wears not out by using, nor does it spend by employing:
Afflictions are but the higher services and employments of grace: A stock of
grace, is an inexhaustible treasure, and a good heart, assures us better then
the bars of a Castle. Faith and a good conscience, are (under Christ) our best
helps in trouble; they are friends that will never forsake us: They are to us
as their Author, who, has promised that he, will not. Grace is our
participation with the Divine Nature, and grace participates with the divine
nature in this, it is an unchangeable good, an everlasting comfort.

And yet we must take this warily, grace and holiness, faith and a good
conscience, are not to be trusted upon, no more then riches or any outward
means. We may make an Idol of our faith, and a vain thing of a good
conscience: The meaning then is, faith and a good conscience are our best helds
and friends, because faith carries us unto Christ who is our best help. Faith
pitches upon Christ and a good conscience, feasts us in the favor of God.
Faith alone is no help, but faith is our help, because it is not alone: Grace
left alone would be our strength but little more then nature is, and our spirit
little more then the flesh. And therefore our comforts are not to be resolved
into this, That we have grace in our hearts, but into this, That we and our
graces are in the hand of Christ. Faith can live no where but upon Christ; That
which faith respects as our help, is Christ in whom we believe, not the act of
believing, We are helped by the grace within us, but the grace within us, is
not our help. Secondly Observe;

A godly man in the darkest affliction or night of sorrow, finds a light of
holy wisdom to answer all the objections of his enemies, and the suspicions of
his friends; Is wisdom departed quite from me? Do you think I have nothing to
say? nothing to reply by way of apology for what I have don or spoken?

Though Job had many afflictions upon him and his friends against him, yet see
how he recollects himself, Is not my help in me? he makes out the goodness of
his cause, in the midst of a thousand evils, and can plead his own integrity,
in the throng of many jealousies and contradictions. Is not my help in me? Do
you think, you have so daunted me, that I am not able to make out my own
estate? or that I know not what I am? The truth is, sometimes God leaves his
servants in so much darkness, for their trial and exercise, that they cannot
see their own estates, but cry out, they are lost and undone; Many a good soul
cannot reflect upon his graces, or get his heart into any communion with Christ
in promises. This is walking in darkness, and seeing no light. As our sins are
sometimes secrets to us, so also our graces may. But let a man be encompast
with never so many outward afflictions, yet if his spirit be free, he is able
to judge of his own interests, through all the black clouds which hang over
him, through all the distractions and confusions that are about him. The eye of
faith is usually quickest, in a dark night. And while trouble is near at hand,
beholds Christ, near at hand. He can never be without help, who carries his
help about him, or within him. Nor can he utterly want counsel to direct him,
whose heart is as a council Table, where Christ (the wisdom of God) is ever
President and in the Chair. My worldly comforts are quite driven from me, but
wisdom is not: I am afflicted, and therefore should not be thus suspected, but
pitied.

Verse. 14. To him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his friend;
but he forsakes the fear of the Almighty. This verse begins the third Section
of the chapter wherein Job draws up a strong charge against his friends, for
their uncharitableness. See the progress and links of his Discourse.

First, he refuted and answered their objections against him, from the first to
the 8 verse.

Secondly, he renewed his complaint, which was the ground of all their
objections from the 8th verse unto the end of the 13th. Here at verse 14. he
begins a charge against his friends of unkindness, indiscretion, yea of cruelty
in managing of this dispute against him. He gives it first in general, or by
way of Preface, To him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his
friend; But he forsakes the fear of the Almighty; As if he had said; You
should have dealt otherwise with me, then you have, in this case; though
(blessed be God) I find help within me, God has given me the light of his
spirit and wisdom to discern my own condition, yet it is no thank to you: I
have found no help in my friends, you have dealt unfriendly with me; you should
have pitied me, but you have opposed me, and so forsaken that duty which the
fear of the Almighty teaches. He proceeds to illustrate this more particularly,
by way of similitude, comparing his friends to a brook, whose waters fail when
we are athirst, or when there is most need of water.

To him that is afflicted. The word signifies, Him that is melted: and the
reason is, because (...) Solvit, dissolvit, liquidum and fluidum reddidit. Sic
mea perpetuis liquescant pectora curis, Ovid. de Pont, (...) a Tributum sic
dictum, quia paulatim liquescere facit facultates, maximo si nimium imponatur,
Buxtorf. b Quidam Pontificii* volunt suam Missam hac voce hebraica fuisse
appellatam. Recte quidem, per eam scilicet pietas omnis liquefacta est and
d^ssoluta, Rivet.
affliction dissolves the spirit of a man, and (as it were) melts his heart:
therefore it is called the fire of affliction; To be dissolved or melted, and
to be afflicted, are the same. And that effect is ascribed to fear and trouble
of spirit, arising from affliction, Psalm 22 15. My heart (says David, a type
of Christ) in the midst of my belly, is like melting wax: By reason of the
heat and greatness of his trouble, and the anguish of his spirit, he was as
metal melted in a furnace. At the defeat of the Israelites before Ai, it is
said, the hearts of the people melted, and became as water, Josh. 7. 5. And in
the sixth Psalm, verse 6. David cries up the exuberance of his sorrows, by
this word: I melted or watered my couch with tears. Thus the Prophet threatening
a day of great fear against Jerusalem, tells them, They shall be, as when a
Standard Bearer faints, Isa. 10. 18. When the Battle waxes hot, and a
vanquished army is running and crying for quarter, the standard bearer is in
greatest danger, all make up to him, and then he faints, or melts away with
fear. (a) Tributes and taxes, are expressed in the Hebrew, by a word coming from
this root, because if heavily imposed, they melt away the estates of a people.
(b) It is a witty observation, that whereas some of the Papists conceive their
word [Masse] was derived from this Hebrew word [Massas] which signifies to
melt; One of ours answers, let it be so: It suites this sense of the word
exactly, and the effect o^ that abominable Idolatry; for the Mass has
dissolved and melted away truth and pity out of the Popish Territories.

To him that is offlicted, pity should be showed. That word pity, in the
Hebrew, signifies a sacred sweet affection of mercy, (...) Pietas, bonitas,
benignitas and per Antiphrasin impletas, crudetitas, ex Cal^aicae linguae usu.
benignity, goodness and piety: And by Contraries (in which sense words are
often used in that language) it notes, First, Reproach; Prove. 14. 34 Sin is
(chesed) a reproach to any people; Secondly, Impiety and cruelty, harshness and
severity; Thirdly, It signifies any abominable wickedness, (Levit. 20. 17.)
where Moses speaking of incest, incest between brother and sister, calls that
abomination, by this word (Chesod) A wicked thing. That may have a good name,
the nature whereof is so ill, that it is not to be named.

Further, The word, as we translate, imports more than a bare act of pity or
commiseration; as suppose a man see his brother in misery, compassionates him,
but relieves him not, this is not pity. Such the Apostle James describes, in
his first Chapter, verse. 15. If a brother or a sister be naked, and destitute
of daily food, and you say unto them, be filled, be warmed, be clothed; poor
creatures, ye are hungry, yea are naked, I pity you, I am sorry to see you
thus; be filled, be clothed; I wish it were otherwise with you; and yet in the
mean time he gives them nothing wherewith either to cloth or feed them; Is
this fulfilling the law of love? Is this charity? Nothing less. The pity here
spoken of, is not a verbal piety; Our saying to a brother in trouble, be
comforted, or I would, course were taken for you, I wish you well with all my
heart, and so we bestow a mouth-ful of good words, but not so much as a morsel
of bread, or a cup of cold water. Good words alone are cheap charity to man's
expense, and they are so cheap in Gods esteem, that they will not be found of
any value at all in the day of reckening: good words, not realized, if they be
found any where, will be found in the treasures of wrath. This is not the pity
which (Job teaches us) should be showed to him that is afflicted: The Apostles
quesion shakes such out of all claim to this grace, 1 John. 3. 17. whosoever
(says he) has this worlds goods, and sees his brother in need, and shuts
up his bowels of compassion from him, how does the love of God dwell in him?
Though a man's mouth be open with good words, yet if he shut his bowels from
good deeds, there is no love to God or man housed in that man's heart. It is no
Pity (to speak of) only to speak pity; and therefore the Apostle adds,
verse 18 My little children, let us not love in word and in tongue, but in deed
and in truth; that's the true meaning of this word, to him that is afflicted,
pity should be showed; But you (my friends) have not given me so much as the
sound of pity, you have not bemoaned me, much less have you relieved me, which
is the substance of pity, real pity: You have not loved me in tongue, giving
me good words, much less in deed and in truth. Deed-pitty, is both the duty and
the disposition of a godly man: therefore this word (Chasid) in the concrete,
is often used in Scripture, to signify a godly man: He is one that has
obtained much grace and pity from the Lord, and he is kind, gracious and
pitiful unto men. The holy Proverb assures us, That a good man is merciful,
pitiful to his beast, much more to a man, and most of all to a godly man, who
is his brother in the nearest bond. And it is considerable how this word was
used by way of distinction among the Jews: who cast their whole people or
nation into three ranks, (and it is grounded upon Romans 5 6, 7. where the
Apostle alludes to those three sorts.) First, There were (Reshagnim)
ungodlymen, the profane rabble. Secondly, there were the (Tsadikmi) righteous
men: And thirdly, there were (Chasidim) good men, or pitiful m^n; scarcely
(says the Apostle) will one die for a righteous man, for a man fair and just
in his dealings; peradventure (for one of the Chasidim*) for a good man, some
one may chance to die; He that had been pitiful, might (happily) find pity; and
having done so much good in his life, all would desire he should live still But
herein God commended his love to us, that while we were ^et sinners (Reshagnim,
in the worst ra^ke of men) Christ died for us. No man had either love or pity
enough to die for them, who had so much impiety. The farthest that the natural
line o^ man's pity can reach, is to do good to those who do him good, or are
good.

Pity, notes out such a sort of men, and such a sort of actions, as Antiqui
vocant Cicon^am, pietatis cultricem. Ciconiis pietas eximia est, So^.
are fullest of love, of bowels of brotherly kindeness, and compassion: Hence
the Stork, which by diverse of the ancients, was put for the Emblem of love and
benignity, is expressed in the Hebrew by this word, Levit. 11. 19. The Storke is
very tender toward her young ones, and her young ones are as tender of her,
when she is old, as naturalists have observed. So then, this word imports the
height of all offices and affections of love from man to man, especially from
Christian to Christian, in times of trouble, and cases of extremity: This Pity
you should have showed me, says Job.

But he forsakes the fear of the Almighty. That is, he forsakes all
godliness, goodness and religion; Fear takes in all that's good; and so it is
conceived, that Job retorts the words of Eliphaz in the fourth chap. Is this
thy fear? or where is thy fear, thy Religion? Now Job says, Is this your fear?
You have forsaken the fear of the Almighty. Is this your Religion, to deal so
harshly with a distressed friend, or to give him such cold comfort? Surely you
have forsaken that fear of the Almighty, which you charged me with. Have not I
reason to ask, Is this thy fear? or to conclude, You have forsaken the fear of
the Almighty.

These words are diversely rendered. Some thus, He that takes away pity from his
friend, has forsaken the fear of the Almighty. And Qui tollit ab ^mico suo
misericordiam, timorem Domini derelinquit, Vulg.
that's a truth, and a good sense, though not so clear to the letter of the Text.

Mr. Broughton joins this with the former verse, By him whose mercy is molten
toward his friend, and who leaves the fear of the Almighty. So referring this
(melting) to mercy, and not to the man; joining it with the former, thus, Have
not I my defense, and is judgment driven away from me, by him, whose mercy is
molten away toward his neighbor, and who leaves the fear of the Almighty? As
if Job had said, Eliphaz do thou think thou haste driven away all wisdom
from me by thy dispute? Do thou think that I have lost my reason, as thou
have lost thy pity? Thou think wisdom and understanding have forsaken me,
but it appears by thy dealings, that thou have forsaken the fear of God, which
is the beginning of wisdom.

Thirdly, it is rendered in the contrary sense. The word Chesid) An dissoluto a
sodali suo convitium, et quod timorem omnipotentis deseruerit? An hac amicitiae
jus? etc. ut nunc ego a vobis audio, Merc.
being taken for reproach and harsh dealing, and so the meaning is made out
with a kind of admiration, thus, Should reproaches be cast upon a man that is
afflicted from his friend! should he be told that he has forsaken the fear of
the Almighty! and that wisdom is driven from him! Do you think I am not able
to discover your dealings? should you go about to reproach me in this
condition? should you tell me thus harshly, that I am departed from the fear of
God? Is this think you a fair carriage toward me: when you saw me melted and
afflicted, you should have given me sweet and comfortable words, not
reproachful words?

Job (according to this sense) sound his friends, dealing with him, as the Jews
with Christ, to whom being a thirst, they gave vinegar to drink: Or as David in
the type speaks, they gave me gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me
vinegar to drink; here seems to be a like meaning. You have given me reproaches
in stead of comforts, slandered me, instead of refreshing me, and is this the
course you should take? As Absalom said to Hushai, 2 Samuel 16. 17. Is this thy
kindness to thy friend? when he seemed to fall away from David unto him. So
Job might speak to Eliphaz, Is this thy kindnesle to thy friend, to load him
with reproaches, when you see him over-laden with afflictions?

A fourth thus;

Shall he that consumes by the reproaches of his friend, forsake the fear of
the Almighty? The meaning whereof is this. Do Qui tabescit ab amico suo
pro^ro, etiam timorem omnipotentis retinquet? Foelices soli videntur sapere,
miseri desipere.
you think that all men whose riches and comforts are lost, have lost their
reason and judgment? And do you think that they who are reproacht by men; do
not fear God? The world commonly judges none wise, but they that are rich; And
that they fear God most, who rejoice most. But my practice and example (I doubt
not) shall consute that opinion, and give all the world to know, that a man
consumed and spent by the reproaches of men, and the strokes of God, may yet
fear God and keep up his stock to the full, in holiness, and in wisdom.
Contabescens charitatem non tam dicitur. erga guem socij charitas contabescit,
quam quu^ per soci^ charitatem preposter ram (fcilicet) and sine scientia
exercitam contabescit. Cocc.


Fifthly, This melting is referred, not to the pity of his friends, but to Job
melting or consuming, by that, which they called pity. Thus.

Shall he be charged to have forsaken the fear of the Almighty, who consumes by
the charity of his friends? that is, who is more afflicted by the counsels,
which his friends (in love) give him, then by all his other afflictions. As the
mercies of the wicked are always cruel, (Prove. 12. 10.) So sometime the
mercies of the godly are; especially, when they give preposterous and
indiscreet counsel; and this interpretation suites well, with the title, which
Job gave his friends, Miserable comforters are ye all. Chap. 16. 2. That is,
you have done your good will to comfort me, but God has not showed you the
way, nor given you the tongue of the learned, that ye might know how to
minister a word in season to him that is weary; and so notwithstanding all your
good intentions, ye have added to my miseries.

A sixth thus, (Hunc) dissolutum (prae doloribus) ab amico ejus (exhibenda)
misericordia (dereliquit) and eundem dissolutum) timor Saddai dear inquit.
Horum duorum versiculorum terminos ita digerimus ut in posteriori, v^x,
dissolutus sit mascu ini generis, and accusativi casus ^egaturque a verbo dear
inquit, cujus duo nominativi sint misericordia and timor Saddai ille vero
dissolut^s sit Job loquente de seipso in tertia persona. Apparet ex hoc.
expl^atione? ^um nominativo, ut, in (...) Isa. 31. 1. and Ezr. 1. 5, Coc.
Dissoluto a socio ejus benignitas est sc. impendenda alioqui timorem
Omnipotentis deserit. Drus. Vau apud Hebraeos vary sumitur, and interdum pro a
ioqui.
That pity, which friends should show this man melted with afflictions, has
forsaken him; but has the fear of the Almighty forsaken him also?

The meaning whereof may be made out to this effect. As if Job had said thus.
You plainly see, that there is no help in me, for my pains and uncessant
troubles, have quite bereaved me of all that strength, upon which I should
naturally subsist; And as for you (my friends) that pity and compassion, which
you should afford a man thus melted with sorrows, is quite fled and gone from
your hearts and lips. But what then? Is the fear of God departed also from this
sorrowful soul? It is confessed, strength is gone from my body, and I see pity
toward me, is gone from your souls. O, how miserable then were I, if I should
go from my God, and forsake his fear! You shall see, that though the pity of
men has forsaken me, a melted man, yet (as you object) the fear of God has
not.

A seventh reading, varying from ours only in a word, gives the sense very fair
and easy * to him that is afflicted or melted, pity should be showed by his
friend, otherwise he forsakes the fear of the Almighty. Whereas we say, [but he
forsaketh] this translation says [Otherwise he forsaketh] the fear of the
Almighty, that is, if a man do not show pity to his friend in affliction, that
man shows that he has forsaken the fear of the Almighty. Thus as I hinted at
the entrance of this passage, Interpreters are much divided about the
Grammatical construction of these words; There is a truth in every sense given,
and their variety may teach us to adore the fullness of the holy language, which
leads our thoughts so many ways, as also to be humbled for our own blindness
of mind, and narrowness of heart, to see or comprehend the mind of God fairly
written to us.

But I take the last to be the clearest meaning of Job in this passage, and
that, to which most of the former are reducible, and therefore staying upon
this sense, I shall give two or three observations from it.

First, It is the common duty of friends, and the special duty of godly
friends, to pity and help one another in affliction. I say, to pity and to
help (for that is the compass of the word) we have not done our duty in
pitying the distressed, unless we come to real assisting them. We satisfy not
our obligation to the bond and Law of love by giving comfortable words. As that
faith, which is alone without works, does not justify us, so that pity which
is alone without works, does not justify our faith; such empty pity will go
for little better then cruelty, and not to help, will be interpreted
oppression. Word-pitty is but the leaf of love, Deed-pity is the fruit of it.
As we should labor to be filled with all the fruits of righteousness, which
are by Christ, so with all the fruits of love, of compassion, and of
tenderness, for these also are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of
God, Phil. 1. 11. Observe secondly,

That the fear of God is ever joined with love to our brethren. True religion
(that we mean by fear) has a double bond in it, a bond of obedience to God,
and a bond of love to men. The Apostle puts so much of religion in the latter,
that in one place he makes it, all religion, the very definition of religion,
Jam 1. 17. Pure religion and undefiled before God (what is it?) It is this, to
visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction. This is religion and
pure religion, that is, this is a great branch of religion, and a special
fruit, which springs from that goodly tree, religion. To visit the fatherless,
is more then to lock upon them, and ask them, how they do: To visit them is to
help them: It is like that visit (in it is proportion) which Christ made into
the distressed world. He visited and redeemed his people, or he visited his
people, to redeem them. And, the fatherless, to whose visit religion lead us,
are not only poor children or Orphans, whose parents are lately dead, and they
not able to shift for themselves, but the fatherless are all the afflicted,
who want our help, or patronage. Every helpless and comfortless soul is as an
Orphan without parents, as a widow without a husband, To relieve such is pure
religion. In the 1 John. 4. 20. the Apostle makes that an everlasting
conviction against any man, that he loves not God, if he loves not his brother;
If a man say he loves God, and hates his brother, (there is no medium in this
point, between hating and not loving, or between hating and not helping, it it
be in our power) he is a liar, for he that loves not his brother, whom he has
seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? Job puts it so here, you
should show pity to your friend in affliction, but you forsake the fear of the
Almighty, and where fear of God is not, the love of God is not. Love to God is
visible in love to man. And in affliction, the love of man to man, is made most
visible. A true friend can hardly be discovered in prosperity, and a false
friend can hardly be hid in adversity. Lastly, observe,

It is not enough, not to be cruel to, or not to grieve the afflicted. We must
show them favor and do them good. The light of nature condemns the
oppressor, and the light of religion condemns them who show no pity.

JOB Chap. 6. Verse. 15-22. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and
as the stream of brooks they pass away;

Which are blackish by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow is hid.

What time they wax warm, they vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed out of
their place.

The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and perish.

The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them.

They were confounded, because they had hoped; they came thither, and were
ashamed.

For now ye are nothing; ye see my casting down and are afraid.


JOB having in the former verse begun to charge his friends with unkindnesse,
proceeds in this Context to illustrate his charge by a similitude; To make
their unkindness, yet more notorious and visible, he sets it out by things,
which are visible: that so their own eyes or experiences might convince them,
as well as his Discourse. The whole similitude is extended from the 15th to the
21th verse. The sum of all is this, That Job had found his friends like those
brooks, which hold least water, when there is most need, and greatest enquiry
for water; they gave him no comfort, when he was nothing (to the eye) but
sorrow. He was parcht and scorcht in those hot regions and fiery climates of
affliction; and they gave him not (to his taste) so much as a drop of water to
cool his tongue, to ease his complaints. That in general.

For the better understanding of this elegant similitude, we may observe the
parts of it.

We have here 1. The Protasis or proposal. 2. The Exegesis or explication 3.
The Apodosis or application
of this similitude

Or more plainly, we have four things considerable in it.

The similitude is 1. Proposed. 2. Explained. 3. Confirmed. 4. Applied.


It is, 1. Proposed, verse. 15. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook,
etc. 2. Explained, verse. 16, 17, 18. Which are blackish by reason of ice, and
wherein the snow is hid, what time they wax warm, they vanish, etc: 3.
Confirmed verse. 19. 20. The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba
waited for them, they were confounded, because they had bope, etc. 4. Applied
to them, verse. 21. For now ye are nothing, ye see my casting down, and are
afraid.


So much for the parts, now to the opening of the words.

Verse. 15. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook etc. My bretbren] The
word signifies, first a brother of the same bowels (so brother is taken in the
strictest sense) a natural brother. (...) Frater, propinquus, vel qui eadem
professione gente, moribus vel amicitia frater est. Etiam tribuitur inanimatis,
quae similitudinem quandam invicem; habent: Chemnit. in Harm. Evang. Veraamicit
ia est quaedam fraternitas and animorum aequalitas.


Secondly, a brother of the same blood, any kinsman.

Thirdly, it signifies any one that is knit to us in affection, or like us in
manners and disposition.

Fourthly, it notes all those, who are bounded with us in the same Nation, or
associated in the same profession, though scattered all the world over. As in
Scripture, that relative word, Father is taken, not only for a natural Father,
but for any Leader, Guide or directour of others in spiritual, or civil
respects; so, they who are near one to another in civil or spiritual respects,
are called brethren, though they be never so far distant in blood or place.

And it is observable, that this word likewise is attributed to things
inanimate, or without life, when they have a similitude or likeness one to
another. So Exodus 25. 20. The faces of the Cherubims shall took one to
another. The Hebrew is, each man to his brother. And Exodus 26. 3. 5. The
curtains of the Tabernacle, the loops, and (verse. 17.) the Tennous, are all
called woman and sister, because they were all to be of the same materials and
dimensions. (...) Frater cognationem habet, cum (...) unus, vel (...) pariter,
quoniam qui similes sunt, vel in uno convenient, fratres dicuntur. (...)


Some Critics observe, that the Hebrew word, for a brother, is of near
brotherhood or alliance, with two other words, whereof the first signifies,
One, and the other Alike or Together, to show that brethren ought to be as One,
and Alike or Together, which latter is by an elegant Paranomatia, joined with
it Psalm. 133. 1. Behold how good and pleasant is it for brethren to dwell
together in unity, or as we put in the Margin, To dwell even together.

So then, the very word, whereby brethren are expressed, notes that there ought
to be a nearness, a similitude, yea an Oneness (if I may so speak) between
them in their affections and actions. Yet (says Job) these men, whose relation
thus obliges them, have laid themselves out to my greatest disadvantage.

My brethren have dealt deceitfully with me: The word imports dealing
perfidiously or treacherously in any (...) Persidus fuit, perfide egit,
violavit sidem, vel foedus.
kind, Isa. 21. 3. The treacherous dealer, deals treacherously. And it is
applied to that treachery or prefidiousnesse, which is the highest in civil
relations, the treachery of the wife to the husband, Jer. 3. 20. Surely as a
wife treacherously departs from her husband, so you have departed from me;
Idolatry is the violation of our faith to Christ, And therefore often called
adultery.

This word (to note that by the way) as it signifies to deal perfidiously, in
the Verb, and perfidiousnesse and treachery, in the Nown; so also a garment or
vesture made up of any kind of matter Forte quod vestimentum sit primae hominis
contra Deum perfidiae tegume^tum and testimonium, cum antea homo nudui fuerit,
Bux.
or stuff And the reason is thus given by the learned Hebrician, Because a
garment is both the cover and the witness of man's first perfidiousnesse and
treachery against God. Our first parents in innocence had no garment, but
innocence: they were without clothing, and wanted no clothing; they were
naked, and did not perceive their nakedness; but as soon as they departed from
God treacherously, their sin told them, that is, made them feel that they were
naked: therefore they put themselves on Aprons of leaves, but God clothed them
with the skins, and clothing he vested in a word of that language, which
should ever mind man of the reason, why clothes were first put upon him,
namely, his perfidious and treacherous dealing with God. That (take it in
passage) which now so many make a matter of their pride, is a witness of their
shame, their shameful rebellion, and falling away from God.

Put these together, My brethren have dealt deceitfully with me. Job means it
of his three visiting friends, these, (if not bethren of his blood, yet) were
of great familiarity and correspondency with him; therefore, he at once titles
and reproves them thus, My brethren have dealt deceitfully with me. Hence
observe,

First, That there is no obligation so near, but an evil heart will break,
through it. My brethren have dealt deceitfully. Though I suppose, Job here
charged his brethren too deeply, if so deep as their hearts, who,
notwithstanding they failed in the business they came about, yet I believe,
had no intention to wrong or to deceive him: Yet many have been intentionally
deceived by brethren; and it is a truth in position, That brethren will deceive.

Secondly, whereas he puts such an Emphasis upon it, My brethren have dealt
deceitfully with me. As if he had said, you are not enemies, you are not
strangers that speak these things, but my brethren. Note from it.

That, as it is ill for any to deal deceitfully, so worst of all for brethren.
It is a trouble to be deceived by any, and a sin, for any to deceive, but it is
worse to be deceived by those we trust. And when a brother deceives, the sin
of the deceit is doubled, whether he be a brother in the flesh, or a brother in
friendship, or a brother in the profesion of the faith. Deceit from a brother
is exceeding bad in all, but worst of all in the last. Deceit from a brother in
the faith is more then double unfaithfulness. David complains (Psalm. 55. 12.)
of the wrong he had received from such a brother, It was not an enemy that
reproached me, for then I could have born it (the reproach had not been half so
heavy or grievous unto me, if an enemy had reproached me, the wound had not
been half so wounding, if an enemy had smitten me.) But it was thou a man, mine
equal, my guide and my acquaintance, we took sweet counsel together, and we
walked to the house of God in company; to be reproached and wronged by thee,
this is the thing that lies heavy upon my spirit. God himself complains most,
when they deal perfidiously with him, who are near him, his own people; He
cannot expect any other of Heathens and strangers; but when his children deal
deceitfully with him, he complains of this, as much, with admiration as with
anger. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against
me, Isa. 1. 2. He calls Heaven and Earth to bear witness of this
unfaithfulness. Men are wicked beyond all reason (not that there is reason in
any wickedness, but so we speak of all excesses) men (I say) are wicked beyond
all reason, when God appeals against them, to things without all sense. David
satisfied himself in the evil measure he received from a stranger, because he
had received evil from a Son; As greater benefits and favors, swollow up the
thought of lesser, so do greater afflictions, and unkindnesses. A man has no
leisure to think of his discurtesie, who gives him ill language, when another
assaults him to cut his throat: When Shimei railed on David, (2 Samuel 16. 10,
11.) Abishai* heats his spirit to revenge; What says David? My son which
came forth of my bowels, seeks my life, how much more now may this Benjamite
do it? This stranger, one of another Tribe and Family: As if he had said, I
have no reason to be much troubled, to hear a stranger speak hard words against
me, when my son is up in arms against me; to hear the one curse me, when the
other would kill me. Moses uses this argument, to umpire between the two
Hebrews, Sirs, ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one to another, Acts 7. 26. It
will be a mighty aggravation of sin, when God shall say, My children have dealt
deceitfully with me: or man, my bowels, my brethren have dealt deceitfully with
me.

My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook. Here is the shadow of their
deceit, Job explains himself by a similitude; They have dealt deceitfully, but
how? I will tell you how, they have dealt deceitfully, as a brook, and as the
stream of a brook they pass away; I can go to the streams, and to the brooks,
and show my friends the face of their hearts (to me I am sure of their dealings
with me) in those waters. (...) Significat haereditatem, deinde fluvium, and
quoniam torrens plerumque in valle labitur, accipitur aliquando provale, Mer


They are as a brook.] The word signifies both a brook and a valley; because
brooks usually run in valleys, therefore one word expresses both. The same
word signifies also to inherit, and an inheritance; Hence some join all the
three senses together in this one word, A brook, a valley, and an inheritance;
because valleys inherit the brooks, which descend to them from the maintains;
valleys are the heirs or inheritresses of the streams which issue from the
hills, Psa. 104. 10. The holy Ghost describes a spring or a brook, thus, He
sends springs into the Valleys, which run among the hills, hills are the
original of Rivers, and they run among the hills; hills send them down as a
portion to the valleys.

But the brook here spoken of, is not such a brook, as has a spring in a hill,
mountain or rock; but a brook or torrent, caused by rain, or melted snow; The
text cleares that meaning; My friends have dealt deceitfully as a brook; A
brook springing from a hill, will not deceive, such a brook being fed with
continual supplies of water, will give us drink continually; but a brook
falling from a hill, fails quickly: such a brook, the next words express more
clearly, and as the stream of brooks they pass away.

As a stream of brooks. That is, as those torrents and overflowings (...) Aqua
impetuosa and violenta quae fluit cum vi and impetu.
of brooks; A brook has a constant channel, and it has an accidental channel:
We see many streams running into a brook in a time of rain, and that brook
swollen above its banks, sending out many streams: So that to say, they are
like the stream of brooks, is to say, they are like brooks, when they stream
forth, or to those streams of brooks, which by waters from the clouds, are
suddenly increast; These streams of brooks, usually called Land-flouds, having
their spring or fountain in the clouds; which sometimes distill in soft,
soaking dewey showers, and often pour out in strong, violent stormy raines,
whence these streams (which in the Hebrew, are denominated from their
impetuous violent strength) run violently, and spend their strength as quickly.
That which is violent, cannot be permanent, much less perpetual. Nullum
viol^ntum perpetuum.
We have the word, Psalm 126. 4. Where the Church prays, Turn again our
captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the South; which some render, As the
mighty waters in the South. Why Tanquam aquas validissimas, Jun.
would they have their captivity turned like those mighty floods in the south?
The reason is this, because the South is a dry country, where there are few
springs, scarce a fountain ^o be found in a whole desert. What then are the
waters, they have in the South? in those parched Countries? They are these
mighty strong torrents, which are caused by the showers of Heaven: So the
meaning of that prayer in the Psalm, is, that God would suddenly turn their
captivity. Rivers come suddenly in the South: where no spring appears, nor any
sign of a River, yet in an hour the water is up, and the streams overflow. As
when Eliah sent his servant toward the Sea (in the time of Ahab) he went and
looked, and said, There is nothing. That is, no show of rain, not the least
cloud to be seen, yet presently the heavens grew black and there was a great
rain, 1 Kings 18. 44. Thus, let our captivity be turned, thus speedily and
suddenly, though there be no appearance of salvation, no more than there is of
fountain in the sandy desert; or of rain in the clearest heavens, yet bring
salvation for us: We use to say of things beyond our supply, have we a spring
of them? or can we fetch them out of the clouds? so though no ground appears,
whence such Rivers should flow, yet let our salvation be as Rivers in the
South, as Rivers fetched out of the clouds, and dropped in an instant immediately
from the Heavens. Job compares his brethren and friends to those streams of
brooks, they came suddenly, but they are quickly down again. The Comparison in
the Psalm, is made only with respect to the sudden appearance of those Rivers;
but Job applies it, to the sudden passing away of those Rivers; as the stream
of Brooks they pass away. Their coming so suddenly, is a great refreshing, but
their sudden departure is as great a disappointment

The word notes two things; First, motion: and secondly, consumption. (...) Est
praeterire and perire, evanescere, quia quae praeterierunt non amplius existunt.
In both senses, violent torrents pass away: First, they pass away with a
strong motion; and then they pass away with a sudden consumption, they run so
fast, that they run themselves off their legs, they come to nothing; their
motion spends them, whereas the motion of a River does not. So the word is
used, Psalm 37. 36 He passed away, and lo, he was not, yea, I sought him, but he
could not be found. Those things that pass away, are many times said to loose
their being and their use; he passed away, and lo, he was not. So Job means
here, these streams pass away, and lo, they are not.

Having thus proposed this similitude, that his friends dealt deceitfully as a
brock, and showed what kind of brook he meant, those violent torrents, which
pass away: now he gives a further description of those brooks.

Verse. 16. Which are blackish by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow is
hid. The Vulgar Latin puts a strange sense upon this passage, rendering it
thus. He who fears the frost, shall be overwhelmed by Qui timet pruinam irruet
super eum nix, Vulg.
snow. Which seems to be a proverbial speech, to set torth those, who shifting
from one danger or extreme, run into another more dangerous, like that of the
Prophet Amos, chapter 5. 19. As if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him;
or went into his house, Elegans dictum in socios Iobi, sed minus concordat cum
Ebraica veritate, Drus. * Tinebam peccata minima, nunc punior quasi pro magnis
sceleribus, Glos.
and leaned his hand on a wall, and a Serpent bit him. But as their translation
is a corruption of the Text, so their ordinary gloss corrupts their
translation. * I feared smallest sins, but now I am punished after the rate of
great sins. Whereas indeed Job was ready to acknowledge, that the least sin he
ever committed, deserved a greater punishment, then the greatest pain he felt;
and yet never looked upon any of his pains, as the punishment of his sins. But
to pass that.

Take the mind of Job, as pursuing his similitude in more words to this effect.
These mighty streams are but for a while, they pass away; or if at any time
they continue, it is not from any quality or fitness they have in themselves to
continue; but as their coming is extrinsical (not out of the ground, but from
the air) so is their continuance: I grant, these great Land-flouds, sometimes
stay with us a while, not because they have any ordinary natural supply or
stay, they are only blackish by reason of the ice: after a great Rain in
winter, a great frost comes, and then your watercourse, or brooks swelling
above their channels, are surprised by cold, and cannot get away, the cold
condenceth the waters, and freezeth them up, and the snow is kept close from
melting; then these torrents or streams, seem to be lasting fountains, and
treasures of water.

Or take it thus, He compares those friends, who administer no comfort in
trouble, to brooks, which in time of rain, when we have no need, overflow with
water; but in cold winter weather are locked up with frosts, or in hot
summer-weather, are exhaled and dried up by the Sun. As it follows;

Verse. 17. What time they wax warm, they vanish, when it is hot, they are
consumed out of their place. These streams, you might think, living, lasting
streams, or standing, fixed waters, when you saw them frozen into great
mountains of ice and snow compact together: but stay a while, and you shall see
what becomes of them; at the next thaw, they are consumed out of their place,
Such friends have I, and such is the friendship of mankind, unless God renew
the heart, or restrain it, from its natural baseness. (...) Diffluere,
diffundi, Buxt.


The word which we translate to wax warm, is used but this once in Scripture:
it signifies also, scattered or dissipated. And the reason is, because heat or
warmth, dissipates and separates those Dissipati. Vulg.
things which were united or congealed. The Sun warms the streams, and then the
waters, which stood on a heap, scatter and disperse. The sum of all is: These
streams in winter have nothing to stay their consuming, but their hardening; and
as soon as heat comes, they dissolve, and are gone, in Summer these brooks are
dry.

This is yet further illustrated in the 18. verse.

The paths of their way are turned aside, they go to nothing and perish. What
he had said before in those words, They vanish and are consumed out of their
place, he says again in these, The paths of their way are turned aside, they
go to nothing and perish; That is, these streams are, as if they had never
been, you cannot find them in their former channels; these waters are quite
spent, the Sun at a few draughts, empties these vessels, and draws them dry;
so that there is not a drop lest, either for man or beast.

The word which we render, Turned aside, signifies, To gather (...) Inclinavit
percelluit.
up a contract into a narrow compass, as when a man of courage, gathers or
shrinks up himself, or, as we say, buckles to a business, that he may put out
the uttermost of his strength. S^ Judge. 16. 29. When Sampson came to the
pillars, on which the house stood, the text says, He turned himself with all
his might; (It is the word of the text) as if Sampson would collect all the
power he had into one place, to pull the pillars out of theirs. He that would
do a great service, will have all his outward strength about him, or near at
hand. And at such a time, a man will have all his inward strength close
together, and therefore puts his body into less room, if he can that all his
members may act as one. We shrink up the body also in sudden fear. The word is
so used, Ruth 3. 8. When Boaz, that good man, awakning, found Ruth at his feet,
and perceived there was a woman on the floor, he gathered or shrunk up himself,
as a man that is afraid in his bed, will gather up his limbs nearer together,
and lies in less room. In such a manner, the heat gathers or shrinks up the
waters.

Thus the paths of these waters (says Job) are shrunk up or gathered together,
as it were, into one channel, or they creep under the banks, to shelter
themselves from that great Drinker and river-drier the Sun, but all their
subterfuges are in vain; the Sun dries up all, nothing remains; so it follows
in the next words.

They go to nothing and perish. It is the word used, Genesis 1. 2. The earth was
without form and void; (...) Vacuitas,
There was a nothingness upon that confused heap before a second creation
stamped a form upon it, that which is useless, is but as good as nothing. The
Jews express an Idol by this word, 1 Samuel 12. 21. which suits excellently with
that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. An Idol is nothing in the world. So these
streams, these rivers which seemed such goodly pleasant streams, such as might
have relieved the thirsty traveller at all seasons, come to them in summer,
they are gone to nothing, that are like that rude mass, when the world lay
undigested into parts, void and without form.

Before I come to the general Observations from the whole similitude, observe,
from this description of passing streams, That,

Things or persons cannot hold long, which are not supplied from aninward
principle. Job describes streams, having no spring to maintain them, the rain
filled them, the cold froze them, and the warmth of the Sun emptied them. As it
is in things, so in persons, no man can hold out either in gracious and
spiritual, or just and honorable civil acts, unless he have a principle
within, answerable to Metapbora insignis and Hieroglyphicum clarissime
exprimens, vanitatem magnae speciei pietati^ and charitatis quae non ex vera
fide provenit, Coc.
what he undertakes. (Job. 27. 10.) Will the hypocrite always call uon God?
Not always, why? because he has not a spirit (or spring) of prayer; Therefore
hypocrites are well compared to such brooks, as Job here describes. A failing
brook, is a clear Emblem of a false heart, both to God and man.

And that is the reason why regeneration is set forth by the gift of a new
principle; of a new heart, or of a new nature. It is to no purpose to work a
man by some extrinsical motive, by hopes, or by fears, by threatenings or by
promises, by rewards or punishments, to do, or forbear good or evil: unless
he have a new heart, all vanishes and comes to nothing. A regenerate person,
has a new heart, a new spirit, is a new creature, a new man; all which notes,
a lasting principle, an everlasting frame of holiness in the main, though it
may sometime decline and need repaires. It is far better to be a rivolet, a
little spring, then to be a great torrent; It is better to have a little spring
of grace, than a great loud stream of profession. It is reported by
Geographers, in their descriptions of America, that in Peru, there is a river
called the Diurnall river, or the day river, because it falls with a mighty
current in the day, but in the night is dry. This may seem to be a fabulous
report, but the reason given (which is direct to the point in hand) makes it
not only probable, but very plain; For they tell us, that this river is not
feed by a fountain or a spring, but is caused merely by the melting of the
snow, which lies on the mountains thereabouts: in the day time, when the sun is
up and warm, the snow melts, but when night comes, and the Sun goes down, the
snow freezes, and so the channel dries. Thus it is with those, who have not an
inward principle of holiness, they may have a great flood of profession, when
the snow melts down into their bosoms, by the shine of outward prosperity; but
when night, and cold, when troubles and dangers come, their waters freeze up,
or pass away, and go to nothing. So much of the causes, why these streams,
these water brooks vanish, they have no spring to maintain and feed them:
Rain, and frost, and snow (uncertain all) are all they have to trust to.

Job having thus explained his similitude, and showed, what he means by brooks,
and what kind of brooks he means. He now confirms all by an experiment, You
shall see it is thus, these brooks will yield nothing at a time of need, Many
have tried them; who are they? The troops of Tema looked, the companies of
Sheba waited for them.

The troops of Tema. That is, the travelers who came in great (...) Semita,
semitae Thema cetus hominum sive turmae viatorum.
companies from Tema, and passed through those desert Countries, where they had
observed in the winter, streams and floods of water frozen, and full of snow;
now in their summer travails, being parcht with heat, and distressed for want
of water, they expected relief from those brooks, which they had marked out for
themselves, and of which they had, said, These will be watering Hos torrentes
designaverunt sive pro statione ad refocil ationem, Coc.
places for us, and refreshings in extremest heat. We read often in the old
Testament of such travelers, Genesis 37. 25. Behold a company of Ishmaelites,
came from Gilead, with their camels bearing spicery, and balm, and myrrh,
going down into Egypt. Such are now called, a Caravan. The letter of the
Hebrews is, The paths of Tema; the path or road, in which they traveled, is
put for the travelers. Itinera, homines inter se facientes.
So Isa. 21. 13. O ye traveling companies of Dedanim; the Hebrew is, O ye
paths of Dedanim, that is, O ye who travel in the paths of Dedanim: Thus here,
The ways of Tema, or the Troops of Tema; and the companies of Sheba, waited
and looked in these places for water, and (as it follows) they found none.

The troops of Tema looked. Why did they look? why did they wait for those
streams? They had seen plenty of water there, and therefore being thirsty they
looked and waited for water. Note hence; first,

That the sense of want carries us out to look for a remedy. The troops of Tema
looked; After what? after the streams of brooks; why? because they were
parched with thirst. They that are thirsty, will be looking for a stream, for a
river; they that are hungry, will be enquiring after bread. As it is in
natural, so in spiritual things; when once the soul is parched and thirsty, oh
how it ^ongs for the rivers of mercy, for the streams of consolation! it looks
and waits for them t^o. As the heart pants after the water brooks so pants
my soul after thee O God, my soul thirsts for God, for the living God, Psalm.
2. 1, 2. That Is the reason, why Job instances in Tema and Sheba, because they
were often distressed in their travel for want of Water. Secondly observe,

That probability of speeding, is ground enough for seeking and endeavoring.
Th^s^ Troops of Tema looked, and as they looked they searched for waters; they
waited, because it was probable that they should find water, where they had
observed water. As (Mat 21. 19*) Christ himself when he was an hungry, saw a
fig tree afar off (says the text) having leaves upon it; A fig tree having
leaves, in probability had fruit also: because the fig tree (as Naturalists
observe) p^ts forth her fruit as soon as her leaf; therefore when Christ saw
leaves upon the fig tree, it was an argument that there was fruit too; And
whereas Mark says, For the time of figgs was not yet, he means the time of
in-gathering figgs: So that, the Tree having leaves, showed it night have fruit
growing, and the time of gathering figgs not being past, both these were ground
enough for the Lord Christ to go and seek fruit upon it: For in this he acted
according to rule of humane reason, not of Divine omniscience. Many object
against seeking God, and humbling themselves before him; It is a thing doubt
full, whether ever they shall speed, whether ever they shall find, or no; they
know not whether God will be merciful unto them or no; He will be merciful to
some (they know) but whether they be the men, is very doubtful. I may answer
such from the point, A probability of speeding, is ground enough for seeking.
If Christ sought for fruit when he saw leaves, beeause it was a thing probable
to find it; and if these of Tema and Sheba would seek for water, because they
had observed water in those places; surely then, there is ground enough of
seeking unto God for mercy, though we suppose there is but a probability of
having mercy. The Prophet persuades that afflicted people, to fast and humble
themselves, upon this ground, Who knows if he will return and repent (loel
2.) that is, it is very probable he will return and repent. Heathen Niniveh, is
carried by the same argument, Jona 39. Who can tell if God will return, etc. No
man is sure he will not, and though we are not sure he will, yet let us
venture. A peradventure from God, is better then a promise; or an assurance
from the creature. And if probability be ground enough, what ground is there in
assurance and certainty? and that is the ground we have of seeking God; if we
seek to him, and wait upon him in faith, we shall be sure to find, Psalm 9. 18.
The expectation of the poor shall not perish, The companies of Tema found no
water, but God is a living Fountain, whose waters fail not, his banks are alike
filled, summer and winter; Christ is not a water brook, but a spring of waters:
We shall never miss water of life, if we seek to, and wait upon him for it:
And if we believe on him, out of our bellies shall flow rivers of living
waters, Joh. 7. 38.

We have seen the endeavor of these troops of Tema, Now see how they speed.

Verse. 20. They were confounded, because they had hoped; they came thither and
were ashamed. The sum is this, they hoped to have found water there, and it
grieved and repented them, that ever they had hope to find water there, because
there was none to be found.

They were confounded. The word signifies indifferently to be ashamed or to be
confounded, (...) Puduit rei vel facti.
and to be confounded in regard of events, or actions. The word is very near in
sound to our English Abashed; It notes also a waxing pale and wan, when the
color fails and withers, comes and goes. If a man be failed much in what he
much hoped, his countenance fails too, his visage changes, as his thoughts
change, and he waxes pale: Therefore we translate it well, confounded. And it
is expressed by confounding; for two reasons.

First, because the complexion is confounded at such a time, shame and blushing
make a kind of confusion upon nature.

Secondly, the Spirits are confounded, the heart is troubled; Disappointments
of our hope perplex a man, both within and without. He is disordered quite
through. And because long delays cause shame, therefore by a Metonymie of the
cause for the effect, this word signifies to delay time (Exodus 32. 1.) And when
the people saw that Moses delayed to come down, etc. that is, when Ainsworth on
Exodus
the people saw, that Moses made them ashamed, by his long delay, they gathered
themselves together, etc. They waited for Moses 40. days, and now Moses had
stayed so long, that they were ashamed of his stay, that is, they expected, but
he came not, as they expected, this troubled them. We read the word in the same
sense (Judge. 5. 28.) The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried
through the latice, why is his chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the wheels
of his chariots? Why is his chariot ashamed? that is, why does his chariot stay
so long, as to make us ashamed of our stay? We have long looked what trophies
Sisera would bring home, why does his chariot by delays make us ashamed? Thus
in the text, these travelers are said to be confounded, because they had great
hope to find water, but were disappointed, They were confounded; because they
had hoped, the latter clause carries (...) Fodit, effodit-per Metaphoram
traductam a fodientibus, erubuit, Nam qui rubore perfus^ sunt ex peccato, ca^ut
in terram dimittunt, instar eorum qui terram defodiunt. Cart^*
the same sense, They came thither and were ashamed.

Yet there is a special elegancy in the word, ashamed; which signifies to
dig; to dig that we may hide a thing: At it is said of the evil servant,
who received but one talent, that he went and dug, and hid his Lords money,
Mat. 25. 18. And so by a Metaphor this word is translated to signify being
ashamed, because a man that is ashamed, would hide his head in a hole (as we
say) if he could, he would run his head into the ground, and rather be at the
pains to dig a hole in the earth, to hide himself, then to endure the shame
of showing himself. No man loves that should appear, or to appear in that,
which is his shame.

These two things, to be ashamed and confounded are often owned by the Saints
in their repentance. It is best not to do any thing whereof to be ashamed, but
when we have done evil, i^ is good to be ashamed. To hide our sins for shame,
and not to be ashamed of them, when they are not hid, are equal aggravations
of sin. Hence when the holy Ghost would set ^orth m^n impudent or shameless
in sinning, who sinned and cared not, who saw them, he says (Jer. 2. 34.) Also
upon thy skirts is found the blood of innocents, I have not found i^ by secret
search, so we translate it; the Hebrew is, I have not found it by digging; As
if he had said, some men are so ashamed of their sins, that when God comes to
find them out, he must dig for them, because they have dug into the earth,
as it were, to hide their sins; but others are so impudent in sinning, that God
needs not digg to find out their sins, they are so shameless, that they let
their sins lie above ground, or as the Prophet speaks (Isa. 3. 9.) They
declare their sins like Sodom, that is, openly. Truth and holiness never
seek corners, and sometimes sin and wickedness do not. And as the doing of
evil forbidden, causes or should cause shame; so does the not receiving of
good expected; Hence when the Lord would assure his people, that they should
undoubtedly receive all the good he had promised, and which they on that ground
could expect, he concludes with them, thus, And my people shall never be
ashamed. Why? The reason is plain in the Text, Ye shall ea^ in plenty and be
satisfied, Joel 2 26. which is directly opposite to this in Job. The Temanites
were ashamed, because being thirsty, they were not satisfied. And because Jesus
Christ shall so abundantly satisfy all the hunger and thirst, and supply all
^h^ wants and weaknesses of every believing soul, therefore it is expressed under
this word and notion, Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed, Romans 9.
33.

Such a meaning the word bears in this text, [They were ashamed] Foderunt
putees, sc. ad aquam inveniendam.
That is, when they saw there was no water to be had, they would have hid
themselves in the earth, or dug holes, to hide themselves in, for grief and
shame.

And some render this word here (though to another sense,) They dug. That
is, when they saw that there was no water in the streams, then they fell a
digging to see; if they could find any springs. That's a good sense. But rather
take digging as before. To show what shame would have us do, when we have done
amiss, or when we Miss what we would find, then we seek covert and hide our
selves. Hence these two are often joined in Scripture, Shame and hiding, with
the disappointment of hope. Read a text of near compliance with this in the
letter (Jer. 14. 3.) Their Nobles have sent their little ones to the waters,
they came to the pits and found no water (it was in a time of drought) they
returned with their vessels empty; What follows? they were ashamed and
confounded and covered their heads. Again, verse. 4. Because the ground is
chapt, for there was no rain in the earth, the plow-men were ashamed, they
covered their heads. And Joel. 1. 10. 11. The corn is wasted, the new wine is
dried up; What follows? Be ashamed O ye husbandmen; howl O ye Vinedressers,
because the harvest of the field is perished. So that in the common language
and current of the Scripture, shame is an effect of disappointment, and hiding
the face, or covering the head an effect of both. Observe hence,

First, That deceived hopes trouble us as much, if not more than present wants.

A present want is a present smart; but deceived hopes are a perpetual smart;
And that is the reason why the burden of sorrow is so heavy, and the drought of
the damned (who, as Dives in the Parable, shall never have a drop of water) so
intolerable. They (to allude to the text) hoped to come to the over flowing
streams of their former earthly delights; But alas, the paths of the way of
those brooks are turned aside for ever, they are gone to nothing and perished.
All the while they travel (and that will be an eternity) through that howling
wilderness and fiery desert, they shall not meet with one rivolet, nor taste
one drop of comfort to cool their parched tongues, or refresh their inflamed
bowels. Hopes delayed trouble, but hopes deceived, confound.

Secondly, observe from this passage,

That deceived hopes fill with shame. Deceived hopes make a man hide his head.

Shame arises two ways, either from doing a thing against common principles.
Or from loosing a thing against common expectation. The Lord threatens the
idolatrous Israelites, That they shall be ashamed of the Oaks, which they have
desired and confounded for the gardens which they had chosen, Isa. 1. 29. Why
ashamed of Oaks and gardens? because in gardens, and under shadie Oaks, they
set up and worshipped Idols, in which they trusted for deliverance and
protection; therefore when destruction should over take them, they must needs
be ashamed of Oaks and gardens, because their hopes were so fowlly deceived by
them. In the same sense the Lord soretels them by the same Prophet, that they
shall be ashamed of Ethiopia, their expectation, and of Egypt their glory,
Chap. 20. 5. because they had hoped for so much help, from confederacies with
these Nations, who in the issue would delude their hopes, and give them no help
at all. Thus also he speaks historically, Chap. 30, 5. They were all ashamed of
a people that could not profit them, nor be a help. All they who hope in any
thing, save the Lord, shall (as these troops of Tema) be ashamed, because they
have hoped, for they shall be deceived of their hopes.

And this is the reason, why hypocrites at the last day, when Christ comes to
judge them, shall be filled with shame. The reason (I say) is, because they
have been so full of deluding hopes. It appears they had great hopes, because
they speak great words, and make great boasts. They presume if any are to be
saved, they are the men; They show fair for heaven, Mat. 7. 22. Many shall say
unto me in that day, Lord, Lord have we not prophesied in thy Name? And in thy
Name cast out devils, etc. They shall say, Lord we have done thus and thus;
what does this repetition of their great works intimate, but the greatness of
their hopes? Now when Christ shall say, I know you not, How will shame cover
their faces for ever; And how will they cover their faces for shame, wishing
they might never be either seen or known. When Jacob had served a full
apprentiship in order to his marriage with beautiful Rachel, and at last,
through the guile of Laban was put off with blear-eyed Leah; the holy Ghost
expresses him in a kind of passionate amazement, And it came to pass, that in
the morning, behold it was Leah. And he said unto Laban, what is this thou have
done unto me? As if Jacob had been in such a distraction, that he could not
tell how to express himself: And therefore says, What is this thou have done
unto me? I know not by what name to call such a usage or disappointment as
this. O, in what a case will they be at the last day, who have served out (as
it were) an apprentiship in hopes of Rachel, the beauty of heaven and
salvation: And yet when they awake at the resurrection, Behold it will be
(infinitely worse than Leah) Hell and Damnation; How will shame and confusion
of face, take hold of such for ever?

So much for the Letter of this similitude; The failing of those streams,
exemplified in the sad experiences of the troops of Tema and the companies of
Sheba, as often deceived and ashamed, as they came to them for water.

Now follows the application of the similitude; as if Job had said, I have
spoken in the clouds, and told you stories of foreign concernment. I tell you
friends, I must even apply all this to you, and leave it at your doors. As
Nathan, when he had told David, the Parable of the poor man and his little
ew-lamb, which his rich neighbor took away to dress for the way-saringman, that
was come unto him; He (I say) brings it home to David in the close, saying,
Thou art the man. So after Job had told a story in the general or in a third
person, about deceitful brooks, and travelers deceived by them, now he
applies it to his friends, Ye my friends are the men I mean by these brooks. Ye
are they I have all this while delineated and set forth by these unfaithful and
unconstant streams of water.

Ver. 21. For now ye are nothing, ye see my casting down, and are afraid. For
now ye are nothing.] What, nothing? Ye are nothing at (...) Fuistis non, Estis
mihi nihili and vanissimi ut torientes descripti. Merc. Ex nihilo nihil fit: Ex
quo nihil fit nihil est.
all unto me: Ye are no more to me in any way of refreshing, then those
streams of the brook, which I even now described, were to the troops of Tema,
for now ye are nothing. As out of nothing comes nothing, so that is as nothing
unto us, out of which nothing comes.

If we render it word for word according to the Hebrew, it is, Ye were not; ye
are unto me, as if you had never been, or ye have deceived me, in what I took
you to be; I hoped for floods of comfort, for rivers of joy and streams of
consolation from you, but now I cannot find a drop, Ye are not unto me. That
man is, indeed, who does that, for which he is, or that, which is expected.

The Chaldee translates, Ye have been, as if ye were not. And there is a
difference in the Hebrew word, for some read it with Vos suistis, quasi non
essetis. Chald. (...) pro (...) and est idem quod (...) In textu Hebraeo
scribitur (...) sed in Margin notatur legendum esse (...) ei q. d. fuistis ei
similes, sc. Torrenti. Drus.
the Pronoun, Them; most with the Adverb, Not; But though the translation
differ, yet it comes to the same sense, ye are them, that is, like to them,
like to those streams, or ye are not; that is, ye are nothing to me. As those
streams were nothing, or were not, to the Travelers. The phrase, ye are not,
imports the deceivableness of those men; Job thought they would be something to
him, yea he thought they would be very much to him, even as much as
waterbrooks to a thirsty man; but they proved nothing at all to him. For as
the word [Yea] in Scripture notes assurance, constancy, fidelity and
faithfulness; so the word [Not or Nay] both in the Hebrew and in the Greek,
signifies unconstancy and unsettleness, especially, when these two are joined
together. And so it has a clear sense, with that (2 Cor. 1. 20.) where the
Apostle speaking of Christ, and of his faithfulness, says, The Son of Qui
respondet expectationi etiam dicitur, Etiam and non, qui varius and inconstans.
God was not yea and nay, but in him was yea; That is, he was not various,
inconstant and uncertain, but he was the very same; look what you have found
Christ at one time, you shall find him a second and a third time, yea, the same
for ever. He will not start from you an inch: So verse. 17. of the same Chapter;
When I was minded to come, did I use lightness? Or the things that I purpose,
do I purpose after the flesh, that with me there should be yea, yea, and nay,
nay? That is, that with me there should be I and No, something and nothing. It
is of a near importance with the words of Job, Ye are no to me; you promised to
be, I, to me, to be yea, yea, bu now it comes to the trial, ye are No, No to
me, that is, ye are nothing to me, ye are no such thing, as I expected you
would be.

For ye see my casting down, and are afraid Ye see my casting down] That is, my
affliction; To be cast down, (...) Dejectus, Metaphorice territus fuit, mente
jacuic.
and to be afflicted are the same. The word signifies dejection, and
consternation of spirit, to be heart-fallen; the falling of a man's mind, as
well as of his estate, Deuteronomy. 1. 21. Fear not, neither be discouraged, let not
your spirit or courage fall. Jobs casting down was in his body and goods, his
spirit and courage stood upright upon their feet; Ye (says Job) see my outward
casting down, the casting down of my estate abroad, ye see how all is broken
and lost; and now what is the help ye give me? Do ye stand to me, or lift me
up, now I am thus cast down? Do ye supply me with comfort? and prop me up with
counsel? no, ye are afraid your selves; ye are so far from removing my
trouble, that you your selves are troubled.

Ye are afraid] Their fear may be referred to his person, or to his condition,
ye are afraid to come nigh me, ye are afraid I will infect you: or ye are
afraid, some such evil will fall upon your selves, I thought ye had come as
friends to deliver me from my fears, and now ye are fallen into fears your
selves: Thus, Ye are not; ye are no such thing as ye promised me, ye promised
to comfort, at least Vos me visistis nulla miserecordia moti. Sept.
to pity me, but ye do not. So the Septuagint, Ye visit me, but ye are not
moved with any compassion toward me. I had been as well without your
companion. Or, if no such men had ever been in the world.

Observe first, from these words, For now ye are nothing.

He that is not, what he ought to be, or what he promised to be is nothing. To
be useless is (in a sense) to be essence-lesse. To be useless in the world,
is to be, as out of the world; A man who lives only to eat, and drink, and
sleep, may be said not to live at all. What we say in our English proverb, is
true, both of persons and of actions, As good never a white, as never the
better; as good not to be, as do no good. The Apostle Judge speaking of
unprofitable persons (ver. 12,) calls them Trees without fruit; And what then?
Twice dead, plucked up by the roots; As if the Apostle had said, I look upon
fruitless persons, as dead persons, yea as doubly dead, that is, dead sure
enough. As a man can be borne but once, in one kind (Nicodemus argued from a
truth, though not to a truth, because he could not destinguish natural from
Spiritual, John. 3, 4.) So a man can die but once, in one kind. These men of
whom the Apostle speaks, were alive naturally, though dead spiritually, how
then is it said, that they were twice dead? They were judged twice-dead,
either, because a spiritual death is so great a death, that it may well go for
two, yea one spiritual death, is worse then a thousand natutal deaths

Or secondly, they are said to be twice-dead, because they were dead, both in
regard of the truth of grace, and in regard of any outward actings of grace;
For some hypocrites, who are indeed dead in sin, yet act grace in many
outward fruits, as if they were alive. But of these persons it is said, their
fruit withers, and they are without fruit. They were not so much as
externally active; they had no life of union with Christ, and they did no good,
with the life of their profession in Christ, and therefore are justly said to
be twice-dead. They who have leaves and look fresh and lively, as if they hade
more then one life in them, yet, if Vselesse, are called liveless, and they who
do nothing in the world, are to be reckoned no-bodies in the world. In the
Parable of the Prodigal, the conclusion is, This my son was dead, and is
alive; Why dead? Because he was unanswerable to those purposes, to those ends
for which he received life. He was a prodigal, and had deserted his fathers
service, therefore his father looked upon him, as if (all that while) he had
not been, at all. That Is the description of the dead, as Jacob said of Joseph
(when he concluded him torn by a wild beast) Joseph is not; and Rachel would
not be comforted for her children, because they were not; so says the Father
of the Prodigal, This my son was dead, or he was not; he was no help nor
comfort to me. We no longer deserve the name or reputation of Any thing, then
we do those things for which we are. If we leave our duty (upon the matter) we
loose our nature, and are as if we had no being, while we reach not (at least
while we reach not after) the end of our being. A Heathen concludes of such a
man, He has only been, he has not lived. But Fuit, non vixit.
we may from the warrant of Jobes Rhetoric, go a degree further, and deny that
he has been, For he is, as if he had never bin, a mere nothing.

From those words [Ye see my casting down, and are afraid.] Note.

That some man is able to bear more than another is able to behold. The sight
of fearful things causes fear. Further observe from it,

A fearful man will never be a helpful man.

Courage in a day of trouble, either of our own or others, is a great cure of
trouble, yea a victory over it. There is one fear very good, when we see the
casting down of our friends; To be afraid of provoking God, to cast us down
(Deuteronomy. 17. 13.) they shall hear and fear, and do no more presumtuously; What
shall they hear? They shall hear how God has cast men down, or cast down a
Nation by his judgments, they shall hear of this and fear. How shall they
fear? they shall fear to do presumtuously, fear to provoke that God, who can
thus cast down men and Kingdoms: It is good to be thus afraid, but there is a
sinful fear, when fear disorders or unfits us to put our hands to the help of
those, who are cast down, and to administer comfort to those, who are in
sorrow; such was the casting down, and the fear here meant; They were so afraid
that they could not lend Job a hand, or give him advised counsel to support his
spirit.

I shall add one Observation from the general scope of the similitude.

That an unfaithful friend fails us most, when we have most need of him. That
is the sum of all. In winter, when there is water in every ditch, those
brooks abound with water, but in the summer, especially in a dry summer, when
the rain of the land is dust (as Moses speaks,) these brooks are dust too, they
vanish and are consumed out of their place, they afford no refreshing at all.
When the man, that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves
(Luke. 10 30.) lay in the way, stripped and wounded, even half dead, A certain
Priest came that way (says the text,) and when he saw him, he passed by on the
other side; and likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on
him, and passed by on the other side; but the Samaritan went to him (not from
him) and had compassion on him. Job speaks very near this language, but fully
this sense, of his friend. They, like the uncharitable Priest and Levite,
passed by him, as the streams of brooks, they pass away. Whereas they should
have been like the good Samaritan, a fountain, a river of settled springing
comfort to him.

This is the great difference between the love of God, and that of most men,
God is the best friend to us at all times (he is best to us in the best times,
if we had not him to friend, it would be very ill with us when we have most
friends) But God is best of all to us in the worst times; a best friend to us
when we have no friends: he is our spring, when the rain falls, but he is our
surest, sweetest spring, when there is neither rain nor dew upon the face of
the earth. Therefore he is compared (as Jer. 2. so in other places) unto a
living fountain, where you may be sure to find water in the hottest season.
This infinitely commends the love of God, beyond that of men, who at the best,
are but broken cisterns, which leak out the comforts they are trusted with, and
for the most part, are but like Jobs brooks, they turn aside and pass away,
when we have most need of them.

It is observed of the Samaritans in Josephus, that when ever the Jews affairs
prosper'd, they would be their friends, and profess much kindness, but if the
Jews were in trouble, and wanted their assistance, then they got them far
enough off, they would not have to do with them, or own them. The rich man has
many friends (says Solomon, Prove. 14. 20.) but the poor is hated even of his
own neighbor. Vbi deficit pecunia, labascit and amicitia.
Worldly friendship ends with riches, and he that wants money seldom abounds
with friends.

But consider how far this is from the very nature of a brother, and from the
law of friendship. Solomon (Prove. 17. 17.) describes a true friend, to be one
who loves at all times, and a brother is born for adversity. As if he had
said, this is the reason God has raised up relations, and made men near one to
another, because himself orders there shall be times of adversity, when they
shall have need of one another; Some render the place, A brother is born in
adversity, as if the meaning were, That, when a man is in trouble, God raises
up a brother to help him, Or as the Septuagint has it, A brother is born, for
this end and purpose, to help in adversity. Therefore a brother loses the very
end and purpose why he was born, if he refuse to help those, who are in
adversity. Ruth was a true pattern of a faithful friend and brother, though a
daughter; I went out full (says her mother in law) but the Lord has brought
me home empty; But though she was emptied of the world, yet Ruths heart was
full of love to her, I will not leave thee; God do so to me, and more also, if
ought but death part thee and me. So says faithfulness in friends, especially
in Christian friends; It is one of the greatest duties and commendations of
Christian profession, to stick to, and stand by one another; be it fowl
weather, or be it fair, blow the winds high or low, let it be stormy or calm,
ever to be the same. The Heathens wondered in the primitive times, at the great
love of the Christians to one another. Let us take heed we do not put Heathens,
natural, carnal men to wonder, O how little do Christians love one another!
Let us not give them occasion to say, O how the Christians hate one another!
how like are they at best to streams of brooks, who fail when their friends
and brethren need the benefit of their assistance.

Let me only give you this caution, God suffers men to be thus unfaithful
unto men, yea sometimes a Christian brother to Talia patitur Deus suis
accidere, ne hominibus nimis fidunt, sed omne solatium, spem and fiduciam in
ipso solo vivo and vero Deo, ponant. Lavat.
fail a Christian brother (which is their sin, and ought to be their sorrow;) I
say, God leaves them to this evil of their own hearts, that we may have a
greater good out of it, then, the highest actings of their love and
faithfulness, could estate us in: Namely, that we may learn to trust upon God
alone, and may better know what creatures are, Trust not in a brother (Jer. 9,
4.) so, as to let out your hearts upon him: think not you are safe in the love
of a brother, no, not of a godly brother: The Apostle (1 Timothy 6, 17.) to draw
off rich men from trusting in their riches, uses this argument, Charge them
that are rich, that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God:
Why should they not trust in riches? He gives the reason in the Epithet,
uncertain; They are uncertain riches, therefore trust them not. So we may say
of men, trust not in men, no, not absolutely, in godly men, for the best of men
are uncertain, possibly they may be as these streams of brooks, whose waters
failed. Psalm. 146. 3. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man in
whom there is no help; why not? For his breath goes forth (that is one reason,
he must die, he must return to the earth) therefore trust him not. But besides
that, we may say, trust not in Princes, etc. while their breath tarrieth in
them, for it is possible their help and faithfulness may go forth, though
their breath does not. Therefore trust ^e^ly in the living God, he will never
leave us, though men do; God only is unchangeable, he only has preserved this
honor without touch or stain, never to forsake those who trusted him, how
forlorn and forsaken soever their condition was.

JOB Chap. 6. Verse. 22, 23, 24, 25. Did I say, bring unto me? or give a reward
for me of your substance?

Or deliver me from the Enemies hand, or redeem me from the hand of the mighty?

Teach me and I will hold my tongue? and cause me to understand wherein I have
erred.

How forcible are right words? but what does your arguing reprove?


JOB Having shadowed out his friends unfaithfulness, by an elegant similitude
in the context foregoing; now aggravates their unfaithfulness to him, in his
wants, by his own modesty, in seeking to them, for supplies. Did I say, bring
unto me? or give a revvard for me of your substance? As if he had said, I have
not been burdensome or troublesome to you, I have not called for your
contributions and benevolences, or sought to have my estate made up out of your
purses. Why do ye charge me with impatience at my loss, as if that were it
which pinches and presses me? did I ever charge you for my reparation, or
redemption; That (in deed) might have been, either burdensome or dangerous to
you; All that I expected from you, was your comfort, and your counsel; these
would not have put you to much expense; or if you could not have reached so far
as to comfort me, yet you might have forborne to contribute so largely to my
sorrows, by overtaxing me with impatience, and charging me with hypocrisy.

Did I say] I was not clamorous or importunate, no, I did not so much as open
my mouth to move you in that point, I have been so far from begging, that ye
have not heard me, saying, bring to me.

Bring unto me?] The word is, Give unto me, Hos. 4. 18. Their Princes love,
Give ye, or bring ye, so says Job, I did not say bring ye, or give ye, my
spirit was not set upon money, or the repair of my losses out of your estates;
I did not either write or send for your charity; you were not invited to visit
me, that you might contribute to my necessity. (...) Proprie munus quod datur
ad corrumpendum Iudicem, a (...) uuus quod unum facit, dantem scilicet and
occipientem.


The word here used for a reward, properly taken, signifies that which is given
to a Judge, to corrupt or turn him aside in judgment. One of the Rabbis gives
this reason, why it notes a bribing reward, because it is compounded of a word
signifying, One; and a bribe makes the giver and the receiver, the Judge and
party; One, or of one mind; A Judge should ever stand indifferent between both
parties, till the cause be heard, but a bribe makes him One of them.

Yet ordinarily, this word is put for any gift or help, subsidy or (...) Humor
nativus in quo vigor corporis consistit, and opes, nam in opibus Consistit
potentia hominum.
supply of another wants.

Of your substance.] The word implies, the native, natural strength, which
supplies the wants, or supports the weaknesses of the body; As also the
strength of the earth, by which it puts forth fruit, Lev. 26. 20. And because
riches are a man's civil strength, therefore the same word expresses both.

Verse 23. Or did I say, deliver me from the enemies hand? The enemies.] Or the
hand of those that have brought me into straights; For the original imports,
the shutting a man up in a narrow compass, so that he knows not how to get out;
he that is in the hand of an enemy, is in a straight hand. Ahab commands (1
Kings 22. 29.) Go carry Micaiah back, and feed him with the bread of
affliction, or with the bread of straights, such bread, as an enemy provides.
The Greek word used by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 8. reaches this fully, We are
troubled, but not distressed, or straightned. Now says Job, did I say, deliver
me out of the hand or power of mine enemies, who have brought me into these
(...).
straights? alluding, as is conceived, to those Chaldeans and Sabeans, who had
spoiled his estate, and slain his servants.

Or redeem me out of the hand of the mighty. Redeem me. That is, my goods which
they have carried away captive. To redeem, signifies the fetching back of a
thing by price or force. Christ is a Redeemer in both senses: he redeemed or
fetched back captivated man, by compact and by price, in respect of God his
father. We are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. that is, bought with a full
prize. Christ did not compound with the justice of his father, but satisfied
it, to redeem us: and he redeemed us by force, out of the hands of Satan,
Spoiling principalities and powers, and making a show of them openly, Col. 2.
15. As in Triumphs, the Romans used to do with their spoiled, captivated
enemies. Job had not begged redemption of his friends, from the power of his
enemies, either way: did I desire you, by compact, and by price, to ransom me?
Or did I desire you to levy an Army, with power and force, to recover my estate
out of the hands of those mighty oppressors.

The word [Mighty] signifies also terrible; the hand of the (...) Terribilis
sua potentia formidabilis
terrible one: It is often applied to God, when he shows himself in terror to
wicked men. Psalm. 89. 7. God is greatly to be feared, Isa. 2 19. He shakes
terribly the earth. But most commonly, to cruel, powerful men, who make no
other use of their strength, but to be a terror to innocents. The Apostle,
Phil. 1. 28. explaines this word, while he says, and in nothing be ye
terrified by your adversities; that word in the Greek, answers this in the
Hebrew, your adversities are terrible men, men who think to beat down all with
their great looks, but, be not ye terrified by these terrible ones. So here,
Did I call unto you, to redeem me out of the hand of the mighty, the terrible?
out of the hand of those cruel plunderers, the Sabeans and Chaldeans? De manu
Tribulationis, Vatab. Puto cum Allegorice tam graves and vehementes calamitates
intelligere, Merc.


Further, Some understand by the hand of the mighty, not the persons afflicting
him, but the affliction it self, which was upon him: Trouble is sometimes
compared to a mighty enemy, Prove. 6. 11. So shall thy poverty come, as one that
travelleth, and thy want as an armed man. Want strips us, but is it self, not
only clothed, but armed, Evils have so much life and strength in them, that
they are compared to the strongest, who live, armed men. Hence observe, first,

It is an aggravation of unkindnesse, to those, who are in want, not to be kind
to them, when they are modest in asking a supply of their wants. Love ought to
prevent asking, and should be moved to give most to them (who being in need)
complain least.

Again, He speaks this to wipe off that aspersion, as if the loss of his
estate were the thing which grieved and pinched him so sore. Did I say unto
you, bring me a reward, etc. It is an argument that a man overloves that, which
he has lost, when he is over-importunate to have his losses repaired. If you
had seen me call out unto you for an estate, then you had reason to think that
the loss of my estate, was the loss of my patience.

Thirdly, Observe the temper of a gracious heart under losses and afflictions.
A gracious heart under losses, is not forward to complain to creatures, or to
ask help of men. Did I say, bring unto me, or give me a reward of your
substance? He complains to God, and shows him his trouble, he openes his
want to God, and asks supplies of him, but he is very modest and slow in
complaining to, or in suing for help at the hand of creatures.

It is not unlawful for those, that are in want, to make their losses and wants
known to men; It is a duty, rather, so to do; only it must be done with
caution, least, when we ask of creatures too importunately, we give an argument
against our selves, that we are too much in love with creatures.

As it is reproved in those Rulers before spoken of, Hos. 4. 18. that they did
love, give ye; It is a crime in the rich, to love, give ye; And certainly it is
a sin, at least an infirmity in those that are poor and in want, to love, give
ye, or to say as Job here had not, bring to me. Solomon speaks of the
daughters of the horsleach, that, they are always crying, give, give, noting
their insatiable thirst after blood. Some poor are always crying, give, give,
which notes a very inordinate desire after riches. Job is very careful to take
off the suspicion of such a blemish from himself, I did not say, bring ye, or
give ye me of your substance.

It is the duty of those that are full, to give to their empty brethren, it is
their sin if they give not; and it is their shame, if they are not most free in
giving to those, who are most modest in asking; But when God has emptied us,
we should not be eager in filling our selves. When God takes creatures from us,
we should take heed of pursuing them: we should not do any thing, which may
argue our hearts glued to them, when the Lord has loosened them out of our
hands. It is an honor to a poor Christian, when in his greatest straights he
can approve himself to God and men, and can say as the Apostle (Acts 20. 33.) I
have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel. It is as sinful to covet in
our wants, as it is in our abundance. And it is as bad (if not worse) to be
greedy of the creature, when we are empty, as when we are full. A poor man
oppressing the poor, Prove 28. 3. and covering from the rich, are sights of
equal abomination.

Verse. 24. Teach me and I will hold my tongue: and cause me to understand
wherein I have erred, etc. This and the next verse, contain the fourth branch
of Jobs reply; and the general sense of them, is, a submission of himself to
his friends, if yet, they should speak reason, or discover his error. Teach me
and I will hold my peace; as if he had said, Though I have to the best of my
understanding, thus far acquitted my self, and cleared mine own innocence;
though, I have as I think, with truth and justice, laid this charge of
uncharitableness and unfriendly dealing with me upon you; yet you shall see I
am ready to hear you, I am teachable: if you can yet teach me, (...) Iecit,
projecit, per metaphoram (...) rigavit quando transfertur ad pluviam quae
lapidum and sagitarum instar ex coelo decidit in terram eamque ferit, rigat,
and foecundat. Hinc per Metathoram significat etiam docere Quod doctrina veluti
instiletur animis dicentium and ininutatim indatur, eosque impuat,
I will keep silence, and if you cause me to understand wherein I have erred, I
shall do so no more.

Teach me.] The Original word notes in strict sense, to cast a thing forth, to
throw a thing, as a dart or a stone is thrown, either downward or upward, or in
a direct motion forward. Hence by a Metaphor, it signifies rain, because rain
is (as it were) darted forth from the clouds, and cast down upon the earth* And
from hence (yet one remove further) the Metaphor is carried, to signify
teaching; Hence the holy Prophet is commanded to drop his word, Ezekiel. 20. 46.
21. 2. Son of man, set thy face toward the south, and drop thy word toward
the south. Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and droop thy word
toward the holy places: And the reason is this, because Doctrines, Truths and
wholesome Instructions, are instilled and cast down among the people, or dropped
into their spirits, as rain is cast or dropped from heaven upon the earth. And
so we may read the word^ out of the metaphor thus, rain down upon me, do ye,
O, my friends, like clouds full of water, dissolve, and shower down
instructions upon me, and see if I do not receive and drink them in. And from
this word, all doctrine and instruction, in the Hebrew, is called, Torah, Prove.
13. 1. and Psalm. 1. 1. And the Jews, by way of eminency, call the five books
of Moses (as also all the books of the old Testament) the Torah, that is, the
Law, or rule of holy doctrine, which God rained down from Heaven, and distilled
graciously upon his people, for their growth in knowledge and in holiness: And
so a Teacher, from the same root, is called Moreh; Job. 36. 22 Who teaches
like Him? who raineth like him? there is no man can distill truths, as God
does. Moses (Deuteronomy. 32. 2.) elegantly sets forth his preaching, by an allegory
of rain and dew. My doctrine shall drop as the rain,; my speech shall distill as
the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the
grass. And the Apostle Paul, Heb. 6, 7, 8. compares a taught people, to ground
that is well watered with rain; For the earth which drinks in the rain, that
comes often upon it, and brings forth fruit, is blessed; but that which
bears thorns and briers, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is
to be burned. A people well instructed, are like that ground which is under
continual showers and dews.

And doctrine is fitly compared to rain, and teaching to raining; First because
all true and holy doctrine comes from God, as the rain does. The rain is Gods
proper gift, (Jer. 14. 22.) Can any of the vanities of the Gentiles give rain?
All the men in the world, are not able to make one drop of rain; So we may say
of this figurative rain of truth and holy doctrine, Can any of the vanities of
the Gentiles? yea, can any of the most learned among the sons of men, give this
rain? Can any man make any one truth, which has not first been made above?
Truth like rain comes from Heaven, it drops from beyond the clouds. Art not
thou He? O Lord our God? therefore we will wait upon Thee, say they of the
natural rain, Jer. 14. 22. and so we must in regard of the spiritual. Hence the
word which Moses uses (Deuteronomy. 32. 2) for Accipere est discipuli ficut dare
praeceptoris. (...)
doctrine, dropping as the rain, signifies a received learning: Holy Truths are
so called in that language, because the doctrine of Religion, is received from
God, not devised by men. So the Apostle phrases it (1 Cor. 11. 23.) I received
of the Lord, that which I delivered unto you. And Christ himself, As my Father
has taught me, so I speak these things, John. 8. 28. That which Nicodemus said
of Christ, is true of every one that teaches truth, Joh. 3. 2. Thou art a
Teacher come from God. As truth it self, so the teachers of it are from God; as
a lie, and the tellers of it, are from the Devil, John. 1. 44.

Secondly, Like rain (as in regard of the original whence it comes, so) in
regard of the effect: rain refreshes the earth; when the earth is weary and
faint, when the earth gaspes and is parched, how does a shower of rain revive
it? When the Psalmist had spoken of the rain coming down upon the earth, he
presently adds this effect, The little hills rejoice on every side, they shout
for joy, they also sing. Thus also a people wearied, and languishing, and
fainting in ignorance, when they receive truths, and holy instructions, how do
their hearts rejoice, how do they laugh and sing? In the Parable, Mat 13. Some
are said to receive the word with joy; Even they who are but formalists and
hypocrites (for it is spoken of them) rejoice and are refreshed for a season
with the word. Truth is such a gracious shower, that they sometimes receive it
with joy, who have no grace. And if truth refresh men, who are but nature, or
move in spiritual works, but, upon natural principles, how will it refresh
those, who have grace, and spiritual principles suitable to it. Thou, O God
(says David, Psalm. 68. 9 10.) did send a plentiful rain, whereby thou did
refresh thine inheritance when it was weary. That is a truth in the letter, and
some understand it of natural rain; but others interpret that plentiful rain,
in a figure, for the rain of doctrine which God sent down upon his people, when
he gave the Law and dropped those heavenly Oracles from Mount Sinai upon his
people Israel: that shower of the Law came indeed in a storm, Thunder and
lightning, and a terrible tempest accompanied it. But though the thunder
terrified, yet the shower refreshed; and the Saints have ever delighted in the
matter of those instructions and holy counsels given there, though Moses a
chief amongst the Saints, seared and quaked exceedingly at the manner of giving
them.

Thirdly, as rain, so teaching makes fruitful. The Prophet Isaiah makes out
this part of the similitude expressly, Chap. 55. 10, 11. As the rain comes
down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the earth,
and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and
bread to the eater: So shall my word be that goes out of my mouth, etc. Hence
also the people of God are compared (Deuteronomy. 32. 2.) to grass and tender herbs,
which grow and flourish, which are fed and bring forth fruit, when watered with
the rain. It cannot be denied, though it be much to be lamented, that many
souls upon whom much of this rain falls, are altogether barren and unfruitful.
But, Oh! How barren are those souls, upon whom not a droop of this rain ever
fell! They that are deprived of these showers are under a grievous curse, even
such a curse, as David imprecates upon the mountains of Gilboa, 2 Samuel 1. 21.
Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain upon
you, etc. When God says unto a people, let there be no dew, no rain upon you,
no Moses to drop doctrine upon you, no Paul to plant, no Appollo's to water you
with the word, this is the saddest shower of curses that can fall upon a
people; as without rain, so without the word, ordinarily, there can be no
fruitfulness. You see at this time how upon a little withholding of the
natural rain, we presently fear barrenness, and famine; the want of spiritual
rain brings in a This was preached in a time of drought.
worse barrenness, though there are not many who fear it, or are sensible of
it.

Fourthly, the word taught is like rain in regard of the dispensing of it. The
rain comes not down alike, at all times; showers are very various; sometimes it
raines softly, then, we call it a still soaking rain; sometimes we have a
strong mighty rain; at another time rain is accompanied with thunder and
lightning, while the showers descend, the great Ordnance of heaven discharge
from the clouds, and fill the air with terror. Thus also it is, or should be
in teaching: Many souls require a still, soft, quiet rain: Others must have
stronger showers, mighty rain, you must power down upon them. A third sort
must have thunder joined with rain, they need a Boanerges, a son of thunder,
a mixture of terror with instruction to bore their ears, and break their
hearts. Those teachers mistake their work, who in stead of raining are always
thundering and lightning. As if their pulpit were set upon Mount Sinai. And I
believe, it is as great a mistake to think Teachers need never thunder. The
word of God in all parts of it, and in all manner of dispensations of it, is
exceeding useful. A Minister without teaching, is (as Jude speaks) a cloud
without water; And he shall do but little good upon some, if he have nothing
but water in his cloud. Fire sometime must mingle with the rain, and a Tempest
come after or before the dewing, distilling, still voice. The word of God is
compared to fire, as well as unto water. Only it must be the wisdom, and it is
the duty, of every Teacher, to know how to give every one his portion, or as
the Apostle Jude counsels, ver. 22, 23. Of some to have compassion, making a
difference, and others to save with fear, pulling them out of the fire: A
difference must be made, some are to be dealt with compassionately, and gently
rained upon; others, must be saved with fear, that is, they must be made afraid
with thunder and lightning, with stormy and tempestuous doctrine. Some spirits
will not be kept out of the fire, but by casting them into the fire; so much
that text in Jude imports. Others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire,
As if he had said, your terrifying them with the fire, will be as a pulling
them out of the fire, A shower of spiritual brimstone (such as God rained on
Sodom in the letter) is best for them, if you spare them, you destroy them.

Teach me, and I will be silent, or, I will hold my tongue. The (...) Fedit
terram, per metaphoram fodit cogitatione, siluit.
word properly taken, signifies to dig or to plow: And sometime improperly to
meditate or think, and it implies much thoughtfulness, because a musing,
meditating, thoughtfull man is ever digging into matters, he rests not in the
outside and face of things, but puts in his plow deep, turning them up to the
very bottom. From whence, by one step further into the Metaphor, it is
translated to signify silence, or to hold our peace, because they who have
many thoughts, have fewest words; Musing men are no great talkers; when the
mind is much at work, and very busy, the tongue usually does little: Job
promises silence, as if he meant to sit down and consider fully, what they
should further say unto him.

This promised silence or holding of his tongne, may have a threefold reference.

First, in general to the duty of a learner, Teach ye me, and I will keep
silence, I will learn.

Or secondly, to his former complaints, Teach me, and I will be silent: That
is, I will give over complaining, I confess I have made a bitter complaint in
the 3d Chapter, but if you will teach me better, I will complain no more.

Thirdly, it may have reference to that, which they should speak to him in
their next advices. Teach me aright, and I will hold my tongue, that is, I will
reply no more, I will not gainsay your counsels, but rather (if I have
offended) acknowledge my error and sit down in silence, I will not wrangle,
when I cannot answer, I can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.
From hence we may observe; first,

That a gracious spirit is a teachable spirit. A gracious heart calls for
teaching. Teach me, and I will hold my tongue. As a gracious heart calls for
strengthening from Christ, so it calls for teaching from Christ, and from any,
who can teach the truth, as it is in Christ* A weak soul says, Lord draw me,
and I will run after thee; an ignorant soul says, Lord instruct me, that I
may understand thee. Give me the wisdom of the prudent, that I may understand
my way, and I shall walk therein. A godly man loves not to be at his own
disposing, nor at his own Tutoring; He that will learn of none, but himself,
has (sure enough) a fool to his Master; And there is more hope of a fool, then
of him, that is (thus) wise in his own conceit, Pro 26. 12. Secondly, Observe.

A teachable spirit is an excellent spirit. A man that is willing to be taught,
is in a better condition then many, who are able to teach. It argues a holier
temper of the heart, to be willing to be taught, than to be able to teach. And
it is far worse to be unwilling to learn, then not to be knowing;
Vnteachablenesse is more dangerous then ignorance. It is sad to consider how
unteachable many are, they will not be taught, or they think they have learned
all, they have devoured all knowledge; they are full and need no more; some
deceived souls (and they most) carry it, as if they had a spirit of
infallibility, what, teach them? they are above teaching. It is a sweet frame
of spirit, when a man sees he may be out of frame. He is in a fair way to
truth, who acknowledges he may be in an error. And he who will not acknowledge
that he may be in an error, is certainly out of the way of truth. The Apostle
resolves it, 1 Cor. 8. 2. If any man think that he knows any thing, he
knows nothing, yet, as he ought to know. Not as if the Apostles meaning were,
that all knowledge must be skeptical or uncertain, all in quaeries, and nothing
in conclusions, that we should halt between two opinions, and hang like meteors
in the air. Nor does he commend to us that proud modesty, which will not let us
acknowledge, we know what we know; but his mind is, to meet with those, who
think they know any thing so well, that they need not, or cannot know it
better, and abound so in their own sense, that they have no room to admit the
sense of others. As he, who thinks himself so good, that he cannot be better,
was never so good, as he should; so, he that thinks he knows so much, that he
can learn no more, knows nothing as he ought. It is best to be fixed in
judgment, but it is very ill to be fixed in opinion. It is to be feared that
man is much divorced from right reason, who is so married to his own, that he
resolves, nothing but death shall part him and his opinion. What if this man
have espoused a fancy of his own, not any truth of God? To be so fixed, that a
man may be fixed in evil, it is as dangerous, as, to be so unfixed, that he may
be unfixed in good. It was a high breathing of holiness, when David said, Psalm.
57. 7. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: While we are upon a known
duty, or have known truth on our side, our hearts cannot be too much fixed and
set upon them. To be of an unfixed, moveable, wavering spirit in goodness, is
within one degree of falling into evil; but to say, I am fixed, I am fixed, I
am resolved, resolved, when yet things are doubful and under difficult dispute,
is actually to be in an error, though possibly, the thing we fix on, be a
truth. The Apostle cautions his Ephesians, and us in them, Chap. 4. 14. That
they and we, be not henceforth children tossed too and fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, and yet they are under a rebuke, who will not be
moved by any wind of doctrine; that is, let never so powerful and forcible a
wind of truth, breath and blow upon them, they will not be carried or moved in
judgment by it. Observe thirdly,

Silence becomes learners. Yet not all silence. There is a speaking helpful to
learning. To move doubts is the way to be resolved and to ask the question, the
readiest means for instruction. But he that will have all the talk, shall have
but little profit. The ear is the Organ of discipline: Hearing is the sense of
learning, and the seasonable stopping of our own mouths, a ready means to open
our understandings. To be, swift to hear, and flow to speak (James. 1. 19.) is
the speediest way to attain wisdom. Fourthly observe,

He that is showed his error, should speak no more, but sit down convinced.
Teach me (says Job) and I will hold my tongue; That is, I will reply no more
upon you, I will never stand up in maintaining an error; I will be no pattern
of evil, though my self am in the fault. Error shall not be excused; or a
mistake apologized for, by me. Some wits are able to make a fair cover for, and
put a gloss upon the most deformed and grossest errors. There was never any
opinion in the world, but some have seconded it, and undertaken it is
protection. When conscience has never a word to say, wit will be very
talkative, and when they have ended reasoning, some can wrangle everlastingly.
When wit and learning undertake a cause, and leave conscience out of the
Commission, there must either be a very ill end of it, or no end. A subtle
Sophister will despute any thing, and bring probable arguments (where reason
alone sits judge) against the most undoubted truths. It is an ill office to be
an Orator for our own or others errous, for our own or others sinful
practices, Prove. 30. 32. If thou have done evil in lifting up thy self, or if
thou have thought evil (or maintained evil) lay thine hand upon thy mouth;
speak no more, never be an advocate in a bad cause, though it be thine own;
when our faults are showed us, we should not open our mouths, unless it be to
renounce and disclaim them. A sad account will be given of that time, and of
those parts, which have been laid out in the patronage of our failings and
mistakes. It is as sinful to few figg-leaves, or make fair pretexts to cover
the nakedness of our opinions, as of our practices.

And cause me to understand, wherein I have erred. As if Job had said, when
once you bring me to see clearly, that I am in an error, and cast light into
my conscience, you shall find me readily submitting to you.

A question arises here in the general, whether Job doubted his Concessio est
quam Quintilianus dicit esse, cum aliquid iniquum videmur causae fiducia pati.
Apud eum dicitur, confessio nihil nocitura. Quin. lib. 3, cap. 2. Non submittit
se errasse, sed humiliter se submittit amicorum censure. Bold. (...) In Hiphil
intelligentem secit, erudii^.
cause, or whether or no, there were an hesitancy in his spirit, about what he
had done or spoken?

I answer, this speech implies not, that he had any doubt of himself, or an
admission that he had erred. Job speaks like Orators or Disputants, who when
they are sure of a point, will yet grant a little doubtfulness, or raise doubts
about what they are able to maintain and confident to carry. It is ordinary to
put things by way of supposition, of which we make no question. When Job says,
Cause me to understand, wherein I have erred; it is not an acknowledgement that
he had a erred; but a submission in case he had, or a concession that he might;
Job was not lifted up with an opinion of his own infallibility; he knew to err
was common to man, and therefore he speaks of himself under the common notion
of all men: Not from any consciousnesse of his own error.

Cause me to understand. It is but one word in the Original, and it signifies
to convince by reason or argument. Cause me to understand, that is, do not
think to force my opinion, or to offer violence to my judgment, do not think
to club me down with great words and clomorous threats, but do it by solid
Arguments, by evident demonstration of reason; Do it by savourie advices and
counsel, not by bitter reproaches and invectives. Deal with my understanding,
not barely with my affections, Cause me to understand.

My errour] It signifies local, corporal wanderings and errors, and bodily
erring or wandering; and sometimes it signifies the wanderings of the mind,
judgment and affections, Prove. 5. 19, 20. Solomon bids the husband, Rejoice in
the wife of his youth, let her be as a loving Hind and pleasant Roe, let her
breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished always with her love.
The Hebrew (as our Translatours put in the margin) is, err thou always in her
love; that is, let all thy wandering, erring thoughts and affections be reduced
and brought home to the wife, whom God has given thee, the next words seem to
interpret so, for why (my son) will thou be ravished with a strange woman,
and embrace the bosom of a stranger? That Is dangerous erring in love:
Therefore (says he) let all thine errings and wanderings, all thy delights and
ravishments be (chaste and conjugal) toward the wife of thy youth.

Further it signifies erring or wandering out of mere ignorance. This word is
often used in Leviticus for the sin of ignorance, Chap. 4. 2. and Chap. 5. 18.
and Chap. 22. 14. If any man has sinned through ignorance or committed an
error, then he shall offer these and these sacrifices and oblations. So Psalm.
19. 12. who can understand his errors; That is, those sins, which he commits
out of ignorance and inadvertency? Hence he concludes with this prayer, Cleanse
thou me from secret faults. He does not mean faults, which he committed
privately, and so were secrets to others, but faults which he had committed
ignorantly, and so were Secrets to himself: That is, they were sins of
ignorance. And I conceive he means, not only such sins, as he had committed
ignorantly, but then knew they were sins, but even such sins, as he was
ignorant, whether ever he had committed them or no; That is, he prays for the
pardon of all those sins, which possible he might have committed, though to
him, as yet altogether unknown and undiscovered.

The title of the 7th Psalm. is Shiggaion of David; it is the same Original
word we have in the text, and some translate it, awandring song; And the reason
for it, is either because of the Cantio erratica.
variable and wandering poetry, or because of the variable or wandering tune in
which that Psalm was sung, and to which it was set for greater delight; others
makes the title (suitable to the translation of the word here) the Psalm of
David's errors, because, sets forth his fears and dangers, which made him
wonder in body, and sometime also, to go a little astray in mind; this Psalm
was sung to the Lord, concerning the words or the business of Cush the
Benjamite, that is, of Saul, who was of Kish and of Jemini (1 Samuel 9. 1.)
called here Cush, that is, Ethiopian or Blackmore (figuratively) from his black
and ill conditions, his heart not being changed, as the Blackmore changes not
his skin. Saul was a bitter enemy to David, and made him fly and wander, and
sometime go astray in his speeches and actions, upon a sudden gust of
temptation. And so a Psalm of that subject may well bear this style, either
from his corporal or spiritual errors. There is a third apprehension upon
Siggaion, taking it for delight and ravishments of mind, and so the Psalm is
superscribed, David's delight or solace; That is, the Psalm which he composed
and sung to the Lord, to comfort himself in all his troubles with Saul; his
soul wandered heavenward in holy ravishments and delights in God, while his
body wandered about the earth in astonishment and sorrows, caused by a
bloody-minded man.

The very same title is given to the prayer of Habakkuk, chap. 3. 1. A prayer
of Habakkuk upon Sigionoth, which some interpret to be so called because of the
strange variety or variableness of the song and tune, the Prophet being in a
holy rapture, ravished in spirit, and swallowed up in the contemplation of Gods
power and majesty soars up and wanders (like Paul in another case) he knows
not whither or how.

But the vulgar renders it, a prayer for ignorance, or a prayer for Oration pro
ignorantijs.
error; which translation is surely an error, if not an ignorance, as to the
scope of that prayer: Though the letter of the Original word (as in the former
instances, and in the text before us) bears that sense.

When Job says, Cause me to understand my error, his meaning is, that his
errors (whatsoever they were) in that business were secret to him, he had not
gone against the light of his own conscience, nor as yet, had they brought any
light to convince his conscience; he had been charged with errors,
extravagancies and wanderings; But he understood not what they were, and
therefore desires them to cause him to understand his error. Observe hence,
first,

Man is subject to error. To error in speech, to error in practice, to
error in judgment. Man by nature, can do nothing else but err, all his
goings are goings astray, and all his knowledge is bottomed upon a heap of
false principles. All his works (by nature) are errata's, and the whole edition
of his life, a continued mistake. Secondly observe;

That man is in a fair way to truth, who acknowledges he may err. Cause me to
understand wherein I have erred, says Job; He thought he had not erred, but he
grants it was possible for him to err. That which has fastened so many errous
to the Popes chair, and from thence scattered them over all the world, is an
opinion, that he, in his chair cannot err; his supposed spirit of
infallibility, has made him the great Deceiver, and deceived him. He that
thinks he cannot err, errs in thinking so, and seldom thinks, or speaks, or
does any thing, but it is an error. He is most secured from error, who
suspects he has erred, and humbly acknowledges that he may.

Thirdly, We may here observe what an error is. An error strictly and
properly taken, is that which we hold or do, out of bare ignorance of the
Truth. It is an error in practice, when we are ignorant of what is better to
be done. An error in opinion is, when we are ignorant of what is better for us
to believe or hold; Heresy is an error and more, for heresy has these three
things in it.

1. In regard of the matter, it must be in some great and fundamental truths;
The word Heresy, is by some derived from choosing, by others, from taking
away, because it takes us off from Christ, or from the foundations of saving
knowledge.

2. Heresy is accompanied with pertinacy and obstinacy, after clear light
offered; It is possible, one may have an error about things which are
fundamental, and yet be no heretic: An heretic is condemned of himself, Tit.
3. 10. But he will not be convinced by another. Not that he does formally and
in terms give sentence against, or condemn himself, but equivalently he does,
as the Apostle, Acts. 13. 46. speaks to the unbeleeving Jews, seeing ye put
the word from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, etc.
These men did not judge themselves such formally, they came not to the Apostle
and said, we willingly submit our selves to hell and wrath; No, they thought
very well of themselves, and judged themselves worthy of eternal life. But
their practice judged them, and gave a real sentance against them, while they
acquitted themselves: Thus also a heretic (who ever has a very high opinion
of himself and his opinions) is condemned of himself.

3. In heresy there, is taken of pleasure and delight, therefore heresy is
numbered among the lusts of the flesh, adultery and fornication, etc. Gal. 5 20.
Heretics desire to disperse and vend their opinions. A man only in an error,
will weep over his opinions, and it grieves him that he dissents and goes
contrary unto others. But he that stiffely maintains an error, insults over
others, and delights to maintain his opposition: he triumphs and boasts of his
war, though he can never obtain victory (Truth only is victorious.) And some
learned Critics observe as much, from the form of the Haereticus est cui
voluptas est falsas tueri opiniones; ea enim est nominum Graecorum in (...)
definentium proprietas ut ad qualitatem designandam non adhibeantur modo, sed
etiam ad innuendam delectationem quam in ea capit, cui illa qualitas in est,
Camer. Myroth, Evang. in cap. 3. Epist ad Titum.
Greek word, Tit. 3. 11. So then, heresy is not only an error in judgment,
but a pertinacy in the will, and it takes in delight at the affections.

Fourthly observe from these words, Cause me understand wherein I have erred!
That

An erring brother or friend, must not be importuned barely to leave his
error, but he must be made to understand his error. Error should not be
left, nor truth received blindfold; a man may sin in leaving an error: they
do (without question) who lay it down thinking it to be a truth; and there is
little question, but they do, who leave it before they understand it to be an
error. It is much alike to reject an opinion as an error, which we do not
understand, and to practice an opinion for a truth, which we do not
understand; If a man practice or believe a truth, not convinced that it is, or
not conceiving it to be a truth, that truth is but as an error, to him;
because he does not believe or practice it under the notion of a truth: and so,
if he leave an error, which he is not convinced to be an error, his leaving
it is not much better (and in some cases it may be worse) then his holding it;
because he leaves it not under the notion of an error. We must not dance after
other men's pipes, or see with other men's eyes: Except we know it is good we do,
and evil which we leave und on, our not doing evil, is not good to us, and our
doing good is (to us) no better then evil.

Verse 25. How forcible are right words? but what does your arguing reprove?
Job speaks by way of admiration; How forcible! I cannot In Haebreo Admirativum
est elegans and patheticum, Bold.
tell how forcible. It is an elegant way of expressing the highness of our
thoughts. As Psalm. 84. 1. How aimable are thy dwelling places O Lord of hosts!
He admires in stead of speaking, they are so aimable, as I cannot tell how
aimable they are: Put your thoughts to their utmost conceptions of beauty, and
that beauty is in the dwellings of the Lord: So says Job here, How forcible
are right words! they are so forcible, as I cannot tell how forcible they are,
I must admire and be silent.

How forcible are right words! The Chaldee Paraphrase reads it, how sweet are
right words! interpreting it by that, Psalm. 119. 103. Oh how sweet are thy
Commandments unto me! they are sweeter than the honey and the honey comb. But
the Originals differ, though that be a good sense.

We read, How forcible! The word signifies any thing that is (...) Acrimoniae
notionem habet.
strong, potent or mighty; It notes also acrimony, sharpness or smartnesse,
and so it is often applied to words either good or bad, 1 King. 2. 8. when
David lay upon his death*bead, giving his last advices to Solomon, Thou (says
he) have Shimei with thee, who cursed me with a grievous curse. In the Hebrew
it is this word, who cursed me with a sharp, strong, forcible curse, he cursed
me with all his heart, with all his might, he laid load upon me. Evil words are
strong, right words are strongest: Job had before at the 6th verse of this
Chapter, called the discourses of Eliphaz unsavory, in this he taxes them for
flat or weak, right words have a pleasing acrimony upon the palate of the soul,
and a power upon the judgment, to sway and carry it; but yours are dull and
feeble.

Some render it after the letter of the Hebrew, words of right or (...) Eloquia
rectitudinis, Mont. (...), Sept, (...), Aquil.
truth: Others in the Concret, how forcible are the words of a right, or
upright man! But take it as we translate, How forcible are right words! Words
are right three ways.

1. In the matter, when they are true.

2. In the manner, when they are plain direct and perspicuous.

3. In their use, when they are duly and properly applied, when the arrow is
carried home to the white, then they are right words, or words of
righteousness. When this threefold rightnesse meets in words, how forcible,
how strong are such words?

But what does your arguing reprove? I confess there is great strength in right
words, and in the words of the upright; but you have been long disputing the
matter with me, and what have you got? where are your gains? The word signifies
to rebuke with conviction and argument, to show what is right, and to refute
that which is contrary Job. 13. 3. the word is so used, Surely I would speak to
(...) Arguit, redarguit, praeparavit verba contra aliquem disputando and
ostendendo jus.
the Almighty and I desire to reason with God, to reason it out as it were by
force of Argument with God. The word is answerable in sense, to that in the
Greek used by the Apostle, Heb. 11. 1. Faith is a conviction or the evidence of
things not seen, that is, an evident conviction; faith gives a stronger
evidence then any reason, yea then sense; therefore though faith be of things
that fall not under sense, and are above reason, yet faith is an evidence or a
conviction, fuller then any Logical conviction or demonstration. The Argument
from such authority as faith grounds upon, is stronger and more convincing then
any, or then all the reason in the world.

What does your arguing reprove? Word for ward, what does Quid disceptando
conficiet disceptatio vestra, q. d. quod vos re^^^guitis redarguendi verbo non
est donandum.
your disputation dispute? Or what do your arguments argue? as if he had said,
your arguing is no arguing, your reasons are no reasons; that which you have
been arguing all this while with me, does not so much as deserve the name of an
argument (in my case) it has no power or strength in it: Job lays a charge
upon his friends by this opposition; Right words are forcible, but your
arguments are not right, or, you are not right who argue, therefore what force,
what power is there in what you have spoken? I can blow it all off as easily as
a man can blow off a feather. Mr. Broughtton varies somewhat from this sense.
And what can your blame soundly blame: that is, you shall find nothing blame:
worthy or reprovable in me. Observe hence, first,

Words rightly spoken, are very forcible; Take it in the general. What mighty
things have words, words duly spoken done? Abigail a weak woman, by a few right
words overcame the strength and wrath of mighty David, and turned his whole
army back; David with all his men, were in the heat of resolution, and upon a
hot march to destroy Nabal, yet she stops them; And that woman speaking to
Johab, (when Sheba fled to the City) with a few right words, prevailed to save
the City, and stay the fury of war.

Take the point more strictly; The words of truth, are full of power, full of
strength. Naked truth is too hard for armed error. Truth has the strength of
God in it, therefore that must needs prevail. The Apostle professes, 2 Cor. 1.
3. We can do nothing against the truth; He means it in regard of the bent of
his spirit, his heart could not move against truth; but we may use it in
another sense, We can do nothing against the truth, that is, let us put out
the uttermost of our power, we can never prevail against the truth. Look upon
truth in the promises, that will conquer all: Look upon truth in the
threatenings, that is forcible to overcome all. Jer. 1. 10. God gives the Prophet
a commission, I have set thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root
out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build and to
plant: Here is a strange commission for a Prophet; How could Jeremiah plant or
root up, build or pull down Nations? He never drew sword, yet he performed this
commission fully, by his word: he pulled them down, and rooted them up by the
word of threatening, and he planted them and built them with the word of
promise, Zech. 1. 10. Your fathers are dead, they are gone, but my words (says
the Lord) which I spoke by my servants the Prophets, did not they take hold of
your fathers? Your fathers are dead, and the Prophets are dead, but my words
live still, and did not they hold of your fathers? you esteemed my words as
wind, but they were a strong wind, they blew down the power of your fathers.
The Apostle gives this honor to all the word of God (which is all right) that
it is mighty, or forcible, through God, to bring down strong holds, and to
bring every thought into subjection unto Christ. And Heb. 4. 12. The word of
God is mighty in operation. The energie of it is such, that nothing can stand
before it, no lust can stand before it, no error can stand before it, it bears
down all with fine force.

Therefore take heed of standing in the way of right words. Truth comes with
such a force, that no man is able to bear up against it. It is better to have
all the men of the world against us, Than to have one word of God against us.
One word of truth will do more against us, than all the Armies in the world,
no force can stand against this force, the force of the word will destroy the
force of the sword. Truth will be the great Conqueror at last.

Thirdly, Take it in the Concrete, in reference to the speaker, How forcible is
the word of an upright man! Then Observe.

The words of one, that is upright hearted, carry great strength and power with
them. Truth loses by the patronage and defense which some give it. Truth gets
little by the tongues of those men, who have no grace in their hearts. Truth in
the mouth of a wicked man, is weakened by the falseness of his heart, and
filthiness of his life. Sometimes precious truths are spoken by vilest men, but
what force have they? they are not received or owned. Christ could not abide to
hear the Devil speak truth. A godly man speaks with Authority, as it is said
of Christ, He spoke as one having authority, and not as the Scribes; the
Scribes taught that which was truth, sometimes, and the Scribes had always
authority to teach, the chair of Moses was theirs, they were not intruders upon
an office they had no call to. When Christ says, the Scribes and Pharisees sit
in Moses chair (Matt. 23. 2.) He speaks not only (de facto) of what they did,
but (de jure) of what they had right to do; They were not usurpers, or actors
beyond their line. But though the Scribes had the right of authority to teach,
yet their teaching had no force of authority, it was but talk. And it appears
plainly, that the words of that hypocritical generation, the Scribes and
Pharisees bare no weight with the people, because Christ gives them a charge,
to observe and do what the Scribes and Pharisees bid them: As intimating that
the doctrine of those Scribes (though true) was low-priz'd and lay much
unpracticed, Mat. 23. 3. We must not shorten the hand of God, as if he might
not use those who have no truth, to publish a truth; He may employ what
instruments he pleases, and he can make those that are evil, instruments of
good. But look upon it ordinarily, thus it is, the word of truth has most
power, strength and force from the lips of those, who are upright in heart, and
holy in life. How forcible are their words? The words of the wise, are like
goads, or like nails, fastened by the Masters of the Assembly, Eccl. 11. But
the words of wicked masters in the assembly, are like nails without points,
they will not drive, or take hold, there is no fastening of them; Or the words
of wicked men are like weak nails, which break in the driving: What do you
arguing, reproving, teaching, you that carry your selves thus, what force have
your words? Truth loses both strength and credit in your mouths: Thou that
teach another, teach thou not thy self? thou that preachest a man should
not steal, do thou steal? thou that say a man should not commit adultery,
do thou commit adultery, etc? are the Apostles chiding expostulations with
the Jewish Doctors, Romans 2. And upon this he charges them with dishonoring God,
and causing his name to be blasphemed among the Gentiles, verse. 23, 24. But
what was the blasphemy? Surely this, The Gentiles grew to have a low esteem of
the word of God, his Law was of no force with them, because those teachers were
so false to it, and unspoke with their lives, whatsoever their tongues had
spoken. That which has no force upon the speakers heart, has seldom any upon
the hearers. What do your teachings teach, or your comfortings comfort? what
do your arguings argue, or your reprovings reproove? Shall vice reprove sin?
as we speak proverbially: or if it does, sin is not much hurt with those
reprofs. Words spoken from the heart, go to the heart, and words read in the
life, are most forcible to reform the life; Then the word goes forth clothed
with list and power when the preacher can read his Sermon in his own heart,
and the people in his life. He that speaks only out of books, does much after
his rate, who (as we say) speaks without book, And he that lives not what he
speaks (what in him lies) kills what he speaks. And how shall such a dead
letter (it is almost a miracle if it does) conveigh a quickening spirit? Such
arguings, seldom reprove any but the arguer, and him they always reprove.

JOB Chap. 6. verse. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Do ye imagine to reprove words, and
the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind?

Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and you dig a pit for your friend.

Now therefore be content, look upon me, for it is evident unto you, if I lie.

Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity, yea return again: my righteousness
is in it.

Is there iniquity in my tongue? Cannot my taste discern perverse things?


IN the two former verses, Job made an humble submission of himself unto the
better counsel and instruction of his friends, if they could yet show him
wherein he had erred. In these five verses, he does two things, further.

First, he expostulates with his friends about their former speech and carriage
toward him.

Secondly, he admonishes them to be better advised, more moderate and
considerate, in what they had yet to say unto him.

The former of these is contained in the 26. and 27. verses. And there are two
branches of it.

1. He taxes them for making so light of what he had said, Do ye imagine to
reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind?
ver. 26.

2. He taxes them for laying such heavy load upon him, in what they had said,
Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and you dig a pit for your friend, verse.
27. As if he had spoken plainly thus, You have carried the matter hitherto with
me, as if I had spoken nothing but bare, empty words, words without any weight;
yea, as if I were rageing mad, distracted, desperate, not knowing, nor caring
what I did, or what I speak; as if my whole discourse were no better, then
mere vapouring, a puff of wind, a nothing; and ye your selves rage against me
with such violence, as a cruel hard-hearted tyrant is enraged with, against a
poor, helpless, innocent and forsaken friendlesse Orphan; or at best, ye deal
with me, as cunning sophisters and subtle disputants, seeking to catch me in
your intricate discourses and doubtful debates, you make a pit for your friend.

This for the general sense of those two verses, containing an expostulation
about his friends unfriendly dealing with him. Now to the particulars.

Do ye imagine to reprove words? The word we translate [imagine] notes a very
curious, exquisite and elaborate invention of any thing. The Vulgar referrs
imagining (...)
to the words, with which they did reprove, not to the act of reproving. Ye
make a neat frame of wards to reprove me; and Ad increpandum tantum verba
concinnatis. Vulg.
so the sense rises thus, you artificially imagine, mint and coin elequent
speeches and subtle arguments, to reprove and convince me with; As if you
came hither to show your selves Logicians and Orators, rather than loving
friends. This is your dealing, You imagine Number verba nuda putatis arguere, q d.
putatesne verba satis esse ad arguendum and disceptandum sine ratione. Planior
fuerit sensus, si (...) ante (...) subaudias, an cogitatis arguere (...) meris
verbis. Merc.
words, to reprove with. Others thus, Do you think that words reprove? That
great words shall overcome me, without weight of reason? This sense referres
also to the speech of Jobs friends; as if he had said, Do you stand devising
words against me, or wording it with me? Do you think that your sine phrases
and elaborate polisht language will carry the matter with me, will words
repoove me? And so we may connect it with the sentence immediately foregoing,
How forcible are right words? But what does your arguing reprove? Your
arguings, that are slight arguings? Your words, are mere words, a sound and a
noise, Verba nuda and sola. Vt mulier mulier bona. Lana, lana alba, and si quae
alia Gramaticis observata. Drus.
words set alone, are often taken for words only, for naked words, words
without any due clothing of comeliness and moderation, and without any ballast
or weight of reason and discretion. And do you (my friends) imagine to gain
me, by such a parcel of words as these?

But according to the sense touched before, Job rather referrs to the opinion,
which his friends had of his words; Do ye imagine to reprove words? That is,
do you think that you have nothing to answer or reprove, but a company of
empty sillables, have I not spoke reason or sense all this while? Do you
think you dispute with some idle-headed fellow, who cares not what he says,
or says he knows not what? Do you think, that your words are strong and full
of reason, that yours are irrefragable arguments, and mine, but idle talk or a
frothie discourse? That Is a second interpretation, and that which I conceive
more clear to this place. It follows,

And the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as winds. We must
understand or repeat the first branch, And do ye imagine to reprove, the
speeches of one that is desperate which are as wind?

The speeches of one that is desperate. [The word signifies a person (...) a
radice (...) Diffidit, desperavit, spem omnem rei alicujus efficiendae aut
consequ^nde abjecit seu amisit.
that is quite without hope, who thinks his estate past remedy or redress,
his wound incurable, his losses irreparable, and his breaches such, as can
never be made up or healed. So Jer. 2. 25. where the Prophet counsels the
Church, to return and repent, but, Thou say there is no hope; or as we read
it in the margin, thy case is desperate; what do you talk of repentance and
of returning now, all is lost, all is gone, I am undon, my estate can never be
recovered, Do ye imagine to reprove the speeches of one, that is desperate?

Some refer this also, to the friends of Job, thus: Do ye think that bare
words are answer enough for me, and that the speeches of a desperate mad man,
which are nothing but wind and sound, are sufficient to refute me. And
therefore you rise up against me in this storm and fury, speaking any thing,
without study or premeditation.

But we may rather understand it, of Job himself, and that, as before, he gave
their sense of his words, that they were but wind; So here he gives us their
apprehension of his person, that sure he was mad or desperate.

Do ye imagine that I am desperate or distracted, because I have little or no
hope to be restored? Because I have lost my estate, my strength, my children,
do ye also think I have lost my wits, my reason and understanding. I confess
I am even worn to pieces and brought to nothing, I am spent and consumed with
sorrows, that is my condition, but am I therefore desperate, and regard not what
I speak? It is an easy and a compendious way of refuting all a man can say, to
say he is mad. His words must needs be but wind, without weight, who is himself
without reason. Do ye think to reprove the words of one that is desperate,
that are as wind? Or, as Haud sane ita convenit, ut pro futilibus, verba mea
habeatis, eo quod afflictonibus attritus sum and tabefactus. Merc.
Mr Broughton reads, Do ye hold the terms of the forlorn, a wind? That is,
do ye think, because I am in such a sad condition, and in appearance in a
desperate condition, that therefore my words are light and vain, such as are no
more to be regarded or heeded, than a puff of wind? And so it is, as if he had
said, ye ought not to slight what I speak, because I am in such a low forlorn
condition. That of Solomon comes to this sense, Eccl. 9. 16. The poor man's
wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.

It is common in Scripture to put light, vain and unprofitable words under this
expression, they are but wind. In the 15th of this book, verse. 3. Should he
reason with unprofitable talk, or with speeches wherewith he can do no good?
Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the East Wind?
That is, should a man talk nothing, but that which is vain and unprofitable?
And so, Jer. 5. 13. The Prophet shall become wind; That is, their prophecies
shall become wind; whatsoever they speak (said that unbelieving people) shall
be put as a vain thing, it shall be as nothing, it shall pass away, and the
place of it shall be known no more; Thus they undervalued the Prophets in those
times, when they spoke the truth of God, and brought them immediate messages
from heaven. Hence observe; First,

That words without reason, mere vain words, are no words, they are but wind.

Hence those profane ones in Jeremy, who said the true Prophets had belied the
Lord, and were but wind, add presently, And the word is not in them: That is,
the words of these Prophets are no words. Indeed the Lord answers for his
Prophets, at the 14th verse, telling the people, because they had thus
dishonored his messengers, that they should find those words, which they
accounted wind, to be a fire, Thus, says the Lord, because ye speak this word,
behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it
shall devour them. Whosoever esteems the word of God to be wind, shall find it
to be a fire: and they who will not be taught by it, shall be consumed by it.
But to the point in hand, we see in that Scripture vain words are windy words,
and windy words as are no words: The Prophets (as they supposed) were wind,
and thence they infer, the word is not in them: That is, their words have no
substance, strength or power at all in them. So, Hos. 12. 1. Ephraim feeds on
wind, and follows after the East Wind; What was the wind that Ephraim fed
upon? Some vain words, some promises, he had from the creature to be delivered,
some hopes raised by the word of man, who is a wind; therefore his feeding upon
those hopes, was but a feeding upon wind, there was no ground or strength to
make those words good. So the next words interpret, He daily increases lies.

Such words are (by the learned) called bubbles; And why Bullatus nugas. Pers
Sat 5. utpo^e similia bullis vento plenis.
bubbles? Because a bubble upon the water is only filled with wind, touched it,
and it is nothing. These words have nothing in them, but the breath of the
speaker.

Unless the spirit of reason fills our mouths, we speak nothing but our
breath, or as we phrase it in our language, we do but vapor. The Apostle
Peter describes such (2 Epist. 2. 18.) They speak great swelling words of
vanity; And the Apostle Jude (...),
uses the same expression, in the 16th verse of his Epistle. Their mouth
speaks great swelling words; that is, words greatly swelled with vanity. Or
swelled, as the flesh swells, by the gathering of corruption, and ill humors.
The greatness of these words was their disease, and not their nature: Wise men
speak great things, and fools speak great words. Secondly, Observe,

That windy, empty words, will never either convince, or convert.

Such words do no work: they are wind, and they pass away like wind without
any impression, upon the hearers. They trouble the ear, but touch not the
heart. When the noise of them is past, all is past. They are a sound, and
besides that, a nothing. Windy meats are not nourishing for the body, neither
are windy words for the soul. Some knowledge does not build up, but puff up, 1
Cor. 8. 1. and that is all the knowledge, which such words can breed, when they
breed any. Thirdly, observe,

We are apt to judge the words of those that are greatly afflicted, to be but
vain windy words. And we are ready to conclude, they complain more then they
need. When the Israelites groaning under the pressures of that bondage, sent to
Pharaoh for some abatement of their burdens: we will not diminish the tale of
the bricks, only let straw be given us, no says Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 17. They are
idle, let more work be laid upon the people, that they may labor therein, and
let them not regard vain words. He resolved to deal wisely with them, and
therefore must count them mad: their persons were near Jobs condition, and
their words were fully under the same censure. Fourthly, hence note,

That it is very sinful to esteem the words of the afflicted to be but wind.

It was great uncharitableness in Jobs friends, thus to expound and gloss the
text of his complaints. We should hear a man in affliction; as if every word
were drenched and steeped in the sorrows of his heart; and take every
sentence, as coming bloody from his wounded spirit.

Lastly, observe, how Job describes his own estate, he was, as a man desperate
(not utterly desperate, for in another place he professes in highest
confidence, that though God kill him, yet he will trust in him) yet desperate
he was in regard of outward help, or temporal succor.

A godly man in affliction may sometime think his case desperate and
remediless. Wicked men resolve in the Psalm, There is no help for him in his
God; and a good man under a cloud of temptation may say, Surely, there is no
help for me in my God; that is, I see not which way I shall be helped, I have
no assurance, no evidence that God will help me: Not that he doubts the power
of God to help him: But the providence of God seems to speak that he will not,
I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, says holy David. Heman looked upon
himself, as a man that had no strength, free among the dead, Psalm. 88. 5. As if
he had got a discharge from the service of this world, and was enfranchiz'd a
Citizen of the grave, where all are free. As (to note that only in passage) It
is said of Azariah, being smitten with leprosy, and so put from the exercise
of the government, which was a civil death; that he dwelt in a several house,
or in a house of freedom, 2 Kin. 15. 5.

Verse 27. Yea, you overwhelm the fatherless, and you digg a pit for your
friend. After he had convinced them of their uncharitableness in accounting his
words light and windy, he shows them how they dealt with him, what kind of
words theirs were toward him: their words were as swords, their words were
blows, every expression of theirs to his ear, was an oppression upon his
spirit; Yea overwhelm the fatherless; He sets forth their (as he conceived)
cruelty against him, by two things, very odious both;

First, the undoing of a fatherless child.

Secondly, the digging of a pit (not for an enemy, but) for a friend.

First, Ye overwhelm the fatherless.

The Original is full of Emphasis, word for word, it may be translated thus,
You throw your selves upon the fatherless; and so it is an allusion to
hunters, either to men, when they hunt wild beasts; or to wild beasts, when
they hunt their prey; as soon as the hunter can reach the game, he overwhelmes
it, he casts himself down, or lays all his strength upon it. A dog having
caught the hare, falls upon it, and keeps it under. Some conceive that
expression, Genesis 49 9. concerning Judah* compared to a lion, reaches this
sense, Judah is a Lions whelp, from the prey my son, thou art gone up, he
stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old Lion, who shall rouse him up?
As if that that crouching and lying down, were when he has taken his prey; who
dares to stir up a Lion, when he has his prey under him, if any dare, the
Lion will make them a prey too. We see in daily experience, how angry a dog
will be, if you stir him up, when he has but a bone under him. Such a violence
is noted in this expression, you throw your selves down upon a poor fatherless
one, a man in a low condition, as if you would tear him to pieces, and eat him
up at a morsel. Our translation comes near this signification of the word, Ye
overwhelm the fatherless.

The word signifies to run upon one with violence, and hence Giants (...) Ruit,
irruit.
are called Nephilim in the Hebrew, which is as much as to say, Oppressors,
because they overwhelm the weaker with force and violence.

Mr. Broughton translates the word to another sense, as noting, not an open
violent way of oppressing, but a secret subtle way of circumventing, Ye lay a
snare for the Orphan: the word may bear that sense, namely, to set a trap, or
to lay a snare: And he paralels (...), Scandatum est impedimentum in via, ut
quis vel collabatur and ruat, vel ab instituto cursu impediatur.
it, with that word used often in the new Testament To scandalize or offend a
brother, which properly signifies to lay a trap or a snare, to set somewhat
whereby to entangle or catch a man, that he may be stopped and hindered in his
way. Thus Job of his friends, you set a trap to ensnare, and make a pit for me
to fall into, or you lay a block to cause me to stumble, in, or turn out of,
the ways of holiness, while you would persuade me, that he who walks
uprightly in that way, shall never meet with any rub of outward trouble. What
is this but to discourage me in the way I walk, because therein I have met so
many troubles. Thus you lay a snare for,

The fatherless.] The word strictly taken, notes a child, whose parents are
dead. Some of the Ancients say, the word Pupil, which is from the latin,
signifies one without sight, or wanting the apple or Pupil of his eyes, because
being deprived of his parents, he wants the light of counsel and direction, to
carry him Pupillus juxta Augustinum and I^idorum ita dicitur, quasi sine
oculis, quae pupillae dicuntur, i. e. parentibus orbus.
on, in his course through the world. What Moses spoke to Hobab his father in
law, is a truth of all good parents to their children, They are to them in
stead of eyes, Numb. 10. 31. But here by fatherless, we may rather understand
any one, that is destitute of help, though himself be a father. He that has
many children may (in this sense) be an Orphan, that is, friendlesse and
comfortless. So Psalm. 10. 14. Thou art the helper of the fatherless; that is,
Thou art the helper of all those, who want help. That Is the meaning of Christ's
promise to his Disciples, I will not leave you comfortless; the Greek is, I
will not leave you Orphans or fatherless; Orphans and fatherless are usually
full of sorrows, therefore to be left fatherless, and to be left comfortless
are the same. In this larger sense take Jobs mind, You overwhelm the
fatherless; that is, you overwhelm me, who am a poor, destitute, helpless man,
who have no friend, succor or support.

And you dig a pit for your friend. Word for word, thus, You dig for your
friend. And this is on all Velut laqueum and decipulam struitis ad eum
capiendum. i, e. captionibus and cavilis eum nitamini circumvenire. Merc.
sides agreed on, to intimate the secret circumvention or subtle practice (as
Job apprehended) of his friends. For in Scripture, to dig a pit is a proverbial
speech, and imports the laying of some secret plot to circumvent another,
either in word or deed. So Psalm. 7. 15. He made apit and dug it, and is
fallen into it himself; that is, he devised some mischievous device to entrap
his brother, and the mischief is fallen upon his own head, Psalm. 64. 5. They
commune of laying snares privily; And Isa. 29. 21. the Prophet describes evil
workers, thus, They dig deep to hide their counsel from the Lord; wicked
Politicians are diggers and underminers; sometimes this is true literally (as
in our powder-plotters) but mystically and mysteriously every one that lays a
plot (though he never breaks ground) is said to dig a pit for his neighbor, In
the old law (Exodus, 21. 33.) A provision was made, that whosoever dug a pit,
should cover it, because pits were dangerous, both for men and cattle To dig a
pit for a friend, is to endanger a friend.

In this sense, the latter part of the verses agrees with Mr Broughtons
translation of the first, Ye lay a snare for the Orphan, and ye dig a pit for
your friend; False and fallacious arguments are traps and pits, in which the
innocent are entangled. And Job supposes, his friends intended to cast him down
into the pit of despair by charging him with hypocrisy and rottenness of
heart in his profession.

There is a further apprehension concerning this word, You have (...) Sgnificat
fodere and convivium instruere. Epulamini super socium vestrum.
dug a pit. Some of the Hebrew Doctors translate thus, You make a feast
upon your friend. The word signifies not only to dig a pit, but to feast and
banquet, and it notes a sumptuous exquisite banquet, 2 King. 6. 23. And he
prepared great provision for them, in this book, Chap. 41. 6. The word is used
in that sense, where Leviathan is described too big for a banquet, Shall thy
companions make a banquet of him? that is, are the fishermen able to catch and
eat Leviathan? As if Leviathan scorned the fisher-mens engines, their nets and
hooks.

Taking the word so, the meaning of the clause may be thus conceived, You
overwhelm the fatherless, yea you are not contented with that, but you feast
upon your poor friend, that is, you rejoice in his misery, and make your selves
merry with his sorrows; as the Philistines dealt with Sampson, when they had
put out his eyes, Come let us bring him out and make sport with him; So says
Job, you deal with me, you oppress me, and then make your selves merry with my
sorrows. The tears of an oppressed poor man, are as wine to the oppressor, he
drinks them down; the groans of a poor man are as music to a wicked
oppressor, and his flesh is as meat to him. Hence observe; First,

To be fatherless is to be in a sad condition. They who are fatherless, are
friendlesse and so most subject to oppression. They who have least help in
themselves, have usually least help from others, and often receive most hurt
from others. Hence we find (Ps. 10. 18) the oppressed and the fatherless put
together; as if the fatherless were to expect oppression for their portion, and
they who needed most protection, should be sure to find most vexation. We use
to say, where the hedge is lowest, there men go over; it is so in every days
experience. The mighty Nimrods ride over the backs of the poor. And where the
hedge is low, they make lower gaps, to pass over more easily to their own
designs. This spirit of oppression is described raging against those, who are
under heaviest pressures, Psalm. 69. 26. They persecute him whom thou have
smitten, and they talk to the grief of those whom thou have wounded: When
wicked men see a man afflicted by the hand of God, they afflict him more; when
they see God has wounded him, they will kill him. The trouble he is in, makes
their victory more easy; As when the Philistines fell before Jonathan (1 Samuel
14.) his Armor-bearer slew after him; so do these, they slay those who are
fallen before the afflicting hand of God. Observe secondly;

That it is a great aggravation of the sinfulness of oppression and wrong
doing, to oppress or do wrong to the fatherless. Commonly the poor are most
oppressed, but always there is more sin in oppressing the poor, though to
oppress or wrong the rich be a sin, and a very great one. What a stock of
wickedness do they gather, who take from these to whom they are bound to
give, who make them naked and hungry, whom they should cloth and feed: who are
straitened in justice toward them, to whom they ought to be enlarged in
charity. It is a sin to deny them justice, who need not your charity, but to be
unjust where we should be charitable, how sinful is that! It is a great sin to
take away from him, who has abundance, but to take away from him, who is in
want, is an abounding sin. Therefore we find that given, not only as a rule,
but as a charge, Prove. 22 22. Rob not the poor because he is poor, make not
poverty your advantage for robbery. There is much baseness in it (besides the
sinfulness) to trample upon those who cannot resist, and perhaps dare not
complain. God is most resisted in wronging those who cannot resist others, or
right themselves. When we help a poor man (especially a godly poor man) God
himself gains, and (in a sense) is enriched by it; because God receives glory,
and is paid (which is his greatest revenew from man) in honor and in praise,
for all the help we give such poor. In our alms, we perform Gods promises for
him; and they who receive premises, cannot but return praise. On the other
side, when we wrong the poor (especially the godly poor) God himself looses,
and (in a sense) is impoverished; because not only his praise (as much as we
can do) is withheld, but his truth and faithfulness are questioned. Man's
uncharitableness, would make void, the promises of God; and when promises lie
unfulfilled, praise lies unreturned. Hence that threatening prohibition, Prove.
23. 10, 11. Enter not into the fields of the fatherless; that is, make not a
forcible or violent entry. Why, is it more dangerous to enter into his field,
than into another? Or is there any license here to enter into the field of a
rich man, or to trespass upon him? No, there is no license to trespass upon a
rich man, or to enter upon his field, but take heed you enter not into the
fields of the fatherless; why? For their Redeemer is mighty, he shall plead
their cause with thee; Though poor orphans and fatherless have no might, no
help, they cannot plead themselves, and they have no friend to help or plead
for them, they cannot get an Advocate or Counselor speak in their cause, Yet
their redeemer is strong, he will plead with thee; He will plead with thee, for
the wrong done the fatherless, as for a wrong done himself, because thou have
oppressed one, whom he undertook to protect, and so (as much as thou can) have
brought up an ill report upon the Lord, as if he were either forgetful of his
word, or unable to accomplish it. We vex and tear the promises of God, every
time we vex and tear the poor of God. How sinful then is this sin; by which at
once we break the command, which God gives us, to relieve the poor, and weaken
the promise, which God has given the poor, that they shall be relieved.

Observe further from that expression of their cunning dealing with him, You
dig a pit for your friend; deceitful words are as pits and snares to catch
men in: The tongue is a great insnarer. The tongue teaches to lay a snare,
Balaam taught Balak to lay a stumbling block before the children of Israel,
Revel. 2. 14. He taught him how to dig a pit, and set such a snare, as caught
the people into adultery and Idolatry: The tongue is a great Engineer, a
trap-setter to catch and entangle both the estates and souls of men.

And we may note another point, from the relation of the person for whom this
pit was dug, You dig a pit for your friend. It is a great aggravation of
unkindness, to endeavor their hurt, to whom we are bound by many names and
obligations to do good, or to whom we have made profession of our readiness to
do them good. The more duty or respect we owe any man, the more is our sin
when we neglect him.

The three remaining verses of this Chapter, contain Jobs admonition to his
friends, wherein he advises them, to deal better, or more moderately with him,
and so he makes a trnsiation to the latter part of his speech, in the seventh
Chapter, wherein he returns to the old matter, the justification of that
complaint made against his life, and the equity of his desire to die.

Verse 28. Now therefore be content, look upon me, for it is evident unto you,
if I lie. Now therefore be content, etc.] Some read it, Now therefore begin to
look upon me, or to look more favorably upon me; as if he had said, all (...)
Acquicscere in re quapiam eamque tota voluntate amplecti. Significat etiam
inchoare, Deuteronomy. 1. 5. Genesis 18. 17.
this while ye had hardened your faces, and clouded your brows against me,
therefore now begin to be more benign in your aspects toward me. The word
signifies, to begin, or take a thing in hand willingly; as also to be well
pleased, content or satisfied, the sense of all comes to one point. We
translate in the latter, Now therefore be content, do this thing freely, be
satisfied and acquiesce in it: as we use to cool and calm an angry friend, who
disputing or speaking to a business, grows hot and passionate, I pray, sir, be
satisfied, let us go on meekly and moderately.

Look upon me. Which notes either his desire of their friendly compliance with,
and respect to him, as Mr. Broughton reads, Now therefore be content, regard
me; or it notes the strength and firmness of Jobes resolution, in this
contest with his friends, I am not afraid to look you in the face, or to speak
face to face, look upon me, you shall not read either fear or falsenesse
written in my forehead; the lines and characters of my countenance, shall show
you nothing but the soundness and integrity of my conscience. For it is
evident unto you, if I lie, you will anon read the lie in my face, if there be
a lie in my heart; therefore break not off with me, turn not away in
discontent, let us discourse a little more about this business, and the truth
will appear. (...)*


It is evident unto you, if I lie. The Hebrew is, it is before your face if I
lie, that is (as we translate) it will quickly be evident, and appear unto you
by a little sober debate of this business, whether I am right or no. Et in
faciem vestrum si mentior; sc. despeream vel moriar, vel non sit mihi propitius
Deus, vel tale quippiam, Mer.


Some think, there is a kind of secret imprecation in this speech, It will be
evident unto you, if I lie: As if he had said, Let not the Lord be merciful or
gracious unto me, let not the Lord pity or spare me, If I am false hearted and
lie unto you. It is frequent and familiar in the Hebrew, to give such
expressions of an oath; As in that oath of God, Psalm. 95. 11. quoted Heb. 3.
11. Unto whom I swear in my wrath, If they shall enter into my rest; which we
translate by a plain negative in both places: They shall not enter into my
rest. And Psalm 89 39. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie
unto David, or, if I lie unto David; then, let not my word be taken any more;
So, Job here, it will he evident to you, if I lie, and if I do, let me not
have help, or strength, or support from God any more.

To lie, may be taken two ways; either strictly, as to lie, is to Mentire est
contramentem ite.
speak that which is false, with an intent to deceive. To speak against clear
knowledge, is the proper, strict sense of a lie: Or to lie, signifies to fail,
or to come short in that which is expected from us by others; To frustrate any
of their hopes, is to lie to them; and so it is applied often times to the
fruits of the earth, (Hab. 3. 17.) Though the labor of the Olive shall fail,
the word is, though the labor of the Olive should lie, that is, though you
coming to find fruit of the Olive, should find none there. The Olive whose fair
leaves promise and speak you fair, as if you should have fruit, if when you
come, it yields none, this Olive lies to you; So (Hos. 9. 2.) The new wine
shall lie, we translate it The new wine shall fail, that is, the vines which
speak thus much, that you shall have new wine shortly if when you come, there
is none, the vines lie. In either of these senses we may understand it; Spem
mentita seges. Hor.
If I lie; that is, if I speak any thing against my mind, wittingly or
willingly; or if I fail in this business, if I am like the vine or like the
olive, when they give no fruit according to expectation; it will be evident
unto you, you shall see if we discuss this controversy a little further the
truth will out, whether I shall fail or belie your expectation, or no. That
place (Chap. 24. 25) will expound it so, who will make me a liar, (says Job)
and make my speech nothing worth? as if he had said, my words shall be made
good, and I will not fail in that which I have undertaken, or taken upon me.

There is a further apprehension about these words, Look upon Totus hic versus
eleganter insinuat rem sorensem, nempe judic is strict issimum examen cosentes
and testes interrogat, non solum verbis, sed etiam nutibus oculorum and
intuitu. Bold.
me, it is evident unto you, if I lie, as i^ they were an allusion to the
carriage of Judges and Magistrates toward offenders, in public judiciary
trials: when an offender or one accused for any offense, is brought before a
judge, and stands at the bar to be arraigned; the judge looks upon him, eyes
him, sets his eye upon him, and he bids the offender look up in his face, look
upon me (says the judge) and speak up; guiltiness usually clouds the forehead,
and clothes the br^w; The weight of guilt holds down the head, The evil doer
has an ill look; or dares not look up; how glad is he, if the judge look off
him. We have such an expression, Psalm. 11. 4. speaking of the Lord, the great
Judge of Heaven and earth, His eyelids try the children of men, as a Judge
tries a guilty person with his eye, and reads the characters of his
wickedness printed in his face; Hence, we have a common speech in our
language, such an one looks suspiciously, or he has a guilty look. At that
great Goale-delivery, described (Rev. 6. 16.) all the prisoners cry out to be
hid from the face of him that sat upon the throne, They could not look upon
Christ, and they could not endure Christ should look on them; The eyelids of
Christ try the children of men. That of Solomon may help this sense, Pro. 20.
8. A King that sits in the throne of judgment, scatters away all evil
with his eyes. Wickedness cannot endure to be under the observation of any
eye, much less of the eye of Justice. Hence the actors of it, say, Who sees
us. It is very hard, not to show Heu quam difficile est, crimen non prodere
vultu, Ovid. secund. Metam.
the guilt of the heart in the face, and it is as hard, to have it seen there.
Job seems to offer himself to the view of the severest Judge, Be content look
upon me, if I am guilty, it will quickly appear unto you, my hypocrisy will
break out in my face, and you may read my conscience, in my countenance. It
is noted of Paul, Acts 13. 59. that when he had to deal witb Elymas the
Sorcerer, he set his eyes upon him, and said, O full of all subtilty. The
Apostle beat him down, as it were, with a cast of his eye; Job bids his
friends look upon him as long, and as critically as they pleased, he was not
afraid of there looks.

Lastly, thus, look to me, that is, attend well what I say, for I will
explain my mind so fully and clearly to you, that it will quickly be evident
to you, whether I am right or wrong.

We may observe from this passage, first,

That uprightness has much boldness. He that has a good cause and a good
conscience, is not afraid to be searched to the bottom; he cares not who
looks upon him, or who looks into him. David in regard of the uprightness of
his heart, calls unto God himself, Search me, and try me, it there be any way
of wickedness in me, Psalm. 139. 23. David was so assured at his own integrity,
that he was not afraid to put him self upon the highest trial, in that point:
A holy heart is willing, that God and men should search it; even search it with
candles, as God threatens he would, the corrupt and false-hearted Jews.

Secondly note this from it;

Where a lie is, it will not long he hid. A lie will break forth one time or
other; you may cover and hide a lie, you may keep it, close, and sit upon it,
as Rachel upon her fathers Images, but at last it will be evident, a lie will
out. We say, Truth is the daughter of time, and so is a lie too: a little time
will bring that work of darkness to light.

Take the word in the other sense, for failing, and it yields us this
Instruction. That.

He who has uprightness of heart, is steadfast for ever. Truth is uniforme:
Which way soever the wind and the world turn, his posture is the same, Christ
will not fail him, and therefore he cannot. Such a man is as Mount Zion, that
shall never be removed; when the heart is sound, the actions are steady; and he
that moves upon a right principle, moves regularly; and in all changes of
events, changes not his way: try him, and try him again, it will be evident
unto you, he will not lie. Grace is ever the same, and renders them who have
it, like him (in their degree) from whom they have it, without variableness or
shadow of turning. He that is not (for the substance) what he was, was never
what he ought to be, sincere. He that is upon a good ground, and knows his
ground, will stand to it; trust him (as a creature may be trusted) and he will
not fail.

Verse 29. Return; I pray you, let it not be iniquity, yea, return again; my
righteousness is in it. He goes on to bespeake his friends to hear him
better. Returne] The word signifies.

First, A Local return, or returning from a place.

Secondly, It is used Metaphorically, to return from anger, or (...) Redire
significat, sed saepe transfertur ad animum, estque a proposito ab sistere,
institutum vita mutare, and paenitentiam agere.
to turn anger away; Isa. 5. 25. His anger is not turned away, the Lord did not
turn from his feirce wrath. Some understand it so here, Return I pray you, that
is, I beseech you be not so angry, be not so hasty and choleric with me.

Thirdly, To turn or return, notes desisting from our purpose, or the change of
our resolutions. And thus it is the same with repentance, the Scripture
aboundes with the word in the sense, I shall not need to quote texts: Thus,
most understand it here, Return, that is, repent of your former hard dealing
with me, persist not in it, persevere not in your uncharitableness. Vbi
redierit is, and tursum redieritis id est. ubi iterum, atque iterum omnia
d^iigenter discusseritis, codem subinde redeuntes, and cadem accuratius
reputantes, meani cognoscetis justitiam.


Or lastly, Return, that is, weigh the matter better, Return, look it over
again, let it have your second and more settled thoughts; consider, whether I
speak not, as one constrained to this seeming impatience, from real sorrow,
rather then from a professed hypocrisy. So, he bespeaks his friends again,
Chap. 17. 10. But as for you all, do you return and come now (that is, be
better advised, as the next words expound his meaning) for I cannot find one
wise man among you. As if he had said, you have not showed any great treasures
of wisdom, in all your disputations against me hitherto; And therefore he tells
them (Chap. 19. 28.) what counsels became them to take. Ye should say, why
persecute we him? let us give over such hard censures and wounding language.
Say to your selves, let us return, as here he says to them, return I pray you.

Let it not be iniquity.] Some understand it thus, let not the thing which is
objected against me be iniquity, object not unrighteously against me: Or thus,

Secondly, in this disputation, as it shall be carried on again, deal not so
unequally, so unjustly and hardly with me as before, deal fairly, uprightly,
heartily and friendly with me, Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; let
there not be such wrangling and hard speeches between us, as hitherto there
have been. Mr Broughton agrees to either sense. Change your mind now: let not
unrighteousness be objected.

Yet the Hebrew particle (Al) does not always forbid, but often Particula
(...) non semper prohibet, sed aliqu^ndo simpliciter negat. Non erit iniquitas
in verbis meis scili es, Merc.
notes, simply to deny; and some translate it here, for a plain denial,
rather than a forbidding, Not as we, Let it not be iniquity; but there shall
not be iniquity, that is, in my words, or in that which I shall speak; and we
may connect it with the latter part of the verse. my righteousness is in it.

Yea, return again. He advised them to return before, now he doubles his
advice, yea return again. Such repeated doubled speeches in Scripture, note;

First, A vehemence of spirit in the speaker?

Secondly, A necessity of obedience to the thing which is spoken, by the
hearer. It is surely a weighty and a necessary point, which is spoken and
spoken again. That Is a double duty, and calls for double alligence, which we
are doubly called to, Return I pray you, do not think that this is a small
matter, a business of indifferency, return again. As (Cant. 6. 13.) Return,
return, O Shulamite, return, return: There was great necessity for the
Shulamite, to return, when he was so often cried after to return. So, Rejoice,
and again I say, rejoice, said the Apostle, to note the vehemence of his
spirit, and the necessity of that Gospel-duty, or how exceeding becoming it
is, for Christans to walk cheerfully and rejoice. Here then, Return, yea return
again, is, as if he had said, there is great cause you should return, and be
better advised, that, you should consider otherwise of my case, than hitherto
you have done;

My righteousness is in it. That is, I am righteous in this matter, in this
business: or upon such a further consideration and returning to the quistion,
my righteousness, (by a true stating of these differences) will appear unto
you. Job was no Justiciary, no boaster in or of his own righteousness; but he
speaks of the righteousness of his cause, and of the uprightness of his
conscience. According to that of (Psalm. 73. ver. 6.) Thy righteousness shall
appear as the light, that is, the righteousness of thy cause: so says Job,
my righteousness is in it, when you return and return again, to consider
diligently and seriously of this business, you will find the result of all
will be, that my righteousness is in it, that is, that I am in the right, or
free from blame in this business, that I have not broken the rules of justice,
or departed from a good conscience.

Further, Others conceive Job bespeaks his friends in this quick language;
Return, yea return again, to recall his Forte in dignaebundi discessum
papabane-aut ja^ surrexer^nt discessuri, quaere illos invitat ad promoven^a^
disputationem, Pined.
friends, who were ready to go away in a pett or in a fume, as we use to say;
They were rising to be gone and Job hastily calls them back, Return, I pray
return; As a man in discourse growing so hot, that the house cannot hold him,
but he will break away, is usually re-invited, pray stay, sir, return again;
so Job, return again, my righteousness is in it, you shall see I mill make
the matter good.

Hence observe, first, (taking the rerurn in a Metaphorical sense.)

That a passionate or inconsiderate man, goes from hemself, and from the
matter. Passion carries from the business before us. An angry man's discourse
runs wild, he had need be reduced. Consideration is the returning of a man unto
himself, or his coming home. As the passions of the concupiscible appetite,
and intemperancies of youth, carry a man beyond his bounds (and therefore the
Prodigal repenting, is said to come to himself, Luke 15. 17.) so likewise do
the passions of the irascible appetite. Anger disorders and discomposes the
spirit, as much as luxury.

Secondly, observe,

To persist in evil is worse than the committing if evil. The one is common
to man, the other peculiar to the Devil, and his peculiars, who know no
repentance. It is bad enough to do ill, but not to return from evil, is
inexcusable; therefore the Lord, often by his Prophets lays this, as the
heaviest charge of all, upon his people. He taxes them with their departures
from him: But especially with their refusals to return unto him, Yet have ye
not returned unto me; this is more sinful than all the sins you have
committed, you have not returned, you go on and persevere in evil. The sword
of God proclaims alike voice in our ears at this day, Return, return again.
We have departed and gone away from God, let us not draw that ancient change
upon our selves, I have smitten you, yet have ye not returned unto me. It is
not sinning, but not returning, which brings final condemnation, impenitency
seals the stone of destruction upon Persons, and Nations.

Thirdly, whereas these words, Return, let it not be iniquity, are referred to
Jobs friends, as if he had said, Let not this your passion make your sin
fouler and greater; you have sinned already, but if you return not, your sin
will be iniquity shortly, Note,

He stops his sin from b^ing an iniquity, who hastens his returning from sin.

Every sin, the least sin, is sin, as the least drop of water, is water: but
every sin (in a strict sense) is not iniquity. The nature is the same, but the
degree varies. As many a child never comes to be a man; so many a sin comes not
to be an iniquity. Happy ^s he that takes those little ones, and dasheth them
against the stones. That returns before his sin be iniquity.

Fourthly, observe further, how Job calls upon his friends, when he sees them
transported (as he thought) with passion; he leaves complaining of his own
sorrows, and gives them good counsel; he, for that present forgets his own
ruins, that he might amend them.

It is our duty to reclaim, and to appease those by gentle entreaties, who, we
suppose, have wronged us, or gone astray from truth.

Job does not rail upon or revile his friends, but beseeches them, to be
better advised, and consider what they did.

Fifthly, in that he says, Return, yea return again, taking this for a call to
a more serious consideration of the business, we may note,

That a man's cause and condition must be considered, and considered again,
twice, that is, fully considered, before he be condemned. We must give account
of every idle word, much more then of every unjust sentence or censure: It is
but wisdom to consider that strictly, about which we must give so strict an
account.

Sixthly, in that he says, My righteousness is in it. Observe,

That a good cause, the more it is searched into, the better it will appear;
the deeper you dig into it, the more truth and holiness you will find in
it. Search a godly man, and the lower you go, the better he proves; the nearer
you come to his heart, the richer treasures of grace and uprightness will be
discovered. at his tongue, or, his lips may be gilded over with good words, but
Whereas take an hypocrite, and you may have a little good metal, search him to
the bottom, and there is all rottenness, even seven abominations at his
heart. A godly man is not gilded, but gold. Search a Job quite through, try him
to the center, righteousness is in all his ways, the further you search, the
better he is, and he will be best of all, at last.

Verse 30. Is there iniquity in my tongue? Gannot my taste discern perverse
things. Formula est seipsum compellantis and animum suum scrutantis, facta
examinantis, Coc Verbaper stultitiam and temeritatem prolata latentis
pravitatis indices.
Thus he concludes his Directory to his friends, and his preparatory for what
himself intended to pursue in the next Chapter, Is there iniquity in my tongue?
does my tongue speak unequal, or evil things? Has any thing bin spoken by me
against common right, or against the divine rule? has my tongue uttered any
iniquity from my heart, Has the sinfulness of my heart broken forth at my
lips? Or has it appeared, that I have done wickedly by what I have said? When
my words are duly weighed, I shall not appear the man you make me.

The word signifies calamity or misery, as well as iniquity, and so we may take
it here, Is there calamity in my tongue? That is, do my words bespeake or
invite my afflictions. We find the word used in that sense, Psalm. 52. 2. Thy
tongue devises mischief, or calamity; Iniquity devised or framed by the
tongue is often a scourge upon the back, Micha 7. 3. the great man utters his
mischievous desire; The mischievous evil words of his soul. Is there, (says
Job) any such mischievous device in my tongue? Dober Havoth Naphshi.
Have I spoken poison to infect you: or blasphemy to dishonor God.

Cannot my taste discern perverse things? Cannot my taste?] The Hebrews is,
Cannot my palate? And (...) Palatum, eleganti Metaphora, a sensibus externis,
ad interiores translata, appellat illam animae facultatem, qua justa ab
injustis, vera a falsis, and aequa ac recta, ab iniquis and perversis
dignoscuntur, nonsecus ac palato cibi dulces ab amaris, etc. Merc. Habet and
anima suum palatum.
because the palate is exquisite in tasting, therefore by a trope the organ is
expressed for the act, Cannot my taste discern, cannot my palate, Or as
others, Cannot my mouth discern perverse things? That faculty of the soul,
whereby we discern or distinguish just from unjust, truth from false-hood, as
sweet is distinguished from bitter, by the palate, is elegantly called the
palate of the soul.

Cannot my taste discern? The Hebrew is, Cannot my taste (...) Scriptura saepe
linguae, faucibus manibus, tribuit, quod men. it is and intellectus proprium est,
sc. med tari and intelligere. Magna est rationis and orationis cognatio.
understand perverse things? It is usual in Scripture to ascribe
understanding, not only to the senses, but also to the tongue, and sometimes
to the hand. Understanding is ascribed to the tongue, in the place before
named: Psalm. 52. where the tongue is said, to de vise mischief; The tongue,
properly, cannot devise, the tongue does but utter mischief, it is the mind or
heart that devises. The shop is within, where mischief is forged and framed,
yet the contrivance of it, is in that text given to the tongue. There is a
twofold reason of it, why the holy Ghost attributes the work of the
understanding to the tongue, hand or senses,

First, there is a great affinity, beween reason and speech, and therefore the
tongue, which is the instrument of speech, is honored with the work of the
understanding: And so great is the affinity beween reason and speech, that no
creature void of reason can speak; Speech is a peculiar property of the
rational creature, Speech is or ought to be the immediate issue or birth of
reason. Words are conceived in the mind, and born at the tongue. And words are
the image of the mind. We may see what work is wrought in the mind, by that
which is spoken by the tongue. The shape of a man's heart (when he speaks
himself) comes out at his mouth. And therefore before a man speaks, he
meditates. Meditation is the conception of words. As speaking is the production
of them. Thus the Lord charges Joshua (Chap. 1. 8.) The book of the law shall
not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night: One
would think, it should rather have been said, The book of the Law shall not
depart out of thine heart, but thou shall meditate therein, or if, not cut of
thy mouth, then Ita meditaberis ut exipsa cogitatione mentis effervescente
redundent, and ebulliant in ore verba.
thou shall speak of it. Meditation is too high a work for the mouth, Yet,
because there ought to be much meditation about the Law of God, before a word
of it comes out of the mouth, therefore the Lord says, The book of the Law
shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and
night; that is, as often as thou shall speak, thou shall meditate, thou shall not
speak rashly, it shall not be the work of thy tongue alone, but of thy mind
and tongue together.

There is a second reason, why, acts of the understanding are ascribed to the
tongue, or to the senses; because when a thing is well spoken, or duly acted by
any sense, Reason is the guide and the bodily Organ is under the dictates of
the mind or understanding. So Genesis 41. 14. when old Jacob in giving the
blessing unto Joseph's children, Manasseh and Ephraim, laid his right hand upon
the younger, and his left hand upon the elder, the text says, he made his
hands to understand, we translate, he guided his hands wittingly; there was so
much reason, such divine reason in that act of Jacobs hands, in laying his
right hand upon the younger, that the Prudenter egit manibus sun, ac siiplae
manus mysteriorum consciae erant. Onkel.
Hebrew gives it with this elegancie, he made his hands to understand; which
one of the Jewish Writers, learnedly expounds thus, He ordered his hands
wisely, as if they had been made acquainted with that great mystery of Gods
counsels, that the greater blessing was the portion of the younger son. And
so the Psalmist (Psalm. 78 72. speaking of David's reign and government says,
He governed them by the skilfulnesse of his hands. The Hebrew is, by the
understanding of his hands; and more, the understandings of (...) In
intelligentiis manuum, vel vol^rum.
his hands. Or, as one renders it, The discretions of his hands, or the
prudency of his Palms, ascribing all kind of political knowledge and
understanding unto David. David in the outward administrations of the kingdom,
acted with so much reason and justice, that his very hands are said to
understand; His hands understood more than the heads of other Princes. As
David's hands, so Jobs palate or taite, had an understanding, Cannot my palate
understand?

Yet further, it is frequent in Scripture metaphorically to translate things,
which are only acted or apprehended by the inward senses, to the outward.
Taste, properly, is of meat and drink; the humor or moisture, which is in
meats, suitable to the salivall humor in the mouth, causes pleasantness of
taste. Here Job speaks of Doctrines, or of actions, Cannot my taste discern
perverse things? If a thing be perversely or properly, truly or falsely spoken,
cannot I taste it quickly? And hence the word of God is compared to those
things, which are the object of taste, as to milk, and to strong meat, 1 Cor.
3. 2. I (says the Apostle) have fed you with milk, and not with meat; That is,
with easy and common truths, not with the more mysterious parts of
Gospel-knowledge, because ye were not able to bear it. The taste of such
mysteries was too strong for your pallates. The same Metaphor is enlarged by
the Apostle, Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14. And in this Book we find it more than once,
Does not the ear try words, and the mouth taste his meat? (Job 12. 11. Chap.
34. 3.) That is, does not the ear try words, as the mouth tastes meat? Cannot
my taste discern

Perverse things? That is, words ill spoken, or wrong placed. The word
signifies (...)
also, any calamity, or sad accident. And so Mr. Broughton renders it. Cannot
my palate declare all kind of heavy sorrows? Do ye think I have lost my
judgment of things, and that I cannot tell, when I am pinch't or pained.

First, in that he says here, Is there iniquity in my tongue? Observe,

The tongue oft-times discovers the iniquity of the heart.

If there be iniquity in the heart, it will one time or other break forth at,
and blister upon the tongue. He that is rotten at his heart, is commonly rotten
in his talk, Matthew. 12. 34. Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks. And when there is abundance of iniquity in the heart, there is
seldom a dearth or scarcity of it in the mouth: especially in times of
trouble, that iniquity and corruption, that disease and plague of the heart,
will break forth at the lips. As, Evil words corrupt good manners; So evil
words discover, that our manners are corrupt. There are few men, but as the
Damosel spoke to Peter, Their speech bewrays them, and you may smell the
filth of their hearts by their breath. Secondly, observe from these words, Is
there iniquity in my tongue?

He whose heart is upright, may know that he is upright.

When Job questions, Is there iniquity in my tongue? He resolves; There is no
iniquity in my tongue; None of that iniquity, which you charge me with. I grant
a believer has not always a sight of his own integrity and uprightness, many
a soul bears false witness against himself, and oppresses his own innocence:
yet for the most part, sincerity has a witness in it self, and holiness
carries a light by which it is seen to him that has it. An upright heart may
know his own uprightness.

Thirdly, in that Job is thus stiff, in maintaining his own uprightness, and in
denying any iniquity to be in his tongue, Observe;

It is a duty to maintain our own integrity and uprightness.

Job was upon it before, and is now upon it again, and he will be upon it
afterward, he never gives over justifying of himself against man, though he had
not a word to plead for himself against God.

Fourthly, from the latter clause, Cannot my taste discern perverse things?
Observe;

Reason distinguishes truth from falsehood, as the palate distinguishes bitter
from sweet. Reason it is the souls-taster. Princes have their tasters before
they eat, least there should be poison in the dish. God has given unto man a
taster for his spiritual meat. The Pope will not suffer the meat he provides
and cooks to be tasted, but will have it swallowed whole, or else he will
thrust it whole down their throats. It is alike spiritual tyranny, to starve
souls, and to cram them. It is our duty, when meat is set before us, and we are
at a full table of knowledge, where variety of doctrins and opinions are served
in, then to call for our taster. We may be surfetted else, if not poisoned.
There may be a wild guord among good herbs in the pot, and so death in the pot
too, therefore first taste, then eat and digest. A Christian has a taste to
discern error from truth; why then should he be denied the use of it? A woe is
pronounced against those, who offer unwholesome doctrine, Isa. 5. 20 Woe to those
that call evil good, and good evil, that put light for darkness and darkness
for light, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. A like woe is due to
them, who will not give others leave to discern for themselves, what is good or
evil, light or darkness, bitter or sweet; as good let another live for us, as
another taste for us. And their misery will be little less, then the woes of
these men, who cannot or will not take pains to distinguish, when evil is
called good and good evil, when light is put for darkness, and darkness for
light, when bitter is put for sweet, and sweet for bitter, or (as Job speaks
here) whose taste cannot discern perverse things. There are some whose taste is
so far from discerning perverse things, that it is easy to discern, their
taste is perverse; for, bring them wholesome, true and savoury doctrine, they
say it is bitter, or false doctrine; Bring them false doctrine, a lie, a dream a
fancy, a mere humane invention, dish out such provision before them, that is
excellent cheer. This was the heaviest curse, which God sent upon the Gentiles,
Romans 1. 28. God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things, which
are not convenient, that is, to a mind void of judgment, a mind that could not
taste or distinguish things, therefore the issue or effect was, They did things
which were not convenient; as if a man not being able to judge of meats, eats
poison, or meats most contrary to his health and constitution. It is a fearful
judgment to be given up to an unapproving mind, to a mind that cannot discern
truth from false-hood, the Oracles of God, from the forgeries of men,
superstition, from holy worship. It is a sad thing to loose our spiritual
senses. Such as play the wantons with the word of God, and walk below the
truths they know, are at last given up to a reprobate mind, to a mind not able
to know the word of truth, and then they swallow down error for truth, and suck
in deadly poison, like sweet pleasant wine. The Apostle speaking of the
difference of doctrins, under the metaphor of meats, says, Milk is for babes,
but strong meat is for them of full age, even for those, that by reason of use,
have their senses exercised to discern good and evil; That is, their spiritual
senses exercised to taste this, from that doctrine, and not to swallow every
doctrine alike. It is a great blessing, when a people have senses exercised; And
it is a blessing we have much cause to pray for, in these times. That many
pallats are out of taste, is too apparent by the multitude of heterodox
opinions, which go down without disrelish. Some, which would even make a man
tremble to name them, are entertained with delight. Some, which dissolve our
comforts, and breaks us off from comfortable communion with Christ: Some, which
shake, if not overthrow the very foundations of faith, are swallowed, as
pleasant morsels. Does not this convince, that there is a want of Jobs taste
among us, to discern perverse things. Therefore get your senses exercised, be
established in the present truth, that, ye, as this holy man in the midst of
all bodily distempers, and outward troubles (which usually put the natural
palate out of taste) may yet even then, as he, have your inward senses
exquisite, and your spiritual palate exact to discern right from perverse
things. Lastly, note,

False doctrine, or true doctrine falsely applied is a perverse thing.

False doctrine perverts, First, Reason; Secondly, Scripture; Thirdly, the souls
of men. The Apostle (Acts 20. 30.) prophecies to the Church of Ephesus, and
with them to all Churches, That out of themselves men should arise, speaking
perverse things to draw away disciples after them. Holy doctrine draws men to
God, and false doctrine draws men to man. As itching ears heap teachers to
themselves (2 Timothy 4. 3.) So false tongues heap disciples to themselves. That
which is perverse in it is nature, is perverting in its effect.

JOB Chap. 7. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. Is there not an appointed time to man upon
earth? are not his days also like the days of an hireling?

As a servant earnestly desires the shadow, and as an hireling looks for the
reward of his work:

So am I made to possess months of vanity; and wearisome nights are appointed
to me.

When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I Am
full of tossings too and fro, unto the dawning of the day.


WHere the knot of connection, between this and the former Chapter lies, is
not so discernable; which has given occasion for much diversity of conjecture
about it.

First, It may be conceived, that Job in his discourse, refutes that tenet of
Eliphaz, that, he was punished and scourged for his wickedness: by showing,
that to be afflicted is the common condition of man, and therefore no such
judgment of any man's wickedness or sinfulness could be made from his
afflictions. Or,

Secondly, That Job here confutes that promise, which Eliphaz made about the
twentieth verse of the fifth Chapter, concerning outward prosperity, He shall
know that his tabernacle shall be in peace, and he shall be delivered, etc. by
proving it inconsistent with the present estate of mortals, to look for such
uninterrupted happiness, or fair days without any clouds and storms, as
Eliphaz seemed to undertake he should, Is there not an appointed time to man
upon earth? are not his days also like the days of an hireling, etc.

Or thirdly, the connection may be made with these words, which himself had
spoken at the four and twentieth verse of the former Chapter, Teach me (says
Job) and I will hold my tongue, and cause me to understand wherein I have
erred: In which words we showed, Job makes an humble submission of himself; and
in case his friends could instruct him better, he was willing to learn, he was
not wedded to his own opinion, or resolved never to be removed from it,

In pursuance of which promised teacheablness, he in this Chapter grants what
was grantable in the former discourse of Eliphaz. Eliphaz had said, Chap. 5.
ver. 7, and 8. That man was born to labor as the sparks fly upward, and
thereupon presently inferres, I would seek unto God, etc. both these, the
Doctrine and the Use, Job seems to prosecute in this seventh Chapter, as if he
should say, what thou have rightly spoken, I will grant thee; thou have said,
Man is born to trouble, I say so too, Is there not an appointed time unto man
(of trouble?) and are not his days as the days of an hireling? And thou
advisest me to seek unto God, and apply my self to him; it is good counsel, and
therefore I will follow it: As we read he does, at the seventeenth and
twentieth verses of this Chapter, O remember that my life is wind, what is man
that thou should magnify him; I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O
thou preserver of men? Why do thou not parnon my transgression, and take
away mine iniquity? Language full of humility, and sounding out the brokenness
of his heart.

But lastly, rather thus, Job having in the former Chapter refuted those
arguments, by which Eliphaz would convince him, and having renewed his request
to die, expostulated with his friends about their unkindness toward him, and
admonished them to a more equal dealing with, and hearing of him: he now
proceeds to the confirmation of his first request to die, which he does from
diverse grounds.

1. From the general condition of man's life, verse. 1. Is there not an appointed
time to man, etc.

2. From the condition of some particular men, A servant earnestly desires the
shadow, and an hireling looks for the reward of his work, may not I therefore
desire death, which only will be a shadow to me, till when, I shall not have
my reward? And,

3. From his own special condition at the third verse, and so forward to the
seventh, therein expressing how sad, how restless, how troublesome his life was
to him, which (as he apprehended) nothing could give remedy to, but only
death: My disease appears curable, only by a grave, and my only medicine, is a
mouth full of earth: Therefore the matter standing so with me, have I not
rightly and reasonably desired, either that I had not lived at all, or that I
may quickly die, and that God would cut off my life.

Having by these arguments confirmed that former desire; In the next place, he
again renews his former complaints from the eleventh verse of this Chapter,
unto the seventeenth. Thirdly, he abases himself before God, as unworthy, that
God should take any notice of him, or bestow a thought, a visit, a smile, or a
chastisement upon him. What is man, that thou do magnify him? that thou
do visit him, etc? Lastly, he concludes with confession of his sin, and
earnest desire of pardon, at the twentieth and the one and twentieth verses.

Thus in general, both for the dependence of the latter part of his speech upon
the former, and the principal parts contained in this.

Verse 1. Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? and are not his
days also like the days of an hireling. The question affirms, there is an
appointed time to man upon earth, and his days are like the days of an
hireling. From whence, we may form his argument thus. He that has a certain
term of life appointed him, to serve in, does not sin in desiring an end of
his service: But there is an appointed time, etc. Therefore it is not sinful to
desire it.

Is there not an appointed time?] The Hebrew thus; Is there (...) Militia, per
Metaphoram, tempus ordinatum, determinatum, constitutum: ipsum ^ilit^ae tempus.
not a warfare to man upon earth? So you find it in the margin of your Bibles:
Our Translators put warfare there, and Appointed time in the text. The word
signifies both, because wars of all other actions, have their seasons, and
their appointed times; and the life of man is well described under both, or
either of those notions.

Consider it first under the most proper signification, and so many read it, Is
there not a warfare to man upon the earth? Isa. 40. 1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort
ye my people, says the Lord, speak comfortably to Jerusalem; Why? Tell her,
her warfare is ended. In that place our translators put appointed time, in the
margin, and, warfare, in the text, as here they put, appointed time, in the
text, and warfare, in the margin; The sense in both is the same. Tell her that
her warfare is ended, that is, the time appointed or constitued for her trouble
is ended: So here, Is there not an appointed time? that is, is there not a set,
determined time of the troubles, or troublesome warfaring life of man?

The Greek Translators interpret it, Temptation, Is there not an Graeci (...),
quasi tentationis officinam ubi homo varia experiatur varijque eventis and
periculis sit expositus, ut miles in bello.
appointed temptation to man upon the earth? And that gives us the same
meaning; for temptation is a warfare; temptation is our spiritual war, the
exercise and probation of a Christian. There are three things in which the
greatest exercise of a Christian life consists, Prayer, Meditation, and
Temptation. First Prayer, wherein man, is seeking unto, and working his heart
toward God: Secondly, Meditation, wherein he is preparing himself, by holy
thoughts and divine considerations, for his nearer addresses unto God in
prayer, and how to walk in every duty toward man: Thirdly, Temptation, wherein
he wrastles and strives with those enemies opposing Prayer, Meditation, and the
whole course of holy obedience. The life of man is a continued temptation, and
that is a spiritual warfare, a continual bickering with a world of enemies; And
though they without stand still, yet a soul can scarce pass one hour, but he
shall have many fights and bouts with his own heart. In this sense, Is there
not an appointed time of warfare or temptation to man upon earth?

Our life is a warfare in diverse respects.

First, it is a warfare, because Christians do or ought, to live under the
greatest command of any in the world; they ought to stand armed at a call. A
Soldier is under absolute command, he must not dispute the Orders of his
General, but obey them; The Centurian in the Gospel says, I have Soldiers
under me, and I say to one go and he goes, to another come and he comes; and
to a third do this and he does it: which he speaks not as commending the
special virtue and good disposition of his own Soldiers, but as describing the
duty of all Soldiers: therefore Souldiary is well defined, To be the obedience
of a stout and valiant mind, Militia est obedientia quadam fortis and invicti,
animi arbitrio carentis suo.
out of his own dispose; A Soldier moves upon direction; so must a Christian,
he is in a warfaring condition, he must have a charge or a word from his
Commander, for every step he treads, or action he undertakes.

Secondly it is a warfare, in regard of perpetual motions and travels: A
Soldiers life is an unsettled life; while he is in actual service, he has no
rest, he is either marching, or charging; and when he comes in his quarters,
his stay is but little, he cannot build him a house, he can but pitch him down
a tent for a night or two; he must away again. Man's life has no stop, we have
here no abiding City, we dwell in tents and tabernacles, waifaring and
warfaring out our days.

Thirdly, a warfare, because of continual watching. It is the watchword which
Christ gave his followers, I say unto you, watch; that is the soldiers word and
work too; warring and watching go together: The Soldier stands Sentinel,
fearing the enemies surprise: A Christian should stand upon his guard and his
watch at all hours, is not that a warfare?

Fourthly, a warfare, because Christians ought to keep their rank and file,
that is, the places and relations wherein God has set them. A Soldier
commanded to stand such a ground, must not stir, though he die for it, and if
he stirs (by Martial law) he shall die. There is so much keeping of order in
war and Battles, that whatsoever keeps order, is said to fight, or war. The
Sarres are said to have fought against Sisera in their courses, Judge. 5. 20.
The Stars are embattaild or encampt in their spears, out of which they move
not, and are therefore often called the Militia, or host of Heaven.

Fifthly, a warfare, because so full of hazzards, troubles and labors, or
because so much hardship is to be endured. A Soldier converses with dangers,
and dwells in the territories of death continually: This caused Deborah to begin
her Triumphant Song, with praise to the Lord, because the people offered
themselves willingly. Many are forced and pressed to the wars; and most who
are not pressed by the Authority of others, are pressed by their own hopes of
gain, or desire of vainglory and renown. A true Voluntiere in war; is a
rare man: There is so much danger in it, that there is seldom much of the will
in it.

The whole life of man, is full either of visible or invisible dangers; he
passes the pikes every day. The Apostle reckons eight distinct perlis in one
verse, which met him, which way soever he turned, 2 Cor. 11. 26. He was in
deaths often. And though there are but few such Heroes as he, yet it is seldom,
but any of us are in deaths: Especially while we remember, the mighty
spiritual enemies and oppositions which encompasse and beset us every day. We
wrestle not with flesh and blood but with principalities and powers, etc. And
are therefore advised to take to us the whole armor of God; never to stir
without our sword.

Sixthly a warfare, in regard of the issue; victory and triumph, or slavery and
death, is the issue of our lives. Either we overcome and are more then
conquerours (that is the Apostles language, Romans 8.) or else we are conquered,
and more then captives; that is the Apostles sense too (both in allusion) They
are taken captive by the Devil at his will: To be led captive by the Devil,
is the lowest captivity, lower then any captivity unto men. In reference to 2.
Tim. 2. 26.
the spiritual part of our warfare, there is no coming off upon equal rermes:
We must be victors or slaves, conquer or die. Only this is the Saints
assurance, that as the Captain of their salvation was made perfect by
sufferings, and conquered by dying, so (at the worst) shall they; spiritual
death (as sinners) has no power over them at all, and when they die (as men)
natural, or by men violently, they shall receive fuller power: Thus our life
is a warfare upon earth.

But take the word as we translate, for an appointed time; Is there not an
appointed time to man upon the earth? And the reason why it bears that sense,
is grounded upon these two things.

1. Because there is a special season of the year, most fit and Non
significat tempus simpliciter, sed tempus certum ac constitutum, ea analogia
quod determinato anni tempore exerceri solet militia. Militia ideo tempus
determinatum dicitur, quia non quae vis aetas bello apta est, sed determinata
and certa.
suitable for war, 2 Samuel 11. 1. And it came to pass at the return of the
year, when Kings go forth to battle. The time for war, is such a known
appointed season, that the same word signifies, warfare, and any appointed
season.

2. Because men go out to war, at a special time of their age: There is an
appointed settled time of man's life, wherein he is fit to bear arms: Every age
is not fit for arms. Old men and children are not fit for the field: Hence we
find, Numbers the first, throughout, that the muster of the children of Israel
is thus made, ver. 3, 20, 22, etc. From twenty years old and upward; all that
are able to go forth to war. The Roman and Greek histories are distinct in
this; In some Commonwealths, from Fifteen to Fifty, in others, from Twenty to
Sixty: and in ours, the appointed time is, between Sixteen and Sixty, so men
are pressed and listed for war; And because there is such an appointed, or a
set time of life in all States to go out to war, therefore, that word is
elegantly applied, to signify a set or an appointed time for any business.

Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? Upon earth: In Heaven our
time knows no bounds, there are no terms or distinctions in eternity; Seasons
and variety of times vanish and shall not be heard of in Heaven. Eterenity is
time fixed. But there is an appointed time.

To man upon earth. The word is Enosh, miserable, weak, frail man, is there
not an appointed time to this man upon earth? that is, while he walks in this
lower region of the world, and lives on mould. The sum of all may be thus
conceived, as if Job had said: Singulis dich^^ sua certaminae praesto sunt,
adeo non nisi cum ipso vitae terminautor labores vitae, ac proinde se. cu^dum
naturam finem vitae expeto, Jun.
Every day has evil annexed, some affliction or other waits upon every
hour, so that there is no period of man's sorrow, but the period of his life;
and therefore I walk by the rule of sound reason, when, that I might see an end
of my trouble, I call for the end of my days. Observe hence, first,

The life of man, is measured out by the will of God. Is there not an appointed
time to man upon earth? There is. As God has set out bounds and limits to the
sea (Hitherto thou shall come, and no further) by a perpetual decree; so, he
has also set out bounds and limits to the life of man, his life it is an
appointed time: Thus far the line of thy life shall reach, and no further. We
live not at adventures, neither can our care lengthen out our own days: As all
our care cannot add one cubit to our stature, so not one minute to our glass
or hour. And as we cannot lengthen, so we cannot shorten our own days in
respect of this appointed time: They who die in a time, when God forbids; yet
die when God appoints: And they live ^ut all Gods time, who wickedly shorten
their own: They cut their thread of life, but they cannot cut the thread of
Gods decree; we live not at our own will, but at the will of God; we are
tenants at his will, in these houses of clay. He is the maker of time, and the
measurer of our days; he gives us the lease of our lives for what years, he
pleases; and it is most fit that he who created time, should dispose of time.
God is the Lord of time, and farms it out, as, and to whom he thinks good.
Christ might do what he pleased upon the Sabbath, for (says he) the Son of
man is Lord also of the Sabbath; God is the Lord of time, and therefore has
power to appoint, to one more, to another less. My times (says David) are in
thy hand, Psalm. 31. 15. Thou may lengthen or shorten, continue or break them
off, as thy pleasure is.

Some live as if they were masters of time, and could appoint out their own
term: as if they lived at their own discretion, and could make a covenant with
the grave, and agree with death, when to come for them. They article with it,
for this year, and the next; rhey say to the grave, thou shall not take me
yet, thou shall spare me yet, I have such ends to drive, such pleasures to
take, before I would die. They (Isa. 56. 12.) speak, as if their tongues and
their time were their own, and they knew no Lord of either; To morrow shall be
as this day, and much more abundant; they speak of the next day, as if they
could command it, and bid it come to serve their lusts. That wretched rich man,
Lu. 12. could say, soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many
years; see how liberal he is to his soul, out of another right; and because
he had got a great stock of riches, he gives himself a rich stock of time, many
years. He resolved to make his life larger, as he had done his barns; and
because they were full of corn, he also will be full of days, whereas the
word came, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee. And he
could not live till next morning, who resolved upon many years, to live.
Secondly observe,

That the decrees of God concerning our lives, must not lessen our care to
preserve our lives. Is their not an appointed time to Non in absurdum trabenda
est haec Iobi sententia, ut temere se quispiam periculis objiciat, quia spatium
vitae definitum est.
man upon earth? Yes, that there is, man lives at Gods appointment; but he must
not live upon that appointment, that is, withdraw himself from means of his
preservation, and say, God has appointed how long I shall live, therefore what
need I take care how to live? or what need I take care for the preserving of my
life? As it is in spirituals, so also in temporals. God has determined and
appointed the portion of every man, all comes under a decree, under an
everlasting and unmovable decree; yet the decree which is past concerning us,
must not take us from our care about our selves. Though only the elect are
saved, yet none are saved by their election; Infants who attain not the use of
reason, much less the actings of grace, yet are not saved barely by election;
what they cannot do, is done for them, they are saved as elect in Christ, not
precisely as elect: how, they are united to Christ, we know not, but we know
they must be united, or else they could not be saved. But they who grow in
years, must also grow in the graces of sanctification, otherwise they are not
saved by the grace of election: The decree of God appoints us to salvation, but
the decree of God does not save us; we must run through all the second
causes, and ways which the word of God has chalked out to eternal life and
glory. Thus also our temporal life, passes under a decree, it is by
appointment: but woe unto those that shall say, God has appointed how long I
shall live, therefore what need I take care about my life? This is to walk
contrary to one part of the decree, while we seem to submit unto the other.
For God who appoints life, appoints all the means which concern the
preservation of life. It has no shadow of a warrant, for any man to cast
himself upon needless dangers, or to forbear necessary helps for the
sustaining of his life, because he hears his time is appointed, and that his
days one earth, are all reckoned and numbered to him, from Heaven.

Thirdly, for as much as there is an appointed time, we should learn patience,
and wait quietly upon God. It is not in creatures (be they never so angry) to
prolong the time of our sorrows. The same word, which shows us, that our life
is a warfare, shows us also, that it is an appointed time. Men cannot appoint
you one moments trouble, or lengthen this war, when God will shorten it. Our
hairs are numbered much more our days. Honor God, and have good thoughts of
him, for whether your times be fair or foul, calm or stormy, they are
appointed times. The whole life of man on earth is ordered in heaven.

Fourthly, if our lives are for an appointed time, we should be willing to die,
when God calls. All the time we would live beyond that, is of our own
appointment, and we should be willing to live, till God calls, for all that is
appointed time. As it is sinful not to be willing to do (though it be
burdensome) what God appoints, so is it likewise, not to be willing to live what
time God appoints, though it (...) Mercendarius a (...) co^duxit. Mercenarius
est qui in certum tempus condu^itur and saepe in die, quem ideo Graeci vocant
(...). Sicut in unico die operario, quamdiu lucet sol, no^ est ulla requies
mercenario constitu^a^. ita dum luce hujus vitae fruimur nulla nobis requies
expectauda est.
be painful and troublesome.

And are not his days, like the days of an hireling? An hireling is he, who
works a set time, for a set reward; And so this latter clause of the verse is
the same in sense with the former, Is there not an appointed time to man, and
are not his days, like the days of an hireling? That is, are not his days
set, as an hireling, with whom we agree for so many days, or for such a day.

An hireling.] We may take him either for a hired soldier, a mercenary in
war, or for an hired servant, a mercenary in work. An hireling in either
notion is called to labor, sorrow and sweat; Such is the common condition of
man, His days, are as the days of an bireling. God threatens Moab by the
Prophet, in this language (Isa. 16. 14.) Within three years, as the years of
an hireling, and the glory of Moab shall be contemned; that is, within three
years, which shall be like the years of an hireling, troublesome years,
laborious years, vexatious years, wearisome years, and then the glory of Moab
shall be contemned, and utterly despised, As if he had said, Moab is now in
great glory, but near great desolation. You shall see three years trouble will
stain all the glory of Moab, and wither all her beauty; we feel this truth,
England was a Nation of great glory, you see how two or three years, like the
years of an hireling, troublesome years, years of affliction, years of hard
labor and travel, have almost spoiled the glory of it.

And yet here Job makes a general description of the life of man: It is not
the lot only of some poor afflicted, hard-wrought servants, that, their days
are as the days of an hireling: he speaks of mankind, of the master, as well
as of the servant, His days are like the days of an hireling. We may note
from it, First, That,

Except we labor we ought not to eat; For the days of man, are as the days
of an hireling, the hireling shall not have his meat, except he work for it,
neither ought he that hires, or sets him a work. The master is in this sense
an hireling. The Saints are (in this sense) Hirelings. The Apostle speaks to
believers, and reproves them (2 Thessalonians. 3. 12.) There are some which walk among
you inordinately, working not at all, now them that are such, we command, that
they work and eat their own bread, and ver. 10. If any man work not, let him
not eat; even they, whom Christ has made free, are to account themselves, as
hired servants, that is, they must not eat the bread of idleness; we steal
all the bread, which (one way or other) we labor not for, and therefore the
Apostle bids the Thessalonians work, that, they might eat their own bread; It
is not our own bread, which we buy with our money, unless we pay (in what we
can, and are called to) labor for it also. As we eat that bread pleasantly, so
we come by it honestly, which is dipped in our own sweat.

Secondly, we are hence taught; That,

We ought to take our travels well, we must not murmur at our labors, or
complain over our work, and say, what a weariness is it.

As the Lord cannot bear it, that any should murmur at spiritual work, or say
with them in the Prophet, What a weariness is it; so it is very displeasing to
him, to say of our callings and the burdens of them, What a weariness are
they? Why? It is the common condition of man: Why then should we quarrel with
that law of labor, which is become the portion of our mortality. The
corruption of our nature has led us into this condition, and made us all as
hirelings. Man's innocence had business, but sin has brought him to sweat, and
changed his labor into toil. Man was put into the garden, as Lord of it, to
dress and till it, but now he is put there, as an hireling, to sweat and toil
at it. There is a stamp of servility and drudgery upon all the labors, which
the children of men take under the Sun. That argument, which the Apostle uses,
to support us, in the bitterness of affliction, has alike strength in it to
comfort us in the toil somenesse of our labors. As there is no temptation
has taken hold of us, but that which is common to man, 1 Cor. 10. 13. So there
is no labor laid upon any of us in our lawful callings, but that which is
common to man. Even the Saints, whom Christ has made free and separated from
the world, are not freed from service, while they are in the world. And while
Christ would not have them careful in any thing, he would have them
industrious in every thing. That Canon of the Apostle is clear for it, (1 Cor.
7. 20.) Let every man abide in the same calling, wherein he was called; that
is, your spiritual calling does not void your civil. When you have learned to
drive a trade for heaven, you must still drive your trade on earth. While there
is any thing of sin in us, there must be somewhat of the hireling in us. There
is not the most ingenious, no, nor the most spiritual labor, we go about,
but there is somewhat of the hireling in it; in the duty of prayer, in the duty
of preaching, there is somewhat of the hireling, that is, there is bodily pain
and weariness, a waste upon our strength, and expense of our spirits. Though
in these things the Saints work not for wages, but their very works is their
wages, and their labor their reward, though there be nothing mercenary in
their spirits, yet they feel the effects of a mercenary work, upon their
bodies, even weariness and waste of natural strength and spirits.

Thirdly, Seeing the days of a man are as the days of an hireling. Observe,

There is a reward or wages, somewhat follows the labor and travel of this
life. The hireling labors all day, but at night he has his reward, Mat. 20.
Christ compares believers, even, in their spiritual capacity, unto laborers
in a vineyard, to hirelings, who wrought for a penny a day, and at night, they
had every one their pay: It is so in reference to the whole course of this
life, we are hirelings; in the evening, we shall have our penny, verily, There
is a reward for the righteous, their labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor.
15. And as the righteous have a reward, so, the wicked shall have wages. Satan's
hirelings shall have full pay, though no content, for all their works, The
wages of sin is death; there is pay, such as it is, woeful pay, a black penny.
The days of man are as the days of an hireling, there is an issue and a
reward for every work

Fourthly, note from the Metaphor, while an hireling is doing his masters work,
he does his own too, that is, his own profit comes in by those acts, in which
he labors for another. It is thus also in the general state of man: above
all, Christ's servants and hirelings, gain by the duties of obedience they
perform to Christ, their own profit comes in, with his honor. A godly man
cannot do a stroke of work for God, but he works for himself too; the
servants of God must not be self-seekers and self-workers, they may not make
themselves their end; but as it is with an hireling, let him be never so
upright hearted toward the master he serves, let him lay self by, in all he
does, yet he has a share of profit in all his labors God has so espoused and
married his own glory, and the good of man together, that, whosoever really
promotes the one, promotes both. It is so likewise with those, who work the
works of darkness, and do the lusts of the devil. While his slaves are doing
his work, they are gaining toward destruction, and their own wages increases
daily, they are treasuring up wrath and judgment against the day of wrath. As
the measure of their sin fills, so does the measure of their punishment. Thus
also the days of man, are as the days of an hireling.

There are two general observations, which I shall but name, because they will
occur again.

1. The life of man, it is short; As the days of an hireling. The servant does
not abide in the house for ever, a hireling is but for a time. And it is good
for a man; that it is so. some complain exceeding much, because their lives
are so exceeding little. But let them weigh it well, and they shall see cause
to rejoice much, because they live so little. In some respect it is good for
wicked men, that their lives are so short: if their lives were longer, they
would be wickeder, and so heaping up more sin, they would heap up more wrath
against themselves. And it is very well for the Saints, that their lives are so
short. Their corruptions and temptations, their weaknesses and infirmities,
their troubles and afflictions are so many, that it is well their days are so
few. If they should have length of life added to heaps of sorrows, and
perpetuity with outward misery, how miserable were they! Christ promises it, as
a point of favor to his, that the days of trouble should be shortened, Except
those days should be shortened, no flesh should be saved (that is, kept or
preserved alive in those tribulations) but for the Elects sakes those days
shall be shortened, Mat. 24. 22. It is a favor also to the Saints, that their
particular days are shortened, that their's are but as the days of an
hireling, for as much as their present days are days of trouble and travel.
The days of the best are so full of evil, that it is good, they are no fuller
of days.

And further, it is good they are so evil, or full of trouble. It is well for
wicked men, that their days are full of trouble; the sweeter their lives are
to them, the sinfuller they are against God. Their outward comforts are but
fuel and encouragement to their lusts; and while their lives are calm and
quiet, they do but sail more quietly down into that dead sea of everlasting
misery. And the Saints have this advantage by the troublesomenesse of their
lives, to be kept in continual exercise, and more dependence upon God; they
would love the world too well, and delight in the creature too much, if God did
not put bitterness into their cup.

Job having thus shadowed the state of man, seems to make out his intendment or
scope thus. There is no reason why I should be charged so deeply for desiring
death; For what is the life of man? Is it not a life full of travel, and of
trouble, full of dangers and temptations, is not the time of his life short and
set? Is it not a speedy passing time, and yet a firmly appointed time? Why then
should not I think the period of my life to be at hand? Why should not I think
my appointed time is come; Forasmuch as I have so many evidences and symptoms
of death before me, and have heard so many messages and summons to the grave.
Death sits upon Plurima mortis imago.
my lips, ready to come in, while I am speaking. Death has taken possession of
me already, and seized my port: death is in my face, I am the very picture of
death, and images of death stand round about me. Therefore Eliphaz, why should
I not call to have my days summed up, that I may see the end and sum of
these troubles; Or wherefore would thou stay my complaint against my life,
or stop my desire of death, by giving me hopes of many days, and of a
flourishing estate in this world?

That Is his first argument, from the general condition of mankind. Now he
proceeds to consider somewhat more special in that condition.

Verse 2. As a servant earnestly desires the shadow, and as an hireling
looks for the reward of his work.

Verse 3. So am I made to possess months of vanity, and wearisom nights are
appointed to me.

As a servant earnestly desires. (...) Traxit aerem ad os per Metaphoram,
inbiavit, ardentur cupiit, qui enim vehementer aeliquid cupiunt, prae desiderii
and expectationis magnitudine ad os rem trabunt seu frequentius respirant.
To desire earnestly, is but one word in the original, it is so full of sense,
that we cannot empty it into any one word in our language. The letter is, As a
servant breaths after the shadow: And because a man, that has an earnest
longing desire for a thing, pants, breaths and gasps after it, therefore that
word, which signifies to gape and draw in the air pantingly, signifies also to
desire, or to desire earnestly, As a servant earnstly desires,

The shadow. Some understand it of the night, when the servant comes to rest
himself after his labor all the day. Night is but a great shadow.

Secondly, We may take it for the shadow of the day; A servant that is heated
in labor abroad in the open field, earnestly desires a shadow, to get under a
tree or a bush, a little to refresh himself. Or,

Thirdly, the shadow may be taken for the house: to come into a man's house, or
under a man's roof, is called a coming under his shadow, Genesis 19. 8. Therefore
they are come under my shadow, says Lot to the men of Sodom, that is, under
the covert of my roof.

The shadow is used often in Scripture to note protection and mercy, Shadows
are substantial mercies, and the promise of a shadow ^^bra id significat quod
prote^endo and custo^^endo ob^mbrat
is a real favor, Isa. 4. 6. The Church has a promise under this notion,
There shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, Isa.
25. 4. A refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat. And Isa. 32. 2. The
Lord promises that he will be as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land
unto his people. And David flies to this shadow for safety. Under the shadow of
thy wings shall be my refuge, till these calamities be over-past, Psalm. 57. 1.
So Psalm. 17. 8. Psalm. 91. 1.

So that in these words, As a servant earnestly desires the shadow, Job means
that, which is most refreshing and desirable by a servant: And in those Eastern
hot Countries, shadows were very refreshing and much desired. Jacob reporting
his labors in keeping Labans sheep, says, In the day time I was consumed with
heat, or parched with heat. Therefore a servant has reason to desire the
shadow.

And as an hireling looks for the reward of his work. There are two things,
which a servant or an hireling desires much, Rest and reward; Shadow and pay.
When he is hot the shadow refreshes him. And when he is hungry, his pay
refreshes him: while his hand is at work in the day, his heart is upon the
wages he shall receive at night. Hence the Lord in compassion to servants made
a gracious provision for them by a law, Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Thou shall not
oppress a hired servant, etc. at his day thou shall give him his hire, neither
shall the Sun go down upon it, for he is poor and sets his heart upon it,
lest he cry against thee to the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.

Job puts the instance in both, As the hireling looks for the reward of his
work, etc.

He looks. The word signifies to expect a thing with an eye (...)
toward it, what we earnestly expect, our eyes move after it. David in his
waiting upon God, says, Mine eyes are toward thee, I lift up mine eyes and my
heart to God; The same word is here used, The hireling looks.

For the reward of his work. So we translate it. The Hebrew is, He looks for
his work: (...)
Why? he had work before, he had his work all day long, his Master showed him
his work, he needed not look for that; then his work is the reward of his work.
In the Scripture, the word work signifies three things.

1. The very act of labor.

2. The effect of labor, the thing wrought, or that which is the product of
labor. When a man has labored, what he labored about is visible, and that
we call his work, as well as the act of his labor.

3. The reward or the wages, which a man receives for his labor, Levit. 19.
13. we read a plain text for it, The wages of him that is hired, shall not
abide with thee all night, until the morning. The Hebrew is, The work of him
that is hired shall not abide with thee. So Psalm. 109. 20. Let this be the
reward of mine adversaries Obus est fructus seu merces oberis quae pro labor
datur, ber Metonymiam
from the Lord; The Hebrew is, Let this be the work of mine adversaries from
the Lord. And Jer. 22. 13. we have the word in the same sense, work for wages.
As it is usual to put prayer for the thing prayed for, a petition for the thing
petitioned, or for the thing obtained by petition, The Lord has given me my
petition (says Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 27.) that is, the child for whom I did
petition. It is usual also in Scripture to put sin for the punishment or reward
of sin, Genesis 4. 13. My sin is greater, that is, my punishment is greater, than
I can bear. And the Master is forbidden to detain the servants wages, least it
be sin to him, Deuteronomy. 24. 15. that is, least he be punished for detaining it.
Thus also it is usual to put the work for the reward of the work, The hireling
expects his work, that is, he earnestly looks that he shall have wages in the
evening for his work. Now (says Job) as these wait, the servant and the
hireling, for the shadow in the day, and for their wages at night; So I am made
to possess months of vanity, etc.

I shall note a point or two in passage from the words, as they contain a
general truth, before I examine them in this application.

Take the words as they are a direct proposition, A servant desires the shadow,
and an hireling looks for the reward of his work. Hence observe,

First, The condition of a servant is a very laborious and a wearisome
condition; He longs for some rest; he earnestly desires the shadow. Observe,

Secondly, The servant must have a reward. There Is all the reason in the world
he should. Observe,

Thirdly, The hireling has earnest thoughts upon his reward; His reward is in
his eye. It is the reason given, why the wages of the hired servant should not
be withheld, Deuteronomy. 24. 15. The Lord the righteous judge between Masters and
servants, gives this account or ground of his Law, Thou shall not detain his
wages, for he sets his heart upon it; Poor man, he has been working all
day, and he has had his heart upon his wages; the hopes of that, gave him some
relief and ease in going through his hard task and service, therefore thou shall
not keep it from him, his heart is set upon it.

But it may be questioned; Is not this a sin in the servant, to set his heart
upon his wages? A charge is given, Psalm. 62. 10. If riches increase, set not
your heart upon them; and is it approveable in a servant, to set his heart upon
his wages or increase?

There is a great difference (and it is worthy our notice) between those two
Scriptures. The word in Deutronomy (speaking of the poor servant) notes the
lifting up of the soul; He has lifted up his soul unto it, so we read in the
margin of our Bibles: But in the Psame (where he speaks of the covetous rich
man) the word imports, the letting down, or settling of his heart upon it. A
poor man has but a little, and his wages (it may be) is above him, his wages
(possibly) is more than he is worth, therefore he lifts up his mind to it, as
a mercy and a blessing from God, for the relief of himself and family; take
heed (says the Lord) that thou detain not his wages; for the poor man lifts
up his soul to it, as a thing he reaches upward for; It is very dangerous to
take that out of the hands of man, which he is taking (as it were) out of the
hand of God. But a rich man, who has abundance, lets his heart down, he
croucheth and broodeth upon the creature. A godly poor man, looks up to his
reward, and fetches his bread from Heaven; A covetous rich man looks down to
his reward, and takes his bread from the earth; A godly man is above all
earthly things, and yet he lifts up his mind to receive them. A mere natural
man is below earthly things, and yet he descends that he may receive them: The
things which both receive, are the same, but the conveyance and derivation,
differ always, as much as Heaven and earth, sometimes, as much as Heaven and
hell. But to the text. Lastly observe,

That, it is the property of an hireling (take it strictly) to eye his reward.
This is the description of an hireling, he is one who looks to his reward,
whatsoever be does to his work. Christ, John 10. 13. confirms this character,
The hireling flees, because he is an hireling, and cares not for the sheep;
he cares much for the fleece, and for the flesh, but he cares little, if at all
for the sheep, that is, how, or whether the sheep be fed and prosper. He that
works for Christ, finds his reward in his work, and his eye is upon his work,
as a reward, as well as upon the reward of his work: he is pleased as much, yea
far more with his business, then he is with his wages: Did he not take content,
and pay himself in this, that he is in a work acceptable to Christ, he could
take no content, he could not be pleased at all, that he is in a work
profitable to himself.

Now Job applies this general, about the nature of a servant and an hireling,
to his own condition. So I am made to possess months of vanity, and wearisome
nights are appointed to me.

So am I made. It looks like a strange, and a very unlikely similitude; As a
servant desires the shadow, so am I made to possess months of vanity:
Therefore to clear it, we must remember, that this is a similitude with a
dissimilitude: The similitude is conceald, the dissimilitude is expressed; we may
make it out thus; As a servant desires the shadow, and an hireling looks for
the reward Similitudo dissimilis.
of his work, so I, who am laboring in the heat of these afflictions, do
earnestly desire a shadow, and I who am at work, as an hireling, would have a
reward; that is, I would see the end and issue of these troubles; But (here is
the dissimilitude) I am made to possess months of vanity, and wearisome nights
are appointed to me; As if Job had said, When the servant has wrought all day,
and is weary he can lie down at night quietly and rest himself; but alas! the
night is as troublesome, and as laborious to me as the day; When the hireling
has labored and taken pains, he receives his reward at evening, but my wages
are months of vanity, and my rewards are nights of trouble, I am paid in ill
coin, months of vanity, wearisome nights are appointed for the reward of weary
days. Thus the sense is plain.

I am made to possess.] The word signifies possessing by inheritance and
descent. Two things are implied in that phrase: (...) Est jure baereditario
aliquid acquir^re and possidere.


First, that troubles and afflictions belong to us by right, they are possessed
as an inheritance, which we receive from our parents and progenitors. I am made
to possess. And,

Secondly, it notes the continuance of troubles upon us: We have not only an
ill lodging for a while, or we stay not with trouble, as travelers for a
night, but we possess and inherit them as our own. Jobs troubles, were not to
him as an hired house, or a lodging, but as an inheritance, wherein he was
settled and estated: I am made to possess months of vanity; as if he had said,
you see what the patrimony and inheritance is, which descends to me: I have
waited for comfort, and have been in expectation of good days, but I possess
months of vanity, that is all I have found and felt, as the issue of my labors.

Months of vanity.] Some read, Empty Moons (the word (...)
bears that sense) as if Jobs Moon were always in the wane, or ever in the
eclipse. The word signifies any kind of vanity, whether in word or in deed,
personal vanity, or real vanity, falsehood or deceit, any thing that is trivial
or light. Such months have I appointed to me.

But some may say: Months of vanity: Why does Job complain of this? Has any
man in the world any other than months of vanity? Why then does Job take it so
ill, that he possesses months of vanity, when no other fall to the lot or
possession of any man? David Psalm. 39. verse. 5. affirms, that, man at his best
estate is altogether vanity; What reason then has Job to complain of months of
vanity in his worst estate? It was with him as well as with any of his
neighbors, we know not who has any other than months of vanity. The Preacher
makes this the preface of his Sermon, Eccles. 1. 2. Vanity of vanities (says
the Preacher) vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

I answer, it is true, our whole life is a life of vanity, but yet there is
more vanity in some man's life, or in some part of the same man's life, than in
another. Vanity is gradual. There is a vain, and a rainer vanity, and there is
the vainest vanity. Months of vanity may be understood two ways.

First, Months of vanity, that is, months empty of comfort, fruitless months,
months bringing me no refreshing or content. Inanis and vacua, quia erat vacua
hominibus jumentis and plantis.
As Genesis 1. 2. it is said, the earth was without form and void: void, that is,
it had neither man, nor beast, nor plant upon it, there was nothing but
emptiness upon the face of the earth, as it lay in that rude mass; So Job
says here, mine are months of vanity, void months, that is, months not filled
up with any comfort, with any refreshing, with any joy, with any light or
content, all these which are as the filling up of our months, and the beauty of
time, are taken away from me, mine are empty months, my days are all
Dogg-dayes, or at best, the days in the calendar of my life are blanks.

Secondly, Months of vanity, because he had not what he expected, or the issue
which he waited for: Job expresses himself in a Vacuum tempus est, quon nullam
nobis offert utilitatem.
posture of waiting, by the former similitudes; The hireling looks for his
wages, and I look for somewhat, but it is in vain, I cannot enjoy it. So the
word is used, Psalm. 78. 33. where the Psalmist describes the sinful distempers
of the people of Israel, and Gods anger toward them, They believed not his
word, etc. What then? Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their
years in trouble. The days of all men are consumed in vanity, as we said
before? but here was somewhat more judicial and poenal; It is a sore judgment
to consume our days in vanity, as that people did: As soon as they came out of
Egypt, they were in a fair way to Canaan; but God leads them about by the
wilderness, and there lets them wander out forty years, expecting and waiting
for Canaan, but no Canaan came, or they came not to Canaan; this was the
spending of their years in vanity, because they were traveling to their
desired rest, but enjoyed it not; they went toyling up and down the wilderness
as in a maze, finding no way out, but at the door of the grave; their carcasses
fell in the wilderness; thus their days were consumed in vanity. So says
Job, I possess months of vanity, that is, months wherein I am tired out in
continual troubles, and they are fruitless, issuelesse troubles, I have no
sensible benefit by them, I see no end of them, my hopes are frustrate, and put
far off from me. And are not these months of vanity? Observe hence, first,

Troubles will prevail upon us, whether we will or no. I am made to possess,
etc. As if Job had said, I would fain have got over these months of vanity, or
worn them out, but whether I will or no, I am made to possess them. The bands
of affliction, are too strong for the creature to break: when the Lord sends
trouble, he will make a man possess it, how displeasing soever it is; It is
best for us to submit, where we cannot remedy, and to yield quietly to that,
which we cannot avoid. Secondly, Observe,

Troubles come to us, as our natural inheritance. I am made to possess months
of vanity, they are as mine inheritance, and I would wave my right, but I
cannot. There are two parts of our natural patrimony, sin, and sorrow, both
these descend to us, and we are made to possess them, till we come to our
purchased inheritance, reserved in Heaven for us. Observe thirdly,

That, though every man's life have vanity in it, yet some men have more: that
is, more troubles and trials, more disquietments and disappointments. The
common condition of all men, in their best estate is, that they are altogether
vanity, but the vanity of some men is more vain, their afflictions more
afflicting, their troubles more troublesome, and their sickness more sick than
their brethren. Job speaks as if he had spoiled all the world of this
inheritance, and had engrossed all vanity to himself: I am made to possess
months of vanity: That vanity which is the portion of all men, seems
sometimes to be the portion of one man alone. I am the man that has seen
affliction, says the Prophet Jeremie. Noctes pl^nae vigilijs and anxietatibus.
Noctes laboris, i. e. laboriosas. Menses babco omni solatio vacuos, ut nec i^
noctibus quidem liceat mihi quiesce e. Allusie ad servi and merceuarij
nocturnam quierem, Pined.
Lam. 3. 1. why, is that such a strange sight, who has not seen affliction?
True, but Jeremy had seen more, then most, and therefore he speaks, as if he
only had seen affliction. I am the man.

And we arisome nights are appointed to me. Wearisome nights.] Or nights of
labor and weariness; As if Job had said, though the servant be wearied all
day, yet the night is not wearisome to him, he rests at night, but I am wearied
in the day, and wearied in the night; wearisome nights are appointed to me; the
night which is given unto others for rest, is measured out to me, in watchings
and in sorrows. And this is a great aggravation of his sad condition: it is
said before, that he had months of vanity, yet it might be supposed, his
nights were comfortable intervals of refreshing: As a man may say, I have had
seven years of hard labor, yet it is supposed he rested all the nights of
those years; so when Job says, I had months of vanity, it might be conceived,
he had, at least sometimes, a good night; therefore he adds, wearisome nights
are appointed to me, I speak not after the rate of ordinary men, whose months
labor, is a month of days, my laboring months include the night also.

A strong, healthy man goes sorth to his labor and to his work, until the
evening, Psalm. 104. 23. But a sick, weak man, goes forth to his labor in the
evening. Nox aegris maxim infesta est, toti sunt in cogitandis malis suis
The night is most laborious to sick men, then they revolve their troubles, and
being free from visits of friends, they visit their own afflictions, and study
their own distempers, freely.

Are appointed to me.] The Hebrew is, (...) Numeravit, supputavit, unde (...)
mensis quod juxta lunae cursum menses numeramus. Non quancumque rationem
numerandi de otat. sed artificialem and Arithme^^c^m; neque illam quam vocant
Additione^, sed substractionem.
Are numbered, or reckned to me: as if he should say, God sets down my nights by
tale or by scores, It is an arithmaticall word, is notes to number by art and
skill: And some observe, that it notes Arithmetique in that operation of it,
which we call substraction or subduction, not that which we call addition or
multiplication. Wearisome nights, are numbered or appointed to me, in a kind of
substraction, that is, God takes or substracts the night out of the months,
and makes them as wearisome and as troublesome to me, as the days are. And
because those things, which are thus numbered by way of separation or
substraction, are usually appointed or appropriated to some special Qui in hac
ratione numer andi quaedam subducuntur, and quasi separantur, ideo significat
scorsim destinare ad aliquem specialem usum.
use, therefore the word is well translated, to appoint or constitute: if you
see a man separate or substract one thing from another, it is an argument that
he has a reason for what he does, and intends it to some extraordinary
purpose. The word is so taken here, to note a special end to which these
nights, being subtracted from the rest of his time, were appointed; namely,
they were to be as Jobs pay and reward; He was troubled all day, and if he
looked for his reward or comfort in the evening, this was given him, A night as
wearisome as his day, or he had an ill nights rest given for his hard days
labor. The Prophet gives us the word in such a sense, Isa. 56. 11, 12. He tells
the Jews their sin in the former words, Ye furnish a drink offering to that
number; Some understand his meaning to be, a reproof of that wicked and
superstitious custom, wherein the Jews (it seems) did sympolize with the
heathens, who were wont to drink to their Idols by number, to such an Idol they
would drink so many cups, and that was called a drink offering to that number;
Now says God, because you have done thus, namely, furnished a drink offering
to that number, therefore I will number you to the sword, or, therefore I will
appoint you to the sword, I will substract and take you out, and you shall be
the men separated for the sword to deal with and destroy; I will number you to
the sword, that shall drink your blood, because you have been so accurate in
wickedness, to drink by number. The word is applied to Christ (Isa. 53. 12.)
He was numbered amongst the transgressors, that is, he was taken aside, and
separated from the innocent, and ranked amongst transgressors; which notes him
appointed, or set apart to that end, that so he might be the Savior of
transgressors, and a deliverer of the wicked from their sins. In Daniel 1. ver.
10. when those children of the Hebrews, desired to be spared from eating the
Kings diet, I dare not do it, says the steward, for I fear my Lord the King,
who has appointed your meat and your drink; as if it should be said, he has
numbered out to you, so many dishes of meat he has numbered out to you, so many
flagons of wine, he has subtracted such a proportion, and appointed it to
you, and I dare not alter it. And in the Prophecy of Jonah, chap. 1. ver. 17.
it is said, God prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah, so we translate, the
Hebrew is, God numbered a great fish to swallow up Jonah, that is, God did
separate or substanct a fish from all the rest of the fishes of the sea, for
that end and purpose, to swallow up Jonah. From all which instances it is
clear, that the word notes an appointment, by way of design, or the drawing of
a thing to some special use and service. When a Party is drawn out of the body
of an Army, they are numbered or appointed to some design; such a meaning is in
Jobs words, these nights are subtracted or drawn out, and then appointed to be
my reward and wages. The sum of all is, Job comparing his estate with that of
hirelings, servants and soldiers, finds his far worse than theirs, they have
rest in the night, at least some nights they rest, but he had none.

Observe here the law of nature, Night is the time of rest. Sleep is the
parenthesis of our troubles: it puts a stop to our sorrows, and gives
intermission to our labors. Observe secondly,

That the troubles of every night, and how many troublesome nights any one
shall have, are determined by God himself. I have wearisome nights (says Job)
but they come not by accident, they are appointed and exactly numbered to me. It
is matter of great comfort, to remember, that God is thus accurate about our
sorrows: He gives his people a cup of sorrow, and he appoints how many drops
shall be in their cup, all the world cannot put in one drop beyond his measure:
He appoints out our trouble for the kind, and for the degree, and for the
time or continuance of it; how many wearisome nights, how long every night
shall be, are all calculated and set down, in the calendar of his heavenly
counsels.

I shall add but a word of the next verse, which is only the description of a
wearisome night: Job having said, that wearisome nights were appointed or
numbered out to him: now resolves us what he means by a wearisome night, or
when he accounts a night wearisome.

Verse 4. When I lie down, I say, when shall I arise, and the night be gone?
And I am full of tossings to and fro, unto the dawning of the day. This is a
wearisome night, and it is a most exact description of a wearisome night; when
a man, as soon as he goes to bed, desires to rise, as soon as it is night,
enquires for day, this man has a weary time of it.

When shall I arise, and the night be gone? Mr Broughton translates, the duskie
time be gone? The word signifies evening, and the verb, to mingle or to mix;
because the evening is a time, (...) Miscuit, advesperascit, inde (...) vespera
tempus ill^d cum tenebrae miscentur luci.
wherein there is a mixture (as it were) of light and darkness. Evening, is
light and darkness mingled; hence we call it twilight; And though all the
night be (in this sense) mixed, because in nature there is no pure darkness,
yet in the evening, this mixture is more discernable; therefore it is rather
appliable to the former part of the night, because afterward the light is more
fully overcome, and conquered.

When shall the night be gone? The Hebrew is, when shall the (...) Mensuravit
binc (...) mensuram quantitatis continuae denotot, sicut (...) discretae.
night be measured out? There is an elegancy in that; it signifies to measure a
thing, as we measure cloth, by a yard, or as ground is measured, by a rod or
pole; it signifies likewise to measure time, to tell, count and observe the
hours: As if Job had said, of himself (as many times sick men do) I lie a bed
all night, and tell the clock. The clock is the measure of the night: now,
says he, when shall the night be measured out? As if he had (with sorrow)
counted the tedious hours, oh when will this time be measured out? what a long
night is this! As come to a sick man in a morning, and you shall have him say,
what a long, tedious night was this? as long as two or three nights.

He adds yet another part of the description, I am full of tossings to and fro
unto the dawning of the day. He lay measuring the night, and was unquiet all
the while, full of tossings to and fro. The (...) Saturatus
word signifies to be filled with meat and drink; I have my fill of troubles,
my fill of torture, I have unquietness enough, as much as I can hold of sorrow.

Tossings to and fro.] The word is understood by some, of inward tossings. I am
full of tossings to and fro, that is, I have great (...) a radice (...) motus,
remotus-elorgatus. Ceterem agitationem denotat. Saturatus sum v^gis
cogitationibus. Rab. Lev
agitations in my heart, my thoughts are very unsettled. One of the Rabbines to
that sense, I am full of wandering thoughts; thoughts will toss up and down,
forward and backward; A man's thoughts will toss him from one end of the world
unto the other; while he is a prisoner in his bed: They toss him from
business to business, while he is unfit for any business. A sick man is
full of inward tossings, of wandering thoughts, his thoughts run fastest, when
himself is bedridden, or confined to his bed: all the night is spent in the
travel of his mind, while his body cannot stir.

But rather undestand it of corporal tossings. A sick man full of Aegrotantes
mutationibus ut remedijs utuntur. Sen.
pain removes from one side of his bed to another, from one corner to another,
sometimes from the head of the bed to the foot. The Moralist expresses it
excellently, Sick men use changes, as if they were medicines, they hope by
changing their place to loose their pain by the way, I am full of tossings to
and fro.

Till the dawning of the day. Till the day break, that is, the whole night
though. Some understand (...) Crepusculum vespertinu^, vel matutinum.
this for the evening, the word signifies both the evening and the morning. And
these interpret this latter part of the verse, for his troubles in the day,
having complained before, that wearisome nights were appointed to him, When I
lie down, I say, when will the night be gone? There is an end of the night,
but when the night is gone, have I any ease in the day? No, I am full of
tossings to and fro, until the evening; And so it is an amplification of his
troubles in regard of both parts of the natural day, light and darkness. But
we may more properly keep it to the description of a wearisome night, and that
word, which may note the evening, is here to be appropriated to the dawning of
the day, when darkness begins to depart, and give way to the prevailing light.

This was a great aggravation of the afflictions of this holy man, he had no
rest, no ease, in any part of the night, he could not so much as, get a nap
toward morning.

The night is the time of our truce with troubles, through a man be in
conflicts with business all day long, yet there is a cessation at night, all
is laid by till morning. Hence the night and sleep are well called, The
Conquerours of evil, and Victors over sorrow; Malurum Domi^ices.
because in the night a man gets rid of them. Christ says, Mat. 6. ult.
Sufficient to the day is the evil thereof: if there be evil enough in the day,
who is able to stand before the evils of day and night too? When our very
sleep becomes our fight, what can flesh and blood do any more? Sleep is a
medicine for all diseases, and Physicians often give a sleepie potion for a
medicine, that the body may have a little refreshing, after it has been worn
and tired out with a wakefull sickness.

Observe from the text, as it is the description of a sick man;

That a man in pain lo^ks upon every time as better to him, than the present
time. When I lie down, I say, when shall I arise? I hope it will be better with
me anon, I hope the day will be better to me than the night, and when the day
comes, then he wishes for night hoping the night will be better than the day.
An afflicted troublesome time is so described, Deuteronomy. 28. 67. In the Morning
thou shall say, would God it were Even, and at Even thou shall say, would God
it were Morning; They shall think any thing, or time to come, better to them,
then the present; therefore when they had night, they called for day, and when
they had day, they sent a messenger for the night, ever thinking the next
change of time, would be-friend them with a change in their condition. Observe,
Secondly.

Change of place gives no ease of pain. I am full of tossings to and fro to
the dawning of the day; he had changed, and changed, and changed, but could not
change his pain for ease, that continued still. Some travel to other
Countries to mend their Estates. Some go from kingdom to kingdom to ease
their minds; and some to better their manners; but, as he that runs to another
country caelum non animam mutat, qui trans mare currit.
changes his air, but not his heart, alters place, but not his manners, the
same is the same still: So it brings no health to the sick, no ease to the
pained to change place.

As a man sin-sick, before he comes to rest and healing in Christ, tosses from
place to place, from this duty to that duty, from this means to that means to
get a little ease for his wounded spirit and aching conscience; he hops this
will do him good, and that will do him good, but all in vain. And as worldly
men hope their pleasures and their riches will do them good, and so they toss
from one pleasure to another, from creture to creature, but al fails there is
no settlement, no composedness, no peace, no redress, till the soul fixes
upon Christ. So in bodily pains, there is no ease, no refreshing, but in God:
it is not this or that place of the bed, it is not the bed or the couch, it is
not the Country or the City, a sharp or a temperate air can do it; God can
alone, and he can command any creature to do it.

You that have months of comfort, and to whom refreshing nights are
appointed, bless God, it is not your bed that gives you rest, but his blessing.

Remember this description of a sick man: present the condition of a sick man
to your thoughts, think what a wearisome thing it is, to lie all night telling
the clock, calling for day, and tossing to and fro, praise God for quiet
nights, and pity those to whom wearisome nights are appointed.

JOB Chap. 7. verse. 5, 6, 7, 8. My flesh is clothed with worms, and clods of
dust, my skin is broken, and become loathsome.

My days are swifter than a Weavers shuttle, and are spent without hope.

O remember that my life is wind, mine eye shall no more see good.

The eye of him that has seen me shall see me no more; thine eyes are upon me,
and I am not.


WE have seen Job in this Chapter confirming his former desires of death.

1. From the general condition of mankind, v. 1. 2. From the condition of
some parlicular man, v. 2. And 3. From his own present condition, which he
draws forth in the 3, 4, 5, and 6, verses.
The third and the fourth verses have been already opened.

In this fifth he gives us a further description of himself, and such a one, as
might well assure us, that his restless nights were not without reason, My
flesh is clothed, etc. As if he had said, if you think I am thus unquiet
without cause, then behold my body, look upon me, and see what a pitiful
spectacle I am, My flesh is clothed with worms, my skin is broken and hecome
loathsome.

These words give us Jobs picture, here is his delineation and pourtracture, as
he was under the hand of God. They who would take Jobs picture, as, in the day
of his afflictions, must draw him, thus, A man clothed with worms and clods of
dust, there is his garment; his skin scabby and discolor'd, full of chaps and
running sores, angry biles and enflamed ulcers, his posture, lying on the
ground, scraping himself with a pot-sheard. (...) caroper Synecdochen corpus in
Piel Bisher significat Evangelium.


My flesh is clothed with worms. My flesh.] That is, my body, by a Synechdoche;
and the word which we translate flesh, springs from a root, or has near
relation to it, which signifies to bring and publish good tidings, or welcome
news; and therefore the Gospel is expressed by it (Evangelium) is the same in
Latin, or ((...)) in Greek with this in the Hebrew: And some Critics give the
reason, why flesh is expressed by this word, which signifies to publish or bring
good tidings, because there should be a taking of flesh, or a making of flesh,
namely the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, which should be the best
tidings, and the most joyful news that ever the world heard of.

Is clothed with worms. In the first Chapter of this book at the 21. verse,
Job describes himself thus, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked
shall I return; but now it seems Job has got clothing, and being ready to lie
down in the grave, he had a vesture put upon him, now (it seems) Job should
not go naked out of the world, for he said, My flesh is clothed; but, what is
this clothing? My flesh is clothed with worms, and clods of dust, that is a
suite of clothes very fit and suitable for the grave, but it is usually put on
in the grave. Job is in his grave-clothes before he dies; or, he speaks this
to show that he accounted himself dead, while he lived, or (as Heman mourns,
Psa. 88.) Free among the dead; A member of that Corporation, a brother of that
society already. For he was now in their habet or livery, A gown of worms set
or embroidered with clods of dust.

My flesh is clothed with worms. It is frequent in Scripture, when the holy
Ghost would heighten the sense of what we are, and enjoy, would to note the
abundance of Quavis re vestiri dicimur, Cujus accessione vel dedecoramur, vel
ocnamur.
a thing, or how man is adorned, or defiled with it all over, then to express
it under the notion of clothing; God himself is expressed, clothed with
Majesty, because he is Majesty all over, and there is nothing but glory upon
him; God is also described, clothed with judgment and with justice; why?
Because these are his honor and his ornament, he is justice and judgment all
over; we find Job in the 29. of this book at the 14, verse, speaking thus of
himself in his state of Magistracy, I put on righteousness, and it clothed me,
my judgment was as a robe and a diadem; that is, I was full of
righteousness, I was altogether reghteous, in dispensing re wards and
punishments, in exercising my power among the people. To be clothed with
humility, to be clothed with the Spirit, to be clothed with Christ, are
phrases of the same importance. So on the other hand to be clothed with pride,
with shame, with dishonor, Let mine enemies (says David) be clothed with
shame, Psalm. 109. 29. Let them be clothed with dishonor, Psalm. 35. 26. that
is, let them be ashamed and dishonored, all over, or exceedingly ashamed or
dishonored. And so a great desolation is called a clothing with desolation,
Ezekiel 7. 27. That which stripps a man naked is in this sense called his
clothing, clothed with desolation.

Thus we are to understand Job, when he says, That his flesh was clothed with
worms; his meaning is, he had many worms, crawling upon his flesh, or lying
within his flesh, and so were as a lining to his upper garment of nature. These
worms spread themselves all over him, as a filthy and loathsome garment
covering his whole body.

And besides this figure, Job spoke properly, while he was thus full of sores,
and botches, and boyles, to say, he was clothed with worms; worms are proper
to sores, many sores, breed worms, and worms are a disease in the flesh, as
well as within the bowels, and such diseases are accounted the foulest and
filthiest diseases of all other: Such was Jobs, his sores and boiles corrupted
and bred worms, which made him an abhorring to himself, Putrefaction is the
foil out of which worms grow, Rotten flesh breeds worms, and a rotten
conscience breeds a worm, Isa. 66. 24. Their worm shall not die; why does the
holy Ghost say of those men who were never washed, nor healed of their
sinne-sores, of their soul-sicknesses and pollutions, that when they die, they
have a worm, that dies not. It is in allusion to this, because, as a corrupt
body, or corrupt putrid flesh, breeds noisome worms, so a corrupt conscience,
a soul full of filthiness and uncleanness, which was never washed or healed
in the fountain of the blood of Christ, this soul, this conscience breeds
worms, even that gnawing worm, which shall live with it, feed upon it, and
cloth it for ever. Both the natural and the spiritual worm, arise from
rottenness, and derive their pedigree from sores, sicknesses, and putrefaction.

And clods of dust. Worms and clods of dust. Here are strange materials,
course stuff for Jobs clothing, clods of dust. Some conceive that Job sat in
the dust, and so the dust gathered about him, as a garment. Others, that these
clods of dust, were the scrapings of his sores, for (...)
the word signifies the filings of any metal, or the scrapings of an unclean
thing. It is said expressly in the second Chapter, that he took a pot-sherd
to scrape himself; those clods of filthy dust, or scales scraped from his
putrefying sores; these, with the crawling worms bred in them, covered his
whole body like a garment, and therefore he complains, I am clothed with
worms and clods of dust.

You see what his garment was, see now (to carry on the allusion) his skin,
upon which this garment was put? My skin (says he) is broken, and become
loathsome. The skin is the immediate garment of the flesh, his sickness had
worn out his skin, he had many holes and rents in that garment, which needed
mending, and it was all over so filthy, that it needed washing. My flesh is
broken and become loathsome. Sores break the skin, and defile the skin, Jobs
skin was so broken and chapt, so defiled and filthy, that he was loathsome to
all beholders, and to himself.

This is the picture of Job, A few days before, you might have pictured or
drawn him thus, Job clothed with silk and scarlet, his garment set with
precious oriental stones, his skin smooth and beautiful, his face cheerful
and manly, his eye quick and piercing. But now Job is clothed with worms and
clods of dust, his skin is broken and become loathsome.

We may hence learn, what our own bodies are. The Apostle (Phil. 3. 21.) calls
the body, a vile body; not that the work of God was vile: The work of God was
noble and honorable in all he wrought, especially in that Masterpiece of it,
the fabrique of man's body; but as the body is come out of the hands of sin,
so it is a vile body, that is, it is a body subject to corruption, and will
quickly corrupt, be vile and loathsome, 1 Cor. 15 53. This corruptable must put
on incorruption. The body of man is but one remove from worms and corruption,
Chap. 17. 4. I have said to corruption thou a^t my Father, and to the worm,
thou art my mother. We shall quickly bear the image of our parents, worms and
corruption.

Then be not proud of your bodies, nor of your beauties; They, who are now the
fairest and goodliest to look upon, may quickly have a broken and a loathsome
skin; A disease, one fit of sickness will spoil all thy beauty, deface and
blemish thy excellent feature, and if a disease does it not, old age will, time
will draw furrows in thy face, and make wrinkles in thy brow. Strength and
beauty of body are no matches for time. All things were made in time, and time
will mar all things. So long as generation continues, corruption must.

Again, take heed of pride in clothing. The two externals, of which man is
most subject to be proud, are beauty and apparel. Clothes are a flag of
vanity, and pride sits upon the skirts. But remember how fine soever your
clothing is this day and hour, God can put you on another suite before to
morrow. We see what change of apparel Job had, a godly man, an humble man.
That which God did to try the grace of one; he can quickly do to punish and
chastise the sin of another; he can quickly put you on such clothing, as you
shall have little cause to be proud of. He can make you wear worms and clods
of dust.

And if we consider it, we have little reason to be proud of clothes: for if we
follow the best of them to their original, they will be found to be but a
clothing of worms, and clods of dust; what are silks, sattins and velvets,
but the issue of worms? And what is your gold and silver, what your pearls and
precious stones? are they any thing (if you will resolve them into their
principles) but clods of dust? They are indeed better concocted by the heat of
the Sun, refined and polished by the art of a man, but if you search their
pedigree, they also are but clods of dust. In your most glorious array, you are
but clothed with dust and worms, and if you be proud of such clothing, God
can cloth you with worms and clods, not only of unrefined and unpollished, but
of putrified and filthy dust.

Thus we see the first thing, the picture or description of Jobs body, His
friends at first sight, might be convinced, that a body in such a case, could
take little rest day or night. He carries on his complaint, a degree further,
at the 6. verse.

Verse 6. My days are swifter than a Weavers shuttle, and are spent without
hope. My days are swifter.] The Seventy render it thus, My days (...).
are swifter or nimbler than a word or speech. Nothing moves faster or passes
away more lightly, than a word; a word is gone, and it is gone suddenly; Hence
the similitude is used proverbially, Psalm. 90. 9. We spend our days, as a tale
that i^ told, or, as a meditation (so some translate) suddenly or swiftly; a
discourse is quickly over, whether it be a discourse from the mouth, or in the
mind; and of the two, the latter is far the more swift and nimble of foot, a
discourse in our thoughts out-runs the Sun, as much as the Sun out-runs a
snaile; the thoughts of a man will travel the world over in a moment; he that
now sits in this place, may be at the worlds end in his thoughts, before I can
speak another word. So that the translation of gloss, by speech or meditation,
aggravates the sense, and extends it to the highest.

But the word properly signifies (as we translate) a Weavers shuttle, which is
an instrument of a very swift and sudden motion. (...)
And the word which we render [Swifter] signifies that which is fitted for the
swiftest motion, Any light thing, because those things which are light, move
swiftest; and we call a good runner, a man light of foot, Hab. 1. 8. The horses
of the Chaldeans are thus described, Their horses are swifter (or lighter of
foot) than the Leopards, so, swifter or lighter than the weavers shuttle, which
passes the loome or web with such speed, that it is grown to a Radius
Textoris dictum proverbiale, radio velocius.
proverb, for all things which are quick and transient. The Latins express
it by that word, which signifies a ray of the Sun, which is darted in a
moment from one end of the heavens to another.

But a question rises. Job in the third Chapter, and so in the fifth, complains
that his life was so prolonged, and slow-paced that it was very tedious to him,
and in this Chapter by a repeated request, he spurrs and hastens his life to
it is journies end; he thought (it seems) his time not winged, but slow footed;
how is it then, that in this place he complains of the swiftness of his
days? My days are swifter than a Weavers shuttle.

I answer, In a word: By his days, here, we are to understand his good days,
his days of comfort and prosperity; the days of my peace and plenty, are
slipped away and gone, even as a weavers shuttle. But when he complains that
his life is slow-footed, and requests that his days might move faster, he
means the days of sorrow and trouble which had overtaken him in his journey;
the former were too swift, and the latter too slow; It is as if he had said,
Alas, all my fair days of prosperity are gone, they are slipped away as a
weavers shuttle, they are as a tale that is told, nothing remains of them, but
the remembrance, which is an addition to my sorrow; but now I have days, that
seem long, very long, they hand upon my hands, I cannot get them off, my
sorrows clog my time, and make every hour seem a year. Hezekiah in his
complaint upon his sick bed, uses this allusion, Mine age is departed and
removed from me, as a shepherds tent, I have cut off like a weaver my life,
Isa. 38. 12. As the weaver cuts off the thread when the web is finished, so it
is with me, I have cut off as a weaver my life; Not that Hezekiah was active in
his own death, we are not to understand it so, for he prayed that God would
spare him; and he spoke this upon the promise of God, to lengthen out his life,
and to tie the thread of his days again, according to which the web was woven
on for fifteen years more; But this speech of Hezekiah, as a weaver I have cut
off my life, is like that of the Apostle, I have finished my course. He
compares the passing of his life to a shuttle, and the conclusion of it to the
cutting off, of the thread; Nights and days pass this shuttle forward and
backward, to and again, the night casts it to the day, and the day to the
night, beween these two, time quickly wears off the thread of life. The heathen
Poets had a fiction answering this allusion of the holy Ghost; they tell us a
story, or a fiction rather, of three sisters, whereof the one held the wheel
or the distaffe, the Tres Parcae elotho Lachesis Atropos.
second drew out the thread, and a third cut it off; In this they shadow the
state of man's life; our ordinary phrase for living long, is spinning a long
thread, and for dying, the cutting off the thread of life.

And they are spent without hope. Some translate, they are spent so, as that
there is no hope left. The word, which here we (...)
english, spent, signifies both consumption and consummation, or sometimes in a
good sense, the end or perfecting of a thing, and sometime in an ill sense, the
end or consuming of a thing, Genesis 2. 1. So the Heavens and the earth were
finished, It is this word, they were ended, God ended his works by way of
perfection, and consummation, he made his work complete. But here, and often
in Scripture, it notes ending by way of consumption, or as we translate, the
spending of a thing; Jer. 14. 12. I will consume (or make an end of) them by
the sword; And Exodus 33. 3. God commands Moses, to go with the people into the
wilderness, for (says he) I will not go up in the midst of them, lest I
consume them in the way.

And to show how deep an expense and consumption of time was upon him, Job
tells us, it had devoured and eaten up all his hope. It is worse to have our
hope spent, then to have our days spent; now (says he) my days are spent,
and that is not all, my hope is spent; Some translate so, my days are spent,
and I have Cum inopia spei, vel defectu spei, sc. longioris vitae.
want or penury of hope; as I have spent my days, so I have spent my hope. And
his hopelessenesse, may refer two ways; I have no hope, or my hope is spent;
First, in regard of long life, I see I am so afflicted with this disease, that
there is no hope I should hold out under it: Secondly, without hope, that is,
without hope of being in a better condition, that is, of having my estate
restored unto me again, if I should have health restored, and a longer life
continued. In both these senses, as he saw the thread of his days cut off, so
he saw the thread of his hope cut off, he was near death, and his hope was dead.
My days are spent without hope, or, there is no hope remaining. This also is a
negative to both parts of Eliphaz his promise, either of longer life, or of a
better.

We may observe hence, first, a common truth (which I shall not insist upon)
about that precious commodity, a commodity more precious then the gold of
Ophir, Time.

All time is short, and we have a very short estate in time. Man is not master
of one day, and a servant but of few days. The holy Ghost gives us very many
remembrances of this, which is an argument, that we are very apt to forget it.
Man is slow to take notice of the swiftness of time, and very dull in
apprehending the speed of his days. It is a wonder that such a plain common
doctrine, should be handled so often, and that the Holy Ghost, should as it
were, labor for similitudes, and fetch in all things that are more then
ordinarily transitory in nature, to teach us the transitorinesse of our
condition: We meet with many in this book, all hinting at the sudden,
invisible motion of time: This is a point easy to be known, but very hard to
be believed; every man assents to it, but few live it. And surely the holy
Ghost would not spend so many words about it, nor gather up so many
illustrations of it from sense, if it were not of much importance to our faith.
We usually slight the hearing of common principles; and a Sermon preached upon
this subject, the shortness of our lives, and the speed of time, is judged a
needless shortning of time; and the hour seems very long, which runs out
upon the speed of time; we think it an easy doctrine, and a Theme for boys.
But the truth is, if the heart did well digest, how few our days are, we
should have better days; and men would live holier, if they knew indeed their
lives were no longer. Therefore though I only touch this subject, yet, do ye
dwell upon it, and stay long in your thoughts upon the shortness of your
lives: Common truths neglected, cause a neglect of every truth. Had we more
serious thoughts of Heaven and hell, that these are, and what these are; that
there is a God, and who he is; that there will be a judgment, and what it will
be, we should more profitably improve and trade our time and talents. Secondly
note,

Time passes irrecoverably. When the weavers shuttle is once out of his hand,
it is gone presently; there is no hope time past should be recalled, or time in
motion stopped: To consider time under that notion, should make us very good
husbands of our time, or (as the Apostle advises) to redeem the time.
Redemptions are made by purchase, to redeem a thing, is to buy it with a price;
the price we redeem time with, is our labourand faithful travel. It is
matter of mourning, to consider, that so little care is taken in spending that,
which when it is gone, we have no hope it can be restored to us again.

Thirdly, In that Job complained before, that his life was so long, and now
complains of the shortness or swiftness of his life, we may note; That,

Man thinks good days end too soon, and that evil days stay too long, or
will never have an end. We love the company of good days, and are therefore
sorry when they depart: When the Disciples were upon the Mount, and had such a
good day of it, how desirous were they to have continued there, and sorry they
were the day was at an end. Master (says Peter) it is good for us to be here:
The sudden passing of our comforts, is our trouble. Time is always of the same
pace, no creature keeps his pace more evenly then time does, it always moves
at the same rate, neither faster nor slower; but man thinks this time short,
and that time long; this time speedy, and that time slow, according to the
several objects he meets with, and to the conditions wherein he is: Fourthly
observe,

That hope is the last refuge of the soul: My days are spent without hope, my
hope is spent too; If I had hope left, I had somewhat left, but my hope is
gone. It is so in natural things, it is so in spiritual things. The Apostle,
Heb 6. tells us, that hope is the anchor of the soul, sure and steadfast; while
hope holds, comfort holds, and when hope's gone, all is gone. Observe lastly,

That, sometimes a godly man's hope may lie prostrate. My days (says he) are
cut off without hope: Job thought (as I have noted from some passages before
(that his case was desperate, his hope lay in the dust, as well as his body, or
his honor. Every godly man is not an Abraham, of whom it is said, Romans 4. 18.
That against hope he believed in hope: Nay Abraham is not always Abraham, he
that has such a strong hope, has it not always, even his hope may sometimes
possibly be hopeless. There are weaknesses in the strongest, and
imperfections may come upon those who are perfect, ebbings after the greatest
flowings, and declinings after the greatest heights of graces and gracious
actings My days are spent without hope.

Job having thus complained of his condition, and asserted his own desires of
death, now turns from his friends, with whom he had discoursed all this while,
and betakes himself to God, to speak a while with him; The next words are
generally understood, an Apostrophe to God:

Verse 7. Or member that my life is wind, mine eye shall no more see good, etc.
O remember that my life is wind. To remember, is not here taken strictly, for
to God all things are present. Remembrance, is the calling of that to mind
which is past; when the act of remembering is applied to God in Scriprure, it
has one of these three senses.

1. It notes a resolution or settled purpose in God, to act his justice, or
inflict punishment upon his enemies, Psalm. 137. 7. Remember, O Lord, the
children of Edom: that is, Lord bring forth that decree of thine, for the ruin
and destruction of these bloody Edomites, who have been cruel against thy
people.

Secondly, it signifies an affection in God, ready to help and releeve his own
people: Psalm. 74. 2. Remember thy Congregation which thou did purchase of
old, that is, do good to thy Congregation, bless thy Congregation.

Thirdly, To remember, imports an act of present consideration: to remember, is
fully to weigh, observe and take notice of the estate of things or persons:
Psalm. 38. 39. He remembered that they were but flesh, a wind that passes away
and comes not again; that is, he considered and weighed the estate of man: So
in this place, O remember that my life is wind, that is, consider, and weigh it
well Lord, put my condition into the balance, observe what a weak creature I
am, how short my llfe is: therefore deal with me, as with a weak short-lived
creature; Thou need not lay any great stresse upon me, thou need not
trouble thy self much to make an end of me, my life is but wind, it is but a
puff, which quickly passes away.

O remember that my life is wind. This is a proverbial speech, Vita ventus,
Elegans proverbiale.
like that before, of a weavers shuttle. The word translated wind, signifies
the holy Ghost, the third Person in the blessed Trinity: As also a Spirit in
general. And because the wind is of a spiritual nature, invisible, swift,
powerful, therefore it is applied to that aerial or elementary spirit; And the
operation of the holy Ghost, is shadowed by wind or breath, Christ breathed
upon his Disciples saying, receive the holy Ghost, John 20. 22. and the holy
Ghost came as a mighty rushing wind, Acts 2. 2.

When Job says, remember that my life is wind, he means, my Quasi ventus
Targum.
life is like the wind; It is a similitude; not an assertion. The life of man
is like the wind in two things: First, the wind passes away speedily, so does
man's life: Secondly, the wind when it is past, returns no more, as you cannot
stop the wind, or change its course; So all the power in the world, is not
powerful enough to recallor divert the wind, which way the wind goes it will
go, and when it goes it is gone, Ps. 78. 34. He remembered that they were but
flesh, wind that passes away; in this sense Job calls his life a wind, it
passes away, and shall not return, by any law or constitution of nature, or by
any efficacy of natural causes.

Yet here observe, Job says not, His soul was a wind, but his life was a wind.
Some have philosophiz'd the soul into a wind, a blast or a breath; and tell us,
that it goes, as the soul of a beast, that life and soul are but the same
thing, when the life's gone out of the body, the soul's gone from its being:
They acknowledge a restoring of it again with the body at the resurrection, but
deny it any existence when separate from the body. How dishonorable this is to
the noble constitution of man, and how dissonant to Scripture, is proved in
mentioning it; we acknowledge, that life which is the union of soul and body,
is a wind and passes away; In all the learned languages, Hebrew, Greek,
Latin, the (...) Flare. (...), Spiritus a spirando; Animum quasi (...) quidam
dictum existimant. Graeci pro respiratione seu spiritu quem ducimas aceipiunt.
primo quod vita nostra respiratione indige^t; sccundo quod flatu videatur
humana vita in prima sua origin constitisse,
word which signifies spirit or life, has its original, from respiring; and
when we say, my wind was gone, or my wind was almost beaten out of my body, our
meaning is, my Life was almost gone. In the creation (Genesis 2. 7.) God breathed
into man the breath of life, or of lives, implying the many facultes and
operations of life. And in as much as the body of man was first formed, and
this life brought in after, to act and move it, this is an abundant proof, that
the soul of man is not any temperament of the body, the body being completed
(as a body) before it, and yet no life resulting. Whereas beasts (to whom that
beastly opinion compares man in his creation) had living bodies as soon as
bodies, their total form being but an extract from the matter.

Solomen, Eccl. 3. 19, 20, 21. brings in the Atheist, drawing this conclusion
from those confused oppressions which he observed in the world: men carried
themselves so like beasts, preying upon, and devouring one another, that he
(who had nothing but carnal reason to judge by) presently resolves; That which
befalls the sons of men, befalls beasts, even one thing befalls them: as
the one dies, so dies the other, yea they have all one breath; so that a man
has no preeminence above a beast, for all are vanity; all go to one place,
all are of the dust, and all turn to the dust again. And whereas the Atheist
heard some speak of the ascent of man's spirit after this life, he puts it off,
as but talk and guessing. ver. 21. Who knows the spirit of man, that goes
upward, and the spirit of the beast, that goes downward to the earth? That is,
who can tell that there is such a difference, between the spirit of a man and
of a beast? who ever saw the one ascending, or the other descending? or from
what Anatomy was this learned? Thus the Atheist derides the doctrine of the
soul, and will therefore laugh and be merry with his body while it lasts,
that is his portion, For who shall bring him to s^e what shall be after him,
ver. 22. Is it not strange, that any who are called sober Christians, should
plant their opinions in this soil of Atheism: and make that a proof of their
faith, which Solomon brings only as a proof of some men's infidelity? The
Preacher in this Book, personated those whom he abhorred, and sometimes speaks
the practices of other men, not his own opinion. There is no more reason to
ground this Tenet of the Souls Mortality upon those texts, then there is of
encouragement to intemperancie in that, chap. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy
youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in
the ways of thine own heart; Or in that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 32. Let us
eat and drink, for tomorrow we die. If any would learn Solomon's own sense
about this point, let him read it, as plain as words can make it (Eccl. 12.
7.) Then (namely when man dies) shall the dust return to the earth, as it was,
and the spirit shall return unto God, who gave it.

So then (to the next before us) the soul is not a wind, but the Hujusmodi
sententi^ regressum animarum in corpora minin e negant, sed necessitatem
moriendi confirmant, and celeri: atem.
life: And all those Scriptures where life is compared to wind, and dying, to
the passing of it without returning, deny the regresse or returning of the
soul to a natural, not to an eternal life, and imply the short stay of the
soul in the body, and certain departure from it, not, a not being, when it
parts. These two must part, and so part, as never to return to that estate
again; Thus Job expounds himself in the words following;

Mine eye shall no more see good. Or as the Hebrew, I shall not return to see
good, answerable to the metaphor of a wind, it passes away, and returns no
more.

To see. In this place, as often elsewhere, is to enjoy, I shall not Videre
bonum pro frui, nota locutio est.
enjoy good, Psalm. 4. 6. Who will show, or who will cause us to see any good?
It was not the bare sight of good, which they desired, but the enjoyment of it.
So Ier. 17. 6. The man whose heart departs from God, is threatened, that he
shall not see, when good comes, that is, he shall not enjoy good, when it
comes: For though to see good be a mercy, yet to see it and not to taste it, is
a curse. Therefore at the last day, they who thought themselves high in Gods
favor, but were indeed under his wrath, are told, that they shall Lam. 13. 26.
see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and themselves shut out;
they shall see what they cannot enjoy, and that sight shall add to their
sorrow. The Prophet cries out, Lament. 3. 1. I am the man that has seen
affliction, that is, I am the man that has felt and had experience of
afflictions. And Psalm 16. 10. the great promise to Christ is, that though he
took a corruptible body upon him, yet he should not see corruption, that is,
partake of corruption; corruption should have no communion with, much less
power over him. And we have the same use of the word in this book, chap. 20.
ver. 17. where Zophar tells the hypocrite, that God will deprive and strip him
of every good thing. He shall not see the rivers, the floods, the brooks of
honey and butter; It is a rhetorical expresson, comparing the affluence of
outward things, to floods, and rivers and brooks, which send forth their
streams plentifully; as if he had said, though there be great store of honey
and butter (those two are specified for the rest) though there be rivers,
brooks and streams of these commodities, yet he (...)
shall see none of them, that is, he shall not enjoy or taste a drop of Sicut
Graeci (...), and Latini bonum, aliquando pro pulchro, commodo and utili
usurpant. Isa subinde Hebraei vocabudum, Tob, Fagius, in Genesis 2. 18
them. That unbeleeving Lord, is told by Elisha, that he should see plenty in
Samaria the next day, but should not eat thereof, 2 King. 7. 2. Not to see, is
not to eat; and he that sees, but eats not is not releeved, but troubled at
the sight.

Mine eye shall not see good. What good? when a man dies, shall he see no more
good? we see but little good while we live, and the greatest good, is to be
seen when we die: or rather while we live, what do we see but evil, and when
the Saints die, what have they to see but good? how is it then, that Job says,
when I die, mine eye shall not see good? what miserable creatures were we, if
there were no good to be seen, beyond the line of this life? our richest stock
of comfort, lies in the good we shall see hereafter, which is therefore called,
the blessed-making vision; And Job knew well enough, that his eyes should see
good after death, for he says (chap. 19. 27.) with these eyes shall I see God;
he knew also his soul had an eye to see good (and a better good then ever he
saw in the world) while his body lay in the grave. Then, his meaning of, Mine
eye shall no more see good, is, no more worldly good, none of these good
things, which I have seen; I shall be above the smart of earthly sorrows, and
above the sense of earthly joys. Good is either natural, or civil, or
spiritual; When God created the world, he looked upon all that he bad made,
and he saw that all was very good: Civil good, is the order, peace and
prosperity of the world, death stops the sight of all this good. As for
eternal or spiritual good, death cannot close or dim the eye against those
objects.

Then here is no plea for Atheists against the resurrection, nor any, against
the souls Being, or being awake, till the resurrection. Job speaks only about
the spear and course of nature; when man dies naturally, and is in the state
of the dead, he enjoyes nothing, he acts nothing according to the estate of the
living, In his and similibus locis, Scriptura in telligenda est de statu
mortuorum in morte quis consitebitur tibi? post resurrect^onem pii laudabunt
Deum, sed ante illam, quamdiuerunt in sepulchro, nemo confitebitur ei anima and
corpore simul, Drus, Iuxta raturae cursum hic loquitur, regans rediturum
^ominem ubi hine excessit Re^urrectio mortuorum divinum and supra naturam opus
est, quo hic non respicit, nutu^e tantum consuctum ordinem afferens, quomodo
intelligend^ sunt q^aecunque talia in hoc libro in Psalmis, and alijs
Scripturae libris, occurrunt.
Psalm. 115. 17. The dead praise the not, etc. there is no work, device or
business at all in the grave, Eccl. 9. 10. The hand works not, the tongue
speaks not, The eye shall no more see this good.

Job expresses himself by an act of the eye, which carries the greatest
strength for refreshing to the whole man. All the joy and pleasure we shall
have in Heaven, comes in by sight, we shall see him as ^e is; The heholding of
God in Christ, is the beatificall vision, much of the good which we have in
this world, comes in by the sense of seeing; and all the good of the next is
placed in seeing; therefore he does not say, I shall no more taste good, or no
more feel good, but no more see good, Per Analogi^ ad summi boni possessionem,
quae in visione consistit aliorum honorum, possessio recte dicitur videre bona.
because the chiefest good, eternal good, consists in vision, therefore
proportionably our present good does so likewise.

Sick Hezekiah speaks in the language of sick Job; I said, I shall not see the
Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living; I shall behold man no more, with
the inhabitants of the world, Isa. 38. 11. When Hezekiah thought he should die,
he describes the state of the dead by a deprivation of all those comforts which
are taken in, by the sight of the eye. But you will say, how says he, I shall
not see the Lord? He does not say absolutely, I shall not see the Lord? But
with a modification, thus, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land
of the living. But did Hezekiah see the Lord in the land of the living, or
while he lived? Yes, as Moses saw him that was invisible, so did Hezekiah: God
makes himself visible to the Saints in this life. Though God cannot be seen in
his essence in Heaven, much less on earth, yet he is seen in his works, in the
acts of his providence, and in his ordinances; we may see the goings of God in
the Sanctuary, and behold the beauty of the Lord, while we enquire in his
Temple, Psalm 27. 4. So that when Hezekiah says, I shall not see the Lord in
the land of the living; his meaning is, I shall not behold God in his great
works, and in the ordinances of his holy worship, and in the Congregations of
his holy people. In all these God is visible, and most in the last; and
therefore he says, I shall behold man no more, with the inhabitants of the
world; God is visible in all creatures, but most in man, and among men, most in
his Saints, and among his Saints most, when they meet in the comely order of
his house and worship; The ignorant and unlearned coming into such a sacred
throng; sees so much of God, that he is convinced and goes away reporting, that
God is in them of a truth. In Christ is seen the brightness of his Fathers
glory, and in the Saints much of the beauty of it is seen. Christ is the
express image of his person, and in the Saints so meeting, much of his image is
expressed.

First, in that Job betakes himself to God, O remember that my life is wind,
etc. Observe, That

In our distresses it is better to cry to God, then to complain to creatures.
God is usually the last, but he is always the best refuge, when we have told
over the story of our sorrows and sad condition, and powered our wants into the
bosoms of our most faithful friends; yet, this Apostrophe is sweetest to the
soul, when we can turn unto God, O remember me. It is said of Hezekiah in his
sickness, that he turned himself unto the wall and prayed, he turned from the
people, from those that were about his bed, unto the wall; why, what was the
wall to him? Or what could the wall do for him? surely nothing. As good turn
to an Idol for help or ease, as to a wall, yea such a turn to the wall, turns
the wall into an idol; Good Hezekiah had no thought of the wall, nor had he any
message to any image, hanging there. But as it is probable, many of his loving
Subjects and servants were weeping about the bed of their sick King, and he
had been discoursing of his disease, and telling them of his sickness, but at
last he turns to the wall; that is, he leaves speaking to the company, and
turns away from them, that he might have communion with God, and his first
word of prayer, is, the same with Jobs, Remember now O Lord, Isa. 38. 3.
Creatures are but creatures, and when they have done their best for us, it may
be they can do no good for us; when they have tried all their skill, and all
their strength, and stirred the utmost of their abilities, to give us counsel
and ease, we must say to them all, stand by, and come to Jobs Turn, O Lord
remember. That man is most to be bemoaned, who can make his moan to man only.
He, who knows not how to complain to God, or to speak out his sorrows, and
his griefs in the ear of Christ, shall gain little, (though he receive much)
by complaining to the creature. But so long as we have a God to turn to, and
spread our cause before, though men turn from us, yea, though they turn
against us, and forget us, yet it is enough, that we have said, O Lord remember.

Secondly, from the matter, which Job puts God in mind of, namely his natural
frailty and fleeting condition, that he was a passing wind. Observe,

It is an argument, moving the Lord to compassion, to mind him of the frailty
of our condition. There is no argument from our selves, so effectual, to draw
out the bowels of Gods compassions toward us, either in regard of our
spiritual or temporal estate, as this, to tell him how frail we are; The
Psalmist shows this the motive of mercy often to that ancient people the
Jews, Psalm. 78. 38. He being full of compassion forgave their iniquity, and
destroyed them not, yea many a time turned he his anger away, and did not
stir up all his wrath; But what moved the Lord to deal thus with his people?
What was it, out of himself? We know, the inward moving cause was his own
free grace, but what did he look upon abroad in the creature? He remembered that
they were but flesh, A wind that passes away, and comes not again. Jobs
argument to a letter. He considered how easily and quickly they might be
destroyed, and therefore he destroyed them not, Psalm. 103. 14. Like as a father
pittieth his children, so does the Lord, etc. Why, what stirr's up this pity?
For he knows our frame, and he remembers that we are but dust; Now, that
which God himself makes the argument, all the argument in us, of his turning to
us in mercy; that we should manage, especially as our argument, when we turn
to him in prayer. Should we plead before God our perfections, and say, Lord
remember our holiness, our zeal, our prayers, our tears, our fastings and
humiliations, could any of this move God, or be any attractive of his
compassions toward us? If we will plead our perfections; God will despise our
prayer. Our strongest argument is to say, we are weak, and to tell God we are
sinful, prevails more, then to tell him, we are righteous: We shall gain
most by saying we are unprofitable servants.

But did not Hezekiah, entreat the Lord to remember that he had walked before
him in truth and with a perfect heart, and done that which was good in his
sight? Isa. 38. 3. And does not Nehemiah use the like plea, Chap. 13. 14, 22.

I answer, first, that, these were the best, most the spiritual and powerful
pleadings with God is not proved, because used by good men. Grace does not act
always at the height, nor bring out choicest it is treasures at all times.

Secondly, they move the Lord to remember what good they had done, but they do
not move the Lord by that remembrance to do them good. Hezekiah was so far
from rejoicing in his own righteousness: that the text says, He wept sore. And
Nehemiah with the same breath, desires the Lord to remember what he had done,
and to spare him, according to the greatness or multitude of mercy. He, that
when he has done best, beggs a multitude of mercies to spare him, is far
enough from challenging justice to reward him.

Men, that are but ingenuous, will be moved most with a sight or report of
another weakness. The beggar speaks most effectually by his rages and sores.
The Woman, 2 Samuel 14. 14. who was hired to move David for the bringing back of
Absalom, uses this argument, For we must needs die, and are as water spilt
upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up again; As if she had said, Sir, if
you will contend with your Son, thus, alas, his life is but water, and he
will dye, for this is the common condition of mankind; therefore be
compassionate and pitiful to him, fetch home your banished. This motive takes
much upon the heart of God, as in regard of particular persons, so of a people
in general, Deuteronomy. 32. 36. The Lord shall repent himself for his servants. But
when will he repent himself? When he sees that their power is gone, and there
is none shut up or left. When they have no power and strength, and there is
none shut up, that is, when they have no fort, no strong places to defend
themselves in, but even lie open to the rage and malice of the adversary, and
are ready to sink utterly, then the Lord takes this, both as an argument and a
season for him, to repent of the affliction of his people; that is, to change
the way of his administrations toward them. This promise was in part made good
to Israel in the days of Jeroboam, Son of Joash, 2 King. 14. 26. The Lord
saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter, for there was not any
shut up, nor any left, nor any helper in Israel.

Thirdly, speaking of the world, he says, Mine eye shall no more see good.
Observe then,

That worldly things are good things. In their sphere and proportion, they are
good. Abraham minds the rich man, Luke 16. Son remember, that thou in thy
life time receivedst thy good things. Therefore, we are to use the world, and
all the creatures in it, as the good things of God, and the goodness we see in
creatures, should raise us up, to admire the goodness of the Creator; if
goodness be stamped upon present and temporary things, how good are things
eternal?

Fourthly, Mine eyes shall no more see good. Observe;

After this life there is no more use, or enjoyment of worldly things. The
things of the world are but for the world; Mine eyes shall no more see, I shall
no more enjoy or use these good things. Consider what it is you lay up, when
you lay up the things of this life, you lay up those things, which after a
while your eyes shall see no more; you lay up those things, which after a few
days; you shall have no more use of; you shall have no use at all of your gold,
no use at all of your silver, no use at all of your apparel, no use at all of
your goodly houses, no use at all of your rich furniture, no use at all of your
lands, you shall have no use of all these good things: Consider then what it is
you lay up, a time is coming, when you shall say of them all, I shall no more
see, I shall no more use and enjoy any of these good things. Therefore be so
wise as to improve this time, which passes like a Weavers shuttle and a blast
of wind, to lay up such good things, as your eyes shall see, when you are laid
down in the grave; lay up spiritual good things, lay up your portion in Christ,
make him yours, and then when you die, and lie down in the grave, you may say,
we have good things, yet to see; our best sight is to come, even such a sight,
as eye has not seen. Such a sight, as to which the glory of all the Princes of
the world is a mere Pagean tree. And so much of Jobs Apostrophe to God.

The next verse is a further description of the state of the dead.

Verse 8. The eye of him that has seen me shall see me no more; thine eyes are
upon me, and I am not. In the former verse, Job had said his own eyes should
see no more good, now he says, that the eyes of others shall see him no more;
The eye of him that has seen me, shall see me no more. It is a great part of
the glory and comfort which men take in the world, to be seen of men. As we
take in our comfort by seeing, so Ponit bic duo, ut significet quod non
revertetur ad conversationem humanam, quae maxim consist it in videre and
videri. Visus cum sit subtilior, sensuum principatum tenet in vita sensibili.
Aquin. Me quaere^t quem aspiciant, bumanitus dictum.
by being seen. No man would put himself into goodly clothing were it not,
that he goes abroad in company to be seen, and knows others will be looking
upon him. Now as Job sets forth the vanity of the creature and of this life,
because he should see none of it, when he died, so, because when he died,
others should see him no more, all his beauty, riches and good things, must be
buried with him. There is an elegancy in putting these two together, to see and
be seen. Death stops both, it takes us from seeing, and it takes us from being
seen. As all the good we have will be hid from our eyes, so all our glory and
excellency will be obscured from the eyes of others in the dark chambers of the
grave.

Thine eyes are upon me, and I am not. Job speaks of a threefold eye. 1. Of
his own eye, Mine eye shall see no more good. Verse 7.

2. Of the eye of men, The eye of him that has seen me shall see me no more.

3. Of the eye of God, Thine eyes are upon me; and I am not. He does not say,
Thine eyes are upon me, and thou shall not see me. Gods eye looks into the
grave, and can see there; when we are out of the eyes of men, we are in the eye
of God; therefore he says, Thine eyes are upon me, and I am not; as if he had
said, Lord, if thou shall defer a little to help me, and then should come to
look for thy Job, I shall be dead, I shall be laid in the grave, I shall not be
capable of remedy, if my remedy be deferred: it is too late to give a man a
cordial when he is dead: Thou shall Tuornm beneficiorum, si forte cupias
(humanitus loquitur cum occulto questu neglectus sui) uon ero capax. Cocc.
not have a Job to help, if thou do not help him quickly. Some understand it
in a spiritual sense, Thine eyes are upon me, as if he should say, Lord thine
eyes are upon me, to search me, and try out my ways, and alas I am not, I am
not able to stand before thy justice, before thy pure eyes, which can behold
none iniquity. But rather take it as an appeal to God, whether or no he were
not near death. Thou Lord see I am as a dead man; as a man not to be numbered
among the living. Therefore if thou will deliver me, let thy loving-kindnesse
speedily prevent me, for I am brought very low. As a sick man in some acute
disease hastens his Physician, Sir, give me somewhat presently, or I am gone,
you cannot but see I am a borderer upon death. Thine eyes are upon me, and

I am not. That is; I am not alive, I am not among the children of men. Not to
be, does not import a not-being, but a not appearing, I am not as I was, nor
can I long be at all. Rachel wept for her children, because they were not;
Joseph's brethren said to their Father, Joseph is not; and Job himself in the
21. of this Chapter, explains this to be his sense, Thou shall seek me in the
morning, and I shall not be; Death is a great devourer, it sweeps all that
appears of man, into the grave. The world shall no more enjoy him, nor he the
world, this is man's not being, when he dies: as the two following verses
further explain by an elegant similitude.

Verse 9. As the cloud is consumed and vanishes away; so he that goes down
to the grave shall come up no more.

10. He shall return no more to his house; neither shall his place know him any
more.

Job having moved the Lord to take notice of, and compassionate his transitory
condition, his life being but like the hastening wind. He gives us another
comparison to the same sense and purpose; There, his life was but a wind, and
here it is but a cloud, As the cloud is consumed and vanishes away, so he that
goes down to the grave, shall come up no more, etc.

The cloud] in a natural notion, is a thick and moist vapor, drawn up from
the earth, by the heat of the Sun to the middle region of the air, and by
the coldness of that heavenly country (where snow and hail, etc. are made and
stored up) is further condensed, congealed and thickn'd, and so hangs or moves
partly from natural causes, the Sun and wind, but especially by supernatural,
the mighty power and appointment of God, like an huge mountain in the air. To
this cloud Job compares the vanishing estate of this life.

As the cloud (such a cloud, as you see hanging in the air) is (...)
consumed, or spent: The same word is used at the 6. Verse, My life is spent
without hope. A cloud comes to it is height, and then it is quickly dispersed and
vanishes away; The letter of the Hebrew (...) Ambulavit, ivit, and per
metalepsin de rebus evanescentibus, intereunti bus, etc.
is, It goes or walks away. The walk of the clouds is according to the walk
of the winds, we call it the Rack of the clouds. When the Heavens are (as it
were) all masked with clouds, and a black vail or curtain drawn between us and
the Sun, the winds in a little time dissipate and scatter them.

It is usual in Scripture to compare those things, which are vanishing and
suddenly consumed, to clouds, In which sense (Isai. 44. 22.) the sins of the
Saints are compared to a cloud, and the pardoning of their sins to this
consuming and scattering of the cloud, I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy
transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins. A cloud is but a kind of a blot in the
pure parchment-roll of the skies, I am sure a cloud of sin is a foul blot in
the roll of our lives, Blot a fair writing, and you cannot read it, but blot
out the blots, and then it is legible again: yet, the blotting out of sin,
intimates it fair written, as an evidence or a record against us, till a pardon
blots it out. In which sense, Christ is said to have blotted out the
handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, Col. 2. 14. Thy sins (O Israel,
so the Lord seems to speak in the Prophet) are as a cloud to hinder the shining
of the light of my countenance upon thee: like blots, they hinder thee, from
reading the evidences of my favor, or they stand like evidences of guilt
against thee. But I have blotted out this cloud, that is, I have pardoned thy
sins, and by the breath of my favor and free grace, scattered thy
transgressions, with all the evils and sequels, which they naturally bring
forth. So that, now the light shines fair and warm upon thee; the evidences,
which were against thee, cannot be read, and thou may read the evidences of
my love, and mercy toward thee. The sins of the Saints are but vanishing
clouds, whereas sin in it self, and the sins of all those, who are out of
Christ, are an abiding cloud, they are a cloud firm and immovable, like a
mountain of brass, or a rock of stone. Sins make such a cloud, as no power in
Heaven or earth is able to consume, but the power of mercy, and a gale of love,
breathing through the covenant of Grace.

And, as the life of man is compared by Job to a cloud, so, to that which is
the matter of the cloud, by the Apostle James, Chap. 4. verse 14. where he puts
the question, what is the life of man? Is it not (says he) even a vapor that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away? A vapor is exhaled from
the earth by the heat of the Sun, and is the matter out of which the cloud is
made. Man's life is not only like a cloud, which is more condense and strong,
but like those thin vapors, sometimes observed arising from moorish grounds,
which are the original of clouds, and more vanishing then clouds. Even these,
are but vanishing enough, to shadow the vanishing, decaying, quickly
dis-appearing life of man. As the cloud consumes and vanishes, (the next words
speak out the mind of the comparison.)

So he that goes down to the grave, shall come up no more. The grave is a
descent; And the word which is here used for the grave, is Sheol, about which
many disputes are raised among the learned: The root of it signifies to desire,
or to crave with earnestness, and the reason given is, because the grave is
always craving and asking; Though the grave has devoured the bodies of
millions of men, yet it is as hungry as it was the first morsel, still it is
asking and craving: The grave is numbered among those things which are not
satisfied, Prove. 30. 16. In the Greek of the new Testament, it is translated
Hades, which by change of letters, some form out of the Hebrew Adam, and Adamah
the earth, unto which God condemned fallen man to return, Genesis 3. 19. We find
this word Sheol, taken five ways in Scripture.

1. Strictly and properly for the place of the damned, Prove. 15.

II. Hell and destruction are before the Lord, how much more (...)
then all the hearts of the children of men. God looks through the darkness of
hell, which is utter darkness. Tam infernus quam sepulchrum (...), Sept. Status
mortuorum vel sepalchrum, nam ut anima de corpore (...) de sepulchro usurpatur,
Ps. 16. Drus.


2. It is put Metaphorically, for great and extreme dangers, or miseries which
seem irrecoverable and remediless; these are figuratively called hell, because
hell properly taken, is a place from whence there is no recovery; There Is no
release from the chains of darkness, all changes are on earth, Heaven and
hell know none: When David praises the Lord (Psalm 86. 13.) for delivering his
soul from the lowest hell; he means an estate on earth, of the lowest and
deepest danger imaginable; Mercy helped him at the worst. To be as low as hell,
is to be at the lowest.

3. The word signifies the lower parts of the earth, without relation to
punishment. Psalm. 139. 8. If I go down into hell thou art there. He had said
before, if I ascend up into Heaven thou art there; by Heaven he means the
upper Region of the world, without any respect to the estate of blessedness;
and hell is the most opposite and remote in distance, without respect to
misery. As is he had said, let me go whither I will, thy presence finds me out.

4. It is taken for the state of the dead, whether those dead are in the grave
or no, Psalm. 30. 3. Isa. 38. 18, 19. Genesis 37. 35. In all which places, to go
out of the world, is to go to Sheol. Jacob in the text alleged, Genesis 37. 35.
said, he would go down into the grave to his son, mourning; yet Jacob thought
his Son was devoured by a wild beast, he could not go down into the grave to
his son, for the bowels of a wild beast was his supposed grave, but he means
only this, I will even die, as he is dead. So Numb. 16. 33. where that dreadful
judgment of God upon Korah, Dathan and Abiram is storied, it is said, that
they, their sheep and their oxen, and their tents, and all went down into
Sheol, that is, they were all devoured and swallowed up. But

5. Sheol signifies the place where the body is laid after death, namely, the
grave, Prove. 30. 16. Man has a demension of earth fitted to the dimensions of
his body; this portion or allotment is his Sheol. Yet, it signifies the grave
only in general, as it is natural to mankind, not that grave which is
artificial and proper to any particular man, this the Hebrew expresses by
another (...)
word: He that goes down to the grave, goes to his long home, to a house out
of which he is never able to see or make his way, and Ainsw. in Genesis 37.
therefore it follows;

He shall come up no more. No? that is sad news indeed, to go down to the grave
and come up no more. Are all the hopes of man shut up in the grave? and is
there an utter end of him when his life ends? Shall he come up no more?

Many of the Greek writers tax Job as not acquainted with the doctrine of the
Resurrection, as if he either knew not that mystery, or doubted, at this time,
of it: And some of the Rabbis say plainly, Hic abnegat Job resuscitationem
mortuorum. Rab. Sol. Non negatur resurrectio ad vitam, sed ad similem vitam,
Pined.
he denied it: But he is so clear in the 19th Chapter, that we need not think
him so much as cloudy here: And if we look a little farther, himself will give
us the comment of this text: When he says, he shall come up no more, it is not
a denial of a dying man's resurrection to life, but of his restitution to the
same life, or to such a life as he parted with at the graves mouth: They who
die a natural death, shall not live a natural life again; therefore he adds
in the next verse;

Verse 10. He shall return no more to his house. He does not say absolutely, he
shall return no more, but he shall return no more to his house, he shall have
no more to do with this world, with worldly businesses or contentments, with
the labor or comforts of the creature, or of his Family; He shall return no
more to his house.

But some may say, how does this answer the comparison, That as the cloud is
consumed and vanishes away, so he that goes down to the grave, shall come up
no more; for we find another description of clouds, Eccles. 12. 2. where the
text says, that, the clouds return after rain: So that it seems, though
clouds vanish and are consumed, yet they return and come again. The clouds
are like bottles full of rain, or spunges full of water, God crushes these
spunges, or unstops these bottles, and they are emptied, and in emptying vanish
away: but yet Solomon affirms, the clouds return after rain, how then does Job
say, that as the cloud vanishes, so man goes to the grave and returns no more?

In that place of Ecclesiastes, Solomon is only giving us a description of old
age, and the sad condition of man in it; he calls it the evil day; and
wishes men would be wise to consider their latter end, remembering their
Creator, and laying up a good foundation, before those evil days overtake
them, before the light of the Sun, and Moon, and Stars be darkened, and the
clouds return after the rain; In old age, the clouds return after the rain,
thus: as in some very wet time, when we think it has rained so much, as might
have spent and quite exhausted the clouds, or drawn those bottles dry, yet you
shall see them return again, it will rain day after day as fast as ever; so in
old age, when rheumes distill so freely, that you would think an old man had
emptied himself of all, yet the clouds will return again, and floods of watery
humors overflow. Thus the clouds of old age return; And in this sense the
clouds of the air return, after they are consumed and spent into rain: But
how does a cloud return? not the same cloud numerically, that cloud, which was
dissolved does not return; the same Sun goes down, and vanishes out of our
sight in the Evening, and returns again, the same individual and numerical
Sun, in the morning; but that numerical cloud which vanished, comes not again:
Thus man vanishes, and returns as the clouds return after the rain, that is,
after one generation Si id quod nunquam fui^, nunc est, quomodo quod nunc est,
post interritum dcnuo fore negatur? Nam si hoc mirum, illud magis mirum videtur
of men are dead, they return again in their children, another generation
springs up: other return to life there is none, till all shall return at the
general judgment of quick and dead. As now we are, who never were, so all shall
return, who were, but are not. It was a witty answer of a learned Jew,
disputing with a heathen Philosopher, who opposed the Resurrection: If that
(says he) which never was in the world, now is; is it strange, that, that
which now is, should be again, after it is not in the world? If this be a
wonder, the other is much more wonderful.

Neither shall his place know him any more. His place, may be taken three
ways. First, For the calling and condition of a man in this life, that is the
place of a man, a man's Calling is his place. Or secondly, Locally for his house
or inheritance, where he dwelt; he shall come to that place no more. Or
thirdly, Place is taken for dignity, magistracy, for the eminency of a man's
calling, therefore we say of a Magistrate or a man in honor, he has a Great
place, or he is a man of place and Rank, in all these senses, his place shall
know him no more.

His place shall not know him. That Is an elegancy of the holy language. Places
are without life and without sense, much more without knowledge; knowing is an
act of reason, how is it then said, his place shall know him no more? Did it
ever know him? There Is a double figure in it: Some understand it by an
Hypallage, or transmutation of the words, his place shall know him no more,
that is, he shall know his place no more. So that is expounded (Psalm. 103. 16.)
The place thereof shall know it no more, speaking of man passing away like a
wind. So Psalm. 37. 10. Thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall
not be; his place shall not be; places continue while the world continues;
Then, his place shall not be, is, he shall not be in his place. Or secondly,
understand it by a Prosopopeia, (frequent in Scripture) which is the imitation
of life, by things without life: when a place takes upon it the person of a
man, or when a place acts or imitates the speech of a man: sense and reason are
often ascribed to things without life, and so the meaning of, his place shall
know him no more, may be Quosi diceret, ipsae res inanima quae serviura and
parent ad nutum mortalibus, mortuis tamen null usui sunt, Illos non agnoscunt
dominos. Ea enim est vis verbi cognoscendi and non cognoscendi.
conceived thus: When a man lives and comes home to his house, his house (as it
were) welcomes him home, and his place is glad to entertain him; as in the
Psalm, the little hills are said to rejoice at the showers, so, when a man
comes home, his house and all he has, have as it were, a tongue to bid him
welcome, and open arms to receive and embrace him; but when he dies, he shall
return no more, and then his place shall know him (that is, receive him) no
more.

Observe from this briefly (because it is a similitude of the same importance
with that opened in the former words) first,

That death is the conclusion of all worldly comforts and relations. As the
cloud vanishes and returns not, so (in that sense) there is an utter
conclusion of man, he is gone, and there is no returning; God by his almighty
power, has fetched back some, and the vanishing clouds have been brought
again: so Lazarus (and others at the death of Christ) was raised from the
grave; but in a natural way, death seizes all fast for ever: your places, your
relations, your credits, your Friends shall know you no more, or give you
farther entertainment. Secondly observe;

That God has given us not only the book of Scripture, but the book of the
creature, therein to learn and read our own frailty and mortality. The
creatures preach what man is, and that is a reason why the holy Ghost spends so
much time; and is so frequent in giving us the measure of our selves by
creatures; these are every hour in our eye, we meet with, and see, and handle,
and feel them continually: The wind, the vapors, the clouds, set forth what we
are, When I consider (said David, Psalm. 8. 3. 4.) the Heavens, the work of thy
fingers, the Moon, and the Stars which thou have ordained, what is man that
thou art mindful of him? To consider the greatness of the works of God,
should abase man; it should amaze us, to remember, that God has made such
things for our use, who are our selves so useless (in comparison of what we
ought) to God. And when man considers the Heavens and the earth, and weighs how
many things there are in them, which set forth his frailty, he has reason to
cry out, O Lord what is man? Man is but a wind, a cloud, a vapor, even such a
thing, as I see most perishing and vanishing in the whole compass of the
creation. Psalm. 19. 1. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handy work* The heavens are excellent creatures, and full of
glorious wonders, they speak the power and wisdom of God, they show forth his
handy work, they can be the work of none, but of God only; The clouds also show
forth the handy work and power of God, Psalm. 147. 8. Who covers the heavens
with clouds: The hand of God draws those curtains, and puts that mask upon
the face of Heaven.

But as the heavens declare the glory of God, so they publish and declare the
weakness of man, the vapors and the winds show forth, how frail he is: As
the invisible things of God, to wit, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen
in the things which are made; God is (as it were) visible in the creatures; so
likewise the frailty and mutability, the weakness and inconstancy of man, is
visible in the things, which are created; we may read a lecture of our own
transitorinesse, in the most transitory texts of nature: And that is an
admirable contrivance and complication of things, that out of the very same
text of the creature, where the infinite wisdom and power of God may be
learned, man also may learn his own frailty: He that studies the creature much,
shall find much of God and of himself, Some conceive when Isaac (Gen, 24. 63.)
went forth into the field to meditate, that he studied the book of the
creatures, probably the holy man did so, but, we are sure he might. How will it
shame those men at last, who know not God not themselves, when they have or
might have had (without cost or travel) so many tutors and instructers.

JOB Chap. 7. Verse. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Therefore I will not refrain my
mouth, I will speak in the anguish of my spirit, I will complain in the
bitterness of my soul.

Am I a sea or a whale, that thou set a watch over me?

When I say my bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint.

Then thou skarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions.

So that my soul chooses strangling, and death rather then life.

I loath it, I would not live always, let me alone, for my days are vanity.


IN the context of these six verses, we may take notice of four things.

1. Jobs violent resolution to complain, ver. 11. 2. His vehement complaint,
ver. 12. 3. An amplification of his sorrows, ver. 13, 14. 4. A renovation of
his often repeated desires to die, and the tediousness of his life, ver. 15.
16.
Therefore.] Job having in an apostrophe to God, showed his weak condition;
takes up a fresh resolution of complaining to God; Therefore I will not
refrain my mouth, etc. as if he had said, The consideration of these things,
is so far from putting me to silence, that it does rather enlarge my heart,
and open my mouth to speak and complain, once more; seeing death is by Gods
appointment, the certain end of all outward troubles, and perceiving my self
upon the very borders or brink of death, my body past cure, my estate
irrecoverable and remediless; therefore I will complain yet again, I will
yet farther lay open my misery before the Lord, and press him to hasten me
thorough the confines of this land of sorrow, that I may accomplish my days,
and see an end of these troubles, for my soul is in great bitterness.

I will not refrain my mouth.] The word signifies to stop, inhibit (...)
Proprie est continere probibere, and cum ad liuguam and orationem refertur
^ffert suppressionem quandam and cohibitionem eluctantis spiritus, and
sermonis, conantis se aperto ore effundere.
or prohibit; Those writs which stay the process of inferior Courts, are
called Prohibitions, and then no man may open his mouth more in that business,
until the Prohibition be dissolved or taken off: I (says Job) will not give
my self a prohibition, I will not silence or suppress my sorrows: I will give
my heart full liberty to meditate, and my tongue to speak out my sufferings:
Being emptied of all my comforts, I will surely take my fill of complainings.
It will be some ease to me, to make known how I am pained. I will not refrain
my mouth. That word is used (Isa. 58. 1.) Cry aloud spare not; when the Prophet
is commanded to tell the people of their sins, the Lord sets his tongue at
liberty, spare not, thou art not silenced or limited, therefore, cry aloud;
Theirs, were crying sins, and crying sins must have crying reproofs, loud
sinners must not be whispered to, therefore, Cry aloud, spare not. I will not
spare my mouth (says Job) or refrain as we translate.

But I will speak in the anguish of my spirit, or in the straightness (...)
ie. in angustiis spiritus mei, coarctat me spiritus pectore inclusus,
patefaciam liberum illi aditum (...) a radice (...) Proprie meditari, vel ex
meditatione interius animo concepta aliquid exterius agere loqui, orari,
conqueri. Vocem edam querulam, musfitando and meditandi, Merc.
of my spirit; I am in a straight, I am pent in my spirit, and unless I let my
spirit out, my heart will break; I must give it vent and air, I will speak
in the anguish of my spirit.

I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. The word rendered complain,
signifies to meditate, and so, to speak upon meditation, or to speak
deliberately. It implies, first, a forming and fashioning of what we would say
in our thoughts; Thoughts are the moulds of our words. Job intends not rash
speaking: what he intended to speak, should be molded, shapt and wrought in
his heart, before brought forth by his tongue. Prayer is expressed by this word,
because prayer ought first to be formed in the heart: Prayer is the
manifestation of our desires to God; If the tongue speaks before the heart,
before the heart makes up our requests, we take Gods name in vain. Hannah
takes up this word (1 Samuel 1. 16.) Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of
Belial, for out of the abundance of my complaint (or meditation, so the word
is rendered) and grief, have I spoken. Hunnah was praying, her voice was not
heard, only her lips moved which caused Eli to suspect and censure her for
drunk or distracted; but she answers in words of turth and soberness, O my
Lord, count not thine handmaid a daughter of Belial, for though my voice has
not been heard, yet I have been speaking out of the abundance of my complaint,
that is, out of the abundance of my meditation; my complaints are not the work
of my tongue, but of my heart, and my lips moved not, until my heart moved, my
complaint is my meditation. Hence likewise that phrase of pouring out prayer,
Psalm. 142. 2. I powered out my complaint before him; He that powers out, must
have somewhat, yea much within, where there is a constant stream, there also is
a fountain, I powered out my complaint, or my complaining prayer; it is the same
word here, I have gathered the bitter waters of sorrow into my own heart, and
now I power them forth in complainings.

I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. What the bitterness Amarum non
solum, dulci opponitur, sed etiam jucundo. Amariorem me fecit senectus, i. e
asperiorem, Plau^.
of the soul is, has been expounded already in the third Chapter, therefore I
shall not stay upon it: It notes only the height or extremity of affliction.
Bitter is opposed to unpleasant, as well as to sweet: In the bitterness of my
soul: The affliction appeared most upon his body, but it afflicted him most in
his soul. He speaks little of the pain of his body, in comparison of the
trouble upon his spirit, he insists principally upon that, I will speak in the
anguish of my spirit, I will complain in the bitterness of my soul, not in
the pains of my flesh, or sufferings of my body; and yet that form of
speaking, excludes not his sense and sensiblenesse of bodily pains, for a man
may well say, his soul is in bitterness by reason of the pains of his body.

Being in this condition, we see what his remedy was, he falls a crying and a
complaining before God, telling how it was with him.

Jobs complaints have been spoken of in former passages of the Book, and why he
complains, has been showed. An afflicted soul finds some ease, in
complaining of affliction; To complain out of impatience, distrust and hard
thoughts of God is very sinful; in that sense we must be silent, as David,
Psalm. 39. 9. when the hand of God was heavy upon him, I was dumb, I opened not
my mouth, because thou did it; in reference to the dealing of God with him,
David had not a word to say; Our Lord Christ (the great pattern of suffering)
was as a sheep before the shearer, dumb, and opened not his mouth, no
impatient speech came from him. Though the grief of Job was very great, and so
it might somewhat (as has formerly been cleared) excuse the greatness of his
complaint, yet, in this Job showed himself a Docemur quantae sint hominis
vir^s, sibi a Deo derelisti. Merc.
man subject to like passions, as we are. Man thinks to get cure by
complaining, but usually he gets a wound: What poor shifts are we poor
creatures often put to? How often do we entangle our selves because we are
straightned? Though Jobs heart kept close to God in the maine, though his
spirit was preserved untoucht of blaspheming, yet we find him touching too
often, and too loud upon this string of complaining. He cannot be excused from
some motions of impatience, while we hear him settling upon these resolutions to
take his fill of, or to let loose the reins of his passion to complain, I will
complain in the bitterness of my soul. Anguish is a very ill guide of the
tongue. It must needs be troubled matter, which passion dictates. Observe
further,

That when sorrow continues and hangs long upon us, it grows boisterous and
resolute.

We have three wills in the text, as if Job had turned all his reason into Will,
and his will into passion, I will not refrain; I will speak in the anguish of
my spirit, I will complain in the bitterness of my soul; He was grown to a
kind of resolvednesse in his sorrow. It is as unsafe for man (in this sense)
to will what Nec tamen is fuit Job. qui quod sibi licere non putaret proterve
ac procaciter vellet aggredi. Meri.
he does, as to do what he will; we ought to will the will of God, but we must
submit our own. We should not mourn over our afflictions, nor rejoice over our
comforts, but as God wills. Yet in this, the will of Job was rather strong then
pertinacious. He was not a man of that rough make, to oppose his will against
the will and good pleasure of God, though that were a pain to him.

Having thus resolved to complain, he complains in this very high Language.

Verse 12. Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou set a watch over me? These are
his first words, words full of deep complaint, like the sea, which, whether he
was or no, he would be answered. Am I a sea? Tell me. His question is of like
importance with that, at the 12. verse of the 6. Chapter, Is my strength the
strength of stones, or is my flesh brass? He expostulates with God, why have
thou laid such trouble upon me? Am I stone or brass that I should be able to
bear it? And here like a sea swollen with bitter waters) in the bitterness of
his soul he begins to break the bounds again, Am I a sea or a whale, that thou
set a watch over me?

A sea or a whale. The sea and the whale are often joined in Scripture, Psalm.
104. 25, 26. O Lord how manifold are thy works, etc. the earth is full of thy
riches, so is the great and the wide sea, there go the ships, there is that
Leviathan, whom thou have made to play therein. Again, Psalm. 74. 13. 14. Thou
did divide the sea by thy strength, thou brakest the heads of the dragons
in the waters, thou brakest the head of Leviathan in pieces.

But why does Job speak this language? In brief, the meaning is this. The
sea, you know, is a mighty boisterous and unruly creature, and the whale is the
strongest, might and most dreadful creature in the sea; the greatest of the
creatures, whether upon sea or land. The sea is the most boisterous of all the
inanimate creatures, and the whale is the most boisterous of all living
creatures: So that here Job gives instance in two creatures, which are the most
headstrong, violent and out-ragious in the whole creation, The whale and the
sea. And he sets forth his own weakness, by the Antithesis of these two
creatures, surpassing all in strength with which God only is able to graple and
encounter. And in asking, Am I a sea or a whale, he may be conceived to speak
thus, Lord thou seem to deal with me in a way beyond all thy dealings with
the children of men; Thou carriest thy self toward me, as if I were more
proud, heady, hard to be reclaimed, then any man in the world; thou seem to
take such a course with me, as with the unruly sea, and with the boisterous
whale, to keep me in compass. He speaks as if God laid too heavy an
affliction upon him, and took too strong a course to tame him, or, as if he
might be more gently dealt with, and that God needed not prepare such bonds and
fetters for him, or lay such law upon him, as upon the mighty sea, and the
monstrous whale.

But for the words in particular.

Am I a sea? There are three things in the sea, specially considerable, at
which Mare barbarum and indomitum elementum est.
Job might have an aim here.

First, the turbulency of the sea; the sea is stormy and turbulent, so stormy
and turbulent, that it threatens to over-whelme all; to over-whelme the ships
sailing upon it, to over-whelme the Visat est Deus conjecisse mare in carcerem,
atque illi pedes, ac manus constrinxisie propte^ quam exquisita
dry land encompassing it, and it would do both, if God did not bound it, if
he had not said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall thy
proud waves be stayed; did not God put an everlasting law upon it, it would be
lawless, Genesis 1. 10. the text says, That the gathering together of waters,
God called seas; God gathered them together, thrust them together into one
place, and there set a watch upon them, put them in prison, bound them
Deiprovidentiam dioitur. Psalm. 95. 4.
in chains, for he saw what an unruly element it was, and how soon it would
disturb all, if left to it is own guidance. So Job 38. 10. He has set bounds
to it, bars and doors to keep it in. He locks and bolts it in by his mighty
power. And then Jobs meaning may be this. Am I an overwhelming tyrant or
oppressor, a swallower up of the poor, etc. that thou do thus imprison and
restrain me?

Secondly, there is a wonderful capaciousnesse in the sea: the sea is so big
and broad, so extensive and vast, that it takes in all the waters that come off
the land into it is bosom, and yet feels no access. And then his meaning may
be thus conceived, Am I able to drink in all these floods of sorrow, and
rivers of affliction, which are let out and unburthen themselves upon me?

Thirdly, the sea is of mighty strength, though we say, weak as water; water is
a weak element in one sense, yet in another, water is a strong element, so
strong, that it bears all down before it, and bears all the storms that
rage upon it. And so his meaning is, am I able to bear continual tempest,
perpetual tossings and agitations. Will thou ever let loose the winds and
gusts of trouble to blow thus furiously upon me?

Or (am I) a whale? The word signifies any great and terrible creature, any
monster (...) Vasta five stupenda quae vis animantia significat, sive
terrestria, sive aquatilia sive aeria, Quidam Thinnorum nomen binc deducunt.
whether of sea or land, but frequently, the whale; so Genesis 1. 21. God created
great whales; and Lamen. 4. 3. The sea monsters, draw out their breasts; which
some interpret the sea calfe. It is taken also for the dragon, which lives
partly upon the earth, and partly in the water (Deuteronomy. 32. 3.) their wine is the
poison of dragons; and so Jer. 51. 37. But place it either at land or sea, it
notes the most fierce, devouring and cruel of all living creatures. Our
Translations understand it of that huge stupendous sea monster, the whale or
Leviathan, Am I a sea, or a whale.

That thou sets a watch (or a guard) over me? The word signifies to watch a
thing so narrowly, that it can neither escape, nor do hurt: for upon these two
reasons, watches and guards are set, we are afraid some will run from us, that
others will hurt us, therefore we set a guard upon them. In this last sense,
Job specially means it, Thou set a watch over me, as thou do over the
sea and the whale. Why does God set a watch over these? It is that the sea
should not hurt thc earth, that whales and sea monsters should not hurt man,
sailing upon the sea, or destory the lesser fishes swimming there.

In the 39th Psalm ver. 2. the word is used for setting a watch (...) a radice
(...) Custodire, servare, significat custodism, undique circumclusam unde
nullum patet effugium.
upon the tongue, I have set a watch (says David) upon my lips, etc. A man
sets a watch upon his lips, least he should speak a miss, or least he should
do hurt or wrong in speaking, so (Ps. 141. 3.) the Psalmist desires God to
set a watch before his mouth, and keep the door of his lips, The tongue is a
hurtful instrument, as the Apostle James describes it, a little member, which
has a world of iniquity in it: Therefore the tongue being so hurtful, it is a
great part of grace, to keep a watch over it, and a great part of our duty to
beg of God to set a watch upon it, that it may do no hurt, that it may not as
a sea or a whale, swollow up our neighbors good name. Nehemiah (Chap. 4. 23.)
made his prayer (a sweet conjunction) and set a guard or a watch; why was it?
to keep off his wicked enemies from hurting him, and hindering the good work he
had in hand.

Some translate it thus, Am I a sea or a whale, that thou should enclose me
in prison? It comes to the same sense, and the Circum dedisti me careere. Vul.
Sicut carcer latinis a coercendo, sic Hebraeis a custodiendo.
word signifies a prison in diverse texts of Scripture: prisons are places of
watch and guard, from whence there is no escape or getting loose. Job thought
himself a man kept in prison, as offenders are, The sea is a prisoner shut
within banks and walls: as a man in prison cannot go where he will, so neither
can the sea. And the whale, of whom it is said, He takes his pastime in the
sea, is, yet Gods prisoner there. And the truth is, all creatures, are in the
prison of providence, the limits whereof they can no more go beyond, then a
man that is bound (as Peter) with two chains, and all the doors locked upon
him. Especially afflictions are imprisonments, sickness is an imprisonment. A
disease is sent like a Sergeant to attach a man: that shuts a man within his
house, confines him to his chamber, and then binds him upon his bed, not to
stir, till God give a release: sorrow is often called a Cord, Psalm. 18. 4. The
sorrows of death (...)
(the cords of death, as the Hebrew is) compassed me about; And Psalm. 116. 3.
The sorrows of hell (or the cords of hell) were about me. And in that sense Job
speaks of himself, why do thou arrest and cast me into prison, binding me
with the cords of these sorrows and sicknesses. So he complains, Chap. 13. 27.
Thou put my feet also in the stocks, and look narrowly to all my paths,
thou set a print upon the heels of my feet. It is said of the woman (Luke
13. 16.) that Satan had bound her eighteen years; she was bound with the cords
of that infirmity, and kept as a poor prisoner those many years. From all we
may collect the sense formerly hinted, that Job expostulates with God for using
him, after the manner of a whale or a sea, as if he were a man so unruly, that
nothing could tame and quiet him but such a severe course, as is used with
beasts, or, as if he were a vexer and a devourer of his brethren, a very enemy
to mankind. Observe from hence.

First, in that Job says, Am I a sea or a whale, that thou set a watch
over m^?

The providence of God watches over all his creatures; All their motions are by
his permission or commission, they stir, not but by his leave. The providence
of God is his watch, and therefore it is called the eye of providence; and
providence has such an eye, as never sleeps nor slumbers; and therein lies
our security, that we have a providentiall eye open for us, when ours are shut
and we asleep. Secondly, observe,

God expresses most care to keep those creatures from hurting man, which are
most apt to hurt man. We see Job instances in these two by name, the sea and
the whale, and tells us, that God puts a guard upon them, he watches the least
cretures, but it speaks most security to man, to hear that these are under a
watch. The Lord watches over all wicked men, that they should not hurt his
people, but such of them as are most harmefull, who are very seas and whales,
men who would swollow and drown his people with a deluge of rage and malice,
over these the Lord watches in a special manner. His eye of jealousy (which is
always awake) is surely wakefull upon these. As the Lord has a special eye
upon the Saints to do them good, so he has a special eye upon the wicked,
that they do no hurt, or no more, then shall turn to good. Hence the Psalmist
admonishes all, and it may have a particular application to wicked men, Psalm.
32. 9. Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule which have no understanding:
whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto
thee. If the Lord sees men so brutish, that they will not be ruled by reason,
he will rule them by rigor, He has a whip for the Horse, a bridle for the
Ass, and a rod for the fools back, (Prove. 26. 3.) A rocky shore for the sea,
and a prison for the whale, rather then they shall come near to hurt his
beloved people.

Secondly, note, That

Man in the passion, and distempered sinfullnesse of his nature, is like the
sea or the whale. A cruel man is as hurtful, as the most hurtful creature.
In the place before noted, while man is warned, Not to be as the horse, or as
the mule, which have no understanding. It is intimated that many men are; and
it is a truth, that all men left to themselves would be like unto a horse or a
mule, yea like unto a sea or a whale in doing mischief. The Prophet (Isai. 57.
20) compares wicked men unto the troubled sea that cannot rest. There is not in
the whole compass of nature, a clearer shadow of man's nature, than the sea.

First, The sea is very vast, and would (if let alone) be boundless, Man is
naturally vast and boundless in his desires, he is never satisfied.

Secondly, The sea is unstable, always fleeting and moving, Genesis 49. 3. Dying
Jacob characters Reuben thus, unstable at water: The heart of man is a moveable
thing, ebbing and flowing forward and backward, tumbling up and down, as the
vast Ocean.

Thirdly, The sea is often provoked with storms and tempests, it is the great
stage, where the winds act their parts, and strive, as it is expressed in the
Revelation. There are many winds striving upon the sea of man's heart
continually, and therefore he is so boisterous, and so stormy; he has winds
within him, and winds from without him; The winds in his own bowels make the
greatest commotions. The Apostle James questions (Chap. 4. 1.) Whence comes
contentions and wars, and fightings among you? Come they not hence, even of
your lusts, that war in your members? Lusts are as boisterous winds in the
soul, which make it unquiet and unruly; strong lusts and desires like strong
winds; and contrary lusts and desires like contrary winds, contend upon this
sea. Most men are (Tit. 3. 3.) serving diverse lusts and pleasures, not only
many, but diverse, or diverse not only in number, but in nature, one lust as a
contrary wind, striving with another, and so making a storm in the heart. And
this storminesse is caused also by an outward blast; Satan blows upon the
heart, and the world blows: so that, till the holy Ghost breaths heavenly
gales to overcome and blow down those storms raised by the blast of
stronglusts and temptations, the soul will be ever like a sea tumbled up and
down, or, as the Apostle Jude speaks (verse. 13.) like a raging wave of the sea,
foming out it is own shame.

And this is further considerable, that as the sea is most turbulent and
tempestious, most loud and roaring about the banks, where it is restrained; so
man is most boisterous, where he is kept in and stopped; if God do but set
bounds to him by afflictions, he begins to rage at those bounds. It is that
which Job (in a degree) complained of, he thought God would bind and bound him
in by affliction, and he began to be somewhat unquiet in his shackles. But when
God sets bounds to wicked men by afflictions, and hedges up their way with
thorns, they are angry indeed, and their corruptions break forth the more, by
how much the stronger banks are made against them. The great bank and bound,
which God has set up to keep the lusts of men from overflowing all, his word
and will, his laws and ordinances, by which he speaks to man, as to the sea,
Hitherto shall thou come, but no further; Against these banks, the hearts of
men naturally rage most. How do their lusts roar and rise up against the holy
and righteous will of God, there the foam of their corruptions is most wrought
and cast up. As Paul himself acknowledged of his natural condition, Romans 7.
8. Sin (says he) taking occasion by the law, wrought in me, all manner of
concupiscence, my lusts and corruptions were more mad, because they were more
restrained, I was like the sea, which makes most noise at, and most assaults
the banks which stay it. So ver. 13. Sin that it might appear sin,
wrought death in me by that which is good; there was a good, a holy, and a
righteous law set before me, but the baseness of my heart was such, that I was
the worse, for that, which taught me what was good, and should have made me
better.

Further, man is as a sea in this, he ever casts up mire and dirt when he is
moved, corruption moves, every stirring stirrs up the pudle of his heart. As he
is a sea for largeness, so he is a very sink for filthiness, Isa. 57. 20.
The wicked are like the troubled sea, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

Lastly, Covetous oppressors have a nearer resemblance to the sea in three
things. They (as the sea) suck in all the rivers and streams of profit, which
flow into them, from any part of the world, and yet are not filled.

Secondly, They (as the sea) wrack and over-whelme thousands, and are not at
all moved with their outcries.

Thirdly, They (as the sea) have huge treasures in their houses, yet all
satisfies not their desires, they are as greedy, as if they were not worth a
groat.

Look upon man, in the other comparison, He is a whale, a devourer. In the
worst of bruits, you may see the picture of man's nature. They who have power to
do what they will, and will do (when their advantage is in it) to the utmost
of their power; These are your Leviathans upon dry land. Senacherib was a
mighty whale, gaping to swallow up the people of God, and therefore the Lord
expresses his dealing with him in a word very suitable to this sense (2 King.
19. 28.) Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is come up into mine
ears, therefore I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips,
etc. See how God uses him, Senacherib came raging and threatening to swallow all
up; God uses him like an unruly beast of the earth, or like a devouring fish of
the sea, He puts a hook in his nose, It is said of Leviathan, that he scorns
the hook and the angle, Job 41. Can thou draw out Leviathan with an hook?
implying that no hook, no tackle is strong enough to hold this sea monster, but
God has a hook can hold him. Some men are like this sea monster, no tackling
of man's making will hold them, no power under heaven can stop them; then the
Lord prepares his engines and inctruments, he can make a hook will catch
Senacherib the great whale, as if he were but a sprat, I will put my hook into
his nose, and turn him about or pull him up.

What devouring enemies have come out against us, threatening to swollow, or, as
the Moabites said of the children of Israel (Number. 22. 4.) to lick up all that
were round about, as the ox licketh up the grass of the field. Yea, they
thought (as it is said of Leviathan) that they could draw up Jordan into their
mouths, that is, remove the greatest difficulties, and overcome all opposition.
But how often has God put a bridle into the lips of the horse, and a hook
into the nose of these whales?

Further, if we consider the words, as Jobs question, in application unto
himself, Am I a whale? Am I a sea? Observe,

Man is apt to have good thoughts of himself. Job would not be the whale, or
the sea. Secondly note,

Man is apt to judge that God lays more upon him than there is need. Am I a
whale or a sea? as if Job had said, Lord thou need not deal thus strictly
and severely with me, or bestow so much care to watch me. I would have come in
at a call, thou need not have bounded me with these afflictions, and put
such a hook in my nose, a nod, or a beck would have fetched me in: Wise men
suite their preparations to their occasion; we carry not out a piece of
Ordinance to shoot at a fly, which we can kill with a phillip; so says Job,
Lord I need not all this, a little admonition, a little chastning, or a check
should have reduced me, such are man's thoughts. But the most wise God, never
lays more upon man, than he has need of: when God streightens us with such
afflictions, he sees there is somewhat of the sea in us, he must bound us,
somewhat of the whale in us, he must watch and bring us under. If we see God
bestow more rods and blows upon us, we must conclude, we could not be without
them; some apprehend, that such is Jobs meaning in the sixteenth verse, What is
man that thou should magnify him? as if he had said, it is too great an
honor for man to be afflicted by thy hand. If we see a King make great
provisions of war, to go out against an enemy, we say he magnifies the
enemy. It is an argument they have great strength, against whom we prepare
great strength. So Job, Lord thou magnifiest me, thou make me to be looked at,
as some powerful creature, a sea, a whale, against whom thou actest so much of
thy power.

Job having, as he resolved, begun to complain of his sorrows, now amplifies
them.

Verse 13. When I say my bed shall cemfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint.

14. Then thou skarest me, etc.

He amplisies his sorrows upon this general ground, because they were such, as
he could not find any ease or abatement of, no not at any time, no not by any
means; As if he had said, my grief and my pain is so remediless, that,
neither artificial nor natural means give me any ease; those things, which
have the greatest probability of refreshing, yield me none. He instances in
those ordinary ways, which give sick and distempered bodies some abatement or
intermission of their pains lying down upon their bed or couch; When I say, my
bed shall comfort me, my chouch shall ease my complaint, As if he had said,
while I was wrestling all day, and conflicting with my sorrows, I yet had some
hope to find comfort at night, and that I should meet with rest in my bed, but
my hope fails me ever: or while in the day time my thoughts are overburthened,
and my spirit overwhelmed within me, I think sometimes to deceive my pains a
little, by taking a nap or a slumber upon my couch; but alas, my pains will
not be deceived, when I say, my bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my
complaint (I find in stead of ease, farther trouble, and in stead of comfort,
terrors. For then) thou skarest me with dreams.

When I say my bed shall comfort me. The word signifies to mourn and repent,
as well as to comfort; (...) Doluit, paenituit, per antiphrasin, dolere desijt,
consolationem invonit.
because comfort usually follows holy mourning and repenting. Godly sorrow is
the mother of spiritual joy.

In the words we have either that ordinary figure Prosopopeia, the fiction of a
person, when acts of life and reason are ascribed to things without life; and
so Job brings in his bed, as his friend speaking to him, when I say my bed
shall comfort me, my bed and I will confer together, I am persuaded that will
afford me a word of comfort: Or we may rather understand it by a Metonymy of
the effect, when I say my bed shall comfort me; Comfort is the common and
usual effect or benefit of lying down upon the bed: The bed is said to
comfort, because ordinarily we find comfort in resting upon the bed; that being
a means or isntrumental cause of comfort, is called a Comforter.

My couch shall ease my complaint. The words are indifferently translated in
Scripture, either for a bed, or for a couch; but if we take them distinctly,
then the bed is the place, where we rest in the night, and the couch by day:
When Job says;

My couch shall ease my complaint; It notes his complaint or sorrow lay as a
heavy burden, or weight upon him; for the word (...) Levavit, evexit, sustu.
li^.
signifies to ease, or to lift up, or to ease by lifting up; if a man have a
burden upon him, the way to ease him, is to lift it off from him; so Job here,
I lie down upon my couch, with a burden of heavy sorrows upon me, God knows,
hoping my couch will be a means to take off that burden a while, that I may
have a little breathing, but (to my grief) I find, it does not. The use of
sleep, is to unburthen the spirit, and take off the load of cares; The word is
used in that sense Magnum est peccatum meum, prae tollendo vel majus. quam ut
tolli possit: Sept. (...), quam ut remittatur mihi quam ut sustinere possim,
Jun.
Genesis 4. 13. about the sin of Cain, which lay upon him as a heavy burden, My
sin (says he) is greater than can be forgiven (so some translations) or
greater than I can bear, word for word thus; my sin is greater than can be
taken off; Forgiveness is the taking sin off from us; it is the word here used
for easing; my sin is greater than I can be eased of; as if Cain thought his
sin a burden which the arm of mercy could not lift from his shoulders: Pardon
is the easing of the conscience, sin the burthening of it; sin is a burden,
and so is sorrow. My couch (says he) shall ease my complaint, by taking off,
or at least intermitting the troubles, which (...) In retractatione five
meditatione miseriae apud animum. Loquen mecum.
cause me to complain: or my couch shall ease me in my conplaint, when I am
meditating, revolving and rolling my troubles up and down in my thoughts, then
my couch and I am discoursing together, and reasoning out the matter, but no
ease comes. We may observe from hence, first,

That a man in pain, expects ease from every change. My bed (says Job) shall
comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint, every thing he sees raises his
hope, every man that comes to him, he looks upon as a messenger of good news,
I said, this shall help me, and that shall help me; surely if I had such a
thing (says a sick man) it would do me good, if I had such meat I could eat,
if I had such drink, my pallat would relish it, if I were in such an air, it
would restore my health, and I should get up again. As a Be goes from flower
to flower, to suck out somewhat, so man from instrument to instrument, from
means to means, from bed to couch, still hoping to find relief or mitigation
at least for his troubled mind, or pained body. Secondly observe hence,

That the most probable or proper means, are unable of themselves to give us
any ease or comfort. What is fitter to give a man rest than a bed? what is more
proper to give one refreshing than a couch? but Job goes to his bed in vain,
and goes to his couch in vain, nor this, nor that, nor the other administered him
any help. Creatures are not able of themseves to give out the comforts
committed to them: Their common nature must be assisted with a special word of
blessing, or else they do us no good. If God will command a bed to comfort us,
it shall comfort us, if he will say to a couch, ease such a man's complaint, it
shall ease his complaint; Job says it, and his saying could not effect it:
Nay, if God will say to a hard stone, give such a man rest, he shall rest and
sleep sweetly upon it; when another shall not get a wink of sleep upon a down
pillow: If God say to a prison, give such a man rest, he shall find rest there:
if God speak to bonds and fetters, give such a man content and pleasure, he
shall find not only contentment, but pleasure in bonds and fetters: if God say
to flames of fire, refresh such as are cast into your arms, the fire will obey
him, and refresh them: The most probable means cannot help us of themselves,
and a word from God will make the most improbable means helpful to us, yea
that which is destructive shall save us. For as God can create that good for us
which is absent, so he can (as it were) uncreate the evil that is present;
Providence can take away or suspend that hurting and destroying power which
creation gave; no creature is able to help or to hurt, if God forbid and lay
his restraint upon it. Bread cannot nourish, or clothes warm us, if he say
they shall not; poison shall not kill, or fire burn us, if he say they shall
not. Man's saying is but saying; Gods saying is doing, Man may say to his bed,
comfort me; to his riches and honors, content me; to his wife and children,
please me; to wine and music, make me merry; he may lay his command, or send
his desires to all creatures, and yet remain comfortless, contentlesse,
mirthlesse. Pleasure it self will not please him, nor the having of his will,
satisfy his mind at his own saying or biding. Observe in the fourth place;

That rest and sleep, are from the especial blessing of God. When I said to
my bed, do it, the bed could not, sleep is not from a soft bed, or from an
easy couch. Psalm. 127. 2. For so he gives his beloved sleep; that is, sleep
with quietness, or extraordinary quiet refreshing sleep; which some have
noted in the Grammar of the text; The Hebrew word Shena, for sleep, being with
(Aleph) a quiet or resting letter, otherwise, than is usual in that language.
He gives sleep to his Jedidiaths, as the word is there, alluding to one of
the names of Solomon, The Lord gives sleep sometimes as a love token to his
beloved: The connection is somewhat obscure, the words before run thus, It is
in vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrow,
for so he gives his beloved sleep; how is sleep a consequent of fruitless
labor, and eating the bread of sorrow, these rather hinder sleep. Some
refer it to the words of the first verse, Except the Lord build the house,
they labor in vain that build it; except the Lord keep the City, the watchman
waketh but in vain, for so he gives his beloved sleep, the Lord watches and
takes a care of a City and family, and thus gives his people rest, and quiet
sleep, they are not awakened with alarms or surprises of the enemy: Others
read it thus, for surely he will give his, etc. that is notwithstanding the
ungodly are eaten up with cares to provide bread for themselves and families to
eat, yet without fail, the Lord of his mere mercy will give food convenient
to his people by their labors, and quiet sleep (which includes all inward
contentments) with it. So Prove. 3. 24. Thou shall lie down, and thy sleep
shall be sweet; And Psalm. 41. 3. there is a special promise made to the sick
man, or to him, who has been a comforter of the sick, The Lord will make all
his bed in his sickness; that is, God will make his bed easy and comfortable
in his sickness. When we cannot sleep, we use to complain of our servants,
and say, sure this bed was not made to night, or it was ill made; no man
complains his bed was ill made, when he has slept well: That his people in
such a case may be sure of rest, the Lord condescends to that low office, the
making of their beds, Therefore we are to receive sleep as a matter of special
blessing, coming from the hand of God; he makes the bed in sickness, and in
health too; then bless God for rest, and not your beds. Though we know sleep
is the portion of mankind and many times the worst of men have quiet and
refreshing sleep; yet no wicked man ever slept upon the pillow of this
promise, nor will God make the bed of the greatest Prince in the world, as
such, which yet, he is ready to do for his meanest servant; common comforts,
are to some special mercies. As some enjoy riches and honor by common
providence, while others enjoy them by virtue of a special promise, so it is
with sleep, He gives his beloved sleep.

But what found Job upon his bed? Instead of sleep and rest, he found skaring
dreams and terrifying visions as it follows,

Verse 14. Thou skarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me with (...) Stratus
prostratus, contritus, per metaphoram, territus consternatus, mente jacuit, Et
velut animi deliqrium importat.
visions. As if he had said, I find my self altogether disappointed and
deceived, instead of being comforted, I am skared, instead of being eased, I am
terrified, my bed is to me as a very rack, and my couch my torment, or a
little-ease.

Thou skarost me. The word signifies to be cast down prostrate to the ground
with fear, or to be ground to powder with fear; And it is often rendered by
that word, contrite, which notes, breaking of the heart by godly sorrow! such a
breaking is upon me, thorough the dreams which fall upon me, in, and break my
sleep; If I have any sleep, it is terrifying, and not refreshing sleep.

Thou skarest me with dreams. That word springs from a (...) Spissus, crassus,
per Metalepsin somniavit quia ex voporibus crassis provenit somnus que^ somnia
conjequuntur.
root signifying thick vapors; because sleep is caused by thick vapors
ascending from the stomach to the brain, and closing up the senses; dreams
usually come in that sleep, and the stronger and thicker the vapor is
procuring sleep, the more we are subject to dream.

And terrifyest me thorough visions. In the fourth Chapter I had occasion to
speak at large concerning visions, therefore I shall not here insist upon that
point, but refer the reader thither; I shall only say thus much, that these
were not visions as those before treated of, for the revelation of any divine
secrets, to enlighten the mind of man, but only visions of hellish horror, to
darken and vex the mind of man. The Hebrew word signifies to see, whence the
ancient Prophets were called (Chozim) Visiones istae quibus percellebatur. Job
erant terriculamenta, lemures species, umbrae, spectra, manes, simulacra and
alia hujusmodi a daemone procurata, quamvis ipse Job sibi a Deo inferri
asserit, Cassia. Col. 7. c. 32.
Seers. Our english word Gaze, has near affinity with it. And we call
Starprophets (who pretend skill in predictions, from the visions of the
Heavens) Star-gazers.

Job had both dreams and visions, for in every dream there is somewhat of a
vision; There are many visions without a dream, but there cannot be a dream
without a vision; An image or similitude, is always represented to, or formed
in the fancy, or else * (...) a radice (...) Hinc prophet^e cbozim videntes
dicti.
there can be no dream: Jacob dreamed (Genesis 28. 12.) and behold a ladder set
upon the earth, and the top of it reached to Heaven. The vision here spoken of,
was (I conceive) the vision of his dream, though some understand it of day or
waking vision.

There is a twofold cause of dreams: There is an inward cause, and an outward
cause. And

The inward cause of dreams is twofold:

1. The accidental motions of the fancy, of which a man can give no reason
from any precedent agitation of mind or body. 2. The settled natural
temperament and constitution of the body.
The external or outward causes, are usually according to the objects with
which, or about which we are conversant in the day time, the impressions of
these kept in the fancy, are formed into dreams at night; such as the desires
or distempers of the mind are, such often are our dreams.

Or take it thus. Dreams may have a five fold cause.

First, The natural temper of the body, and so from the variety of
constitutions, variety of dreams are shaped; Choleric, or Melancholy, or
Flegmatique, or Sanguin, produce their special dreams.

Secondly, Dreams are caused by the distempers of the body, either from
intemperate drinking, or eating any kind of meat, or from the very eating
(though moderately) of some meats, or from the diseases and sicknesses of the
body; from this latter Jobs dreams were much increased, and Satan took the
advantage to raise fumes, and stir the pudled humors of his body up into his
brain, out of which his fancy formed terrible representations to his mind. As
Melancholy is said to be the Devils bath, so are other diseased sickly humors;
in them he sports himself, and vexes man.

Thirdly, There is a moral cause of dreams; such as the studies and
businesses, labors and employments, cares and disquietments Quaecunque men.
it is agitat infestus vigorea per q^ietem sacer and arcanus refert veloxque
sensus, Sen. in Octa.
of a man are in the day, such often are his dreamings. As he works in the day,
his fancy works in the night.

Fourthly, Dreams have a divine cause, and are immediately from God. The
Scripture is full of instances, I need not stay upon them: Jacob had such a
dream, Genesis 28. 16. and Jospeh had many dreams from God: Hence his brethren
called him in scorn, The dreamer, or a Captain Dreamer, Genesis 37. 19. And not
only have godly men dreams from God, but heathens also, Pharaoh and
Nebuchnazzar, men of the earth received dreams from Heaven, of high
concernment, revealing the counsels of God, concerning their own Kingdoms, and
the latter about the state of all Kingdoms and Monarchies, till all the
Kingdoms of the earth shall become the Kingdoms of that One, sole, Supreme
Monarch, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, There are diabolical dreams, dreams which are from the Devil: Not
that the Devil of himself is able to cause a dream, he cannot stir the
fancy in the night, or tempt in the day, but as he has a power given him; but
permitted, he causes sometimes sinful and fifthly dreams; as Augustine
bewailes in the tenth book of his Confessions: sometimes terrible and
troublesome Aug. confess. li. 10. Ca. 30.
dreams, sometimes treacherous and deluding dreams. It is by some conceived,
that the dream of Pilats wife, Mat. 27. 19. was from the Devil: she comes to
Pilat, and desires him to have nothing to do with that Just man: for (says
she) I have suffered many things this night in a dream, because of him. The
reason why some conceive that dream was from the Devil, is this, because
thereby Satan would have hindered the work of man's redemption, if Christ had not
died, and so by saving him, would have destroyed us all. I will not assert
this; but it is clear to the point in hand, that there are dreams from the
temptations, motions and suggestions of the Devil, who has a power over us,
as God lengthens out his chain both day and night.

But, when it is said, Thou skarest me with dreams, what dreams were these,
divine or Diabolical? Job speaks unto God, Thou skarest me with dreams:
doubtless divine dreams had an influence upon his spirit, and left terrifying
impressions there. But Satan having power to afflict Job which way he pleased,
was isntrumental here: and yet Job says to God, Thou skarest me. As before,
when Satan by his instruments took away all from him, he said, The Lord has
taken; so here, when Satan vexed him with visions, representing horrid and
fearful spectacles, yet he says; Thou skarest me with dreams, and terrifiest
me with visions, as pointing still unto the power and providence of God, who
has all second causes, Satan and all, at his own dispose. Observe here, first,

That even our dreams are ordered by God. Though Satan be the instrument, yet
we may say, Thou skarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me with visions. Job
was not ignorant, that second causes had a great power upon the body, to
produce dreams and nightly fancies; he was not ignorant, that the strength of
a disease might do very much in this, and that Satan his former enemy was
busy to improve the distempers of his body for the trouble of his mind: yet he
overlooks all these (as he did before) and says, Lord thou skarest me with
dreams, and terrifiest me with visions. Dreams are in the hand of God: As our
waking times are in the hand of God, so are our sleeping times: when we are
sleeping we are in the arms of an ever waking Father: Satan has not power to
touch us, sleeping or waking, without leave.

Secondly, Ged can make our sleep an affliction. Jobs were skaring and
terrifying dreams: Some dreams are for warning and admonition; The Lord
warned Joseph in a dream: Some are for counsel and instruction, he revealed
great things in dreams: Others are for comfort and consolation. Many a soul
has tasted more of heaven in a night-dreame, than in many days attendance
upon holy Ordinances. As the lusts of wicked men have dreams attending them,
so also have the graces of the Saints. Jobs dreams were for terror and
afflictions. Observe secondly,

Satan's desire of troubling poor souls, is restless. It is restless indeed,
for he will not give them leave to rest, they shall not sleep in quiet, their
very dreams shall be distractions, and their nightly representations, a
vexation to them. Note further,

That (if God permit) Satan can make dreams very terrible to us. He can show
himself in a dream, and offer ugly sights, extremely perplexing to the
Spirit. He is able to cast himself into a thousand ill favored shapes, into
horrid and dreadful shapes, he can cloth himself with what habit he pleases,
if God give him a general Commission. And hence the devil terrifies, not only
by temptations to the mind, but by aparitions to the eye, and is seen, at least
conceived to be seen (especially by such as labor under strong diseases) like
a Lion, a Bear, a Dog, gaping, grinning, staring: whence we say of any
terrifying sight, it looks like a devil. We depend upon God, as for sleep, so
for the comfort of sleep. Many lie down to sleep and their sleep is their
terror. As that evil spirit (in the Gospel) went about seeking rest, but
found none: So he hinders some, (and would more) from finding rest, when they
seek it. Therefore bless God for any refreshing you have by sleep: Bless
God when your dreams are not your skares, nor your beds your rack. See the
effect, what deep impressions, dreadful dreams made in Jobs spirit, he was so
affrighted with them, that he professes with his next breath.

Verse 15. My soul chooses strangling, and death rather then life, I loath it,
I would not live always. So that my soul chooses strangling.] He renews his
former often repeated motion, but with a greater ardency; He not only prefers
death before his troubled condition, but a violent death, and (in the opinion
of some) the worst of violent deaths, strangling, which though it be not the
most painful of violent deaths, yet it is looked upon as the most ignominious
of violent deaths.

Some refer these words to the terror which Job had in his dreams and
visions, as if they were so violent upon him, that they almost distracted him,
and made him mad, that they even put him upon desperate thoughts of destroying
himself: My soul chooses strangling, that is, I am often tempted and almost
prevailed Ab hujusmodi spectris multos sejam strangulasse, and profiliisse in
puteos asserit. Hippoc.
with, to make my self away. The learned Physicians tell us, that their
Patients have often attempted to destroy themselves thorough the terrors of
dreams and visions.

Yet we may understand the word [strangling] only of natural and ordinary.
Every death is a kind of strangling; and some diseases stop and choke a man
even as strangling does; so that, My soul chooses strangling, may be taken in
general, My soul chooses death rather then life.

My soul chooses. He puts the soul (as it is often in Scripture) for the whole
man; and the sense of all is, as if he had said, If I might be my own chooser,
if I might have my election, I would even take the worst of deaths rather than
the life which now I live. My soul chooses strangling.

And death rather then life. If we take strangling for a special death, then
here death is put in general; As thus, if strangling be too easy a death, let
me die any kind of death, Death rather then life.

The Hebrew in the letter is, And death rather than my bones, which some render
thus, And death rather than to be with my (...) Os a robore dictum, nihil in
ipso taem sort and firmum quod vis doloris non debilitarat and confregerat.
Aquin.
bones; To be with our bones is to live. Others make this choosing an act of
his bones, My soul chooses strangling and my bones death: that is, every part
of me chooses death, all vote for the grave, I have not a dissenting member,
no nor a dissenting bone; when David prays, Psalm. 6. 2. Heal me O Lord, for
my bones are vexed; His meaning is, I am vexed quite through. And when he
promises (Psalm. 35. 10.) All my bones shall say, who is like unto the Lord,
etc. his meaning is, that he will praise God quite thorough, soul and body.
Again (Lam. 1. 13.) From above has he sent fire into my bones, and it
prevails against me, that is, he has utterly consumed me. So here the whole
man is expressed by parts, soul and bones, or body and soul, that is, whether I
consider the anguish of my soul, or the pains of my body, I desire to die.

Thirdly [Death rather then my bones;] because he had such sore putrified and
afflicted bones, painful bones: For when Satan desired a Commission to afflict
him, he words it thus, Touch his flesh, and his bone, and he will curse thee to
thy face: Doubtless Magis optarim mori, quam talia essa and membra pu^^ida and
ulceribus difflaentia. Merc-Ossiu^m mentinit quod dolor ad intima usque ossa
penetravit.
Satan had gone as deep, as his commission; he had liberty to touch his flesh
and his bone, and he did it: He vexed his very bones (as we say) my bones are
ewen rotted and consumed, the sores and the putrefaction is sunk down into my
marrow, I had rather have death than my bones; that is, than a body thus
consumed and putrified even to the very bones.

Yet further, some of the Hebrews give it thus; Death rather than my bones]
because Job had nothing left him, but bones, he could not say my flesh, for his
flesh was consumed: As we say, Jobo vix aliud quam ossasuperesset.
Such a man is nothing, but skin and bones, a very skelleton; I am nothing but
bones, and I had rather die, than live such an Anatomy.

Verse 16. I loath it, I would not live always; let me alone, for my days are
vanity. He closes up his complaint, as he had often done before, with the
tedium that was upon him, and the nauciousnesse of his life: I loath it, I am
nothing but skin and bone, nothing but sores and boyles, my life is a burden
to me, I would not live always.

I loath it. The word signifies the greatest aversation possible. God
expresses (...)
his greatest displicency of that, wherein the Jews were commanded to take
their greatest pleasure, under this notion, Amos 5. 21. I despise your feasts;
you think you keep solemn feasts, wherein I delight as much as your selves,
but I loath them, my stomach turns at every dish. The stomach closes with
wholesome meat, and turns to it; that which is unwholesome, the stomach turns
against, the sight of it causes loathing. Their feasts were of Gods own
appointment, and he used (in a sense) to feast with them, but their hypocrisy
spoild the banquet. Job speaks of his own life, what the Lord spoke of their
feasts. I loath it, even as that meat which is most burdensome to the stomach.
So Psalm. 53. 5. Thou have put them to shame, because God loathed them, or,
because God despised them: They who are loathsome to God cannot long be
honorable or acceptable among men.

I would not live always. The word is, I would not live to eternity; or, I would
not live (...)
for ever. Why, who can, if he would? Why should Job deprecate that, which was
not attainable? I would not live always, he needed not trouble himself about
that; (for he speaks of a natural life) it being impossible that he should.
There is no fear of living always in this world, nor is there any hope of
avoiding it in the next. Why then does Job say, I would not live always. To live
always or for ever, is often used in Scripture, for a long time; The Ceremonies
and institutions of the Jews were said to be for ever, because they were
long-lived, yet we know they are vanished and gone, That which continues as
long as it should, continues always. So here, I would not live always, that is,
I would not live long or I would not live out my full time, I had rather be cut
off in the midst of my days, or in the midst of my years, than live to the
end of them.

Let me alone, for my days are vanity. Let me alone.] Or cease from me; which
is taken two ways, either, leave off to prolong and protract my days, cease
from me so, do not stand by me, with thine assisting power to keep my life
whole within me; I am ready to die, give me no strong-water or cordial, rather
pull away my pillow, let me go: Or, Cease from me; that is, cease afflicting
me, take off thine afflicting hand from me, do not any longer hold me in this
woeful and sad condition, (...) huic (...) Mundus, tempus hoc nomen non tam
humanae vitae ^erminum quam totum vitae cur^icul^m and tempus humanae vitae
praefinitum denotat quod cito deficit and cess^t.
Cease from me. The world and time, while they continue are always ceasing,
and therefore have their denomination from this word, which signifies co cease.

For my days are vanity. That Is the ground of his prayer, why he requests God
to cease from him, My days are vanity; why should thou stay me longer in a
vain shadow. If we take, Cease from me, or, let me alone, for the ending of
his affliction, it is, as if he had said, my life is vanity, there is trouble
enough in it; if thou give me the greatest ease, that ordinarily a life can
have, yet it is but a vain life, I need not have this super-addition or
accumulation of sorrows upon me: Or, let me alone my life is vanity; why should
I converse further and longer with vanity.

My days are vanity. He says not, my days are vain, but they are vanity. My
days (...) A verbo Habal, quod est evanescere. R^^ denotat quae non est
quidpi^m, aut quae cito desinit, aut fl^^us, qui exit ab ore, sic enim halitu^
infantium appellant. Page
are Hebel, which signifies a vain, light thing, a buble on the water, or a
breath of the mouth, my days are but a breath, or a puff. The root imports,
vanishing or disappearing, the still almost unperceiveable breath of a little
infant, which will scarce move a feather. Alas, my days are fleeting and
vanishing, vain, yea vanity, they have no consistency in them, O then cease
from me, and let me do what vanity must, vanish out of sight. Hence observe,

First, That which a man loatheth, he longs to be rid of. I loath it, I would
no live always. When a man loathes his sin, then he says, I would not sin always.
I would be eased of this burden of corruption, O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death. When a man delights in sin, he
would sin always, he thinks he can never have enough of sinning: it is so in
any other instance; where once affection is alienated, we would be estranged,
and taken off from conversation: We care not to be with that from which our
hearts are departed. As Soon as ever Amnon, had defiled, he loathes his sister,
and as soon as he loathed her, he turned her out of doors, And Amnon said unto
her, arise and be gone, 2 Samuel 13. 15. He that loathes his life, is glad when a
door opens for it is departure.

I loath it, I would not live always. Secondly, observe,

Trouble makes a little time seem long. He had said before, that his life was
swifter then a Weavers shuttle; now, I would not live always; O how long is my
life, how tedious! He looks upon it, as if it were a kind of eternity, as if
his life would never have an end, never be done, I would not live always. Pain
makes every hour a day, and every day a month, and every month a year, yea
an age. He thinks his life will never end, whose affliction does not; he
thinks he shall never die, because his troubles live. Every man is ready to
say, he lives too long, when he lives not, as he would. The souls under the
Altar cried out (Revel. 6. 10.) How long Lord, how long Lord, will thou cease
to avenge, etc. of our good days we complain, How short Lord, how short? And
of our evil days we cry out, How long Lord, how long? This is a long day, and
this a long night indeed, this is a long fit, this a lasting affliction. As the
eternity which we shall have in heaven, is the longest, so it is the shortest;
Eternity is longest in regard of duration, but it is shortest in regard of
apprehension; The eternity of heaven shall be to us, no more tedious than a
minut or a moment. Eternity is so full of pleasure and satisfaction, that it
breeds no fulness of it self: living at the well head of comfort, in
immediate communion with God by Jesus Christ, our comforts renew as much as
they continue; whence freshness of appetite, and fulness of satisfaction,
are perpetually interchangeable. The joys of that estate are so many, that the
years seem but few. Eternal joy makes eternity, but as a moment, as eternal
pain will make every moment an eternity.

Thirdly, Observe; forasmuch as Job says, I would not live always; he
intimates, that there is such a desire in some men; for he speaks of a life in
this world;

There is a principle in man, drawing out his heart in desires, to live always
in the world. I (says Job) would not live always; let others make that their
choice, if they will, I will not. Most are very greedy of that commodity, and
would not part with it upon any terms: and no wonder, for (as the Psalmist
describes them) They have their portion in this life; He that has his portion
in this life, would ever have this life; he that has nothing beyond this
world, would never go heyond the world. Such must needs be all for life, all
for the world, because these are their all. You shall never come to a worldly
man, and find him in a mind to die, Let orhers take heaven, he is contented
with his earth; let others make their best of the next life, the present shall
serve his turn.

From the reason of this request, My days are vanity, Observe;

The life of man is a vain life. Vanity has two things in it, whereof the one
may seem quite contrary to the other; it has emptiness in it, and it has
fullness in it; it has emptiness of comfort, and fullness of vexation; that is
the right vanity, Vanity with vexation of spirit; My days are vanity, they are
empty of good and full of evil.

Four ways, the vanity of man's days may be demonstrated.

First, they are vain comparatively: So our days are more then vain, or
less then vanity, for they are nothing, Psalm. 39. 5. Mine age is nothing
before thee. As in comparison of God (Isa. 40. 15. 17,) The Nations are as the
drop of a bucket, etc. they are vanity, yea they are nothing, yea they are
counted to him less then nothing; So our days are vain, they are nothing but
vanity, they are less than vanity, or nothing; Nothingnesse is the substance
of vanity, and all troublesomenesse is the accident of it. We cannot form up
an apprehension of our life, so little as it is, we cannot reach so low in our
thoughts, as the bottom of man's vanity, in either notion. As we are not able
to raise our hearts so high, as the excellency of that estate, which we have by
Christ; no man's thoughts are bigg enough, or can be, to comprehend or to take
in that: So we cannot little our thoughts enough to consider the estate, sin
has brought us into; therefore it is said, to be as nothing, and less than
nothing, and how little that is, which is less then nothing, no man can
proportion.

Secondly, our days are vanity, because they are so unconstant and changeable,
so subject to motion and alteration. That Is a vain thing which is ever upon
it is change. That which sets the glory of God highest in opposition to the
vanity of the creature, is, That with him there is no variableness, nor
shadow of turning, Jam. 1. 17. or, shadow by turning; some translate it so,
no shadow by turning, because the Tropique or turning of the Sun makes the
shadow: while the Sun is in the Zenith, that is, directly over our heads in
the highest point of the heavens, we cast no shadows. Now the Lord never
turns, he is ever fixed at a point, and so makes no shadow; or thus, as we
render it, no shadow of turning; that is, not only is there no turning in God,
but there is not so much as a shadow of it, not so much as the least
imagination of a shadow. This sets up the glory of God highest: And in
opposition to this point of highest perfection in God, lies the lowest point of
the creature vanity: that in them there is nothing but turning, in them there
is nothing but variableness, and the substance of turning. The fashion of the
world passes away, it is ever passing, never standing at a stay. It is more
then passing, it is posting from stage to stage, night and day. As the nature
of Sicut bomo omnes in scipso res velut mundus quidam, ita omnium mutationum
seminae continct.
man contains the seeds and principles of all things in the world (and is
therefore called a little world.) So his nature contains the seeds and
principles of all the changes in the world. Therefore his days are vain.

Thirdly, the vanity of these days appears in this, because they are
unsatisfying days. That Is a vain thing, which does not satisfy; for vanity
is emptiness, and emptiness can never fill: our days are but as a dream. And
what is spoken in Isaias (Chap. 29. 8.) concerning the dreamer, is verified of
a mere natural life, It is says the Prophet, As when a hungry man dreameth,
and behold he eats; but he awaketh and his soul is empty; or, as when a
thirsty man dreameth, and behold, he drinks; but he awaketh and behold he is
faint; neither hunger nor thirst can be appeased by dreams, satisfaction comes
not in at the door of imagination. Our days of themselves can give us no more
satisfaction, no better a breakfast, then a dream of meat and drink does to
a hungry, or a thirsty man. All creatures are not able to fill one. There is a
satisfaction which comes to us thorough the creature, but the creature does not
satisfy: God can make any thing satisfy, the least of his creatures shall
fill the greatest. He can give us as much, as we expect from them, that is,
look what satisfaction a man would have from a creature, that God can give
when he pleases: But the days of man are vanity in this, because we cannot
take this satisfaction our selves from the creature; neither is any creature
able to give it us. When creatures have done their best, we are hungry and
restless still, empty and unsatisfied still. There is no rest till we return
to God, or till God turn his face to us.

Fourthly, the vanity of our days appears in this, that they are deceiveable
days; that is very vain to us, which deceives us. And in this the great vanity
of the creature consists: it promises much and performs nothing. Great
promises are made, and hopes are raised very high: Riches will tell us, what
they will do for us; and honors will tell us, what they will do for us, and
how happy they will make us; and the wine will tell us, O how that will refresh
us, and the sweet and the fat will tell us, how they will fatten us. All these
make golden promises, but leaden performances. They cannot make good what they
promise, unless they can, with evil. As Satan said to Christ, when he had not
so much as a shoela^chet to dispose of, All this will I give thee: So the
creature joining with our hearts, makes wonderful promises of high content,
and then leaves us most discontented, This is vanity and vexation of man's
spirit. If the creature were not so free to enter bond, and give us security,
for the payment of great good, it would not be so ill with us. If the creature
would say directly to us, it is not in me, as Job brings in the creatures
disclaiming wisdom (chap. 28.) The sea says, it is not in me; and the earth
says, it is not in me; So if creatures would speak plainly, comfort is not in
us, help is not in us, satisfaction is not in us, and so tell us how vain they
are, their vanity were less to us, though the same in it self. It is worse to
be deceived of good, then to want it.

Surely (says David of this life) every man walks in a vain show, Psalm. 39.
6. there is a show of this, and that, and the other Qnasi nihil habeat humana
vita verum and solid^m, sed apparens umbratile, imag narium,
thing a promise of it, but it is a vain show, it is but like a Pageant, which
feeds the eye, and delights the fancy, or pleases the ear, but passes away,
and leaves you as empty as before. In the fifth verse of that Psalm, the
inventory of man's temporal estate is summed up, and the total amounts but to
this, Every man at his best estate is altogether vanity; and least any should
think he has miscounted, an affirmation is prefixed; Surely, every man at his
best estate is altogether vanity; Every man is vanity, and every man is vanity
at his best estate: not only in his afflictions and in his losses, in his
troubles and in his sorrows, such as Job now was in; but take a man in the
height, and perfection, and accomplishment of all creature comforts and
accrewments: take the cream, the pith, the marrow, the sweetness of all;
extract a quintessence of all that can be had in creatures, all is vanity, Man
at his best estate is vanity, yea altogether vanity.

When Cain was born, there was much ado about his birth, I have got a
man-child from God, says his mother, she looked upon him as a great
possession, and therefore called his name Cain, which signifies a possession;
But the second man, that was born into the world, bare the title of the world
vanity; his name was Abel, which is the word here used; They called his name
Abel, that is, vanity: a premonition was given in the name of the second Abel
viventium ^m^ium typus and representatio, Pined.
man, what would or should be the condition of all men. Psalm. 144. 4. there is
an allusion unto those two names; we translate it, Man is like to vanity, the
Hebrew is, Adam is as Abel; Adam (you know) was the name of the first man, the
name of Abels father; but as Adam was the proper name of the first, so it is an
appellative, or common to all men; now Adam, that is man, or all men, are Abel,
vain, and walking in a vain shadow.

And this word is by some translated, nothing, his days are nothing, Temtus
(...), Pined.
Idols are nothing; time is but the Idol of eternity, and things temporal, but
the Idol of things eternal. This word signifies in the Hebrew, an Idol and a
vain thing: Deuteronomy. 32. 31. Jer. 2. 5. the word Abel, is translated Idol; and
the Apostle (1 Cor. 8.) tells us, that an Idol is nothing in the world, that
is, an Idol is the vainest thing in the world, or the greatest vanity: So that
upon the matter, our estate and our days here are but an Idol, that is, the
representation of a thing which is not; so much vanity and folly, so much
trouble and sorrow, so much affliction is mixed with the days and life we now
lead, as A nothing is all it can justly be called, or an Idol, a show, of what
is not.

And therefore we may well make it an argument (as Job here) to take us off
from the world, and to chide worldlings with, as David did (Psalm. 4.) O ye sons
of men, how long will ye love vanity! or as Solomon about that adored Idol of
the world, riches, (Prove. 23. 5.) will thou set thine eyes (or as the
Original) wilt (...)
thou cause thine eyes to fly upon that, which is not. An Eagle will not catch
flies (that is no game for her) much less will she make a flight at nothing,
when there is no game sprung at all. And will thou make a flight with thy heart
(for the eye which Solomon chiefly intends, is the eye of the soul) when
nothing springs before thee, but, that which is not.

To close this point, if the creature be so vain, and the days of man be
vanity, let us set our eyes and hearts upon that which is, something, upon that
which is all, upon that which is lasting, upon that which is everlasting, upon
that which is true, upon that which is truth, upon that which will not deceive,
upon that which cannot deceive, upon that which will be more in fruition, then
ever it was in expectation.

The excellency of that estate we have in spirituals, consists in this, that as
it promises much, so it performs much, and rather more than it promises; a
believer finds himself satisfied in Christ, beyound expectation; the soul did
not expect so much as it finds: As the Queen of Sheba coming to Solomon, had
satisfaction beyound report and promise, so shall all who come to Christ; he
makes us large promises, and if we believe, we shall find larger performances:
We shall, at last, say, that the half of those good things which we now enjoy,
were not told us in the promises: God has laid up all good in his word, but
our thoughts are not able to take out the extent of those good things; Hence it
is said, that when Christ appears, He shall come to be admired in his Saints;
things shall be so far beyound their apprehension, that they shall be all in
admiration.

JOB Chap. 7. Verse. 17, 18. 19. What is man, that thou should magnify him?
and that thou should set thine heart upon him?

And that thou should visit him every morning: and try him every moment?

How long will thou not depart from me, nor let me alone, till I may swallow
down my spittle?


THese three verses, contain a farther argument, whereby Job strengthens his
complaint. The sum of the argument is taken, from a comparison of the power,
majesty and greatness of God, with the meannesse and misery, with the lowness
and poverty of man; What is man, that thou should magnify him, and that
thou should set thine heart upon him? Why should the great, the wise, the
powerful, the glorious God, contend or have to do with weak, miserable, vain
man. How unequal is this Paria paribus congandent.
match?

What is man?] The word is, what is miserable man? Enosh, man encompast about
with sorrows. What is this sorrowful miserable (...)
man? Job concluded in the former verse, man is vanity. And yet here he
questions, What is man?

The question rellisheth of contempt, rather then of ignorace: and carries with
it a low estimation of man, let him be what he will, not a want of information
what man is: What is man? As we use to say to, or of those we slight, who are
you? or what is he? It imports the vanity and deficiency of the creature. Or the
words are a diminitive admiration: He admires the smallness, the littleness,
the meannesse, the nothingnesse of man. Questions in Scripture, often abate the
sense, Zech. 4. 7. Who art thou O great mountain? thou look very big and
very great, but who art thou? tell me who thou art, or I will tell thee, thou
art now but a molehill, thou shall be a nothing shortly, Before Zerubbabel thou
shall become a plain: it is a contemptuous undervaluing question against the
proud opposers of the Church. Who am I, O Lord, and what is my house (says
David, 2 Samuel 7. 18.) His question extenuates. On the other side; questions
often increase the sense, and raise it to the highest. Exodus 15. 11. Who is a
God like unto thee? where is there such a God as thou art? So Mich. 7. 18. Who
is a God like unto thee, pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin? The
question puts the brightest glory upon God, in pardoning sin. Hence man is
abased in a question, what is man? how low, how poor a creature is he?

Or take the question, barely for a desire of resolution; as if this were a
piece of a Catechism about man's frailty, what is man? He had told us in the
words immediately forgoing the text; that man is vanity, why then does he
enquire in these words, what is man? It is not to learn what man is, but to
teach us the wonder, that man being such, should be thus regarded: As if he had
said, Forasmuch as man is vanity, what is vanity that thou should magnify
it? will any one esteem vanity, and prize a thing of naught? man is vanity;
that is the answer to the question.

The Scripture gives many answers to this question: Ask the Prophet Isaiah,
what is man? and he answers (chap. 40. 6.) Man is grass, All flesh is grass,
and the goodlinesse thereof as the flower of the field. Ask David, what is
man? He answers (Psalm. 62. 9.) Man is a lie, not a liar only, or a deceiver,
but a lie and a deceit. All the answers the holy Ghost gives concerning man,
are to humble man: Man is ready to flatter himself, and one man to flatter
another; but, God tells us plainly, what we are.

That thou should magnify him? or make him great? (...)
There is a threefold sense of that word [magnifie] used in Scripture. Magnus
quantitate vel qualitate, annis bonore existimatione, authoritate, Shind.


1. It implies, only a manifestation or declaration of another greatness, or
an opening of his intrinsicall worth and dignity; in which sense, man is often
said to magnify God, he declares and publishes the infinite, internal worth
and dignity of God. Luke. 1. 46. the Virgin begins her Song thus, My soul
does magnify the Lord. It is impossible we should give the least addition to
the greatness of God: Then magnifying of God, is only a declaring that God is
great: So, Psalm. 34. 3. O magnify the Lord with me, that is, let us join our
hearts and our tongues in this great work, to lift up the honor and Name of
our God.

2. To magnify, is to esteem or prize greatly: So the Apostle speaking of his
office, shows how highly he prized it, by breaking forth into this holy boast,
Romans 11. 13. I magnify mine Office. I esteem this as my greatest privilege
and honor, that God has called me to be an Apostle; And Acts 5. 19. when the
Pharisees were so angry with the Apostles, and many were afraid to join with
them, the text says, the people magnified them, that is, the people had high
thoughts of them, and esteemed them greatly.

But thirdly (which is chiefly intended in this place) to magnify, is, to
make great, or to give some real addition of worth and respect. Thus the Lord
magnifies man; he magnifies him, by adding somewhat to him, by giving glory and
luster to man, who in himself is vile, and mean, and contemptible. And thus
God magnifies man four ways.

First, He magnifies man in the work of creation; of that we read, Psalm. 8. 4.
where this question is put, What is man that thou should be mindful of him,
or the son of man that thou visitest him; The third verse shows us, what it
was which raised the Psalmist to this admiration of the goodness of God to
man; When I behold the heavens, the work of thy fingers, the Moon and the
Stars which thou have made; Lord what is man? God in the work of creation,
made all these things serviceable and isntrumental for the good of man. What
is man, that he should have a Sun, a Moon and Stars planted in the firmament
for him? what creature is this? when great preparations are made in any place,
much provisions laid in, and the house adorned with richest furnitures; We
say, what is this man that comes to such a house? when such a goodly fabrique
was raised up, the goodly house of the world adorned and furnished, we have
reason, admiring to say; what is this man that must be the tenant, or
inhabitant of this house? There is yet a higher exaltation of man in the
creation, man was magnified with the stamp of Gods image; one part whereof the
Psalmist describes at the fifth verse; Thou have given him to have dominion over
the works of thy hands; Thou have put all things under his feet, all sheep and
oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field, the foul of the air, and the fish of
the sea, etc. Thus man was magnified in creation. What was man that he should
have the rule of the world given him? that he should be the Lord over the fish
of the sea, and over the beasts of the field, and over the fowls of the air.
Again, man was magnified in creation, in that God set him in the next degree to
the Angels; Thou have made him a little lower than the Angels; there is the
first part of the answer to this question, man was magnified in being made so
excellent a creature, and in having so many excellent creatures made for him.
All which may be understood of man, as created in Gods image, and Lord of the
world, but since the transgression, it is peculiar to Christ, As the Apostle
applies it, (Heb. 2. 6.) and to those who have their blood and dignity restored
by the work of redemption, which is the next part of man's exaltation.

Secondly, Man is magnified or made great by the work of redemption. That
exalts man indeed. Man was laid low, and his honor in the dust,
notwithstanding all that greatness which he received in creation: Though Sun,
and Moon, and Stars, the fish of the Sea, and the fowls of the air, etc.
were made his servants, and himself a companion of Angels; yet by sin he fell
below all these privileges, and was made a companion for Devils, a citizen of
hell: Therefore the second magnifying of man, was by the work of redemption.
And, what was man that thou should redeem him, when he was a captive? raise
him when he was down, build and repair him when he was ruined, when he was
lost seek him, and when he was bankrupt and undone, give him a better stock
and set him up again? What was man that thou should do all this for him?
How did the mercy of God magnify his servants, when he gave his Son to pay
their debt to his own justice? If man was magnified when the Sun, and Moon,
and heavens were made for him; how was he magnifyed, when God was made man for
him? how was he exalted, when the Son of God was humbled for him!

Thirdly, Man is magnified or made great in the work of regeneration, wherein
God re-stamps his Image upon him, in those shining characters of holiness and
knowledge; The first creation being spoiled, occasioned redemption, and
redemption purchased a second creation. Every one that is in Christ is a new
creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Our dignity is far greater in being new creatures, then
in being creatures.

Lastly, Man is magnified by those several acts of favor and grace, which God
casts upon him every day: smiling upon him, embracing him in his arms,
admitting him to near communion with himself, watching over him, tending him,
guarding him with Angels, directing him, counselling him, comforting him,
upholding him by his spirit, till he bring him unto glory, which is the highest
step of preferment that man's nature is capable of. What is man that thou
should magnify him in all these things? Observe hence; first, That,

All the worth and dignity of man, is out of himself. What is man? As if he
had said, man has nothing of his own, to commend him to, or to ingratiate
himself with God. God has put something upon him, he has magnified man, and
given him a real worth, because he would. Free grace exalts man. Hence (Psalm.
90. 20.) the Psalmist prays, Let the heathen know themselves to be but men: As
if he had said, man, who is high in his own esteem, conceits himself to be
somewhat above man, he judges of himself beyound his own sphere and border:
Therefore Lord bring their thoughts within the compass of their own condition,
let them know that they are but men; A man that is acquainted with himself,
will be humble enough; A mere man, is but mere earth. The Prophet tells him
so, thrice over, with one breath (Jer. 22. 29.) O earth, earth, earth, hear
the word of the Lord. Man is earth, in the constitution of his body, that was
framed out of the earth: he is earthly in the corruption of his mind, that muds
in the earth: The Apostles style is, earthly minded men: And he will be earth,
in his dissolution; when he dies he returns to his earth. A natural man is
earth all over; earth in his making, earthly in his mind, his spirit earthly,
earth gets into this heaven, his upper regions: and the body, his lower region,
shall moulder to earth again: Then, what is man? Hence (I say) it is, that
when man at any time would exalt and lift himself up, he thinks himself above
man, he has some notion or apprehension of an excellency, beyound the line of
a creature: He conceits he has or is a piece of a deity. The first ground of
hope upon which man raised himself against God, was, that he might be a god;
he was not satisfied in being made like unto God, he would be (which was the
highest robbery) Gods equal, and stand by himself: this thought was his fall.
There is such a principle of pride in the hearts of all men by nature. They are
not contented in the sphere of a creature, they would be somewhat, beyound
that. The truth is, all the true worth and dignity of man, is in what he has
beyound himself, his excellency is in Christ, and his glory, in being made
partaker of the divine nature. It abased man, when he aspired to take a divine
nature to himself, but it exalts man, when God inspires him with a
participation of the divine nature. What is man that thou do thus magnify
him? Christ makes us very great and glorious, by the dignity which he puts upon
us: as he tells the Church (Ezekiel. 16. 14.) Thy beauty was perfect, through my
comeliness which I had put upon thee; thou had no comeliness, no beauty of
thine own, but thorough my comeliness thou art very beautiful. The worth of
man is out of himself; the Church shines by those rays, by that luster, which
Christ casts upon her.

Secondly observe from this question, What is man, etc.

Man has laid himself so low, that he is not worthy of one thought from God.
What is man that thou should magnify him and set thy heart upon him? It is
a wonder that God should vouchsafe a gracious look upon such a creature as
man; it is wonderful, considering the distance between God and man, as man is
a creature, and God the creator; What is man: that God should take notice of
him? is he not a clod of earth, a piece of clay? but consider him as a sinful
and an unclean creature, and we may wonder to amazement; what is an unclean
creature, that God should magnify him? will the Lord indeed put value upon
filthiness, and fix his approving eye upon an impure thing? One step further,
what is rebellious man, man an enemy to God, that God should magnify him! what
admiration can answer this question? will God prefer his enemies, and magnify
those who would cast him down? Will a Prince exalt a traitor, or give him
honor, who attempts to take away his life? The sinful nature of man, is an
enemy to the nature of God, and would pull God out of Heaven; yet God even at
that time, is raising man to Heaven; Sin would lessen the great God, and yet
God greatens sinful man. Thirdly observe;

Though man be low in himself, yet God bestows many thoughts and cares upon
him. Though there be no reason at all in man, why God should magnify him, yet
God does and will. Free grace overlooks all the distance that is between God
and us, as we are creatures, and it overlooks that greater and vaster distance,
which is between God and us, as we are sinful creatures; Many a man is ready
to think himself so good and so great, that his brother is not worthy one of
his thoughts, or a cast of his eye; he thinks it too much to look toward a
man, that is of the same make with himself, because he is a little lower
statur'd in estate or degree. A great rich man thinks he does a poor man a
very great favor, if he turns about and speaks to him: We may well cry out
with admiration, O the pride of man to man! and O the love of God to man! one
man has scarce humility enough to speak to another, who in nature is equal
to him, and yet God (who is infinitely above us) has love enough to magnify
and set his heart upon him.

The language of the holy Ghost, is very graduall about this point.

Eirst, What is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that
thou visitest him? Psalm. 8. 4. To be mindful of a man, is not so much as to
visit him, we may be mindful of those, whom we go not to see, or to whom we
send no help.

Secondly, What is man that thou take knowledge of him, or the son of man,
that thou make an account of him, Psalm. 144. 3. It is much that God will take
knowledge of a man, or cast an eye upon him, but it is a great deal more, that
God will make account of him; but the third and highest step of favor, is this
of the text, that the Lord will magnify man and set his heart upon him, as if
he could not be without him? Observe, Fourthly,

The true apprehension of the greatness of Gods mercy and goodness to us,
makes us little in our own eyes. I ground it thus, when Job had considered how
the Lord exalts and greatens man, he then abases and diminishes man, what is
man that thou should magnify him? Nothing should draw man so low in
himself, as to think how high God does, and how much higher, yet, God intends
to raise him. In the 1 Chronicles. 17. 16. When David enquired of God by Nathan,
whether he should build him an house? God answered no, he should not, but his
son after him should; But though the Lord would not have David build him an
house, yet the Messenger, who was to carry this report, must tell David, That
the Lord would build him an house, and establish his son upon the throne
after him, verse. 10. 11. As Soon as David had this answer brought him, of Gods
wonderful goodness toward him, and of those large promises to his family, he
breaks out into this diminutive admiration, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is
mine house, that thou have brought me hitherto? And yet this is a small thing
in thine eyes, O God: for thou have also spoke of thy servants house for a
great while to come, and have regarded me according to the estate of a man of
high degree, O Lord God. We hear not of such an humble speech falling from
David's lips, till Gone sent him that message of advancement. And so (2 Samuel 9.
8.) when David out of that abundant love he bare to Jonathan, enquired, Is
there any that is left of the house of Saul, that I may show him kindness for
Jonathans sake? Mephibosheth was found; And when David told him, I will take
care for thee, Thou shall eat bread at my table continually; This favor
astonisheth Mephibosheth, what is thy sevant, that thou should look upon
such a dead dog, as I am? He spoke of himself below men, when he heard David
speak so highly of him. A living dog is better then a dead Lion; but what is
worse then a dead dog? The like impression David's excessive kindness made
upon the spirit of Abigail (1 Samuel 25. 41.) when he sent messengers to her,
after the death of her husband Nabal, to assure her, that he would be her
husband. This honor (that David anointed King over Israel should desire her
to be his wife) abases Abigail in her own eyes, Let me (says she) be a servant
to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord. David's wife! (said she) it is too
much preferment for me, to be David's servant! I shall be honored enough to be
his servants servant, and that in the lowest service, to wash their feet. As
ingenuous spirits, when they hear messages of great favors tendered them,
fall low in their own thoughts: So much more will gracious spirits. Those
magnifying offers of Christ and pardon of sin by him, of a crown of life, and
an exceeding weight of glory purchased by him; these magnifying promises (I
say) bring the soul upon the knee, upon the meditation and acknowledgement of
it is own meannesse and vileness; What am I that the Lord should respect me,
that the Lord should redeem me, that he should regenerate me, than he should
set his love upon me, prepare heaven and glory, a crown and a kingdom for me?
what am I? There is nothing does more empty us of self-conceit and high
thoughts, than duly to consider, what high thoughts God has of us.

Note one thing further from these words, what is man that thou should
magnify him?

If God magnify man, one man should not vilify and debase another; one man
should not contemn and slight another. Who art thou that centemnest thy
brother? Thou can not (really) magnify thy brother, and will thou debase
him? It is a most dangerous attempt to abase those, whom God magnifies, to
despise those whom God honors. That, on whom God sets his heart, against him,
man should set his heart, or tongue, or pen. God seeks occasion to magnify
us, though we give him advantages every day to cast dishonor upon us. Let man
takc heed how he dishonours those, whom the great God now does, and intends to
honor more. When Pharaoh magnified Joseph, he caused the people to cry Abrech,
that is, bow the knee before him, Genesis 41. 43. And when Ahasuerus intended to
advance Mordecai. He commanded him to be arrayed in royal aparrell, etc. and
proclamation to be made, Thus shall it be done to the man, whom the King
delights to honor, Esth. 6. 11. Princes expect that al should favor and
honor, those, whom they honor and make their favorites. Surely then the
great God will not bear it, that they should be despised, whom he delights in,
and casts honor upon.

But here a Question arises, How this is appliable unto Job? why does Job, who
lay upon a dunghill, and was cast into so low a condition, speak of
magnifying? Was Job magnified? Does Job wonder at his preferment and
exaltation, when he was brought down to the dust? Poor Job! Thou wast almost
nullified, and made no body, and do thou speak, as if thy honor were too
big for thee, What is man that thou should magnify him? We may answer.

First, By connecting this word [magnifie] with the words that follow; What is
man that thou should magnify him, and that thou should set thine heart
upon him? As if he had said, What is man that thou should magnify him, by
setting thine heart upon him? And so, setting the heart upon man, is an
explication of what is meant by magnifying man. And that is a clear truth; when
God sets his heart upon a man, he magnifies him sure enough; that act of God is
the exaltation of the creature: Man needs no greater honor then this, that God
sets his heart upon him; he that knows that, knows himself high enough.
Whatsoever man sets his heart upon, he (as man can) exalts and magnifies it. If
a man sets his heart upon another man, he magnifies that man. Yea, if a man
sets his heart upon a beast or a stoue, (he in a sense) deifies that beast,
that stone. If he sets his heart upon any creature, he makes that creature a
god to him: for nothing should have the heart, but God alone. And the reason
is, because setting the heart upon any thing is the highest exaltation we can
give it. Therefore nothing ought to have the heart set upon it, but God; for he
is Lord over all. And the Lord calls us to set our hearts upon him, because that
is the highest honor, creatures can give him. Now, as our setting our hearts
on God magnifies him, so the setting of his heart on us, does wonderfully
magnify us. And he therefore sets his heart upon us, that we might at once see
and admire, how much he honors us. If a King set his heart upon a man, that
man is greatly magnified; he is magnified in the opinion of others; and not
only in the bare opinion of others, but there is a real dignity put upon that
man, on whom a King puts his heart. How much more, if God sets his heart upon
man, is man really magnified. That God sets his eye upon a man, is a magnifying
of him. It was the privilege of Solomon's Temple, that the Lord promised his
eye would be upon that place; and it was a high honor to the Temple, that God
would look upon it continually, 1 King. 8. 29. If it be a condescension for
God to eye the creature, He humbles himself to behold the things that are in
heaven and in the earth, Psa. 113. 6. How great is his condescension in setting
his heart upon the creature. So there is a truth in this sense, and we may make
a comfortable improvement of it, What is man that thou should magnify him,
by setting thine heart upon him?

Secondly, Job may have respect to his former greatness, when God magnified
him, and made him the greatest man in the East; and is now be-moaning his own
change, in the changeableness of man's condition; who, when he is lifted up to
the highest, fairly built and adorned, yet in a moment may be cast down and
Quorsum in me lo^^pletando tuam operam p^suisti, tuam providentiam ostendisti,
quare me ad cum statum evexisti in qua parsistere non poteram.
ruined. Therefore Job comes with his wonder, Lord, what is man! What is the
ordinary state of man, that thou should take care to make him great! As if
he had said, why did thou magnify me, to make me the greatest man in the
East? Why did thou set thine heart upon me, to bless my family, and provide
for me, as if thou had none else to provide for? Thou see man's beauty is
blasted in the twinkling of an eye, and then all thy work is lost. It is not
worth the while to do that, which may be undone so soon. Would any one be at
cost to build a house, to bestow a great deal of charge and pains upon it, and
it may be spend some years about the adorning and furnishing of it; and when
all is done, it is such a house, that the next breath of wind may level with
the ground. What is such a house, that a man should build it? When man is
raised up and built, a puff of wind, a blast of affliction blows him down,
and brings him to the dust; what is this man, that he should be magnified? This
is a good sense of the words; that Job reflecting upon his former greatness,
and honor, now defaced and overthrown, breaks out into this expostulation;
what is man? Why should God in his providence lay out so much to magnify and
set a man up; who may be so quickly down, as you see I am at this day.

But thirdly, rather take it thus. What is man that thou should magnify
him? Namely, by dealing with him thus in chastnings and afflictions by
disciplining and tutoring him with the rods of thy correction.

But you will say, Is it a magnifying of a man to afflict a man?

Yes, it is a magnifying of man; man is magnified two ways, by affliction.

First, in that, God, who is so great will descend to chastise and correct, or
to order the Chastisements and corrections of man. Man is magnified, when God
deals or contends with him. That, Indignus sum, quem vel percutias,
contemptior sum quam ut adversus me manum extendas.
God wrastles and strives with man, is an honor to man. David (1 Samuel 24. 14.)
seems to look upon it, as too great honor (though it were a burdensome one)
that Saul, a King, one so much above him, would follow and pursue him, Against
whom is the King of Israel come out? against a dead dog, or against a flea?
Alas, I am no match for thee, thou put too much weight upon me, in that
thou contendest with me. To make great preparations, and to send out a great
army and skifull Commanders against an enemy, magnifies that enemy, that is,
it begets an apinion, that surely he is some great and potent enemy, against
whom such great preparations are made. In this sense you may understand it,
that affliction is a magnifying of a man, because the great God comes forth to
battle against him, who is but dust and ashes, but as a dead dog, or a flea.
The Heathens had such a notion, they looked Hoctamen infoelix miseram solabere:
morte. Aenei magni d^xtra cadis, Virg l. 10. Occumbens, I, nunc Herculis armis.
Donum ingens semperae tuis memorabile factis. Valor. Flac. l. 3. Argon
upon it, as no small privilege for a man to be slain by some famous great
Commander; Comfort thy self in this miserable death (said one) thou fallest by
the hand of great Aeneas, thou art magnifyed enough in this, that thou have
such a man as Aeneas to fight with thee. And another, To die by the arm of
Hercules, amighty favor, and always to be remembered. Some kind of trouble is
an honor, as well as a trouble: The magnifying of man, as well as an
afflicting of him. Man is so far from deserving any favor from God, that, as
a creature, he is not worthy a blow, though, as a sinner, he is most worthy of
death from God.

But secondly, we may answer it, that man is (not only thus notionally, but)
really magnified by afflictions, and that two ways.

First, in this life; the very humblings of the Saints are their exaltations:
their afflictions are their glory. There was never any so famous for
greatness, for riches, for honors, as some have been for sufferings. Who is
there upon record throughout the whole book of God? who is there in any
history of the world so famous for greatness and riches and high
achievements, as Job a sufferer? All the victories of Alexander or Caesar, yea
of Joshua and David, have not rendered them so famous to posterity, as the
conflicts of Job. His affiictions have magnified him more, then all his other
greatness, or then the greatness of other men has magnified them. If Job had
only been the richest man in the East, I believe, we should never have had a
word of any of his acts, or so much as mention of his name in Scripture. That
which gave him the honor to have a whole book written of him alone by the pen
of the holy Ghost, besides the often mention of his precious name in other
books, is this, that he endured so much. That man is magnified really, who is
thus afflicted, and comes off holily.

Secondly, Afflictions have an influence upon the life to come. The Apostle is
express in that, 2 Cor. 4. 17. where he exhorts, not to be troubled with our
present afflictions, for they work for us a far more exceeding weight of
glory. That which works for us an exceeding weight of glory, magnifies us. It
is not said any where in the Scripture, that man's honors, or his riches, or
his greatness in the world, work for him a far more exceeding weight of
glory: There is no such thing ascribed or atributed to outward comforts and
privileges; but our afflictions work for us a far more exceeding weight of
glory. Not (as Papists abuse that Scripture) as if afflictions did merit glory:
but as the way Duntaxat significatur, quo itinare ad gloriam pervenitur.
and course wherein God sets men, and through which he will exalt and lift them
up to greatest glory. Glory is the purchase of Christ, and all the heaviest
sufferings of the creature are not able to purchase one grain of glory, not
the least imaginable weight of glory, much less an exceeding weight of glory;
but God brings his people to glory, and makes them (as he did the Lord Christ)
in their degree, perfect through sufferings. Hence observe;

That afflictions are (if rightly improved) the exaltations and magnifyings of
the Saints. The rod of discipline in Gods hand, becomes a scepter of honor in
ours. This crosses the common thoughts of the world. The truth is, there is
scarce a soul in the world under affliction, but he thinks himself abased by
it, and says, that God has laid him low. Yet the right use and improvement of
affliction, is the best preferment. The Apostle, Jam. 1. is express, Let the
brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted. The low have an
exaltation; yea their lowness is their exaltation: yet, we are ready to have
undervaluing thoughts of our selves, when the hand of God is upon us; when God
takes away that, for which men set a price upon themselves; they scarce think
themselves worth any thing. But this especially reaches that sinful contempt
of others, a man afflicted is esteemed by most as a man abased. They who have
prized a man, and had great thoughts of him, when he had a great estate, etc.
let him once fall in temporals, though he continue the same in spirituals, yea,
though he increases in them, and his grace shines, as much or more, then ever,
yet he is dis-esteemed and laid low in their thoughts. So much for those words,
what it is to magnify; and likewise how they may have a sutablenesse with Jobs
condition, he being so afflicted and emptied, when he spoke them.

And that thou should set thine heart upon him. To set the heart notes four
things in Scripture.

First, Great care and intention of spirit, Prove. 27. 23. Be thou diligent to
know the state of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds; the Hebrew is, set
thine heart upon thy herds: The heart is set upon the herds in providing and
taking care of them, in looking to the welfare of the herds and of the flocks.
Samuel uses that language to Saul (1 Samuel 9. 20.) when he came seeking his
fathers asses, As for the asses (says he) set not thine heart upon them. that
is, take no care for them, never trouble thy self more about that business,
that care is over, they are found. In this sense God sets his heart upon man;
What is man that thou should set thine heart upon him? That is, that thou
should take so much care of him, and watch over him; As the Lord speaks of
his vineyard (Isa. 27. 3.) I the Lord will keep it, lest any hurt it, I will
keep it night and day; He set his heart upon the vineyard to watch it, least
any should, touching, hurt it. God in this sense takes so much care for man,
that he seems (as it were) careless of all other creatures, 1 Cor. 9. 9.
Does God take care for Oxen? God does care for Oxen: The Apostle having showed
the goodness of God to beasts, providing by a law, that they should not be
muzled, presently he questions, Does God take care for Oxen? As if he had said,
surely there is some what more in it, or, says he it altogether for our sakes;
Not altogether, doubtless God had regard to Oxen, But for our sakes no doubt
it was written, that is, chiefly for our sakes, That he which ploweth, should
plow in hope, and he that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope,
So, when Christ speaks of the Lillies, Mat. 6. If God so cloth the Lillies of
the field, how much more will he cloth you? You shall have the strength of his
care to provide for you, to feed and cloth you. thus God sets his heart upon
man, he looks to his people, as to his household, to his charge; he will see,
they shall have all things needful for them. And so not laying to heart,
(which is the contrary) signifies carelessness, Isa. 47. 7. It is reported of
Babylon, Thou said I shall be a Lady for ever, so that thou did not lay
these things to thy heart; that is, thou did not regard these things, to take
care about them. And Ezekiel. 40. 4. the expression is very full, where God calls
the Prophet to attention, and he calls him all over, Behold (says he) with
thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart on all that I shall
show thee: He wakens the whole man; See, and see with thine eyes; Hear, and
hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon it, the sum of all is, be thou
very intentive, and diligent about this business to the utmost.

Secondly, To set the heart notes an act of the affections and desires, A man
sets his love upon what he sets his heart; that is the meaning of Psalm. 62. 10.
If riches increase; set not your heart upon them; That is, let not your love,
your affections, your desires close with these things: when riches abound, let
not your desires abound too. It is an admirable frame of heart to have narrow,
scant affections in a large plentiful estate, He is the true rich man, who
loves his riches poorly. Set your affections on things that are above, Col. 3.
2.

Thirdly, To set the heart, notes high esteem and account, this is more than
bare love and affection, 2 Samuel 18. 3. when a counsel of war was held by
David's Commanders, about going out to battle against Absalom, they all vote
against David's person all undertaking, upon this ground, they will not care for
us, they will not set their hearts upon us, or value us, their hearts are set
upon thee, thou art the prize they look for, and therefore the heat of the
battle will be against thee. Again, 1 Samuel 4. 20. When the wife of Phineas
was delivered of a son (a son is the woman's joy and glory, yet) the text says,
when the women that stood by, told her that a son was borne, she answered not,
neither did she regard it, she did not set her heart upon it, because the glory
was departed from Israel.

In either of these senses, the Lord sets his heart upon man, he greatly loves
man; The love of God to man, is the spring of mercy to man, yea love is the
spring of love, love acted, springs from a decree of love (Deuteronomy. 7. 7.) The
Lord thy God did not set his love upon you, etc. because ye were more in number
then any other people, but because the Lord loved you, Love also led in that
highest work of mercy, the giving of Christ: God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son. Josh. 3. 16. As love is the spring and root of all
the real duty, which man's performs to God, and is therefore called the
fulfilling of the law; Our love fulfilleth the will of God: so the love of God
is the root of all that good we receive, his love fulfilleth our will, that is,
whatsoever we will or ask according to the will of God, the love of God
fulfills it for us. Our love fulfills the law of Gods command, and Gods love
fulfills the law of our wants and lawful desires. His heart is set upon us,
and then his hand is open to us.

Further, God does not only love man, but his love is great, and his esteem of
man very high; and he reallizes the greatest love, by bestowing the greatest
mercy: How did God set his heart upon us, when he gave his Son, who lay in his
bosom, for us, He set his bosom upon us, when he gave us his Son, who came
out of his bosom.

Hence let us see our duty. Should not we set our heart upon God, when God sets
his heart upon us? the sovereignty of God, calls for our hearts: He, as Lord may
use all that we have, or are: And there is more than a law of sovereignty, why,
we should give God our hearts; God has given us his heart first: he who
calls for our hearts, has first given us his. What are our hearts to his
heart? The love of God infinitely exceeds the love and affection of the
creature. What were it to God, if he had none of our hearts? But woe to us, if
we had not the heart of God. This phrase shows us the reason why God calls for
our hearts, he gves us his own; it is but equal among men, to love where we
are loved, to give a heart where we have received one; how much more should we
love God, and give him our hearts, when we hear he loves us and sets his heart
upon us, whose love and heart alone, is infinitely better then all the loves
and hearts of all men and Angels.

There is yet a fourth consideration about this expression, the setting of the
heart. Setting the heart, is applied to the anger and displeasure of God; so
the phrase is used (Job 34. 14.) If he set his heart upon man, all flesh shall
perish together: that is, if God be resolved to chastise man, to bring
judgments upon him, all flesh shall perish together; none shall be able to
oppose it. As it is the hightest favor to have God set his heart upon us in
mercy and love, so it is the highest judgment, to have God set his heart upon
a man in anger and in wrath, to set his heart to afflict and punish. The Lord
answers his own people, Jer. 15. 1, 2, 3. that notwithstanding all the prayers
and motions of his beloved favorites, in their behalf, his heart could not be
toward them: Then his heart was strongly set against them, or upon them in
extreme anger; therefore he concludes, they that are for the sword, to the
sword, and they that are for destruction, to destruction, etc. If God set his
heart to afflict, he will afflict, and he can do it. And there may be such a
sense of the text here. What is man that thou should set thine heart upon
him? that thou should come so resolved, to contest and contend with man, who
is but dust and ashes; The words following (though I adhere rather to the
former interpretation) carry somewhat toward it.

Verse 18. That thou should visit him every morning, and try him every
moment? Here are two acts more about which the question is put. What is man
that thou should visit him every morning? And what is man, that thou
should try him every moment?

That thou should visit him every morning? To visit, is taken three ways,
and they may all be applied to this (...) Visitavit in bonum and in malum.
text.

To visit, is first to afflict, to chasten, yea to punish; the highest
judgments in Scripture, come under the notion of visitations. Exodus 34. 7.
Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children; that is, punishing
them. And in the Prophet; Jer. 5. 9. Shall not I visit for this? shall not my
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Jer. 48. 44. when God came against
Moab with those terrible judgments, it is called the year of their
visitation. I will bring upon it, even upon Moab, the year of their
visitation. And it is a common speech with us, when a house has the plague,
which is one of the highest strokes of temporal affliction, we use to say,
such a house is visited. Then observe,

Afflictions are visitations. They are called so, because then God comes to
search our hearts and lives; afflictions are Gods searchers and examiners.
Jerusalem is threatened to be scearcht with candles, and that was the time of
Jerusalems visitation. To search with a candle, notes the most accurate
searching, as the woman when she had lost her groate, lighted a candle, and
sought diligently till she found it; she visited every hole to find it out.
When you see the Lord afflicting, then he is visiting, he lights a candle to
search every corner of your lives.

And if afflictions be Gods visitations, it is time for man to visit himself,
when he is afflicted. We should visit our souls, when God visits our bodies,
our estates, our families, or the Kingdom where we live. Woe to those, who do
not visit themselves, when God visits them. The Prophet calls to this duty in a
time of saddest visitation, Let us search and try our ways, Lam. 3.

Yet further, If God in affliction visit us, let us visit God; let us answer
his visitation of us, with our visitation of him. Lord in trouble have they
visited thee, they powered out a prayer when thy chastning was upon them. Isa.
26. 16. Would you know what the visiting of God is? It is praying unto him,
They visited thee, they powered out a prayer when thy chastning was on them. We
visit Heaven in our afflictions, when we pray much in our afflictions. When God
visits us, let us visit him, and never give over visiting him, til he remove
his visitation from, or sanctify it to us. That Is the first sense.

Secondly, To visit, in a good sense signifies to show mercy, and to refresh,
to deliver, and to bless; Ruth, 1. 6. Naomi heard how the Lord had visited his
people, and given them bread. Genesis 21. 2. The Lord visited Sarah, and she
conceived, etc. Exodus 3. 16. The Lord has surely visited his people, when they
were upon dawnings of deliverance out of Egypt: That greatest mercy and
deliverance, that ever the children of men had, is thus expressed, Luke, 1. 68.
The Lord has visited and redeemed his people. Mercies are visitations, when
God comes in kindness and love to do us good, he visits us. And these mercies
are called visitations, in two respects.

1. Because God comes near to us when he does us good: Mercy is a drawing near
to a soul, a drawing near to a place. As when God sends a judgment, or
afflicts, he is said to depart and go away from that place; so when he does us
good, he comes near, and as it were applies himself in favor to our persons
and habitations.

2. They are called a visitation, because of the freeness of them. A visit is
one of the freest things in the world. There is no obligation, but that of
love, to make a visit: because, such a man is my friend, and I love him,
therefore I visit him. Hence, I say, that greatest act of free grace in
redeeming the world, is called a visitation, because it was as freely done, as
ever any friend made a visit to see his friend, and with infinite more
freedom; there was no obligation on man's side at all, many unkindnesses and
neglects there were, God in love came to redeem man,

Thirdly, To visit, imports an act of care and inspection, of tutorage
Idiotismus est elegans apud Hebeaeos pro eo quod est diligentissime and
exactissime rem investigare. Bold.
and direction: The Pastors office over the flock is expressed by this act,
Zech. 10. 3. Acts 15. 36. And the care we ought to have of the fatherless and
widows, is expressed by visiting of them, Pure Religion (says the Apostle
James) is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, Jam.
1. 27. and Mat. 26. 34. Christ pronounces the blessing on them, who, when he
was in prison, visited him: which was not a bare seeing, or asking, how do you:
but it was care of Christ in his imprisonment, and helpfullnesse and provision
for him in his afflicted members. That sense also agrees well with this place,
What is man that thou should visit him? that is, that thou should take
care, have such an inspection over him, look so narrowly to, and provide for
him? (...) Singulis mane, quotidie mane, mane autem fieri dicitur quod quotidie
fit, ac diligenter seduloque Drus.


That thou should visit him every morning. Fvery morning. The Hebrew is, in
the mornings. And the word here used for morning, is considerable: There is a
twofold morning, which the Jews distinguished exactly by their watch. One
morning was that, which they accounted from an hour before Sun rising, from the
very first breaking of the day, till the Sun appeared above the Horizon, which
is about the space of an hour: And the word which they use for it is, Shachar,
which signifies to be darkish or blackish, because that first morning is
somewhat dark: And so the Latini vocant dilucuium, quasi diei lucula, i. e.
parva lux.
latin word (diluculum) which is for the first morning, is by Crittiques
called, a little of the day; But their other morning, was the space of an hour
after Sunrising, and the root of that word, signifies to seek or to enquire,
to enquire diligently. And the reason why they express the second morning so,
is, because when the Sun is up, we may seek and search about our business, or
go on in our callings and affairs; The height of the day, they call the
Reliquum diei tempus, quasi ob majorem lucis intensionem vocant. (...) Ghetsem
Hajom, i. e. corpus, sive robur dici, Bold.
body or strength, we, the heat of the day; either morning may be here meant,
though the word bears the later properly: Thou do visit him every morning:
that is, as soon as the Sun is up, yea as soon as day breaks, or there is
any light, thou art visiting. Man's visits are usually in the afternoon: it is
an extraordinary thing to visit one in the forenoone, more extraordinary to
visit in a morning, and most, early in a morning. Gods visits are extraordinary
visits, they are visitings in the morning, and visitings every morning, as
often as the morning returns, so often does God come to visit: not a morning
that we miss him.

To do a thing every morning, notes first the doing of it always, or
secondly, the certain doing of it; Thou do visit every morning, that is, as
surely and as certain as the Sun rises, and the morning comes, so certainly
does God visit man. Or thirdly, it notes the speed, the have that God makes to
visit; He visits in the morning; that is, betimes, God delays not until
noone, much less stays till it be night; but he comes in the morning. Psalm.
46. 5. God shall hear her, and that right early; the Hebrew is, God shall
hear her in the morning, betimes, speedily. The late coming in to work in the
vineyard, is expressed by coming at the eleventh hour; they came speedily, who
came in the morning at the first hour. And to show that we ought not to
continue in wrath, and keep up our anger, it is said, let not the Sun go
down upon your wrath, that is, do not continue all day angry, let your anger
go down speedily, even before the Sun.

In this sense, Job says, that God visits man every morning, as a Hic ad
conservationem and generalem providentiam pertinet. Metaphora a pastoribus
singulis matutinis oves suas recensenntibus, Coc,
shepherd his flock, least any should be hurt or straied; we may apply it, as
before in the several senses of visitation, either to Gods visiting of us in
afflictions, or in mercies, he afflicts (if he pleases) continually, speedily,
certainly. And as sure as the Sun rises, and the morning comes, so sure God
visits his, with mercies, therefore his mercies are said to be renewed every
morning, Lam. 3. 23. or fresh every morning. Unless God bring new mercies
every day, the old would not serve: we cannot bring the mercies of one day over
to another: The mercies of a former day, will not support us the next,
therefore they must come every morning, sufficient for the day, is the evil
thereof. Mat. 6. and, but sufficient for the day, is the good thereof. As we
are therefore commanded to pray every day for our daily bread: the bread you
had the last day, will not serve this day, you must pray for the bread of this
day, and for a blessing upon it, that God would visit your bread, and your
store in mercy. So if need require, God afflicts every day: And the hearts of
some men, want as much the rod every day, as bread every day; they could not be
without affliction every day, to keep them in order, and God will be as
careful to correct his children, as to feed them. If a man be watchful over
his own ways, and the dealings of God with him, there is seldom a day, but he
may find some rod of affliction upon him: But, as through want of care and
watchfullnesse, we loose the sight of many mercies, so we do of many
afflictions. Though God does not every day bring a man to his bed, and break
his bones, yet we seldom, if at all, pass a day without some rebuke and
chastning. Psalm. 73. 14. I have been chastned every morning, says he Psalmist:
Our lives are full of afflictions; and it is as great a part of a Christians
skill, to know afflictions, as to know mercies; to know when God smites, as to
know when he girds us; and it is our sin to overlook afflictions, as well as to
overlooke mercies.

Secondly, Take the word, as it imports care and inspection, Then observe;

The care of God is renewed every morning: The eye of God is always upon us: He
visits so as he tells all our steps, he tells our very wanderings: He
visits us so, that we can turn no way but he is with us; his eye of
inspection, as a Tutour, as a guide, is ever upon us; he looks to his people
as a shepherd to his flock, who knows their wanderings.

And try him every moment. It is of the same sense with the former. Try him.
The word (...) Periculum fecit, expertus est, tentavit. (...), Sept.
signifies an exact and through trial: Some take it to be an allusion to the
practice of those who set the watch in Armies or Garrison Towns; who least
their Sentinels or Watchmen should sleep, use to come suddenly upon them
(possibly) diverse times in a night, to try whether they are faithful and
wakefull; The Prophet Isaiah* hints at such a custom (chap. 21.) The watchman
is set, v. 6th. Go set a watchman, let him declare what he sees: The watchman
is tried, v. 11. He calls to me out of Seir, watchman what of the night?
watchman what of the night? And it is observed in foreign parts, that their
watchmen in Frontier Towns are tried every hour of the night, the token being,
their giving so many tolls with the Bell hanging in their Watchtower, as the
great City-clock strikes. This is a good sense of the place, the Lord visits ns
every morning, and tries us every moment, that is, very, very often, as often
as may be, to see whether we keep our watches, and stand duly upon our guard.

But secondly, it may note a trial, as a Scholar is tried, by examination: We
call it Probation day, when the proficiency of Scholars is examined; God
comes to examine and make probation of men's proficiencie; what have you
gotten? how have you improved such times, such opportunities for the gaining of
spiritual knowledge? what have you learned, what know you more of your selves?
what more of God and Jesus Christ, whom to know is eternal life?

Thirdly, It may note trial by affliction: There are three words 1. (...), 2.
(...), 3. (...).
which signify the troubles, which God brings upon man: They are First,
strictly, Judgments, which he sends in wrath upon enemies: Secondly,
Chastisments and corrections: Thirdly, Temptations or trials: these are proper
to his children. Hence observe;

Afflictions are trials. The Lord proves what grace there is in the heart, and
he tries what corruption there is in the heart by affliction. There are many
graces in the heart of man untried, and there are some that cannot be tried,
till God bring him to an hour of trouble. There are many corruptions in the
heart of man, which he taks no notice of, nor can, till he is afflicted; many a
good soul would not believe that they had such an unbeleeving heart, such a
proud heart, till God tried him, and then corruption discovered it self. The
reason why God brought his people such a way about in the wilderness, was
(Deuteronomy. 8. 2.) to prove them, to try them, to know what was in their heart. God
knows what is in the heart of man intuitively, and he needs not go about; he
can go the nearest way into every man's heart; he proves it only to make it
known to others, and to make a man know himself. They could not think their
hearts were so rebellious, so full of murmuring and unbeleefe, if God had not
taken them about to prove and try them, those forty years.

Prosperity and comforts are trials too: whatsoever God does with a man, he
some way or other tries him. Look not only upon your afflictions as trials,
your mercies also are trials: God gives you them to see what you will do with
them; he gives riches, and honor, and credit, to see how men will use and
improve them: as by afflictions, so by outward comforts, he tries both what
grace and what corruption is in our hearts. He gives comforts, to see how we
can live upon God in Christ, when we have the creature; and that we may show,
how much we make of him, without whom we cannot live, when we have all things
besides him. Prosperity tries corruption, then pride and creature-confidence
break forth, which before were undiscerned: We say, Magistracy shows a man,
nature when it is exalted shows it self, as much as when it is vexed.

He tries every moment: A moment is the least part and division (...) ad
momenta.
of time: To try every moment, is to try not only frequently, but continually:
Hence observe;

The temper and state of man's heart is so various, that there needs new
experiments of him every moment. Why does God try us every moment? Because we
are one moment in one temper, and the next moment in another: The acting frame
of a man's heart this hour, cannot be collected, from the frame it was in, an
hour before; therefore there is a continual trial. Some things if they be
tried once, they are tried for ever; if we try gold, it will ever be as good as
we found it, unless we alter it: as we try it to be, so it continues to be;
But try the heart of man this day, and come again the next, and you may find
it in a different condition; to day believing, to morrow unbeleeving; to day
humble, to morrow proud; to day meek, to morrow passionate; to day lively and
enlarged, to morrow dead and straightned: pure gold to day, and to morrow
exceeding drossie. As it is with the pulse of a sick man, it varieth every
quarter of an hour, therefore the Physician tries his pulse every time he
comes, because his disease alters the state of his body: so it is with the
distempered condition of man's spirit, God having tried our pulse, the state of
our spirit, by crosses, or by mercies this day, next day he tryes us too, and
the third day he tryes us again, and so keep us in continual trials, because
we are in continual variations: That sickness, and disease within us, alters
the state and condition of the soul every moment, Our comfort is, that God
has a time wherein he will set our souls up in such a frame, as he shall need
to try us but that once. Having set us up in a frame of glory, he shall not
need to try our hearts for us, or to put us to the trial of our selves any
more, we shall stand, as he sets us up to all eternity.

I must yet come down from the thoughts of this blessed eternity, and show you
Job tried out with his time, and earnestly calling, but, for a minutes respire
from his pains and sorrows, in the voice of the nineteenth verse.

Verse. 19. How long will thou not depart from me, nor let me alone, till I may
swallow down my spittle. In this verse Job makes application of the two former
to himself; as if he had said, seeing man is a creature so weak and unworthy
in himself, and I am such among the rest, why do thou visit me, and try me
every moment? How long shall it be ere thou depart from me? or, how long will thou not look away from me?

The word under another construction, signifies to look upon a (...) Quando
construitur cum (...) significat, aspicere, respicere cum detectatione, Genesis 4.
5. sed cum (...) significat avertere, recedere.
man with respect and complacency. So Genesis 4. 5. The Lord had respect unto, or
he looked graciously upon, Abel and his offering. But here to look away; and
so Isa. 22. 4. Look away from me, I will weep bitterly. And because they who
withdraw their eyes from us, are ready also to withdraw their presence from us,
therefore it signifies to depart. How long will thou not depart from me, etc.

But is this the voice of Job? Is he burdened with the presence of God? Or
does he think the time long, till God be gone from him? The wicked say unto
God depart from us (Chap. 21. 14.) And the Lord threatens this as the sorest
judgment against his own people, Jer. 6. 8. Be instructed O Jerusalem, lest
my soul depart from thee; And by the Prophet Hosea (Chap. 9. 12.) Woe also
unto them, when I depart from them. The promise of strongest consolation to the
Saints, is this, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. And the
very offer of a departure, did so afflict Moses, that he was ready to throw up
all, Lord, if thy presence go not along with us, carry us no further (Exodus
33. 15.) How earnestly do the servants of God deprecate the hiding of his
face, how bitterly have they complained upon those hidings, how importunately
have they prayed, that he would return, look on them, behold them, cause his
face to shine, and lift up the light of his countenance upon them? And is Job
so weary of Gods company, that he beggs of him to depart? Is the voice of Job?
Will a man that is in darkness, bid the Sun go from him? Or will a man that
is thirsty, say to a fountain, turn away from me?

I answer, the Lords presence may be considered two ways.

First, as his pleased comforting presence.

Secondly; as his angry afflicting presence. When Job says, How long will thou
not depart from me? his meaning is, How long will thou not withdraw thine
afflicting hand from me. We may expound it by that of David, Psalm. 39. 10.
Remove thy stroke Usquoque non parcis mihi. Vulg. Iram alio converte Jun.
away from me, I am consumed by the blow of thine hand. Hence some translate,
How long do thou not spare me? And another glosses, Turn thine anger away
from me. Or, as himself speaks of a third person (Chap. 14. 6.) Turn from him,
that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as a hireling his days. This sense
is given us fully in the next clause of the verse.

Nor let me alone, till I may swallow down my spittle. This is not a refusal
of suport from God in the way of his providence, by which he upholds every
creature: For the truth is, if Accipienda sunt haec de Deo affligente non
providente, and curante.
God should so let us alone, we of our selves are not able to swallow down our
spittle. We are insufficient barely of our selves, not only for spiritual
acts, but also for natural. We can, not only not pray, and here and believe,
and repent without the strength of Christ, but we cannot go, nor walk, nor
eat, nor drink, nor spit, nor swallow down our spittle without an assistance
(suitable to those acts) from him, for in him we live, and move, and have our
being. This letting alone, is like the departing before spoken, in the first
clause of the verse. As we use to say to a man assaulting or smiting us, Pray
let me alone; Such is Jobs meaning, pray give over these bitter chastenings,
leave off to wound or smite me any more.

The word signifies to loosen or untie that which is bound or (...) Dimit^ere
illud quod tenet ligat^m laxare dotores, dissolvere funi mos cruciatuum.
straightned, and so to deal more gently and tenderly, then before. The word is
used sometimes in a good sense, to note, that the Lord keeps close and
straight to his people, as being knit and bound to them, by the tie and knot of
his own love and free grace. (Josh. 1. 5.) I will never leave thee, or, let
thee loose from me. And, as it is applied in the negative to the close-keeping
of God to us in love; so in the affirmative, to our departure from God by
unbelief, Prove. 24. 10. If thou faintest in the day of adversity, or art
loosened from God, by fear and want of faith, thy strength is small. If thou
faintest thus in the time of straights and poverty, it argues, thou have a very
straight, narrow, poor spirit, That Is the elegancy of the original. Si
remissus suis^^ (...) ^^gustiae, angusta foritudo tua.


When Job desires to be let alone or loosened, his meaning is, loosen the bonds
of my affliction, take me off from the rack of these tortures and troubles. As
we are girded with strength, so also we are girded with weakness. Job speaks
of God in this word (Chap. 12. 21.) He we(...) the strength of the mighty; The
Hebrew is, He loses (...) of the strong. The same God, who loses the girdle
of our strength, loses the bands of our infirmity: and therefore Job prays,
O depart from me, loosen me, let me alone, let me go. Hence observe;

First, The Lord can make his own presence grievous to his own servants. In
his presence, there is fulness of joy, and at his right hand, there are
pleasures for evermore (Psalm. 16.) Yet he can make his presence to be the
fulness of sorrow, and give us pains with his right hand. As he can be to
his people like a Sun to warm and comfort them, so like a fire to consume and
burn them, as like a shield to defend, so like a sword to wound them. The Lord
is a Sun and a shield (Psalm. 84: 11.) yea, and he is sometime as a fire, and
a sword, even to those, who walk uprightly. The sinners in Zion are afraid,
fearfullnesse has surpised the hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with
devouring fire; who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings; That is,
who shall be able to bear the displeased presence of God, which makes him to
sinners, as a devouring fire, Isa. 33. 14. And thus the Saints in Sion are
sometimes afraid, and fearfullnesse surprises the upright in heart: Even they
cry out, how shall we dwell with this devouring fire, with this everlasting
burning? They especially who have slighted the presence of God, may quickly
feel the burden of it. Not only do they so, who say formally and in plain
terms, depart from us; but they also do it, in a great measure, who do not
prize the presence of God, who do not welcome and entertain him, in all his
approaches to them. If a friend come to your house, and you will not look upon
him, or speak to him, you bid him be gone, and your silence interprets his
non-acceptance with you. Then take heed of neglecting the comfortable, and
sanctifying presence of God, least you fall speedily into his afflicting
presence. The angry presence of God is never so terrible to us, as it is, after
our undervaluings of his gracious presence.

Secondly, note, if the presence of God chastning, be so grievous, what will
his presence be punishing and tormenting: If afflictions, which are but for
trial, and are all steeped in love, be so grievous; what, will those terrors
be, which all steept in pure, everlasting wrath? If his chastnings be so
intolerable to some of his dearest friends, what will his revenges be to all
his professed enemies? Wi^^^^ men are now burdened with the presence of God,
becau^^ (...) so holy, they say depart, for we desire not the knowledge ^^ thy
law, but hereafter they shall find the presence of God burdensome to them,
because he is so just; O how will they cry out, How long, shall not thy wrath
depart from us! How long will thou be angry, for ever, and shall thy jealousy
burn like fire for evermore? Yes, that it shall, They, who have so often said
in their hearts to God, depart from us, shall hear his voice, saying to them,
Depart from me ye cursed, etc. Ye, who have not loved my presence, shall be
banished from it for ever. Thirdly, observe;

Troublesome times are very tedious times to us. How long? The Psalmist under
some hidings and ecclipses of divine favor, thought himself in an everlasting
night, Has the Lurd forgotten to be gracious, etc. Will the Lord cast off for
ever? Psalm 77. 8.

Fourthly, observe from the latter branch.

That afflictions are bonds.

Eirst, They should bind and hold us fast from sin, and to our good
behavior. It is better to be bound fast with the cords of affliction, then to
be loose and at liberty in the ways of sin.

Secondly, They will bind us from taking in our worldly comforts; and sometimes
they do (which they ought not) bind us from taking in spiritual comforts.

Fifthly, observe,

That man cannot rescue himself out of the bands of affliction, till God
please to loosen him. If he bind none can untie; if he imprison, none can set
free; we cannot break his bands, nor cast away the cords of his afflictions
from us. He opens and no man shuts, he shuts and no man opens, Revel. 3. 7. Be
ye not mockers, says the Prophet, least your bands be made strong (Isa. 28.
22.) that is, stronger then they were. So I may say, be ye not strivers or
strugglers with God, for your bands are made strong. It is said, Exodus 4. 25,
26. That the Lord met Moses in the Inn, and sought to kill him. The Lord is
never to seek to do what he pleases; but thus he speaks after the manner of
men, who offer or assay at any business, They seek to do it. But Zipporah
having circumcised her son, He let Moses go, It is this word, He slacked or
loosened, having before, as it were arrested and attached him, or clapped him in
prison for making that great default, the neglect of Circumcision.

Sometimes we find the Lord himself speaking, as if he were at the mercy, or
under the power of man, and therefore calling (in this word) to be loosened or
let alone, Deuteronomy. 9. 14. Let me alone that I may destroy them. The prayer of
faith is as a band upon Gods hand, holding him so fast, that he seems, as one
that cannot strike or destroy, till a Moses will give him leave, by ceasing to
pray unto him. To be sure we are at Gods mercy, and under his power so, that
nothing but the prayer of faith can loosen us. And therefore Job does not
attempt to break the cords, or cut them asunder, nor seeks he to untie their
knots, but desires God himself to do it, let me alone, loosen me: I will be a
prisoner, till thou openest the door for my deliverance.

As Jephtahs daughter said to him, (Judge. 11. 37.) when he had bound himself
and her, in the bands of a rash vow, Let me alone for two months, or loosen me
from the engagement of my vow for two months, as if she had said, I will not
loose my self by a wilful refusal, but, do thou give me a willing
dispensation. So a godly man bespeaks the Lord in his straights, Loosen me
Lord. Unless God be pleased to loosen him, he will be contented, and (when in
a good frame of heart, and freeness of spirit) well-pleased with his bands. In
some sense he speaks, as Paul and Silas, when they were in prison (Acts 16.
37.) Let the Lord himself come and fetch us out. That is, let us see such means
of our enlargement and freedom from trouble, as may assure us, that the Lord
has loosened and enlarged us. A godly man had a thousand times rather be put
into a prison by God, than put himself into a paradise. He had rather be bound
by Gods hand, than loosened by his own. That place touched before, may reach
this sense (Prove. 24. 10.) if thou faintest (so we) or loosnest thy self in the
day of adversity, Thy strength is small; that is, the strengh of thy faith and
patience is small. There is nothing discovers our weakness more than striving
to break the cords of our afflictions. The stronger we are in faith, in love,
in humility, the more quietly we lie bound. Faith seeks ease and release only
in God: to say Lord loosen me, is a duty, to loosen our selves, is both our sin
and our punishment.

Till I may swallow down my spittle. Some conceive, that from this Hebrew word
(Rak) which (...) Saliva, unde quidam deducunt Raca, Mat. 5. 22. quod (...)
interpretantur, i. e. conspuendum vel dignum qui conspuatur Alii a (...) vacum
quasi cerebro vacuus and judicio carens. Drus.
we translate spittle, Raca is derived (Mat. 5. 22.) as if to call a man Raca,
were as much as to say, he is worthy to be spit upon, or, that one should spit
in his face: though others spring that word from Rik, which signifies empty, as
if it were, as much as to call a man, an empty fellow, without wit or brains,
or within one degree of a fool, which is the next word in Matthew.

But what is Jobs intendment, in desiring God to let him alone, Till he might
swallow down his spittle.

First, Some refer it to a bodily distemper, as if Job were troubled with a
Inter caetera mala Synanchen habuisse se perhibet. Hieron.
squinsie or sore throat, which hindered the swallowing of his spittle.

Dimitta me, ut gustum aliq^em hujus vitae capiam Albert.
Another takes it in a Philosophical notion; as if Job had said, Lord, let me
have some ease, that I may at least taste once more, what it is to live, or how
sweet life is. For that sense of taste works by the salival humor or spittle in
the mouth, which mixing with the juice or sap that is in meats, affects and
delights the palate.

Thirdly, these words are taken, as the description of a man ready to die, who
is disabl'd, either to swallow his spittle, or to void it. As if he had said, I
am now even at the point of death, let me alone a little; David's prayer comes
near this sense, Psalm. 39. 13. O spare me that I may recover strength, before I
go hence, and be no more.

Fourthly, It may be taken proverbially, and that two ways.

First, To note the shortest time, even so much as may serve a Serno
proverbialis talis est, neque ad scalpendas aures mihi otium est.
man to spit. As if he had said, O let me have a little intermission, a little
respit; such is the sense of that phrase, Chap. 9. 18. He will not suffer me to
take my breath. And the like are those, used in some countries, I have not
leisure or time to scratch my ear, or to pare my nails. My sorrows know no
interim: my fever is one continued fit, I have no well days, no nor a good
hour; Ne tantillum quidem temporis est quo^ non tenter a^te. Coc.
therefore let me at least have so much time of ease, as I may swallow my
spittle, let me have the shortest time. That I may once more know (though but
for a moment) what it is to be without pain. To whlch interpretation, that also
subscribes, which makes these words to be a circumlocution for silence. For
while a man is swallowing his spittle, his speech stops: he cannot bring up his
words, and let down the spittle at the same time; so his meaning is, I am
forced to complain continually, I would be silent, and forbear speaking, but my
grief will not suffer me.

The second proverbial understanding of the word, is, that they Elegans
proverbialis loquutio ad denotandum diligentem in alium intuitum quo minim as
in alio discernet actiones. Saliva fere imperceptibiliter obsorvetur.
import, a very strict watch held upon another, in all his motions: so that he
cannot stir a finger, or move his tongue (silently) in his mouth unobserved. If
I do but stir my tongue, to swallow my spittle (which is one of the most
unperceivable acts of man) thou take notice. O do not hold so strict a hand,
and so curious an eye upon me. Let me have a little liberty, do not examine
every failing, do not question me upon the least infirmity.

From the former proverbial exposition. Observe, first,

Afflictions are continued upon some without any intermission. Job had not so
much whole skin, as one might set a pin on, nor so much whole time, as a man
might spit in. Every hour brought a wound with it, and the renewing of every
moment, renewed his affliction. Observe secondly;

A short refreshing may be a great mercy. Dives in hell desires not a large
draught, but a drop of water, which alas! could not have eased him so long, as
a man is swallowing down his spittle. The eternity of pain in hell, shall not
find so much abatement, as that, either in time, or in degree, Every affliction
in this life, by how much it is with less intermission, by so much the more
like it is to hell, and every comfort by how much the more it is unbroken, and
without stops, by so much it is the more like to Heaven. Consider then your
mercies, who have un-interrupted mercies, days and years of ease, and not
pained so long, as a man is swallowing down his spittle: your mercies are like
the glory, and the joy of Heaven.

From the latter proverbial exposition. Note,

That God, observes the least, the most secret motions of man. He tells our
steps, our wanderings; and those not only corporal, but moral and spiritual. He
knows how many steps our hearts fetch every day, and how far they travel, Thou
have searched and known me, (says David, Psalm. 139. 1, 2.) and this search is
not made in the out-rooms only, but in the inner parlour and closest closets,
Thou understandest my thoughts, and those (not only present, or produced, but
to come and unborn) thou know them a far off. What can escape that eye, which
a thought cannot? And he that sees man swallowing down his spittle, how shall
not he both hear and see him, coffing up and spitting out the rottenness and
corruption, the filth and phlegm of his sinful heart?

JOB Chap. 7. Verse. 20, 21. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserver of men? why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a
burden to my self?

And why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity?
for now shall I sleep in the dust, and thou shall seek me in the morning, but I
shall not be.


JOB having in the former part of this Chapter contested with his friends, and
expostulated the matter with God: now turns himself into another posture, even
to humble his soul, and make confession of his sin. He had justified himself
against the accusations of men, but now he accuses, and judges himself in the
presence of his God. He will a while forget his sorrows, and bethink himself of
his sins, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?

The words may be taken two ways.

1. As a confession or a prayer. 2. As a confession or a grant.
I shall first open them under the notion of a repenting prayer and confession
of sin.

I have sinned.] As if he had said, Lord, if thou hold me thus long upon the
rack of this affliction, to gain a confession of me, to make me confess, here I
am ready to do it, I do it, I have sinned.

The word signifies to miss the mark we aim at, or the way, wherein we would
walk. And so it is put strictly, for sins of infirmity, (...) significat
errare, aberrare, declinare, deflectere a via vel scope.
when the purpose of a man's heart is (like the Archers, when he draws his bow)
to hit the white, or (like the honest travelers in his journey) to keep the
right way, and yet he miscarries, and is drawn aside.

I have sinned. But is this a sufficient confession? What! to say only in
general, I have sinned. Did not hard-hearted Pharaoh (Ezod. 9. 25)
False-hearted Saul (1 Samuel 15. 24.) and Traitor-Judas) Matthew. 27. 4.) make as
good a confession as this. Every one of these said, I have sinned, and what
does Job say more? It is surely no great cost nor pain to sinful nature, to
bring up such a confession as this.

I answer; First, a general confession may be a sound confession; It is one
thing not to express particular sins, with the circumstances of those sins, and
another thing purposely to conceal them. I grant, implicit confession may be
as dangerous as implicit faith. And to digg in the earth, and hide our sins in
the Napkin of our excuses, is worse than to hide our Talents in the Napkin of
our idleness. And as it is most dangerous, knowingly to conceal sin from God,
so it is very dangerous to do it through ignorance or inadvertency; Some
confess sin in general terms only, because they know not what their sins are,
or have quite forgot them; As Nebuchadnezzar called the Astrologers, and
Sorcerers, and Chaldeans, and told them he had dreamed a dream, but he could
not tell what it was, For the thing was gone from him, Dan. 2. 5. Some such
there are, who can, or, will only say, They have sinned, they have sinned; but
what, they cannot tell, or they do not remember, Those things are gone from
them. That which is written of the learned Bellarmine, a great Cardinal, and a
Champion for Auricular, particular Confession of sin to man, seems very
strange, That when he lay upon his deathbed, and the Priest after the Popish
manner, came to absolve him, he had nothing to confess: at last he thought of
some slight extravagancies of his youth, which was all he had to say of his
own miscarriages: We see a man may de a Scholar in all the knowledge of the
world, of nature, and of Scripture, and yet not know his own heart, nor be
studied or read in himself. He that is so, in a spiritual notion, can never
want particular matter in his most innocent days to confess before the Lord,
and to shame himself for. What though he has escaped the pollutions of the
world, and is cleansed from the filthiness of the flesh? yet he knows that
still in his flesh there dwells no good thing, and that in his spirit, there
are, at least touches of, many spiritual filthinesses, as pride, unbelief, etc.
besides his great deficiencies in every duty, and in his love to Jesus Christ,
which is the ground of all. So then, in any of these senses, to confess sin
only in general, is a sinful confession. And yet Job made a holy confession
here, and so did the Publican (Luke 18.) when he smote his breast and said
only thus, God be merciful to me a sinner.

For secondly, though to speak a general confession be an easy matter, and
every man's work; yet to make a general confession, is a hard matter, a work
beyond man. As no man (in a spiritual sense) can say, Jesus is the Lord, but by
the Holy Ghost; (1 Cor. 12. 3.) so no man can say (in a Holy manner) I have
sinned, but by the Holy Ghost; Good and bad, believers and unbeleevers, speak
often the same good words, but they cannot speak the same things, nor from the
same principles; nature speaks in the one, in the other, grace. The one may
say, very passionately, he has sinned, and sometimes almost drown his words in
tears, but the other says, repentingly, I have sinned, and floods his heart
with Godly sorrows.

Thirdly, to clear it yet more, the general confession of the Saints, have
these four things in them.

First, Besides the fact, they acknowledge the blot, that there is much
defilement and blackness in every sin; that it is the only pollution and
abasement of the creature.

Secondly, They confess the fault, that, they have done very ill in what they
have done, and very foolishly, even like a beast that has no understanding.

Thirdly, They confess a guilt contracted by what they have done, that their
persons might be laid liable to the sentence of the law for every such act, if
Christ had not taken away the curse and condemning power of it. Confession of
sin (in the strict nature of it) puts us into the hand of justice; though
through the grace of the new Covenant, it puts us into the hand of mercy.

Fourthly, Hence the Saints confess all the punishments threatened in the Book
of God to be due to sin; and are ready to acquit God, whatsoever he has
awarded against sinners: O Lord righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us
confusion of face, as at this day, to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, Dan. 9. 7.

And, as in this confession, for the matter, they acknowledge, the blot, the
fault, the guilt, the punishment of sin: so for the manner (which sets the
difference yet wider between the general confessions of wicked and Godly men)
they confess;

First freely; Acknowledgements of sin are not extorted by the pain and trouble
which seazeth on them, as in Pharaoh, Saul and Judas. But when God gives them
best days, they are ready to speak worst of themselves: And when they receive
most mercies from God, then God receives most and deepest acknowledgements of
sin from them. They are never so humbled in the sight of sin, as when they are
most exalted in seeing the salvations of the Lord. The goodness of God leads
them to this repentance, they are not driven to it, by wrath and thunder.

Secondly, they confess, feelingly; when they say they have sinned, they know
what they say. They taste the bitterness of sin, and groan under the
burdensomeness of it, as it passes out in confession. A natural man's
confessions run through him, as water through a pipe, which leaves no
impression or sent there, nor do they (upon the matter) any more taste what sin
is, then the pipe does of what relish water is. Or if a natural man feels any
thing in confession, it is the evil of punishment feared, not the evil of his
sin committed.

Thirdly, they confess sincerely; they mean what they say, and are in earnest
both with God and their own Souls. Blessed is the man in whose spirit there is
no guile, Psalm. 32. 2. The natural man casts out his sins by confession, as
Seamen cast their goods overboard in a storm, which in the calm they wish for
again. They so cast out the evil spirit, that they are content to receive him
again when he returns, though it be with seven worse then himself. Even while
they confess sin with their lips, they keep it, like a sweet bit, under their
tongues: And wish it well enough, while they speak it very ill.

Fourthly, they confess beleevingly; while they have an eye of sorrow upon sin,
they have an eye of Faith upon Christ: Judas said he had sinned in betraying
innocent blood (Mat. 27. 4.) but instead of washing in that blood, he defiles
himself with his own, he goes away and hangs himself. No wicked man in the
world (continuing in that state) did ever mix Faith with his sorrows, or
believing, with confessing, he had sinned. So much for the clearing of the
words, and the sense of this general confession. Hence observe, first,

While a Godly man maintains his innocence, and justifies himself before men,
he willingly acknowledges his infirmity, and judges himself before God. Job had
spent much time in wiping off the aspersions cast upon him by his friends, but
he charges himself with his failings in the sight of God. Secondly observe,

God speaks better of his servants then they do of themselves. When God
speaks of Job, we find not one blot in all his character, all is commendation,
nothing of reproof. He says (c. 1. v. 21.) in all this Job sinned not: but for
all that, Job says, I have sinned: A hypocrite has good thoughts of himself,
and speaks himself fair; He flatters himself in his own eyes, until his
iniquity be found to be hateful, Psalm. 36. 2. A godly man thinks and speaks
low of himself, he accuses himself in his own eyes, though his integrity be
found very acceptable with the Lord. Thirdly observe,

The holiest man on earth, has cause to confess that he has sinned.
Confession is the duty of the best Christians. First, The highest form of
believers in this life, is not above the actings of sin; though the lowest of
believers, is not under the power of it. And if the line of sinning be as long
as the line of living, then the line of confessing must be of the same length
with both. While the Ship leaks, the pump must not stand still. And so long as
we gather ill humors, there will be need of vomits and purgings.

Secondly, Confession is a soul-humbling duty, and the best have need of that,
for they are in most danger of being lifted up above measure. To preserve us
from those self-exaltations, the Lord sometimes sends the Messenger of Satan to
buffet us by temptations, and commands us to buffet our selves often by
confession.

Thirdly, Confession affects the heart with sin, and ingages the heart against
it. Every confession of the evil we do, is a new obligation not to do it any
more. The best in their worst part, have so much freedom to sin, that they
have need enough to be bound from it in variety of bonds.

Fourthly, Confession of sin, shows us more clearly our need of mercy, and
indears it more to us. How good and sweet is mercy to a soul, that has tasted,
how evil, and how bitter a thing it is to sin against the Lord. How welcome,
how beautiful is a pardon, when we have been viewing the ugliness of our own
guilt?

Fifthly, Confession of sin, advances Christ in our hearts. How does it declare
the riches of Christ, when we are not afraid to tell him, what infinite sums of
debt we are in, which he only, and he easily can discharge? how does it
commend the healing virtue of his blood, when we open to him such mortal wounds
and sicknesses, which he only, and he easily can cure? Woe be to those who
commit sin abundantly, that grace may abound; but it is our duty to confess
sin abundantly, that grace may abound.

Lastly, Though we need not confess sin at all to inform God: he knows our
sins, though we will not make them known; and has an eye to see, though we
should not have a tongue to confess. Though (I say) we confess not to inform
God what we are, or what we have done, yet, we must confess to glorify God.
While we shame our selves, we honor him. My son (says Joshua to Achan. c.
7. v. 19) give I pray thee glory to the Lord God of Israel; and make confession
unto him: Every attribute of God, receives this gift of glory by man's
confession. Justice is glorified, and mercy is glorified, patience is
glorified, and holiness is glorified. Holiness is glorified in opposing sin,
and patience in sparing the sinner; mercy is glorified in pardoning sin, and
justice in receiving satisfaction at the hand of Christ for the pardon of it.
Fourthly observe.

Holy confession of sin, leads the way to gracious pardoning of sin, Job
begins the next verse with a vehement prayer for pardon. And why do thou not
pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity. Sin concealed and kept
close, grows upon us: And it grows three ways; First, in the strength of it;
Secondly, in the guilt of it; Thirdly, in the terror and vexation of it, Psalm.
32. 3, 4. When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the
day long. Confession is a means to obtain the abatement of sin, in all three.
The strength of it is weakened, the guilt removed, and the terror overcome.
Then hear the counsel of the Prophet (Isa. 43. 26.) declare that thou may
be justified.

Thus far of the words as they are a confession of sin. I shall now handle
them, as they are a concession or a grant that he had sinned; and so the sense
may be given thus: I have sinned. what shall I do unto thee? As if he had
said; Let it be granted, or subpose that I have sinned, and sinned as deeply
as my friends have charged me; sup^^^e I have been as wicked as they imagine,
what th^n if this were my case, what shall I do unto thee O thou preserver of
men:

The later words plainly import a question, What shall I do unto thee? But the
sense of the question is not so plain: The question may be taken two ways:
Either affirmatively, or negatively. Take it affirmatively; and so the sense
is, what shall I do? that is, Lord direct, me, council me, order me, teach me
what becomes me to do in such a case, in such a sinful condition as I,
either, confess my self to be in, or, am supposed to be in. That Is the
affirmative sense.

What shall I do?] The word which we translate [do] signifies (...) a radice
pagnal, respondet Graeco (...), est agere cum energia and effectu, Piscat.
working or doing, under a two fold qualification.

1. Working with great willingness and readiness of mind; and hence it is
applied to the workings of sin in natural men, who work with the greatest
freedom that can be. Man sins naturally, and therefore freely: he is carried
on with a full swing, with tide and wind he sins, nothing in himself
contradicting or giving a contrary vote: He is a true worker of iniquity, Psalm.
5. 5.

2. Working with energie and success, and the doing of a thing not only
effectually, but willingly, Numb. 23. 23. What has God wrought? When God
works, he works thoroughly; he does not his business to halves. So Isa. 26. 12.
Thou have wrought all our works in us; that is, thou have brought them to
pass, they have succeeded through thy help, and the influences of thy blessing.

The word being taken in this height of sense, and the question for an
affirmation, What shall I do? that is, show me, direct me what to do; we may
observe from it, First, That,

What to do in case of sin, is a point of the highest consideration, I have
sinned, what shall I do? If ever we have need to go and ask counsel, to sit
down and debate the matter with our sevles or others, it is, when we have
sinned. Such is the nature of sin, and such the consequences, that it calls us
to highest consideration what to do about it. Matters of great consequence, are
matters of great consultation: Sin has an influence upon an eternity. If any
thing be more worthy your thoughts then that, let it have them.

Secondly, Look upon the question as following Jobs confession: Observe thence,

That sincere confession of sin, makes the soul very active and inquisitive
about the remedies of sin. I have sinned; the very next word is, What shall I
do? Many make confession of sin, who are never troubled about the cure and
redress of sin; Lord what shall I do? is not the next question to, Lord, I
have sinned. Nay, it may be the next action is, to sin over the same sin, they
have confessed. As soon as those Jews heard of the foulness of their sin in
crucifying Christ, and of the sadness of their condition; their question is
like this of Job, what shall we do? what shall we do that we may be saved? As
Christ speaks to the woman of Samaria (Job. 4. 10.) when he offered her the
water of life, If thou did know the gift of God, and who it is that speaks
unto thee, thou would have asked, etc. That is, if thou were sensible of the
excellency and virtue of this water, and thy need of it, thou would be very
inquisitive how to get it, how to have a taste of it. As in regard of Christ,
and the benefits we have by him; so of sin, and the evils which come by it:
When a man has confessed and acknowledged his sin, we may say to him, if thou
did but know what thou have confessed, if thou did but know what thou have
acknowleged, thou would presently be asking, how shall I get free? how shall
I get clear of these sins which are so deadly, poisonous, destroying and
condemning? He that is but sensible what the wound of sin is, will never be at
rest, never give over enquiring, til he has found a plaster or a medicine for
it. He that knows what he says, when he says I have sinned, will resolve, as
David in another case, that his eyes shall not have a wink of sleep, till he
sees where to have help against it.

Thirdly, In that he says, what shall I do? Observe,

That a soul truly sensible of sin, is ready to submit to any terms which God
shall put upon him. What shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? Put
what terms thou will upon me, I am ready to accept them. That was the sense of
their question (Acts 2. 32.) what shall we do? show us the way, let it be what
it will, we will not stand making of conditions, we will not pick and choose,
this we will do, and that we will not do, this we will submit unto, and that
we will refuse; no, let the Lord write what articles he pleases, we intend not
to debate, but yield and subscribe unto them. When the Jailer found himself in
the bonds of his iniquity, he was ready to enter into any bonds of duty, Acts
16. 30. Sirs, what must I do to be saved?

Lastly, From the question in the affirmative, Observe,

That God is to be consulted and enquired after in all doubtful cases,
especially in our sin-cases. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserver of men? He calls upon God, to know what he should do, and to learn
what course he should take. Though, when we have opportunity to speak to men,
that is good, and a duty; yet we must not rest in the counsels of men, what to
do in sin-cases: God must be consulted. After the people had committed
idolatry in making the Calfe, you have sinned (says Moses) and now I will go
up unto the Lord, that I may make an atonement for you; I will go up to the
Lord, that I may understand from him, what course to take for the removing of
this sin, though we have not such a mount to go up unto, as Moses then had to
speak to God; yet there are ways for the soul in all sincases, to make
addresses unto God; A sinner may say, I will go to the Lord, and make my
atonement: whatsoever advice and direction we receive from men, we must
enquire whether it be an advice and counsel established in Heaven. And the
reason is clear, God is the person offended in every sin, and therefore he
must be consulted about the remedy of sin. Again, God only can resolve us what
will please him; we may pitch upon a wrong course, and take a wrong way; we in
stead of pacifying God, may provoke him? in stead of satisfying, further
displease him: Therefore we must say, when we have sinned, Lord what will thou
have us to do? his advice will lead us to Christ for ease and peace.

So far for the question taken in the affirmative sense, What shall I do
unto thee? show me what I shall do, and I will readily submit unto it.

Secondly, Take the question negatively, what shall I do unto thee? And so I
find two senses of it.

First, Some render it thus, what have I done against thee? and Quid tibi neeui
ant quid te lasi, Olymp.
then the meaning is this, I have done nothing against thee, or I have not hurt
thee by sinning: What have I done against thee? wherein have I injured thee,
that thou layst thy hand thus severely upon me in these grievous afflictions,
both upon my soul and body? I am hurt, what have I hurt thee? There is a truth
in this: though I take it not for the truth of this place. A man may say
Paeecana nostra beautm illam naturam tabefactare non possunt.
when he has sinned what hurt have I done unto God? and yet all the hurt and
wrong which God receives, he receives by sin. Our sins are no hurt unto God, by
abating any thing of his happiness, or fulness, or intrinsicall essential
honor; take it thus, and our sins cannot hurt God: All the darts of our sins,
fall infinitely short of God, they cannot reach him, so, as to annoy him: And
we have that language expressly in the 35 Chapter of this book of Job, ver 6.
If thou do sin what do thou against him? (that is, thou do nothing
against God, as a real damage to him) or if thy transgressions be multiplied,
what do thou unto him? Sin as many sins as you can, you cannot impare the
happiness of God, or diminish his greatness: he is out of the reach of the
creature in that sense. As on the other side, if a man be never so holy and
good, or do never so many acts of righteousness, yet God has no good or gain
by it, we cannot advantage God by our holiness; and that is the language of
this Scripture too, Job 35. 7. If thou be righteous, what give thou him; or
what receives he of thine hand? We make no addition to the happiness of God
by all our holiness, Job. 22. 3. Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou
art righteous? Or any gain unto him that thou make thy ways perfect? That
which is infinite cannot increase, neither can it be increased. God is a above
all gain and loss, above all accesses of pleasure or pain. When the
Scripture says, he is delighted in the services of the Saints, and takes
pleasure in his people, we must understand them in the same sense, as those
Scriptures, which describe him displeased with the sins of men, angry and
grieved, because of their provocations. All the motions of Gods delight or
grief, pleasednesse or displeasure, are only expressions toward the creature,
not any impressions upon himself. But I shall let that sense pass.

Secondly, in the negative, take the question thus, What shall I do unto thee?
Or, as the Septuagint reads it, What can I do unto thee? That is, I can do
nothing to thee? Lord I have sinned, and if thou seek for satisfaction at my
hands, I am able to make none. And so he speaks like a poor, undone, broken
man, to his rich creditour arresting him for a dept, which he is unable to pay.
The poor man falls down at his feet, and says, Sir, I confess I owe you a
great sum, you have my bonds, I confess my hand and seal, but what shall I
do unto you? I cannot pay you a penny, I have nothing, I have lost all, I am
not worth a groat, what will you have of me? This sounds such a kind of
melting, pitiful language, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee; O thou
preserver of men? Lord, when I look into my stock, into my treasure and
revenues, I see I have nothing to satisfy this debt of sin, I have run in,
and stand engaged to thy Majesty for; what can I pay thee? And so the word
[doe] signifies a retribution or recompense; so it is used in the second verse
of this Chapter, where he speaks of the hireling, waiting for his work, that
is, for the reward of recompense of his work, the payment of his wages. What
shall I do? is as much, as, what shall I pay, or what shall I render? This is
a due debt, but I have nothing to pay, no way of making satisfaction, for all
the damage I have put thy holy Majesty to, by my sins.

Or thus, there may be a threefold negation in the Question, What shall I do
unto thee?

First, I can do nothing to escape thy power, I cannot get a way from thee, J
cannot rescue my self from under thy hand.

Secondly, I can do nothing to satisfy thy justice.

Thirdly, I can do nothing, to pacify thine anger. J cannot only not pay the
dept, but I cannot appease thee, or turn away thy displeasure in the least
degree.

From the Question taken in this sense, we may observe. First, That,

The holiest man on the earth by all his sufferings and doings cannot satisfy
the justice of God for one sin. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee? When
the Angels had sinned, what could they do unto God, in this respect? These
three negations lay upon them, and do lie to this day, and shall to all
eternity. They sinned but once, yet could they not escape out of the hand of
God. Though spirits and powers, yet they could not maintain their state
against the power of God, and are therefore cast into prison, and reserved in
chains of darkness to the judegement of the great day. They could not pacify
the wrath of God toward them, God is as highly displeased, and his wrath burns
as hot against them, as ever. Now if sinning Angels could do nothing to God,
what can sinful man do? The Question is put Micha 6. 6. Where with shall I
come before the Lord? And bow my self before the high God? Shall I come before
him with burnt-offerings? with calves of a year old? will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of rams? or with ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my
firstborn for my transgression? the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
These Questions are denials; come not before God with any of these. Then what
is it, that God does require? He has showed thee, what is good, to do
judgment and righteousness, to walk humbly with thy God. But why these
things? What, though I cannot make a price for my sin with calves and rams, and
rivers of oil, though my children will not be accepted as a ransom for my
transgressions, yet can I make a price for them, out of justice and
righteousness and humble walking? No, not out of these neither. The Lord does
not require these, for the paiments of our debt, as we are sinners, but for the
paiments of duty, as we are creatures. There is a double debt to God: a debt to
the justice of God for sins committed, and a debt to the law of God for duties
enjoined. The former no man is able to pay, but with eternal sufferings. The
latter, the Saints (through grace) do pay by their daily holy actings.

There is a threefold deficiency in all that man can do, to satisfy the
justice of God.

Frist, all is imperfect and defiled, our services smell of the vessel,
thorough which they pass, and taste of the caske into which they are put.
There is a stamp of our sinfullness even upon our holy things. And can that
which is sinful satisfy for sin?

Secondly, whatsoever we do is a debt, before we do it. All our duties are
owing before we perform them. And can we pay the debt of sin, by those duties
which were due, though sin had never been committed?

Thirdly, The greatest deficiency is this, our works want the stamp of Gods
appointment for that purpose. God has no where set up man's righteousness, as
satisfaction for man's unrighteousness. Hence, if it should be supposed, we had
performed perfect righteousness according to the whole will of God commanded,
yet we could not satisfy the justice God offended, unless God had said, that
he would accept that way of satisfaction; it is the appointment and institution
of God, which renders what we do acceptable unto himself. Surely, all that
Jesus Christ did or suffered for us in the flesh, had not satisfied the justice
of God, if God had not appointed that Christ should come to do and suffer
those things for the satisfying of his justice. It was the compact between
Christ and his Father, which made him a Savior, Sacrifice and offering thou
did not desire. Sacrifices were refused by God, it being impossible, that
they should purge sin (Heb. 10. 4.) Then the ear of Christ was opened or
bored; as a servant, according to the law in that case, Exodus 21. 6. to receive
and do the will of his Father. Or, as the Seventy interpret, which the Apostle
follows, God prepared him a body. Then Christ undertakes the work, And said,
lo I come to do thy will O God. Why? In the volume of the book it is written
of me. That is, thou have decreed and ordained from everlasting; The record is
clear for it, that I am he, whom thou have ordained to do thy will: Hence the
Apostle concludes at the 10th verse, That we are sanctified (that is, saved) by
that will through the offering of the body of Jesus once for all: As inserting,
that the very offering of the body of Jesus Christ could not save us, but by
the will and ordination of God. His hanging and dying on the cross had not
delivered us from death, unless it had been written in the volume of the
Book. There is nothing satisfactory, but what the law, or the will of the
Lawgiver makes, or agrees to accept, as satisfactorie. In the volume of the
book, there is nothing written, which appoints man such a work, and therefore
he cannot do it.

There is some what to be done by way of thankfulness, but nothing can be
done by way of payment. That question (Psalm. 116. 12.) affirms as much, What
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits? We must render unto the Lord
for his benefits; but we cannot render to the Lord for our sins. We ought to
take up the Cup of Thanksgiving: but Christ has, and he alone was able, and he
alone was ordained to take and drink the Cup of Satisfying.

Secondly, observe (which depends upon the former.)

That pradon and forgiveness of sin, come in at the door of free grace.
Free Grace does all. What can I do? J can do nothing, O thou preserver of men;
J can only (nor that without thy help) acknowledge my sin: it must be thine
infinite goodness to pardon it. When a man has traveled through all duties
and doings, he must at last sit down in Gods love, and rest in this, that God
is merciful to poor sinners, Isai. 55. 1. Come unto me, O all ye that are
thirsty, come without money or without price: There is nothing in the creature
that God requires as a price of his favor: his milk and his honey, his bread and
his water are al gifts and bounties unto his people. He calls us to buy these
because we shall have them, as willingly from God, as any things from man, for
our money; and he calls it a buying without money, because no value can be set
upon it high enough, nor any heart receive it freely enough. To offer money,
that is, to think to obtain any of that favor, by what we do, is the most
dangerous offer in the world. We read how dreadful the issue was to Simon
Magus, when he offered money, for the gifts of the holy Ghost, and yet those
gifts were such, as a man may have, and go to hell with them, for they were but
gifts of miracles and of healing, and the like: But this gift of the favor and
love of God in the pardon of sin, is such a gift, as whosoever has it, is sure
and safe for ever: And therefore (the gift being much more precious than that
of Simon Magus) Take heed of offering this kind of money for it, your works and
doings. To do so is the worst Simonie in the world. Better offer literal
money for those gifts of the holy Ghost, then this figurative money for the
favor of God in the pardon of sin. What Peter threatened Simon Magus, may be
affirmed of them. Their money must perish with them, That is, their prayers and
tears, their sorrows and their humblings, their alms and good deeds,
forasmuch as they have thought, that this gift of pardon may be obtained by
such money. They have neither part nor lot in that mercy, for their hearts are
not right in the sight of God. A good work trusted to, is as mortal, as a sin
unrepented of.

Again, There is somewhat to be done, when we have sinned but nothing to be
paid. That Is Gospel-language, when a man has sinned, to say, What shall I do?
Those converts in the Acts who enquired, What shall we do? were told by the
Apostles of some what to be done, Repent and be baptized, believe and thou
shall be saved. These are ways wherein salvation is tendered, not works for
which it is bestowed. It is a dangerous error, so to lift up the grace of God,
as to deny the industry of man through grace, and because he can do nothing by
way of satisfaction, that, therefore he must do nothing. The Apostles gave
Gospel-counsell, yet when men asked them, what shall we do to be saved? They
said not, ye must do nothing, God will save you by his free grace: no, they
called them to repent and believe, etc. Take heed, when ye have sinned, to say
we need not mourn for sin, we need not be humbled, we need not repent, for,
Lord, what can we do unto thee, O thou Savior of men? These are the inferences
of our own spirits, not of the Spirit of Christ. They who lift up the grace of
Christ, to lessen the necessity of gracious actings in themselves, show they
know not the meaning of his grace, and have not indeed tasted how gracious the
Lord is. To deny our own righteousness, and to be very active in the ways of
righteousness is the due Gospeltemper. The Apostle, Phil. 3. 8. counts all
things but loss and dung; all duties and humblings, all legal righteousness
and obedience, not that he refused righteousness, or neglected duties, but he
would not mingle them with Christ, or bring them in as contributions to the
purchase of blessedness. Our righteousness and holy duties are dung and
dross in justification; but they are gold and precious things in
sanctification: without these, we cannot walk worthy of our holy calling, or,
as it becomes the Gospel of Christ.

So much for these words, what shall I do unto thee?

O thou preserver of men! Here is the Compellation, or the title, under which
Job bespeaks the Lord (and it is a royal one) The preserver of men. (...)
Narsar conservavit, observa. vit, custodivit, dise dit, de qualibet custodia
dicitur and significat etiam se ris vectebasque elaudere licet proprie custos
(...) dicitur, sed confundi scias. Drus.
The words signifies, both to preserve and to observe; and hence it is applied
to our keeping the law of God, Psalm. 119. 22. I have kept thy testimonies, I
have kept them, by observation, that is, I have obeyed thy Commandments. The
word is often applied to God, in reference to man's protection and preservation,
Deuteronomy. 32. 10. Moses describes the care of God over his people Israel, He found
them in the wilderness (as a people wandering and going astray) and he kept
them as the apple of his eye; that is, he looked to them and had a continual
tender care over them. So Psalm. 17. 8. Keep me as the apple of thine eye.

The Septuagint render it, O thou observer of men; What shall I do unto thee,
O thou who art the observer and looker into the very hearts of men? Lord says
he, what will thou have me to do? Thou look quite through me, and see all
that is in me, I (...), qui prespectam habis mentem hominum Sept.
need not declare my self unto thee, thou know me altogether, Thou who art
the searcher of the heart, and the trier of the reins; Thou who art a most
vigilant watcher over all my ways, what have I done, or spoken, but thou
know and can easily observe. Thus Job speaks at the 14th of this book,
verse. 16. Thou numberest my steps; a man observes another curiously, when he
tells how many steps he treads, it is an expression, noting the exactest
observation. Solomon joins the act of keeping with observing, Prove. 24. 12. If
thou say, behold he knows it not (this is the refutation of an Atheist)
does not he that pondereth the hears, consider it, and he that keeps thy
soul, does not he know? He that preserves us in our ways, must needs see us
in all our ways.

Again, Preserving or keeping may be understood two ways.

First, There is a preserving or keeping of man, that he shall not escape. And

Secondly, A preserving or keeping of man, that he shall not Custos hominu, sc.
qui homine talibus malis quasi quadam custodia includis it non sit effugium.
take hurt. Some understand it in the first sense, O thou preserver of men!
that is, O thou, who art so strict a keeper and watcher over men, that they
cannot escape thine hand. A man is said to be in safe custody, when he is a
prisoner, and so the sense is thus given, Lord, thou have me fast enough, I
cannot break away from thee, I am locked up within iron-gates and bars, what
would thou have me do unto thee? Thou may put what conditions thou
please upon me, I must submit. Such language we have (Lam. 3. 5, 7.) which
may illustrate this, He has builded against me, and compassed me with gall and
travel, he has hedged me about, that I cannot get out, he has made my chain
heavy. You see, he speaks of God (as we may speak with reverence) as of the
master of a prison, who says to his underofficers, there is such a one, look
to him well make his chain heavy, that he may not get a way, put him in a
place, where there is a strong wall, least he break prison. This sense of the
word makes Job speaking like Jeremy, He has builded against me, he has
compassed me about, he has made my chain heavy upon me.

But the second sense, according to the letter of our Translation, is most
clear and apt, O thou preserver of men! Thou, who keep man, least he take
hurt or fall into danger; As if Job had bespoke God, thus, Thou art the Savior
and protector of men, thou have not only given man a being, but thou providest
for his well-being: thou art a preserver of our outward estates, and a
preserver of our spiritual estates; A God, in whom we live, move, and have our
being, as well, as we receive being, life and motion from thee; and therefore
seeing such is thy nature, and this thy office, to be a preserver of men, what
would thou have me to do unto thee? Why do thou thus destroy me, and
break me to pieces? Why do thou follow me with affliction upon affliction,
till I am utterly ruined and undone? Thus Jacob (Gen, 28. 15.) If thou will
keep me in the way that I shall go, he makes a vow to God, and indents or
articles with God to be kept and preserved by him, The word there is Thomer,
but that and this are used promiscuously, as Psalm. 121. 4. The keeper of
Israel, In the word of the text, and Psalm. 31. 23. The Lord preserves the
faithful; he preserves them, from the reach of dangers and troubles
incompassing them on every side.

So then in this title, we have the work and office of God held forth, the
second act of his power. The first is the act of creation, the second is this
act of preservation or providence. Preservation or ptovidence is a continued
creation. Observe from this title; First.

Man wants a preserver. If God having made man, and set him in the world, had
left him to his own keeping, what would become of him? When God trusted man to
go a little alone, and did not hold a special hand of preservation over him,
to keep him from or in temptation, how quickly did he fall and loose himself?
Man like a little child (which if the mother or the nurse leaves alone
unwatched or uneyed) runs into dangers and deaths every moment. Man is a weak
creature, therefore he needs a preserver. Again, man (as fallen especially) is
a foolish creature, he has no understanding to guide himself, he is as
ignorant as a child (if God leave him) how to dispose of his own ways, and
order his goings; The way of man is not in himself, neither is it in him that
goes to direct his own steps.

Lastly, Man walks in the midst of enemies. He is beset with dangers, therefore
he needs a protector; what would become of a man, living in a throng of
adversaries, were it not that he has a God, whose name is the preserver of men?

It is good for us to know God by this Name in every letter of it, in the full
extent of it.

First, Immediately, his own hand and outstretched arm, is our safety, Zech.
2. 5. I will be unto Jerusalem a wall of fire round Mirus sane Dei amor in
populu suum, mira previdemia Sanct. in Zech. 2,
about; If you want a wall, I will be your wall, my immediate providence shall
be your defense, rather then you shall not be defended. Is my strength the
strength of stones, or is my flesh brass? was Jobs question, Chap. 6. 12. We
may resolve it, the strength of God is more then the strength of stones, and
he, The Spirit is more firm then brass. The Romans in their wars used to
call out the Tutelar gods of those Cities they besieged, etc. as believing them
a stronger defense to those places, than walls or forts. And yet our God is more
then a wall of stone or brass, he promised to be a wall of fire. Now, who can
batter down a fire, that is it is own fuel, or who can set up ladders to
scale the flames?

And as the Lord is a wall of fire, so a wall of water for the safety of his
people, Isa. 33. 21. there will I be a place of broad rivers, and of streams;
that is, I will be their preservation; the broad river preserves a place from
the invasion of enemies: waters are stronger then bulwarks of stones. And least
any should object, though broad rivers keep of Foot or Horse, yet they give
advantage to ships; therefore it is added, I will be such a river to thee, as
wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant Ship pass
thereby. But if any shall venture their Navies upon these streams to thy
annoyance, then know (as the 23. verse. intimates). Their tacklings shall be
loosed, they shall not well strengthen their masts, they shall not spread their
sails; They shall be so ruffled and entangled, that the lame shall take the
prey, that is, the weakest resistance shall subdue them and make prize of their
whole fleet, even of their invincible Armado's. I love the Lord my strength,
my rock, my tower, my fortress, my buckler, the horn of my salvation; Ps. 18.
1, 2. all these titles meet in this one, The preserver of men.

Secondly, God is a preserver of men mediatly by instruments: he preserves man
by man, and man sometimes by the beasts of the earth, and fowls of the air,
but chiefly he preserves men by Angels; Are they not ministering spirits, sent
out for the good of those that shall be heirs of salvation? (Psa. 91.) He
shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, they
shall bear thee up in thy ways, least thou dash thy foot against a stone. A
promise so full of sweetness for faith to feed on, that the devil has no way
to elude it, but by tempting us (as he did Christ) to over-act it, and surfeit
faith into a presumption, by a wilful needless throwing our selves into
danger.

And there is a necessity that God himself should thus take upon him the
preservation of men: This necessity is threefold.

1. None are strong enough to preserve us without him, our enemies would break
thorough all strength below God: so that, if he were not our preserver, none
could: In vain is salvation hoped for from hills, and from the multitude of
mountains; truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel. Jer. 2.

2. None are wise enough to preserve us, except the Lord. As evil spirits are
powers, for strength; so likewise serpents, for policy and craft; this craft
of hell cannot be discovered, much less disappointed, without wisdom from
Heaven.

3. None but God are patient enough to be the preservers of men, I believe if
the Angels left to their natural temper, were set to be keepers of men, they
had all given over this charge long before this time, as it is supposed, they
who fell, refused to undertake, or take it up, at first, Angels have not the
patience to keep such a froward piece as man. It is a wonder God does not give
over that care, and in stead of preserving dash him in pieces. When the Lord
told Moses, he would send an Angel before him, and drive out the Canaanite
(Exodus 34. 2.) For I will not go up in the midst of thee, for thou art a
stiff-necked people, least I consume thee in the way. The text says, when the
people heard this evil tidings, they mourned, and no man did put upon him his
ornaments. Why, what was it that troubled them? was it that the Angel is sent
now to conduct them to Canaan? That was told them (Chap. 23. 20.) and they well
satisfied with it, Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the
way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared. I answer, The
Angel in the 23. Chapter is by all (that I meet with) agreed to be the Lord
Jesus Christ, the great Angel of the Covenant; but the Angel, chap. 33.
appears to be a created Angel and rather threatened them, then promised them.
And though the Lord is pleased to signify a reason of sending this Angel in
favor to them, namely, least he himself consume them in the way, for their
stubbornness. Yet the people are not satisfied with this tidings; surely they
thought if the Lord was not able to bear their provocations, much less could
an Angel, and therefore if he should send an Angel, and withdraw his own
presence from them, they must perish; A mere Angel could not have borne their
manners as the Lord did; receiving provocations from them, and continuing
preservations over them those forty years.

It is yet further observeable, that the Hebrew is not only singular, but a
particular: The preserver of Adam, or, of that man, which has some speciality
in it, We translate in general, the preserver of men; but the preserver of
man, or of that man, is more emphaticall. God preserves all, but he has a
special eye of preservation upon some, Thou preservest man and beast, says
the Psalmist, the beasts of the earth are preserved, but man is preserved more:
And among men, some are more preserved. It is a truth, the great God preserves
his greatest enemies; a wicked man were not able to lift up a hand or a tongue
against him, if God did not uphold him: but God is the special preserver of
that man, that is, the preserver of a godly man, or of godly men. As Christ is
the Savior of all men, but especially of those that believe; so the preserver
of all men, but especially of those that believe; he has a care of them,
beyound the care he has of the world. The care which God has of the rest of
the world, compared with that toward his own, is but carelessenesse, and he
(as it were) neglects the whole world to look to his own people. As it was
said of Constantine, that for the love he bare to Constatinople, he undressed
and unadorned all the other Cities of the Empire, to beautify and adorn that:
God seems to take off from al men in the world, to lay it on, upon his people;
The very gleanings of those mercies which his people have, are better then the
whole vintage of the world: And the Lord is therefore a special Savior to his
people, because,

First, They are more precious than the rest of the world: and that calls for
most care, which has most worth. A man takes more care of his jewels, then of
the lumber in his house; These are my Jewels, says God (Mal. 3.) A man carries
his jewels about him, or keeps them in a safe cabinet.

Secondly, Neerenesse of relation calls for that care; will not a man perserve
his wife, his spouse? The Church is the spouse of Christ. Will not a man
preserve his children? if his house be on fire, bring my children out says he:
The heart of God is toward his children, he must provide them a porton. Yea
they are his portion, he makes a revenew of them (Deuteronomy. 32. 9.) A man will
preserve his revenew, that wherein his estate lies: All that God has on earth
(though he has such a fullness in himself, that he needs nothing from his
Church, yet, all that he has) he is pleased to say, he has it from his Church:
and therefore God is said to be great in Zion; He is the same great God all the
world over, but it appears not so, what he is, to the men of the world, as to
the Saints in Zion it does: yea he is little in the eye of the world, in
comparison of what he is in Zion, therefore he takes great care to preserve his
Zion. Lastly observe.

The preserving care of God over man, especially over that man, over his own
people, is a perpetual care. Preservation is a continued act, if God should
leave us one moment, and stop providence, creation would be dissolved: This
continuance of his care, is eminent toward his Church; Isa. 27. 3. Least any
hurt it, I will keep it night and day. Night and day divide all time between
them: to do a thing night and day, is to do it continually. Psa. 121. 4. He
that keeps Israel, neither slumbreth no^ sleeps; A slumber is less than
sleep; but God will not so much as slumber in his thoughts toward us, all
his, are waking thoughts. Futher, his love is without intermission, that knows
no stops nor breaches, therefore his care is so too. His peoples dangers are
without intermission, therefore his preservation is so too. Enemies oppose his
people without intermission, therefore he protects them so too. The Devil
goes about like a roaring lion, he is ever in motion, he goes about as an
Abaddon or Apollyon, the destroyer and devourer of men: The care of Christ
prompts him to a like vigilance, He goes about preserving; his act of
preservation runs parralell with that of the enemies opposition: God watches
that his people may have some quiet rest and sleep. As the story reports of
Alexander the great, that he told his Soldiers, I watch more Certo scio me
plus vigilare quam vos, ut ipsi somnos quietos capere possitis, Arian. l. 8.
than any of you all, that you may sometimes have quiet sleep: his care
dispensed with some of their carelessnesse. It is most true of God, he wakes
for ever, and he watches for ever, to preserve us, that, we may sleep in
quietness and confidence. Solomon reprooves some secure ones, who are as they,
who sleep on the top of the mast (Pro. 23.) But the Saints may sleep (in regard
of fear, though not of endeavor) on the top of the mast, while they remember
that both the helm and the winds are in Gods hands. As our spiritual estates,
so our temporal are kept (as with a garrison in their degree) by the power of
God through faith unto salvation. So much for the title, O thou preserver of
men.

Why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my
self.? Why have thou set me as a mark against thee?] The word signifies (...)
Occurrit obviam factus fuit. Quare posuistime contraium tibi, Vulg. In occursum
tibi, Pagn. Objectum tibi; Tygur. Offendiculum in quem semper impingas Vatab.
to meet one, to come the opposite way; Hence some translate this, why have
thou set me contrary to thy self? because he that meets another, comes the
contrary way, the way opposite to him: Why have thou put me as an object
against thee? or, as an enemy to thee? the object stands directly before us,
and we desire to have an enemy right before us. And the word may be taken
simply for an enemy, or adversary, who stands opposite to us, both in his
actions and designs, and against whom we direct both ours. We render,
wherefore have thou set me as a mark? and that suites the sense of the word
fully, because a mark at which a man aims, is set in direct opposition to
him; we level our atrowes or bullets at the mark right before us, Job thought
himself thus placed, why have thou set me as a mark to meet with, or
intercept thy shot, thy arrows, thy bullets, thy blows upon my breast? Will thou make the bosom of thy servants, like the breast of an enemy, a But to
receive all thy arrows? A mark is as a standing enemy; and an enemy is a moving
mark to shoot at: a mark is a livelesse enemy, and an enemy is a living
mark: his meaning then is; Thou have set me against thee, as if I were an
enemy, as if I were one, against whom thou resolvest to direct all thine
arrows, and aim every stroke: so the word is used, Judge. 8. 21. where Zeba and
Zalmunna, two Kings taken captive by Gideon, said to him, rise thou and fall
upon us; it is this word, set us before thee as a mark for thy victorious
sword: So the Prophet (Amos 5. 19.) tells us that a man in hopes to escape the
hand of God, shall be as if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him,
such a man is but a mark for a Bear, who thinks to out-runne this Lion. That
expression (1 King. 5. 4.) is very clear to this sense, where the peacefulness
of Solomon's reign is described, thus, there was neither adversary nor evil
occurrent; the word we translate, evil occurrent, it is that in the text, no
evil met or befell them. So then the sum of all is, That Job expostulates or
complains before God, that he was as it were, the man chosen out amongst all
the men in the world, to be as the mark and But against which God shot his
afflictions, and levelled all his arrows: As if he had said; There are many mo
about me, and thou do not so much as touch one of the hairs of their heads,
there are men that receive not so much as one shot from thee, but I am made thy
standing mark, why is it thus Lord? So he expresses himself, in other words,
but to this very sense, chap. 19. 11. chap 13. 24. Wherefore hold thou me
for thine enemy? or (according to the letter of the Hebrew) among those who
straighten thee, as an enemy straightens a City, in the time of a siedge: And
this he does to move God to pity and compassion; Lord, says he, I am set as a
mark against thee. You would be much moved (a tender heart would) to see a man
bound fast to a post, and another standing off with his bow bent, and his arrow
on the string, with his gun or pistol cockt, aiming at his breast: Job
presents himself in such a posture, as if the Lord had bound him fast to a post
or to a tree, and were pouring vollies of shot, and sending showers of arrows
upon him continually.

Observe, first the manner of the language, which is by way of a vehement
question, or expostulation, Why have thou set me as a mark against thee?

Man is very inquisitive to know the reasons of Gods dealings with him. That Is
one thing.

And secondly which is near the same,

It is some satisfaction and ease to the mind smitten by the hand of God, to
know the reason why he wounds, why he smites. Why have thou set me as a mark?
as if he had said; if I could but learn this, and see the reason of it, surely
I should receive thy wounds as kisses, and take thy strokes as embraces. When
Gideon saw so many evils and troubles upon Israel, Jud. 6. and the Angel told
him, the Lord was with him, Then, why is it thus (says he) Can you give me a
reason, why God being with us, it is thus with us? To know the reason of our
pain, is a great ease, and almost the care of it. If the people of God did but
know what infinite reason he has (reason of the highest temperament of wisdom
and goodness) why he lays affliction upon them, and makes them as his marks,
they would be abundantly satisfied with it. What is the reason why the Saints
coming out of great affliction, are willing to confess, it is good for us that
we were afflicted, and blessed be God that we were chastned. It is, because
then they see more clearly the reason why God afflicted them, and they then
begin to taste the fruit of those afflictions. If while the affliction is upon
us, we knew what good God means us, what honor he intends us, we should
bear it, not only with courage and with patience, but, with joy. If Job had
been but fully acquainted with this, that God therefore set him up as a mark to
shoot at, that he might be to all the world a mirror of patience: that God
intended him this honor, that his name should be upon record in his Book so
long as there was a Church, surely he would have borne all with more patience
and ease than he did; But he was groping in the dark, and therefore enquires,
wherefore have thou set me as a mark against thee? The words are not only, or
not so much, an expostulation, because he was set as a mark, as an
inquisition, why he was set as a mark. Thirdly note,

God sometimes seems an enemy to his faithful servants. For one to be before
God as a But continually shot at, what other interpretation can sense make of
it, but this, that God looks upon him as an enemy? Jacob says of Joseph (Genesis
49. 23.) the archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him. Joseph was as
the common mark of his Bretherens envy. But in this case, as it is said of
Joseph (Genesis 42.) when his brethren came to him, he made himself strange to
them. (Joseph strained himself, and used his art, to overcome his nature, he
made himself strange: Joseph was of a meek and loving disposition, and
therefore like a Player upon a stage, he only acted the part of a rigid master
or governor.) Thus many times the Lord takes upon him the posture of an enemy,
and forces a frown upon a poor creature, whom he loves and delights in with
all his heart; he makes him as his mark to shoot at, whom he lays next his
own heart. Thus the Church speaks, Lam. 3. 12. He has bent his bow, and set
me as a mark for his arrows; And (Job 16. 13.) that, you may see how his
language agrees with other Scriptures; His archers compass me round about, he
cleaves my reins asunder, and does not spare. He pours out my gall upon the
ground. How exactly he speaks! A man shootes at a hairs breadth that shootes
thus; when God sends his archers, their bows shoot so true, that they cleave
the reins asunder: the reins are in the midst of a man, and to cleave the
reins, is to shoot level: as pouring out the gall, or unbowelling, imports to
shoot dead.

Fourthly observe this, Why have thou set me as a mark?

God takes the most eminent and choicest of his servants, for the choicest and
most eminent afflictions. He makes a Job the white. Why have thou chosen me?
There was great reason, God should choose him, he was the most eminent in
holiness and grace of all about him: he was the most remarkable man for grace
and goodness, therefore he must be the mark. They who have received most grace
from God, are able to bear most affliction from God. God does this in infinite
wisdom: as the Apostle, Romans 14. 11. gives an excellent advice in reference to
weak brethren, such as are weak receive, but not to doubtful disputations;
take heed how you engage your weak brethren in doubtful disputes, you may
loose them so; take those that are strong and able, such as have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil, such as are well ballasted for a
storm, take these men, if you will, to doubtful disputations, but do not
take weak brethren. If God will not have us take a weak Christian to a
doubtful disputation; surely then, he calls such to sufferings, of whose
strengh he is well assured: A man under great affliction, is brought to a very
doubtful disputation; therefore the Lord will not bring a weak one, one low in
grace to it, but he takes out the strong: As the General of an Army chooses out
the valiantest and most experienced veterane Soldiers, to put them upon hard
adventures, it is not wisdom to venture a fresh water Soldier upon difficult
services. God will not put new wine into old bottles: as it is in acting
duties, so in sufferings. And as Christ orders the word in such wisdom, that he
will not have counsel given, to any soul, who is unprepared to receive it, or
unable to bear it. John 16. 12. I have many things yet to say unto you, but you
cannot bear them now; therefore I will defer, until you have got more
strength: So God says of a young Christian, one that is newly come in; thou
have great afflictions to undergo before thou dyest, but thou art not fit to
bear them yet, I will defer thy trial till thou art grown more hardy,
through more communion with me, to fit thee for that encounter. As our Lord
Christ told Peter (Joh. 21. 18.) When thou wast young, thou girdest thy self,
and walkedst whither thou would; but when thou shall be old, thou shall
stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whether
thou would not. That is, when thou wast young and unexperienced thou
enjoyest thy liberty; but when thou shall be grown older in years, and stronger
in grace, thou shall willingly stretch forth thy hands, and quietly suffer thy
self to be bound to the Cross (Peter was not nailed as Christ, but tied to the
Cross) and there die in witness of my truth; for this Christ spoke, signifying
by what death he should die and glorify God, ver. 19.

Fifthly, In that he says, Why have thou set me as a mark against thee? Why
do thou run thus against me? Observe,

Man in sinning, runs contrary to God, and God in afflicting seems to run
contrary to man. Every act of sin, is a direct opposition unto God: we set God
as a mark, and shoot arrows of disobedience against him; sin is a missing the
mark of duty, but it ames to hit the Lord, as a mark, who charges us with that
duty. In affliction God runs upon us, and makes the trangressor his mark.
Moses (Levit. 26. 41.) speaks both ways; If your uncircumcised hearts be
humbled, and ye acknowledge that ye have walked contrary unto me, and that I
have walked contrary unto you, that I have made you a mark, and shot at you by
my judgments, and that you have made me a mark, shooting at me by your sins;
then I will remember, etc. So that our sinning is a walking contrary unto God,
and Gods corrections are his walking contrary to us: There is an excellent
expression, noting how sin strikes, (and as it were) shoots at God (Job 15. 25,
26.) He stretches out his hand against God speaking of a wicked man) and
strengthens himself against the Almighty; (here this word is used) he
runs upon him; even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his bucklers. See
how he describes a wicked man in his natural course; what does he? he runs upon
God, he runs upon him, even upon his neck; as a man that encounters an
enemy, runs upon him, and sets his feet upon his neck; he runs upon the
thick bosses of his bucklers, a warrier has bosses upon his arms, both for
beauty and defense. The enemy runs upon the very bosses and fears nothing: such
is a wicked man He runs against God; will not God run upon him? He will certainly
be upon the bosses of their bucklers, and upon their necks too, one time or
other, till they shall be forced to cry out, that as they have been burdens
unto God, so now they are burdens to themselves. Thus Job concludes in his own
case.

So that I am a burden to my self. (...) Tulit onus a tollendo ac ferendo
dictum. Sum super te onus, (...), alii vertunt (...), ouerosus, molestus quo
alluditur ad importunos peccatores, qui auribus Iudicum perstrepunt. (...),
tibi, quod scriba mutarunt in (...) mibi, quod indignum divina majestate
arbitrarentur, ut homuncio et oneri ess^t. Abe Ezr. Drus.
The former words, are the cause, and these the effect. Thou have set me as a
mark; what follows? O, I am a burden to my self! The Septuagint read thus,
so that I am a burden unto thee, or, so, that I am burdensome to thee. And
then his meaning may be conceived thus, Lord thou set me as a mark, so
that I become burdensome unto thee; I have such a weight of afflictions upon
me, that I am forced to complainings and expostulations wherein I am afraid, I
am burdensome to thee; as poor Suitors when they cry long in the ears of a
Judge or Magistrate, he says forbear, you are very troublesome, very
burdensome to me.

The Rabbis observe, that this was the ancient reading of the Text, I am a
burden unto thee, and that the Scribes, who wrote out the Bibles in Hebrew,
made this alteration, a burden to my self; because they conceived it was
unbecoming the Majesty of God, that Job should say, he was a burden to him.
There is a general truth in that translation, a burden unto thee; The sins of
man are burdensome to God, the frowardness and impatience of men, are
burdensome unto God: But I conceive our translation carries the sense fairer,
in a reflection upon his own tired spirits, So that I am made a burden to my
self, that is, thou do even throw me upon my self, whereas heretofore thou
wast wont to bear me, and take my burden upon thy self. Alas I faint, I cannot
stand under my self, I am weary of my life, because I am left alone to bear it,
I know not what to do with my self, I am so burdensome to my self. Hence
observe. First,

Outward afflictions, poverty, sickness, want, etc. are burdens, and they make
a man burdensome to himself. It is a great burden to have our comforts taken
away from us. The removing of comforts lies like a heavy weight upon the
spirit: the removing of health from the body is a weight upon the soul; fear is
a burden, care is a burden, and so is pain. Therefore God calls us to cast all
those burdens upon him, Psalm. 55. 22. Secondly, observe,

Man left to himself, is not able to bear himself. Man is much borne down by
the weight of natural corruption. Hence the Apostle calls it, A weight and the
sin which does so easily beset us, (Heb. 12. 1.) or dangle about our heels,
to burden us, as long garments do a man that runs. Our ordinary callings and
affairs, left upon our own backs press us to the earth, much more do our
extraordinary troubles and afflictions. And therefore he advises, Cast thy
burden upon the Lord (he assures in the next words) and he shall sustain
thee. As implying, that man cannot sustain or bear his own weight. And
though, it should seem we have strengh to spare for others, and are therefore
commanded to bear one another burdens, (Gal. 6.) yet no man of himself, no
not the holiest Atlas, nor the spirituallest Porter on earth, is able to bear
his own self, unless Christ be his supporter, who is also, therefore, said to
uphold all thiags by the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3. Because no creature in a
natural, or man in a spiritual capacity can bear his own weight.

Thirdly, From the connection between these two phrases, Thou have set me as a
mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self; what is it that makes my
life to be so burdensome to me? It is this, because I am set as a mark before
thee, that is, because thou seem to be an enemy to me: And so the note from
the connection is this.

That which presses and burdens the soul ahove all, is the apprehension that
God is against us. Job in many things looked unto God under these temptations,
with sad thoughts, as if he were his enemy: so he expressed himself in the
sixth Chapter, The poison of his arrows drinks up my spirits, he sets
himself in battle array against me. In these temptations and desertions, this
was the burden of his spirit, that God appeared as an adversary, Why do thou
set me as a mark against thee? Let the Sabians and the Chaldeans shoot at me
as much as they will, let fire and winds contend with me, and make me the
mark of their utmost fury; I can bear all these. Job was light hearted
enough, when he thought he contended only with creatures, and that creatures
only contended with him; but in the progress of this trial he finds God
against him, withdrawing comforts from, and shooting terrors at him; now he is
a burden to himself, he can bear this no longer. As Caesar said in the Senate
(when he had many wounds given him, yet this wounded him most, that he was
wounded by the hand of his son) What thou my son? So when a believer looks
this way and that way, and fees many enemies, Satan and the creatures, all in
arms against him; he can bear all their charges and assaults, but if he
apprehend God opposing and wounding him, he weeps out this mourneful
complaint, What thou my Father? What thou my God? Thou who have so often shined
upon me, do thou darken thy face toward me, and appear mine enemy! These
apprehensions of God, will make the strongest Saint on earth, a burden too
heavy for himself to bear. That which causes the most burdensome thoughts in
the Saints, is the inevidence of their pardon; Sin unpardoned is in it self a
burden: and our not knowing sin to be pardoned, is a greater burden: but our
jealousies and fears, that it is not pardoned, is the greatest burden of all,
and that which adds weight, yea an intolerableness to all other burdens. Hence
Job in the next verse, and with the last breath of his answer, points directly
at that which pincht him.

Verse 21. And why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take away mine
iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the dust, and thou shall seek me in the
morning, but I shall not be. In the former verse we found Job humbly confessing
his sin, and earnestly enquiring of the Lord a reason of his sorrows, why he
had shot him so full of arrows, that now he was not so much wounded as loaded,
And become a burden to himself.

In this verse he sues for the pardon of those sins, and so for the removal of
those sorrows. That the bow might speedily be unbended, and not a shot more
made at his bleeding breast. In the answer of which suite, he desires speed and
expedition, lest help being retarded, come too late: for he professes that he
cannot hold out his siedge long, he must needs make his bed in the grave, and
then being sought for, he shall not be found.

And why do thou not pardon my trangressions? We may consider the words two
ways.

1. In the Form of them.
Matter

2.
In the form, they are a vehement expostulation. Jobs spirit has been heated
all along with the fire of his sufferings, and here he speaks in the heat of
his spirit, and with fiery desires after mercy: He keeps up his heart to the
same height and tenor still, There it was, Why have thou set me as a mark
against thee? Here Is another Why, and why do thou not pardon my
transgression? As before he was grieved to be set up as a mark for afflictions
to aim at; so now he desires to be made a mark for mercy to aim at.

I shall note one thing from hence, before I come to open the words; They who
are sensible of the evil of sin, will pray heartily for the pardon of sin.
Expostulation is earnest prayer; expostulation is a vehement postulation, a
vehement enquiring after or desiring of a thing, Why do thou not pardon my
sin? may be resolved into this, O that thou would pardon my sin! Or,
Will thou not pardon my sin? The matter of this prayer requires such a form,
such a vehemence of spirit in him that prays. If there be any petition in the
world about which the spirit should be fired, it is in this, when we pray for
pardon of sin.

Will not a man whose body is defiled by falling into the mire, call hastily
for some to cleanse and wash him? Will he not say, if it come not speedily, why
do ye not bring away the water there, sin is the defiling and bemiring of the
soul, and pardon is the cleansing of it.

If a man be deeply and deadly wounded, will he have only some few feeble
desires, or make cold requests for a Chyrurgion. Will he not call and call
aloud? Call and call again for help and healing? Sins are the wounds of the
soul, and pardon is the only cure of it.

If a man has broken his bones, will he not be very earnest to have them set
again? Sin is the breaking of the bones, and pardon is their setting. How does
David cry to the Lord (Psalm. 51. 8.) That the bones which he had broken might
rejoice; Sin had broken his bones first, and the hiding of Gods favor from
him, was a second breaking.

If a man's peace, or the peace of a Nation be disturbed, is there not earnest
crying (as at this day) to have it repaires and re-established? Sin troubles
our peace, the peace of the soul, and the peace of Kingdoms, Sin is the great
makebate, and pardon is the returning of our peace, and quieteth all again,
and therefore no marvel, if we cry out, Why do thou not pardon our sins?

He that is greatly in debt, and fears every hour to be arrested and cast in
prison, is trying all friends to get security, and protection. Sinning is a
running in debt with God, and it brings us under the danger of his arrest
every-moment: forgiveness cancels the bond, when the sin is pardoned, the debt
is paid, and the soul discharged; And therefore no wonder if in this case, we
hear or make strong cries, Why do thou not pardon our sins. My son (says
Solomon, Prove. 6. 4. speaking about suretiship) if thou be surety for thy
friend (if thou have engaged thy self for another) Give not sleep to thine
eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, deliver-thy self as a Roe from the hand of
the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler. Not to give rest to the
eye, nor slumber to the eyelids, notes the hottest pursuit and greatest
intention of spirit about a business; Thus busy Solomon advises a man to be,
who becomes surety for another. Then what should we do, who have contracted
huge debts our selves? How should we in this sense give our eyes no rest, and
our eyelids no slumber, till our souls be delivered, as a Roe from the hand of
the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler; that is, from all the
power and challenge, which the Law without us, conscience within us, Satan
pursuing us, and the justice of God threatening us, can any way make or have
against the peace of our souls. That Is the first thing from the manner or form
in which Job sues for the pardon of sin. His spirit does not fall, he grows not
flat upon this point, but is as high and earnest here, for the pardon of sin,
as in any of his requests for the ease of his pained body, or the dissolution
of it.

Why do thou not pardon my sin, and take away mine iniquity? I shall first
show what is meant by pardoning and taking away; and then, what by
transgression and iniquity, and so put the sense of all together.

Why do thou not pardon my transgression? The (...). accipiunt. (...) tanquam
a (...) oblitus fuis.
Septuagint reads it, Why do thou not forget my transgression? Or bury it in
the grave of oblivion: and the word may signify to forget, as well, as to take
away. But generally it imports the lifting up or taking away of that which lies
heavy upon us, either in a moral or in a natural notion, Hos. 11. 4. I was to
them, as they that take off the yoke; And because pardon is the taking away or
lifting off of sin, therefore it is often put for the act of pardoning.

Hence also it is applied to that gesture of the Priests, when they (...)
Tollere, levare; per Metaphoram donare, co quod munera and donaria in altum
elevari solerent, sicut sacrificia cum Deo offerebantur.
received gifts and sacrifices, because they were wont to elevate and lift them
up. Hence Christ the substance of all the Sacrifices, is said to be lifted up,
himself says, As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the
Son of man be lifted up, (Joh. 3. 14.) we may say, as Aaron lifted up the
Sacrifices at the altar, so the Son of man was lifted up. This lifting up,
noted also the acceptance of those Sacrifices, and the favor of God to those
who brought them. When Pharaoh bestowed a great favor upon his chief Butler,
Genesis 43. 30. according to his dream, he lifted up his head: Joseph expounded
so, After three days Pharaoh shall lift thine head; that is, he shall freely
pardon thy offense, and bestow some great honor, gift or reward upon thee. And
in this sense it is proper to the text, when sin is pardoned, a man's head is
lifted up himself is advanced indeed.

The Lord proclaims his name in this tenor, (Exodus 34. 7.) The Lord, the Lord,
forgiving (or lifting up) iniquity; and Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgiven or lifted up.

Further, this word signifies, not only, to take or lift off a burden from
another, and lay it down: but so to lift it off from another, as for a man to
take it upon himself, and bear it in his stead, from whose shoulders it was
taken. And in this strict sense, we are especially to understand it in the
point of pardon; for pardon is not the taking away of sin from a man, and
laying it, none knows where: but sin being taken off from man, some other
shoulders are prepared to bear it, even the shoulders of our Lord Christ, on
him our sin is laid, All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every
one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all, Isa.
53. 6. when the burden of dept was taken off from us it was charged on Christ.
He did not take or lift the burden of sin from us, and throw it by, but he
bare it himself; nothing but this could complete the work of pardon: therefore
it was also prophesied, Isa. 53. 4. Surely he has born our griefs and carried
our sorrows, And (1 Pet. 2. 22.) who his own self bare our sins in his body on
the tree; that is, in his humanity or humane nature, while he dwelt with us in
the body. Body is not here opposed to Soul, but includes it; as sometime the
whole work is laid upon the soul of Christ, not excluding his body, Isa. 53.
10. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin. By the whole man this
offering was made, and the whole man bare our sins on the tree. That passage,
Mat. 8. 17. (where the first prophecy of Isaiah is quoted, is very emphatical)
when Christ had healed many of their outward distempers, this reason is added,
That it might be fufilled, which is written (sc. Isa. 53. 9.) himself took our
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. Now Christ took our infirmities, and bare
our sicknesses, when he took and bare our sins: when he took sin, he took that
which was the necessary fruit of sin, our sicknesses and our sorrows; For as in
Scripture Christ is said to be made sin for us; that is, with the sin he bare
those affiictions and sorrows, which are the consequents of sin; so here, when
it is said, He bare our sorrows and our sicknesses, it takes in the bearing of
those sins, which procured and produced those sorrows.

The Greek words used by the Evangelist are full with this sense, (...)
assumpsit sccum, atque recepit, quasi ad se transtulit.
He took them to him, he received them upon himself; he (as it were) translated
them from poor sinful man, to his own body.

The word also imports his taking our sins and sicknesses upon him, as a
vesture or a garment, and so wrapping himself in them. We know our sins by
nature cloth us as a garment, ours, is not only a burden, but a clothing of
sin and filthiness, Take away his filthy garments (says the Lord concerning
Joshua the High Priest) then follows, and unto him I said, I have caused thine
iniquity to pass from thee, and I will cloth thee with change of raiment. Man
saw not his own nakedness, till he was clothed with sin, Genesis 2. Christ to
answer that, clothes and wraps himself with our sins, as we our selves were
wrapped about and clothed with them; he clothes himself with our sorrows, as
we our selves were clothed with sorrow. In which sense (among others) Christ
may be called a man of sorrows; as we may call a man clothed with rags, a man
of rags; and a man clothed with silk, a man of silks.

The second word of the Evangelist, Mat. 18. 17. signifies to bear (...)
as a Porter bears a great burden; Christ took up that burden onder which all
the Angels in heaven would have sunk, he took it up like a mighty Sampson, and
carried it out for us. The scape-Goate was a type of this, Levit. 6. 22. And
the Goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities into a land not inhabited; or
a land cut off and separated from other lands and people, figuring hereby the
total abolishing of our sins, which being carried into a land, where no man
dwells, shall be as lost and gone for ever, not to be found when they shall be
sought for: who can find that, which is, where no man ever was; pardoned sin is
carried and (as it were) hid out of the sight both of God and man, for it is
not; and that which is not, is not (according to man) to be seen. In allusion
to all which, Christ (Jo. 1. 29.) is pointed at by the Baptist, with, (...).
Behold the Lumb of God that takes away the sins of the world; he takes sin off
from the world, upon himself, and carries it away no man knows whither. That
for the first word, pardon, why do thou not pardon my sin.

The second word is rendered by our Translatours, Take away, (...) Est, 1.
simpliciter praeterire, 2. interire, perire, evanescere, mori.
why do thou not take away mine iniquity? Others thus, Why do thou not
cause mine iniquity to pass away? Or, Why do thou not put away mine
iniquity? So we rranslate, 2 Samuel 12. 13. where as soon as David confessed his
sin, saying, I have sinned, Nathan answers, and the Lord has put away thy sin;
he has made it to pass away.

The word signifies, first, simply, to pass away or to pass by.

Secondly, to die, perish or vanish away, that which passes by us is vanished,
as to us: So the word is taken, Psalm. 37. 36. where David speaking of the
flourishing estate of wicked men, says, I have seen the wicked in great
prosperity, flourishing as a green bay tree, yet he past away and lo he was
not: A man unpardoned, sees, or should see, his sins growing up as a mighty
tree: sin unpardoned, flourishes like a green bay tree, it roots in the soul,
and guilt nourishes it; but when pardon comes, sin passes away, and it is not,
because, that which gave it sap, is not.

Further, this word (which is very considerable) is applied to Quando dicitur
de mandato pacto, juramento, significat transgredi, violare, peecare.
the committing of sin, as well as to the pardoning of sin: For, when it is
joined with those words, The Commandments of God, the Statutes of God, the
Word of God, or the like, it signifies to violate, to break the bounds, to
transgress: for in sinning a man passes by the Word and Commandment of God,
the precepts which God has given, and the charge God has laid upon him, he
goes away from all; when man sins he passes by the Commandment of God, and
when God pardons, he passes by the sin of man, or he causes his sins to pass
away.

So that this word, Take away, put away, or cause to pass, Transire facis, e.
i. impunitum retir quis, condonas.
notes the removing of sin, both in the guilt and punishment; When sin is past
by, all the punishments due to sin are passed by, the sinner shall never be
touched, or feel the weight of Gods little finger in judgment; when God comes
with his revenges, he passes such by, as in that plague of Egypt, the slaying
of the first born, which was therefore called the Lords Passover, in memorial
whereof, that great ordinance was appointed the Jews, of keeping the Passover,
and eating the Pascal Lamb, Exodus 12. 13, 14. In this sense the word is used,
Amos 7. 8. when God was resolved to punish and charge the sins of that people
upon them, he says, Behold I will set a plumbe-line in the midst of my
people, Israel, and what follows? I will not again pass by them any more. God
came before, once, and again, armed to destroy them, but when he came, he past
by them, he put up his sword, he unbent his bow, he stopped up the vials of his
wrath; when a cloud of blood and judgments hung over their heads, he sent a
breath of mercy, and caused it to pass over them; but now (says he) I will not
again pass by them any more; that is, I will surely punish them, so the next
words interpret, the high places of Isaac shall be dissolate, and the
sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid wast.

Some translate that in Amos, I will not any more dissemble Verbum Ebraicum
(...) quoties in scripturis sanctis ex persona Dei ponitur pro poena
accipiendum est, ut ncqu^quam apud eos maneat sed pertranseat, Hieron. in Amos
5. Non ultra dissimulabo ei scelera tua, Pang. Merc. (...).
your wickedness or your sin; and that carries a fair sense, for when a man
pardons or will not punish an offense, he seems to take no notice of it, for
that (properly) is to dissemble a thing; (as simulation is to pretend that
which is not, so dissimulation is to take no notice, or not to hold forth that
which is;) God passes by and dissembles the sins of men, in a gracious way
when he will not observe or look upon them to question or punish them.

The Greek word (Matthew. 26. 39.) answers this Hebrew, where our Lord Christ
ptayeth earnestly about the removal of the cup, Father (says he) if it be
possible, let this cup pass away from me; In the same sense that sin is said to
pass away, the cup of Gods displeasure and wrath passes also away, when sin is
pardoned: therefore Christ prayed thrice, that the cup might pass away from
him, that he might not be dealt with as a sinner, but that there might be a
course found out to spare him, and save the glory of his fathers justice: Yet
(he submits) not my will but thy will be done, if it must not pass away, I am
contented it should not pass. Thus far we have seen, what is meant by
pardoning and taking away.

A word upon those two terms, transgression, and iniquity (which are the
objects on which pardoning mercy works) Why do thou not pardon my
transgression, and put away mine iniquity? Trangression and iniquity, are words
of great significancy: for in them all manner of sins, especially sins of a
greater stature are comprehended.

The former transgression, notes a violation of the Commands (...) Proprie
rebellio peccatum ex superbia. Non simplex and qualiscunque sed malitiosa and
temeraria transgressio.
of God with a high hand, or a rebellion of the mind, when pride of spirit
shows it self very much. There is a spice of pride in every sin: Because of
pride (says Solomon) comes contention; all the contentions we maintain
against the word and will of God, rise from the pride of our own hearts,
because we cannot submit to the will of God; but in some sins, pride holds up
her head more proudly. Such sins this word notes, it is not (simply) any sin,
but sin very proudly and rebelliously committed.

The latter word Iniquity, imports the crookedness and inequality (...)
Incurvationem, declinationem a recta via and ad animum translata, significat
per versitatem and melitiam. Curvi mores.
of a thing; when it turns this way or that way, and extends not in a strait
and right line. Hence it is applied to the vitiosity and perverseness, to the
crookedness and inequality of man's nature. Our nature is a crooked piece, and
that makes all the crookedness in our lives. The Latins speak so, in a moral
sense, they call ill manners, and ill manner'd men, crooked men, and crooked
manners. David, Psalm. 51. 5. bewaileth his birth sin under this notion, I was
born in iniquity: And he that was first borne in the world, applied this word
to himself, saying; my iniquity (the Peccata denotat quae fiunt ex (...), and
destinata malitia seu proposito, cum sc. men's videt quod aequu^ est, and tamen
indulgens cupiditatibus sequitur deteriora. Moller. in Psalm. 106 6.
perverseness, the crookedness of my ways) is greater than can be forgiven, or
made straight, Genesis 4. 13. So that this word also (take it strictly) implies
more than a bare act of sin, arising from infirmity, weakness or inanimad
vertency; it rather notes those sins which are committed from a crooked
purpose, from an ill or false bent of the heart: when the mind sees that which
is right and good, just and strait, and yet turns to crooked paths, and
follows that which is perverse and worse.

Take one thing further. This word in Scripture, signifies not only the act of
such sins; but secondly the punishment of them, Psalm. 31. 10. Genesis 19. 15. And
thirdly, it is put for the means of expiation or pardon, Hos. 4. 8. They eat up
the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their iniquity. But how did
the Priests eat up the sin, and set their hearts on the iniquity of the people?
Sin can make us but a hungry banquet. The text bears variety of
interpretations. But to the point in hand, sin is here put for the sacrifices
offered up for sin, out of diverse of which, the Priests had a portion for
themselves to eat; so that the Prophet here describes the horrible profaneness
of those degenerate Priests, who set their hearts upon the sacrifices, because
themselves were fed by them, not because the people came to seek the favor of
God, and make their peace by them, when they had sinned. As Physicians may be
said to eat the diseases of the people, and set their hearts upon their
sicknesses, when they (because their own gain is in it) are pleased to hear of
spreading sicknesses, etc. Or as Lawyers, eat the contentions and quarrels of
the people, when they are glad to hear of Suits, etc. because they grow rich by
it. So those base-spirited Priests were said to eat the sins of the People, and
set their hearts on their iniquities, because they were glad to have of a
multitude of sacrifices, their provisions being enlarged by them. So that then,
iniquity is the sacrifice for iniquity, in which sense also Christ is said to
be made sin for us, namely, a sacrifice for sin, 1 Cor. 5. 21.

From the words thus opened, we may observe;

First, to whom Job addresseth himself for pardon: is it not unto God? And why
do not thou pardon my transgression?

God only can, pardon sin. Pardon is his act, his proper and peculiar act, he
can do it, and none can, but he. We read it among his royal Titles (Exodus 34.
7.) the Name of God is proclaimed in this style, The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and in truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression an sin.
Pardoning sin, is put the last of those seven attributes, in which the Lord
manifested himself to Moses, as being that, wherein all the former are summed
up, and into which they conveigh their several blessings, to make man
completely blessed; or to show that none can be a pardoner of sin, but he who
is vested with all those foregoing glorious titles, and therefore none, but God
alone. Hence the Prophet Micah (chap. 7. ver. 18.) puts the question, and
challenges all the world; Who is a God like unto thee, pardoning iniquity? Show
me one if you can, there is no sin-pardoning God besides thee. Who is a God
like unto thee, pardoning? As if the Prophet had said, some will be, or have
been offering at this work, but they all have been, or will be found mere
bunglers at this work. None can pardon as thou do. None can pardon, 1. So
freely. 2. None so fully, 3. None so continually, 4. None eternally, 5. None so
indifferently, whether in respect of sinners or sins, as thou do. It is all
one to thee, what the sins are, and all one to thee, whose the sins are, so
they come to ask thy pardon. And that which is a disadvantage to ask pardon of
man, is an encouragement to ask it of God, the greatness of our sins. The
Psalmist did, and any man may make that his plea, Lord pardon my sin, for it is
great. Dare any be a competitor with God in this work? The Pharisees put the
question right, if they had not mistook the person to whom they put it, Mark 2.
7. Who is this that forgiveth sins? none can forgive sin but God alone. Again
sin (in one sense) is committed only against God, and for that reason also,
God only is the pardoner of it: Psalm. 51. Against thee only have I sinned.
Only the creditor can remit the debt, and he the offense, to whom we have done
the wrong. God is wron^d in all sins chiefly, and the wrong is so much his,
that it may well be called only his, therefore without him no pardon.

But man is charged to forgive his brother: Luke 17. 4. Forgive thy brother
seven times; and Christ has taught us to pray for the forgiveness of our
trespasses, as we forgive those that trespass against us, Mat. 6. 12.

I answer, there are two things in all second-able sins; First, disobedience
against God; Secondly injury to man; That which man can, or is required to
forgive, and be a pardoner of, is only the injury done unto himself, so as not
to revenge it; he cannot take off the sin against God, or stay him from taking
vengeance.

But other Scriptures speak of a power committed to man, to remit and forgive
sin, John 20. 23. Whose sins ye remit are remitted, and whosesoever sins ye
retain, they are retained.

I answer, This power is not authoritative and magisterial, but ministerial and
declarative. God has set up such an institution, that man should pardon man,
because many men, yea most men are not competent judges of their own estates,
whether they be fit for pardon or no: Many wicked men, would remit and loosen
themselves when as their sins are to be retained; they see not their sins, as
another man may and does see them: The Apostle Peter could say to Simon Magus,
Acts 8. 23. I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond
of iniquity; Simon Magus did not perceive it, he did not know his own
condition, he flattered himself, and thought all well, because lately
sprinkled with the water of Baptism; therefore some must declare these men
bound, and hold them still under sin.

Again, There are others, whose hearts are upright and sincere, such as are
indeed reconciled to God, and all whose sins are pardoned; but they are not
able to make it out, and they cannot clear up this thing from the word to their
own hearts: therefore they need a helper, to declare them pardoned, for they
cannot speak or declare it to their own souls: in such cases, both for the
conviction of presuming sinners, and the help of upright-hearted, yet weak and
doubting Christians, God has left this power with his Ministers, whose sins ye
remit they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain are retained. As in the case
of leprosy, Lev. 15. The Leper was brought to the Priest, and set before him
as a Judge in that point; many were not competent Judges of their own diseases,
they could not resolve it, whether they had the leprosy or no; some perceiving
a scab or a sore rising upon them, thought (presently) it was the leprosy,
when indeed, it was not, and so wronged themselves; Others who were indeed
infected, would not be persuaded that they were, therefore the Priests office
was, to determine these cases, to bind and restrain, to loosen and let them go,
as he saw cause: In which ceremonial practice, we have the shadow of this
Gospel practice, in the power of remitting or retaining, of binding or of
loosing sin, according to the various conditions of men. Yet all this while God
keeps the great work in his own hand, he is the pardoner, and therefore Job
(as the whole tenor of the Scripture rules it) made his address to him, why
do not thou pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity?

Secondly, From these expressions about the pardon of sin, we may learn what
the pardon of sin is; Pardon of sin, is the removing or the lifting off, the
passing away of sin from the sinner; that properly is pardon of sin. Scripture
language is very various and copious about this thing, and yet all runs into
this general; I shall instance some of them.

First, Pardon is often expressed by a Metaphor from paying of a debt, 1 John
2. 12. I write unto you little Children, because (...).
your sins are forgiven you; the word notes, your sins are paid, your debts are
satisfied; the same word the Apostle uses, Romans 8. 32. in reference to the
sufferings of Christ, God spared not his Son; He did not spare him the debt,
that is, he neither forgave the whole, nor compounded with him to take half, or
a part, and remit the rest; no, he made him pay all fully down. So, to be
pardoned, notes the sparing of the debt, letting the debt pass, without calling
us to account about it.

Secondly, Pardon of sin, is the remooving it out of sight (Isa. 38. 17.) Thou
have cast all my sins behind thy back, says Hezekiah, that is, thou have put
them out of thy sight. As when man is said, to cast the Word of God behind him,
Psalm. 50. 17. or behind his back, Neh. 9. 26. The meaning is, he regards it
not, at all to obey it; so when God casts the sin of man behind his back, the
meaning is, he will not regard or see it all, to punish it. That phrase used by
the Prophet Micah, is of the same importance, though of a deeper sense, chap.
7. 19. Thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea. Who can live
thither to fetch them up? But, may they not rise up or swim, out of themselves?
Surely no; our sins are not cork or wood, but they are iron or lead, they are
like stone, or like a mil-stone. To show how irrecoverably the Egyptians were
destroyed in the Red Sea, it is said, they sank like lead in those mighty
waters (Exodus 15 10.) and to show how irrecoverably Babylon shall be destroyed,
the holy Ghost says, that, Babylon shall be like a great mil-stone cast into
the Sea by a mighty Angel (Rev. 18. 21.) The casting of a stone, iron, or lead
into the sea, Phocenses ferream mass^m in mare demerserunt, and jurarunt non
prius sc in Pho^aean reversuros, quam hac massa e fundo maris emergerit, atque
in summa aqua extaret, Herod. l. 1. b Montanus ex iib. Mifna cap. de phase.
was anciently the Emblem of everlasting forgetfulness, or of a resolution,
never to recall that which was resolved. A learned Hebrician observes, that it
was a custom among the Jews, to take those things which they abominated as
filthy and unclean, and cast them into the sea; which act, noted either the
purging of them, or the overwhelming them out of sight for ever: And a like
usage is noted by Josephus Aeosta, l. 5. de Historia Nature and Moral. Novi
orbis.
a reporter of the manners of the Americans, that those barbarous people either
desciphering some wicked thing upon a stone, or making a symbol or sign of it,
used to throw it into a river which should carry it down into the sea, never to
be remembered.

Thirdly, Pardon of sin, is noted by washing and purging, to show that the
filthiness of it, is removed from us, Psalm. 51. 2.

Fourthly, By covering, Psalm. 32. 1. and by not imputing, ver. 2.

Fifthly, By blotting out, Isa. 43. 25. and blotting out as a thick cloud, Isa.
44. 22. All these notions of pardon concur in this one, that sin passes away,
is lifted up and taken off from the Conscience of the sinner, when it is
pardoned: The sum of all which is read in that one text, Jer. 50. 20. In
those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for, and there shall be none, etc. (why?) For I will pardon them, whom I
reserve. So that pardoned sin, in God's account is no sin; and the pardoned
sinner, is as if he had never sinned: Forgiveness destroys sin; as forgiving a
debt destroys the debt, and cancelling a Bond, destroys the Bond. Thirdly
observe,

When sin is pardoned, the punishment of sin is pardoned. Both words signify
both the punishment, and the sin; and Job having complained that he was set up
as a mark, and wounded by sharp afflictions, now seeks ease in the surest and
speediest way, the pardon of sin, why do not thou pardon my transgression,
etc.

There are three things in sin; The inward matter, the foul evil, the stock,
the root of sin, which is natural corruption dwelling in us, and flowing out by
actions. Secondly, The defilement and pollution of sin: Thirdly, The guilt;
when we say sin is pardoned or taken away, it is not in the former (though in
pardoned persons corruption is mortified, and the actings of it abated) but in
the latter, the guilt is taken away, which is the Obligation to punishment, and
so the punishment is taken away too; nothing vindictive or satisfactory to the
justice of God, shall ever be laid upon that soul, whose sin is pardoned: Hence
Isa. 33. 24. the Prophet fore-shewing, how happy a pardoned people shall be,
assures them; The inhabitant shall n^^ say, I am sick, the people that dwell
therein, shall he forgiven their iniq^^ty; When iniquity is forgiven, our
infirmity is cured: When the soul is healed, the body shall be recovered, Both
the body natural, and the body politic. Plague, and sword, and famine, and
death, all these evils go away, when sin goes; Judgments are nothing else but
unpardoned sins; sin unpardoned, is the root which gives sap and life to all
the Troubles which are upon man or Nation: And as sin committed, is every
judgment radically, that is, there is a fitness in sin to produce and bring
forth any evil upon man; so pardon of sin is every Mercy radically; when you
have pardon, from thence every other particular Mercy springs; you may cut out
any blessing, any comfort out of the pardon of sin; particular Mercies are but
pardon of sin specificated or individuated, brought into this or that
particular Mercy; of all blessings you may say, this is pardon of sin, that is
pardon of sin, and the other is pardon of sin. Forgiveness destroys that
wherein the strength of sin lies, it destroys our guilt, and to us abolisheth
the condemning power of the Law: in these the strength of sin lies. Hence when
the people of Israel had committed that great sin in making the golden Calf,
the first thing Moses did, was, to pray for the pardon of sin, and he did it
with a strange kind of Rhetoric, Exodus 32. 32. Oh, this people have sinned a
great sin, and have made them gods of Gold. And now if thou will forgive their
sin; what then Moses? There Is no more said; Moses is silent in the rest, it is
an imperfect speech: a pause made by holy passion, not the fullness of the
Sentence. Such are often used in Scripture, as Luke 13. 9. And if it bear
fruit, what then? Our own thoughts are left to supply the event: Our
translaters add, well. The Greek translators supply that in Exodus, thus; If
thou will forgive them their sin, forgive them: We may supply it with the word
in Luke, If thou will forgive them, well. As if Moses had said, Lord forgive
them, and then though they have done very ill, yet, I know it will be very well
with them; God cannot withold any mercy, where he has granted pardon, for
that with the antecedents and requisites of it, is every mercy. Moses knew what
would follow well enough if they were pardoned, and what if they were not:
therefore he adds; And if not, blot me I pray thee out of thy book which thou
have written: If their sins must stand upon record, Moses would not; he knew,
if they were an unpardoned people, they were an undone people, all miseries
would quickly break in upon, yea, overwhelm them, and he desired not to
outlive the prosperity of that people. If Israel must bear their sins, they
must also bear the wrath of God, and if their sin be but taken off, then his
love is settled on them: God gives quails sometime, but he never gives pardons
in anger. Fourthly observe,

The greatest sins fall within the compass of Gods pardoning mercy. The words
in the text are of the highest signification. Job speaks not in a diminutive
language, he is willing to lay load upon himself; they whose hearts are upright
will not stand mincing the matter, and say they have sins, but theirs are small
ones, sins not grown to the stature of other men's. As the sins of a godly man,
may be very great sins, so (when they are) he acknowledges that they are. I
know not where to set the bounds, in regard of the nature or quantity of sin;
what sin is there which a wicked man commits, but a godly man (possibly) may
commit it, excepting that against the holy Ghost? These Job did, and the Saints
may put to God in confession: and as he did not, so they need not be
discouraged to ask pardon for them, because they are great. The grace of the
Gospel is as large as any evil of sin, the Law can charge us with. The grace of
the Gospel is as large as the curse of the Law; whatsoever the Law can call or
show to be a sin, the Gospel can show a pardon for it; whatever the Law can
bind us with, the Gospel can unloose. The Mercy-seat covered the whole Ark; The
Mercy-seat noted the forgiveness of sin; and if you read the description of it
(Exodus 25.) you shall find that it was exactly, to a hairs breadth, of the same
dimensions with the Ark, wherein the Law was put: intimating, that there was
mercy and pardon for sin, let it come out of any part of the Law laid up in
that Ark. As the least sins must of necessity have a pardon, so the greatest
sins are in a possibility of pardon: And the truth is, there is no sin, as it
is an Anomy, a transgression of the Law, without the compass of pardon. It is
not the malignity of the sin, but the malignity of the sinner, that makes it
incurable; the sin against the holy Ghost is not unpardonable, because there
wants mercy large enough to pardon it, but because it refuses the mercy which
should pardon it, and the medicine that should heal it.

Fifthly, Observe, who it is that here presses thus for pardon; it is Job, and
was Job never pardoned till now? Or was this, (think you) the first time that
ever Job prayed for pardon? Had not Job thought of this business before?
Without question he had; he was one of whom God gave this testimony, that he
was a just and an upright man, one that feared God and eschewed evil; He that
did all this, and was all this, must first be in favor with God, and yet Job
cries out, Why do thou not pardon my transgression? Whence observe,

They whose sins are pardoned, must yet pray for the pardon of sin: Yea, they
who, upon good grounds, have assurance, that their sins are pardoned, must yet
pray for the pardon of their sins, 2 Samuel 12. 13. When Nathan told David, God
has put away thy sin; he assured him that he was pardoned, and doubtless the
heart of David opened by Faith to let in that gracious Message; he was not
faithless, but believing. Yet David in his penitential Psalm penned afterward,
prays, (O how earnestly!) for pardon, again and again? That which a man is
assured he has, he may pray to have and enjoy: make it so high, which some
make the grand objection against this point. Why should we pray (say they) for
that which we have already: I say, a man may pray for that, which he has
already, and is assured he has. Christ himself was assured of the love of his
Father, and that his Father would stick to him for ever, and he knew God was
near unto him, yet he cries (Mat. 27. 46.) My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Which Question may be resolved into this Petition, My God, my God,
do not forsake me. When David had received a Message by the Prophet concerning
a great temporal Mercy, the establishing of his house, that, God would settle
him and his Posterity in the Throne for ever; the text says (2 Samuel 7. 15.) he
presently went in, and sat before the Lord, and there makes a most earnest
Prayer; and what is it about? He prays that God would settle and establish
his Kingdom, verse. 25, 26. And now, O Lord God, the thing which thou have
spoken concerning thy Servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever,
and do as thou have said, etc. and let the house of thy Servant David be
established before thee.

Might not the Lord answer (according to this Objection) why do thou trouble
me about this? Did not I send thee a Message even now, that I would establish
thy Kingdom? Do thou think I have forgotten my Promise, or will be unfaithful
to it? We find not David thus chidden for praying thus. Nay at v. 27. you shall
see how David makes this the very ground of his prayer, Lord (says he) thou
have revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an house, therefore
has thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee, etc. Even
because thou have revealed this unto me, that thou will build me an house,
therefore upon this very ground I make this prayer, that thou would build
it. And to show, that he was full of Faith, the thing should be done, before he
prayed it might be done, he adds, v. 28. Thou art that God, and thy words be
true, and thou have promised this goodness unto thy servant. Now therefore let
it please thee, to bless the house of thy servant. No man could be fuller of
Assurance, or fuller of Prayer than David was. Likewise Christ knew and was
assured, that his sheep, his elect people, should continue for ever, and that
none should be able to take them out of his hand, yet how abundantly does he
pour forth his Spirit in prayer about these things, Joh. 17. Again, Christ was
assured he should be delivered and upheld in death, Yet in the days of his
flesh he offered up prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears to
him that was able to save him from death, and he was heard in what he feared,
Heb. 5. 7. He was not afraid of the event, whether he should hold out and
prevail or no, whether he should conquer and obtain the victory or no, he
doubted not the success of this war, though it were with principalities and
powers; His fear was only a natural passion, which he took upon him, when he
took our nature upon him. He was certain of the issue, and knew he should carry
the work through against all the armies of hell, he would never have undertaken
it else: yet he prays with strong cries, that he might be strengthened. So
then, it is no argument, because a Believer knows his sin is pardoned, that
therefore he should not pray for pardon; for many things, of which there was
clear and certain evidence, that they were, or should be, have been prayed
about; it is our duty, for it has been the practice, both of Christ, and of
his people to pray in such a state.

Further we may Answer: Matters of Faith are of Two sorts:

First, Such as are fully accomplished, acted and completed in all the parts
and circumstances of them: for, and about such things, we are not to pray. No
man is to pray for the Redemption of the World, for that is a thing past, and
yet it is a matter of Faith: But the pardon of sin, though it be complete in it
self, and a matter of Faith to us, yet it is completing and perfecting every
day more and more. Pardon is given us, yet we feel not all, which pardon gives.
It is a settled act on Gods part, yet it is in motion on ours; that is, in a
perfective motion. Therefore, though we are assured that our sins are pardoned,
and shall stand pardoned for ever, yet we may pray about the pardon of them.

Thirdly, Suppose a man know his sins are pardoned, yet he may pray to know it
more, and that his evidences may be made yet clearer to him; for though sin
cannot be more pardoned in respect of God at one time, than at another; yet in
regard of man it may. He apprehends the pardon of his sin more now, than
before, and may hereafter apprehend it more, than now: And it is worth the
while to bestow pains in prayer for pardon, to have the pardon a little more
enlightened: The degrees of any grace or favor, as well as the matter and
substance of them, are worthy all our seekings and most serious enquiries at
the throne of Grace.

Fourthly, He that has assurance of the pardon of sin, is to pray for the
pardon of sin, because he continues still to sin: And though it be a truth,
that sin uncommitted is pardoned in the decree and purpose of God, yet we must
not walk by the decrees of God, but by his commandments and rules. His decree
pardons sin from all eternity; but his rule is, that we should pray for pardon
every day, as we pray for the bread we eat every day, Matthew. 6. 11, 12. We must
not say, God has pardoned all sin at once, therefore no matter to ask it
again: or I have once had the sight of pardon, and therefore the sight of sin,
shall never trouble me; seeing we are directed to search our hearts for sin,
and to seek to God for pardon continually. So long as we sin it becomes us to
be suitors for the pardon of sin. He that has ceased to sin, may cease to ask
the forgiveness of sin, till then, I know neither rule nor promise, that gives
a dispensation for this duty.

To close this point, there are two Cases wherein believers are especially to
renew their suits about the pardon of sin.

First, (which though it be lamentable, yet it is possible) in the case of
falling into scandalous and gross sins: These not only weaken assurance, and
be-night the soul, but exceedingly dishonor God, and grieve the holy Ghost.
This caused David to pray and cry for the pardon and purging of his sin, as
freshly and as strongly, as if he had never received a pardon, or any evidence
of Gods love (of which yet he had great store) before that day, Ps. 51.

Secondly, In times of great troubles and trials, whether personal or National,
the Saints reinforce prayer about pardon: This was Jobs case, his personal
afflictions occasioned him to beg the remission of sins; and not only
remission for sins, then committed, but for all the sins, he had committed
either before or after Conversion. Even our formerly pardoned sins, need
pardon, when we loose the sight of pardon, and when the soul has no visions,
but visions of terror, it must seek visions of peace, in the free grace of
God, renewing and sealing pardon in the blood of Jesus Christ.

Job having thus breathed his spirit in arguings, complaints, and prayers,
moves the Lord, for a speedy end and gracious answer: otherwise he sees no way,
but he must breath back his spirit into the hands of the Lord who gave it, and
lay his body in the dust, from whence it was taken.

For now shall I sleep in the dust, and thou shall seek me in the morning, but
I shall not be.

Now shall I sleep in the dust.

What he means by this sleep, has been handled, (Chap. 3. (...) Proprie est
cubare, hinc mortui (...) vocantur, ut etiam (...).
13.) where it was showed that death is called a sleep, why, and in what
manner, death is a sleep. The word here translated, to sleep, signifies
properly to lie down: but the sense is the same, because men lie down, when
they compose and fit themselves to sleep. And the dead are called down-lyers,
as well as sleepers in the Hebrew. The Septuagint reads it, now shall I go to
the earth. David speaks near this language, Psalm. 22. 15. Thou have brought me
to the dust of death.

Observe hence, whether we are traveling, and where we must take up a lodging
for our bodies, ere long. They whose heads are highest, they who lie in beds of
Ivory, must lie down in a bed of earth, and rest their heads upon a pillow of
dust. Most sleep in the dust, while they live, but all must sleep in the dust,
when they die; Earthly men have earthly minds, and they cannot rest, but in
earth, for it is their Center. Only he who has laid up his heart in Heaven,
can comfortably think of laying down his head in the dust.

Further, it is remarkable in how pleasing a notion Job speaks of death, when
his life was most unpleasant to him. He complained of restless nights in the
third, fourth, thirteenth, and fourteenth verses of this Chapter: yet he could
think of a time, when he should lie quietly in his bed, and not have so much as
a waking moment, or a distracting dream. And when he was once gone to this bed,
the curtains of darkness being close drawn about him, he should open his eyes
no more, till the eyelids of that eternity-morning opened, therefore he
concludes;

Thou shall seek me in the morning, (sc. of time) but I shall not be. In the
Hebrew, Thou shall seek me in the morning, is but one (...) Si dilucula veris
me, ficto verbo.
word. And some cut out a latin word fit to serve it. We may English it
strictly to the letter* If thou morning me, that is, if thou come to seek me
(as the force of this word has been formerly given) with never so much
diligence and care, I shall not be found, thou will not have Job alive upon the
earth to bestow thy mercies upon, For

I shall not be. The Hebrew is, And not I, that is, I shall not be alive, I
shall (...) Non ego, subaudi sum, vel ero. Cum jam in isto
not be to be had, he means a nonexistence, not, a non-essence: a being he
should have, but he should not appear to be. It is as if he had said, Lord I
shall not be a Subject capable of outward deliverances and bodily comforts,
unless they come speedily, Lord if thou will give me any help, give it, for
death hastens upon me, as if it hoped, to be too nimble for, or, to outrun thy
succors.

Mr. Broughtons translation seems to intend another sense, pulvere decumbam?
aut quid non tempesti ive requisivisti me, ut non essem. Jun.
which others of the learned Hebricians favor too. He renders the latter part
of the verse thus, Whereas I lie now in the dust (referring it to his present
condition; I am now lying in the dust, to be pitied of the keeper of men, so he
himself expounds, Lord I lie in the dust, a pitiful object, then) Why do
thou not quickly seek me out, that I should no more be, which he interprets, I
would by a quick death be rid from these pains. As if in these words Job had
again renewed his former desire of death; concerning which, many things have
been spoken from preceding passages of his reply, and I will not double upon
them here.

But I take the former reading and meaning of the words, as most proper to the
coherence, and conclusion of Jobs discourse: and so they are but a repetition
or re-inforcement of what he spoke at the 7, and 8. verses: There he said, O
remember that my life is wind, mine eye shall no more see good, the eye of him
that has seen me shall see me no more, Thine eyes are upon me, and I am not.
Here he speaks the same thing in some variety of words, Thou shall seek me in
the morning, and I shall not be. The severity of my sickness threatens to
prevent thy earliest preparations for my relief.

Thus (through the strength of Christ) some discoveries have been made about
this first congresse, or charge between Eliphaz and Job. But Job has not yet
done; Behold a second and a third Combatant, ready to enter the list against
him; And when these three have once tried their skill and strength upon him,
they all three charge him a fresh, a second time, and two of them, a third: Was
ever poor soul held so hard to it, as he! How much does the life of grace make
him exceed man, when he (as a man) could scarce be reckoned among the living?
Truth and grace will triumpth and prevail, notwithstanding all the
disadvantages of flesh and nature. Is it not strange, that a man should not be
weary with arguing, while he often professes he was wearied with living? That
while he could scarce fetch his breath for pain, he should do so much work (in
a manner) without a breathing. For, as the Messengers of his troubles gave him
no rest; But while one was yet speaking, there came another also and said, etc.
And while a second was yet speaking, a third came and said, etc. So neither did
these disputants about his troubles. While Eliphaz and Job were yet speaking,
Bildad answered and said, etc. While Bildad and Job were yet speaking, Zophar
answered and said. What Eliphaz said, and Job answered in this first
undertaking, you have heard: The opening of what Bildad had to say, and Job to
answer, waits (till the Lord shall be pleased to vouchsafe it) a further
opportunity. What is now (as himself has pleased to enable his unworthy
instrument) offered, waits upon him for his blessing. To him all blessing is
for ever due; on him let praises ever wait, for all his blessings. Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE, Directing to some special Points noted in the precedent Expositions.
A
ADvancement is from God, page 267. The difference between Gods advancing his
own People and enemies, page 270 Afflictions. Sore afflictions indispose for
duty, p. 15. Affliction often disturbs the seat of reason, p. 17. Times of
affliction, special seasons for the use of our graces, p. 23. Affliction
discovers our hearts, and our graces to our selves, p. 28, 29. Afflictions good
for the Saints, p. 115. They are but trials, 116. Affliction is a cleanser,
how? p. 117. They are sent to humble us, ib. To bring the Saints nearer God, p.
118. Man naturally seeks the reason of his afflictions out of himself, p. 220.
Every affliction has a cause, pa. 221. It comes not by the power of any
creature, ib. It is from the Lord, p. 222. It is our wisdom and our duty to
seek God in times of affliction, p. 230. We are to seek him about four things
in affliction, ib. It is a great ease to the soul to do so, p. 231. Affliction
and happiness meet in the same person, p. 309, 310, 312. Yet every one that is
afflicted is not happy, p. 313. The best of Gods children, sometimes entertain
afflictions unwillingly, p. 321. They sometime apprehend them as unuseful, p.
323. As disgraceful, p. 324. The least affliction ought not to be slighted, p.
324, 325. We ought highly to prize them, 326. Afflictions of others are to be
thoroughly weighed, and wherein that consists, page 315. It is an addition to a
man's affliction, when others are not sensible of it, page 416. Afflictions are
heavy burdens, p. 420. They come by multitudes, 433. Afflictions are the higher
services of grace, p. 487. They are measured out by the hand of God, 589. Man
apt to think he needs not so many or so great Afflictions, p. 630, 631. It
makes a little time seem very long to us, 643. Affliction is the magnifying of
a man two ways, p. 659, 660. Why called visitations? 665. They are trials,
668, 669. They are bands, and such as man cannot break, 674. It is a great ease
to an afflicted mind, to know the reason why afflictions are sent, p. 699, 703.
God brings his eminentest servants to the most eminent trials by afflictions,
page 701. Angels are the servants of God, p. 129. Their several services for
the Church, 129, 130. And against the wicked, 131. Angels how chargeable with
folly, p. 135. Pride and self-confidence, the sins of Angels, p. 138. Angels as
creatures mutable, ib. Yet now confirmed by Christ, 139. God has no need of
Angels, p. 141. Answering, how taken in Scripture, p. 409. It is the duty of a
man, to answer when he is questioned or charged with any fault, ibid.
Application of general truth very necessary, p. 403. Arrows, how taken in
Scripture, p. 425. Arrows of God why so called, p. 427. Afflictions like
arrows in four things, ib. 428. Poisoned arrows, p. 429. Assurance, To be
assured of a mercy, is better than the enjoyment of a mercy, p. 383.
B
BEasts, in what sense put for men in Scripture, page 368. Beasts of the earth,
hurtful to us three ways, p. 369. Beasts how at peace with us, p. 378. Sin
has made the beasts and all creatures hurtful to man, 379. It is from special
providence that the beasts hurt us not, 380. Beasts complain not without cause,
p. 440. Man in passion worse than beasts, p. 628, 630. Behold, a note either of
derision, or of asseveration, p. 8. Belial, wicked men, why called sons of
Belial? p. 47. Blast and breath of God, what they signify in Scripture, p. 55,
56. Blessedness, three degrees of it, p. 384. Body of man compared to a house,
in two respects, p. 145. Why called a house of clay? 146. How it should humble
us, 147, 148. Much care of the body, is usually joined with neglect of the
soul, p. 148. Bread the staff of life, p. 345. It is a precious comfort, to
have bread in a promise, when we have none upon the board, p. 347. Brethren,
many sorts of them, p. 497. Brethren deceitful, 499. The deceit of a brother,
is double deceit, especially of a brother in the faith, ib. Burial, A comely
burial is an honor and a blessing, p. 394.
C
CHarity, Four acts of spiritual charity, p. 8. Spiritual charity best, p. 13,
14. Charity, especially spiritual charity is open handed, p. 14. Chastnings,
see Afflictions. What is properly a chastning, p. 326. How we may improve this
notion, that Shaddai God Almighty chastens us, p. 329. Children of wicked
parents, often wrapped up in the same judgment with their parents, p. 200.
Children of godly parents nearest the blessing, p. 389. Blessings upon children
are the parents blessings, p. 390. Surgeon, Three necessary qualifications
for him, either in a natural or mystical sense, p. 337. Christ confirmed the
good Angels, p. 139. No stability in any estate out of Christ, ib. Christ is
not only a principle, but a pattern of holiness, 175. Faith can live upon
nothing but Christ, p. 487. Cloud, what, p. 613. Dying man like a cloud, ib.
Commendations with a But, wound, p. 17. Committing our cause to God, what it
imports, p. 228. Committing our cause to God, a great ease to the soul, 231. A
caution about committing our cause to God, p. 232. Complaining, when sinful,
622. Concealing the word of God sinful, four ways of concealing it, p. 462,
463. Confession of sin: a general confession may be a sound one, p. 679. Diverse
ingredients of it, p. 680. The holiest have cause to confess sin, and why? p.
682. Sin not confessed, gets strength three mayes, p. 683. It makes the soul
very active about the remedies of sin, p. 684. Confidence, Holy confidence what
it is, p. 21. Confidence in God, settles the heart in all conditions, p. 30.
Conscience, the testimony of it, the best ground of willingness to die, p. 465.
Correction, what it is, p. 313. The greatest afflictions upon the children of
God, are but corrections, 314. How a correction differs from a judgment, ib.
315. A child of God is happy under all corrections, 316. What it is to despise
corrections, opened, 319, 320 Crafty men, who they are, 273. Craft, wisdom of
natural men is craft, 275. Crafty men Satan desires to get to his side and
service, why? page 276, 277, etc. Crafty men full of hopes, 279. and industry,
ib. They want power to effect what they devise, 279. It is a wonderful work of
God, to stop the devices of crafty men, p. 281. In what sense any of their
devices prosper, 282. How God takes the wise in their craftiness, p. 284, 287.
No craft of man can stand before the wisdom of God, p. 286. Creatures, a book
wherein we may learn much both of God and our selves, 618. Creatures cannot
give us any comfort without God, 633. He can make any creature helpful to us.
ib. Counsel, in counselling others, we should show our selves ready to follow
the same counsel, p. 233. God turns the counsels of wicked men against
themselves, p. 287. What counsel is? 290. Rash, hasty counsels are successless,
page 292. Curse, What it is to curse, p. 190 The Saints in Scripture, rather
prophecy of, then pray for curses upon the heads of wicked men, 191 No
creature can stand before the curse of God. p. 196.
D
DAlilah, What it signifies, page 303. Darkness in the day time, what it
signifies, p. 293. Death consumes us without noise, p. 153. Man cannot stand
out the assauts of death, p. 154. We are subject to death every moment, 155.
Death hastens upon us all the days we live, 156, 157. What death is? p. 162.
In death all natural and civil excellencies go away, p. 162. Greatest wisdom
to prepare to die well, 164. How man is said to perish for ever when he dies,
157, 158. Few of the living observe how suddenly others do, or themselves may
die, 159. Thoughts of death laid to the heart, are a good medicine for an evil
heart, 160. A happy death, what? 390. A godly man is a volunteer in death, 395.
When a godly man dies, he has had his fill of living, 396. In what sense a man
may be said to die before his time, and in the midst of his days, 397.
Assurance of a better life, carries us through all the pain of death with
comfort, 457. So does the testimony of a good conscience, 465. No evil in the
death of a godly man, 480. Death the end of worldly comforts, page 618
Deliverance is of the Lord, page 341. The Lord can deliver as often as we can
need deliverance, 341. God delivers his people from evil while they are in
trouble, pa. 344. Despair, A godly man may think his estate desperate, p. 545.
Devices, what? p. 272. Discontent at the dealings of God with us, a high point
of folly, 182. Discontent at the afflictions of God, afflicts more than those
afflictions, p. 183. Dreams, The several sorts, and causes of them, p. 636,
637. Our dreams are ordered by God, 638. Satan makes them terrible, p. 639.
E
EGg, White of an egg, what it emblems, p. 443 End, two ways taken, p 599.
Envy, what it is? p. 180. Fnvy a killing passion, ib. 181. Envy a sign of
folly, p. 184. Error, he that is showed his error, should sit down convinced,
529. He is in a fair way to truth, who acknowledges he may err, p. 533. What
is properly called an error, as distinct from heresy, 533. Upon what terms an
error is to be left, p. 534 Eternity, how the longest and the shortest, p.
644. Example of God and Christ, how our rule, p. 175. Exhortation a duty, p.
229. It must be joined with reproof, ib. The best Saints on earth may need
brotherly exhortations, ib. Exhortations must be managed with meekness; p. 230.
Experience the mistress of truth 186. Experience works hope, page 305.
F
FAll, A threefold fall in Scripture, p. 12. Family, To order a family well,
is a great point of wisdom, p. 387. A family well ordered, is usually a
prosperouus family, ib. Famine, A very sore judgment, the effect of it, p.
345, 346. How many ways the Lord redeems from famine, p. 347. Fatherless, who,
p. 546. Such in a sad condition, 548. A grievous sin to oppress them, p. 549.
Faith ought to be great, because God can do great things, p. 224. We must
believe not only what we cannot see, but what we cannot understand, 248. Faith
should increase in us, when God works wonders for us, p. 253, 254. Fear,
Natural what, p. 92. It is natural for man to fear at the appearances of God,
and why, ib. Four effects or symptoms of natural fear 93. It is a strong
passion, 98. From what kind of fear God exempts his people in times of danger,
p. 358. Fear, Holy fear what it is, page 19, 20. They who have most holy fear
in times of peace. shall have most confidence in times of trouble 27. It keeps
the heart and life holy 30. Fear of God ever joined with love to our brethren,
p. 495. Fearful persons cannot be helpful, p. 516. Eellow-feeling of others
afflictions, a duty, p. 415. It adds to a man's affliction, when others have no
feeling of it, 416. We cannot be truly sensible of the afflictions of others,
till we troughly weigh them, 417. He that has not been afflicted, seldom
feels the afflictions of others, ib. Fool, who, and what a fool is, p. 177.
Every wicked man is a fool, 181, 186. A fool ever worst when he is at ease, p.
186. Foundation is the strength of the building, p. 149, 164. Friend, An
unfaithful friend fails us most, when we have most need of him, 516. A faithful
fricnd who? p. 518. Froward men who they are, pa.. 290.
G
GArments, testify man's perfidiousness against God, p. 498 Glory of God
promoted, promotes the good of man, p. 576. God can easily destroy his enemies,
showed in particulars, p. 57, 58. He can do it suddenly, 58, 59. Secretly, ib.
Vnavoidably, ib. Man is not able to bear the presence of God, 95. Reasons why
men tremble and fear at any greater manifestations of Gods power or presence,
92. Man naturally prefers himself before God, 110. It is high presumption for
the best of men to compare with God, 111. God in himself is most just and pure,
112. Holiest men compared with God, are unholy, 113. God is so just and pure in
himself, that he can do no wrong to any creature, 114. Objections against this,
answered, 115 etc. It cannot be ill with him, with whom God is, 119. To
consider God in his greatness, is an excellent means to humble man, 236. The
consideration of Gods greatness, should provoke us to seek him, ib. God can do
great things as easily as the smallest things, 243. God can do the same things
as often as he pleases, 256. God appears sometimes as an enemy to his best
frinds 433, 700. When God appears an enemy, man cannot bear it, ib. 4. 34. 704.
Best to turn to God for comfort in distress, p. 607 Godly, can be in no
condition wherein God does not love them, p. 193. A godly man has help within
him, when all worldly help fails, 486. A godly man has a light within him in
the greatest outward darkness, p. 488. Good done is a reproach to us, when we
do the contrary evil, page 18. Grace, False grace fails when we have most need
of it, p. 24. Our graces should be made visible in our actions, 29. Grace acts
not always alike, 30, 31. how failings in grace consist with sincerity, 31.
Grace must not be trusted to* we may make Idols out of our own graces, p. 487.
Grass of the field, how man is compared to it, p. 389. Greatness of Gods works,
p. 240. The least works of God, have a greatness in them, because they are his,
240. A twofold greatness in the works of God, p. 242. Groping at noonday,
what it imports. p. 294.
H
HAllelujah, what it signifies, where first used in the Scripture of the old
and new Testament, p. 132. Hand of God, how said to be loosened, p. 455. If God
stretch out his hand of power, all creatures are helped or destroyed by it, p.
456. Hands hanging down, what meant by them, p. 9. Weakness of the hands arises
four ways, p. 10. Happiness, what it is, p. 310. Many opinions about
happiness, and whence they arose, ib. Why the Hebrew word for happiness is in
the plural number, p. 311. Hearing is more than a work of sense, p, 400. Heart,
a judiciary hard heart is the greatest judgment on this side hell p. 121.
Setting the heart upon any thing, magnifies it, 657. Setting the heart, notes
four things, 661. Our duty to set our hearts upon God, 663 Heart of man full of
changes, 670. Heresy, Three things concur to make a heresy, p. 533. High, God
can set us high and safe, p. 269. Hirelings, who, p. 573. His eye upon his
wages, more than upon his work, p. 582, 583. Holiness, better than peace in our
dwellings, p. 385, 388. What the holiness of the creature is, 469. We must go
to God for holiness, 471. To despise holiness, is to despise God, p. 472. Holy
One, God is called the holy One in five respects, p. 467. The excellency of the
holiness of God, above that in men or Angels, showed diverse ways, 468. None
are fit for communion with God, but holy persons, p. 472. Hope, What it is to
hope, p. 22. Hope taken two ways, 304. The people of God have hope in the
worst times, ib. It is no vain thing to hope in God, 305. Experience breeds
hope, 305. Hope, is better to the people of God, then all their possessions,
306. Hope that troubles will end supports the heart in bearing present
troubles, p. 461. Hopes deceived, trouble us more than wants, p. 511. Deceived
hopes fill with shame, ib. Hope the last refuge, 601. A godly man's hope may lie
prostrate, p. 602. Humble, The apprehension of Gods great goodness, humbles
man, p. 655 Hypocrites profession, grounded upon hope to gain by it, p. 25, 26.
They cannot hold out in profession, because they want an inward principle, p.
505. Hypocrisy paints the face as well as pride, p. 266.
I
Innocence, or an innocent person, whence called, p. 37. A man is bound to
defend his own innocence, p. 409, 410. Innumerable, a threefold sense of it,
p. 255. Instruction, To instruct others, is a man's duty and his praise, p. 13.
Such as know God aright, are ready to instruct others in his knowledge, ib. An
honor to great men to instruct others, 14. It is easier in some cases to
instruct than to learn, 18, 528. It is a shame when our actions cross our
teaching, ib. Invocation of Saints confuted, p. 171.
K
KNowing, Three sorts of knowing men, p. 401. Knowledge, or to know, taken five
ways in Scripture, p. 381. A man may know much, and yet get no good by it, p.
403.
L
Labor, It is a sore affliction when we cannot enjoy our labors, p. 202.
Except we labor, we have no right to eat, p. 574. we must not be displeased at
our labor, ib. Laughter, what it is, p. 360. To laugh, how taken in Scripture,
with the kinds of it, 361, 362. A godly man laughs at, or triumphs over all
outward evils, 364. Yea, though brought at once to charge against him, p. 366.
Lie, To lie taken Two ways, p. 552. A lie cannot be long hid, p. 553. Life, No
strength in man can give him assurance of long life, p. 479. The life of man a
warfare, 568. etc. The life of man is measured out by the will of God, 571. The
decree of God concerning our lives, no ground for any to abate their care of
preserving their lives, 572. Life short, 576. It is good for man that it is so,
ib. Light, A double light necessary to seeing, p. 294, It is a sore judgment
not to see when light shines, p. 295. Lions, their several names, p. 60. How
they shadow several sorts of men, 61. How Tyrants resemble Lions, p. 62, 63.
Lowness, twofold, p. 266, 268. Low, They that are lowest, are nearest
exaltation, 268. It is a wonderful work of God, to set on high those that be
low, p. 270. Lusts, Several lusts ast in several ages of man, p. 177.
M
Magnify, signifies 3 things, p. 650. God magnifies man four ways, 651.
Especially by setting his heart upon man, p. 657. Man's natural constitution,
makes him sensible of affliction, 482. Man's worth is out of himself, 652. God
bestows many thoughts upon man, p. 654. Mavelous things what, p. 249. They
are separated from man three ways, ib. Ordinary works of nature and providence
are mavelous in two respects, 251. Marvels are a token of Gods presence, 253.
Many marvels wrought in our days, ib. Marvels should work faith in us, ib.
254. Christ will wonder at our unbelief, if we believe not, when he does
wonders, 254. Mass, a Popish conceit about the Name of it, p. 489. Memory, and
to remember, what, p. 33. The Works of God are to be remembered, ibid. Mercy, A
threefold mercy in God, p. 460. Mercy of God most moved toward us by telling
him our misery, 609. Miracles, Signs and Marvels, how they differ, p. 250, 251.
Morning, To do a thing in the morning, and every morning, what they import, p.
667, 723. Moth, How man is crushed as a moth, a threefold meaning of it, p.
152, 153. Mourners described, p. 266. Such nearest joy and exaltation, 268.
Murmuring or complaining, To murmur at the dealings of God, is to make our
selves juster than God, 123. complain to God, but not of God, 124. Musing men
no great talkers, p. 527.
N
NOstril of God, what meant by it, page 56. Numbers, Three, six, and seven, how
used in Scripture, 337, 338. Twice and thrice, three and four, six and seven,
seven and eight, what they signify in Scripture, 339, 340.
O
Old Age, a full old age, what? 390, 391. A perishign old age, and a
flourishing old age, 392. A godly man ever dies in a full age, 394. A blessing
to live to Old Age, 395. Oppression, To oppress the poor and fatherless, a
grievous sin, p. 549.
P
PAssion carries us out of our selves, p. 556. Pardon of sin, God only can do
it, p. 713. Why pardoning or remitting sin is committed to men, and in what
sense, 714, 715. How pardon of sin is expressed in Scripture, 715, 716. When
sin is pardoned, the punishment of sin is also pardoned, 717. Greatest sins
pardonable, 718. They whose sins are pardoned, may and ought to pray for
pardon, 719. In two cases prayer for pardon is especially to be renewed, p.
712. Peace with beasts, how? p. 378. When God is at peace with us, he can
quickly make all Creatures at peace with us, 379. Peace a great mercy, 380,
383. Perishing, or to perish taken five ways in Scripture, p. 35, 36. How
righteous persons may, or cannot perish, p. 38, etc. Persisting in evil most
dangerous, p. 557. Pity what it is, p. 490, etc. It is a duty to pity the
distressed, 494. Plowing of iniquity, etc. p. 44. Plowing referred to good
actions, p. 45. Poor. Some Gods poor, and some the Devils poor, p. 297. Poor
are full of desires, because full of wants, 298. Poor most subject to
oppression, 301. Wicked men plot against the people of God, how poor soever,
and why, 301. God delights to help the poor, 302. Poor must take heed of greedy
seeking the creatures, 522. Poor that are modest in asking, should be soonest
supplied; 522. Prayer, Some wicked men thrust out of the prayers of Gods
people, p. 192. A dreadful thing to be so, 193. Prayer is the putting of our
case to God; 228. They who pray much, expect much, 452. God often keeps prayer
by him unanswered, 453. The return of prayer is the solace of the soul, 453.
Presence of God twofold, p. 671. God can make his own presence grievous to us,
673. Preservation of man the work of God, p. 692. Man wants a preserver, and
why, 693. How God is a preserver, 694. A necessity that God should be man's
preserver, 695. He preserves his own people in a special manner, and why, 696.
His preserving care is perpetual, 697. Pride grows in the best soil, 117. God
resists the persons of the proud, and he will resist pride in his best friends,
p. 118. Pride in apparel and beauty, p. 596, 597. Probability of finding, is
ground enough for seeking, 507. Promises are the portion of Believers, p. 403.
Providence, the common blessing of God, not dispensed without a special
providence, p. 260, 261. Providence watches over all creatures, most over such
as are hurtful to man p. 627. Prudence goes softly, p. 292. Punishment may come
long after the sin, p. 49. It shall be proportionable to the degrees of sin,
50. It shall not exceed the desert of sin, ibid. It is often like the sin in
kind, 51. The strongest sinner shall not escape punishment, 65. Punishment is
gradual, 66. Reasons why the Lord suspends punishment, 69. Wicked punished by
those whom they have oppressed, 204, 206. God can punish the strongest by the
weakest instruments, 207.
Q
Quections in Scriture, sometime heighten the sense, and sometime abate it, p.
649.
R
RAin, the benefit of it, p. 259. 260. How it is a special gift of God, 261. It
is a wonderful work of God to send rain, 262. The giving of rain a motive to
fruitful obedience, and a conviction of the disobedient, 263, 264. Rain of
Doctrine, 523. Reason is the souls taster, page 562. Redemption, what it is, p.
341, 521 Remembering, what it imports, when ascribed to God, p. 602. Reproof
must be sweetened with friendly insinuations, p. 6. It is no easy thing to
bear a reproof, 7. in some cases we must reproove, whether men take it well or
no, ibid. Returning, what it imports in Scripture, p. 554. Return, return, what
it imports, 555. Reward, every man shall have a reward, p. 577. Riches, wordly
men very careful to secure their riches, p. 209. Ill gotten riches cannot be
secured, 210. Riches, why called strength, 213. Righteous, men so called in a
fourfold sense, p. 37, 38.
S
SAints, what a Saint is, p. 173. It is our duty to look upon and imitate the
examples of the Saints, 175. When God forsakes a man, the Saints on earth
forsake him too 177. Salvation or safety is of the Lord, p. 300. Salt in our
speech what, p. 442. Ministers of the Gospel, why called Salt, 449. Sanctify,
how man sanctifies God, 473. Sand of the sea applied three ways in Scripture,
p. 419. Satisfaction for sin cannot be made by man, p. 688. A threefold
deficiency in all our works for that end, 689. Scandal, what? 546. Scourge of
the tongue, vide Tongue. Sea, three things in it most considerable, p. 624. How
like man in his natural condition, 628. Especially to covetous oppressors, 629
Season, every thing (even pale death) is beautiful in it, 397 Seeking implies
four things, p. 227. We must seek God especially in times of affliction, 230
Sense of want carries us to lo^k for a remedy, p. 507. Shame, how caused, p.
511. Shaddai, One of the names of God what it signifies, p. 327, 328. Shadow,
How taken in Scripture, p. 580. Sheol, How taken in Scripture, p. 615. Shekel,
Whence so called, it is use, p. 411. Shiggaion, What it means, p. 532. Sight of
the eye, much comfort comes in by it, p. 606, 607. Silence or stopping of the
mouth caused two ways, p. 307. Mouths of wicked men stopped two ways, 308
Silence becomes learners, 529. Sin, the material cause of it, is in our selves,
p. 219, Sin is the meritorious cause of suffering, ib. We need no teaching to
sin, 223, 224. Sin and sorrow the portion of man by nature, 224. They are
contained vertually in our nature, ib. To sin is no burden to a natural man,
225. Not to sin, how taken, 386. To be kept from sin is better than all outward
blessings, 384, 387. Sin the greatest evil, 388. Sin contrary to the nature of
God, 472. They who are sensible of sin, will pray hard for the pardon of it,
706. Sinners expect benefit by sin, 48. Sin persisted in, shall have a
sorrowful reward, 48, 49. Sleep, the ease of trouble and cares, p. 591. Bed
cannot give sleep 592, 634. Smallest matters fall under providence, p. 241.
Sorrow, we ought to give a reason of our sorrows, as well as of our hopes, p.
409. Great sorrow stops our speech and makes broken language, 423. Not to be
able to express our sorrow is an increase of it, 424. Soul of man is the man,
p. 151. Man's excellency, 161, 162. Souls being separate from the body, 603,
604. Sowing, How applied and taken in Scripture, p. 45, 46. Speaking, when the
heart is full of matter, it is a hard thing not to speak, p. 7. Stones of the
field, what it is to be in league with them, p. 370, 371 etc. How God turns
stones into bread, and how man may be said to do so, p* 376. Sword, Two swords
of the mouth p. 199. The hand of the Sword, Sword in the hand, what they
import, p. 349.
T
TEaching compared to raining, or holy doctrine to rain in four respects, p.
523, 524. Teachable, a gracious spirit is teachable, and a teachable spirit is
an excellent spirit, p. 528. Unteachableness more dangerous than ignorance, ib.
Temptation by way of assay or trial, p. 5. Temptation, prayer and meditation,
the three great exercises of a Christian, 568. Terrors, after terrors God
usually sends comforts, p. 104. Terrors of God what, why so called? 430, 431.
Diverse sorts of terrors sent from God. 431, 435. Spiritual terrors, as
spiritual joys are known to few, 436 Toughts compared to boughs or branches
of a tree, and why, page 80. Toughts the flrst-borne of the soul, 81. A godly
man's top-branches or highest thoughts, are about highest things. 81. God never
lost any one of his thoughts, or ever shall, page 281 Time, The shortnesso and
speed of it, p. 600. Time past irrecoverable, 601. Tongue, a scourge, and what
the scourge of the tongue is, p. 351. etc. What it is to be hid from the
scourge of the tongue, 354. It is most sad, when Christians scourge each other
with the tongue, 356. It is a great mercy to be delivered from the scourge of
the tongue, 357. The tongue discovers the iniquity of the heart, 561 Troubles
afflict them most, who supposed themselves beyond trouble, p. 192. Truth is
infused not borne with us, p 76. God sometime (as it were) steals a truth into
the hearts of his people 76. Why he is said to do so 77. Holy truths are very
pleasant to the care of a holy person. 78. Our hearts too narrow to take in or
h^ld all the truths of God, 79. A godly man ^ver receives somewhat, when truth
is revealed. 79. God usually humble^ man, before he shows him his truth. 97.
Truth deserves our most diligent search, 401 We are to search and make truth
our own, before we distribute it unto others, ibid. 402. Truth may challenge
credit, ibid. Truth is the portion of the Saints, 403. Truth mis-applied is
very unsavory, and may be dangerous, 449 Truth must be made known 465. It is
the study if a godly man to do so, 466. Dangerous to conceal truth, ib. The
strength of truth, naked truth is too hard for armed error, 537. Common truths
seriously to be studied. 601
V
VAnity graduall, Months of vanity, what, 585, 586. The vanity of man's life,
showed four ways 644, etc. Visions and revelations feigned often by false
prophets, and why, p. 72 and Heathens, 73, 74. Four sorts of visions or divine
revelations observed among the Rabbis. 82. Three forts noted from Scripture,
83. Visions five ways distinguished, 85, 86. A further sort of visions. 636.
Visit, To visit, what it imports, p. 385. Visitation of God three ways, 664,
etc. Understanding the work of it attributed to the tongue and senses, why. p.
559. Unsearchablenesse of God in his works two ways considered, p. 245. 246.
Uprightness, what, p. 22. It makes us confident in saddest times, 28. It has
boldness, 553. and steadfastness, 554. an upright heart, the more it is
searched, the better it proves. 558 Useless, to be useless is in Scripture
account, to be essenceless, p. 515.
W
War usually accompanied with famine, and why, page 348. War a devourer.
ib. Warfare The life of man is a warfare, showed in six particulars, page 565.
etc Weavers shutle, life of man like it, 598. etc. Whale, why God sets a watch
over him. 625. etc. Wicked man may flourish in great outward prosperity, 188.
The patience of God glorified in the prosperity of wicked men, 188. Two other
reasons why they are permitted to prosper, 189. Wicked men may flourish a great
while, ib. They are under a curse while they flourish. 193. Wickedness is very
laborious, p. 47. There is an art in wickedness, 48 Wife, good wife the beauty
and ornament of the house, p. 385. Wind, vain winds compared to wind, 543,
544, How the life is a wind. 502. etc. Wisdom, is the stability of things 274
Wise men to whom plain things may be dark and obscure, p 296. Wit often
abused by Satan, 266, etc. (...) works, p. 34. A caution about it, ib. word of
God, how it may be hid, and how not. 462. Words the conceptions of the mind, as
hard to keep them in as children ready for the birth, p. 7, 8. Words of the
wise very powerful, 15. Right words very strong, three things in right words,
5^5, 536 Works of God are perfect works, 238. work of man put for his reward,
582 World, when we are most retired from the world, we usually have and are
most fit to have communion with God, 88. wordly men would live always in the
world, 644. Worldly good things not good in themselves, p. 189. They are no
argument that a man who has them is good, 190 No evidences of the fovour of
God, 194. The best of worldly things loathed, if long used, spiritual things,
the more used, the more desired, 310. Best of worldly things fading, 384. The
world is but for this life, 610 Woundings by the hand of God are often
preparatoric to a cure. 332. God never makes a wound too bigg for his own cure.
334. And he can easily cure all the wounds which the malice of man can make,
335 Wrath, what it is, p. 178. Wrath kills three at once, 180
Y
YE^ and nay what they signify in (...), 51^
A Table of those Scriptures, which are occasionally cleared and briefly
illustrated in the foregoing EXPOSITIONS. The first Number directs to the
Chapter, the second to the verse, the the third to the page of the BOOK.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 2. 585 1. 4. 43 1. 9. 22 1. 16. 242 2. 7. 604 2. 25. 274
3. 1. 273, 374 3. 3. 344 3. 22. 8 6. 5. 219 9. 27. 180 11. 3. 145 11. 5. 417
14. 14. 14 16. 12. 438 17. 13. 92 17. 17. 362 18. 12. 361 18. 14. 250 18. 21.
417 22. 17. 419 25. 8. 392, 395 25. 25. 237 29. 25. 512 30. 8. 290 32. 2. 129
32. 24. 89 34. 1, 2. 43 35. 5. 430 35. 11. 328 40. 30. 708 47. 6. 212 47. 13.
17 48. 14. 560 48. 17. 248 49. 3, 4. 161 49. 9. 546 Exodus.
Chap. Verse. Page 4. 25, 26. 674 8. 18. 249 8. 22, 23. 345 12. 13, 14. 711 14.
24. 58 14. 31. 128 15. 10. 716 20. 20. 27 22. 6, 209 28. 8. 272 32. 1. 509 32.
32. 718 33. 2. 695 33. 16. 250 34. 7. 708, 713 Leviticus.
Chap. Verse. Page 10. 3 472 13. 3, 8. 191 16. 22. 710 20. 17. 490 26. 41. 702
Numbers.
Chap. Verse. Page 11. 20. 319 12. 6, 7, 8. 83 14. 9. 205 14. 19. 258 21. 8. 102
23. 21. 46 Deuteronomie.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 18 255 4. 15. 16, 102 7. 7. 663 8. 2. 669 9. 14. 675 11.
8, 11, 12. 264 13. 14. 125 17. 8. 250 17. 13. 516 19. 18, 125 22. 4 332 24. 15.
582 28. 67. 592 32. 2. 524 32. 13. 374 32. 21. 208 32. 31. 648 34. 7. 392
Joshua,
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 5 672 1. 8. 559 7. 19. 683 21. 45. 122 23. 13. 35 23. 14.
122 Judges.
Chap. Verse. Page 5. 2. 569 5. 28. 509 8. 21. 699 9. 15. 208 6. 54. 207 10. 13.
256 10. 10, 14. 342 15. 19. 439 16. 29. 504 20. 16. 386 Ruth.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 8. 504 1 Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 16. 621 1. 27. 305 2. 5. 338 3. 1. 85 3. 12. 238 7. 12.
375 9. 9. 85 14. 6. 243 16. 14. 430 20. 19. 372 24. 14: 301 15. 41. 656 27. 12.
157 28. 21. 17 2 Samue.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 14, 26. 365 7. 15, 25, etc. 720 9. 8. 655 15. 25. 232 ^6.
10, 11. 500 16. 21. 11 ^8. 3. 662 19. 25. 158 19. 35. 256 23. 9. 44 1 Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 8. 535 4. 29. 4^0 5. 4. 699 6. 19. 5 1 Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page 14. 12, 13. 391 17. 1. 262 18. 21. 81 19. 12. 103 22. 29. 520
2 Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page 15. 5. 545 1 Chronicles.
Chap. Verse. Page 17. 16. 655 23. 25. 157 Ezra.
Chap. Verse. Page 9. 13. 242. 272 Nehemiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 9. 26. 716 13. 14 22. 609 Job.
Chap. Verse. Page 9. 9. 152 12. 21. 673 15. 3. 543 15. 25, 26. 702 14. 14. 157
16. 2. 49 16. 13. 701 20. 17. 604 24. 25. 552 27. 16. 205 29. 6. 374 29. 14.
594 30. 2. 392 31. 8. 203 32. 14. 432 34. 3. 223 34. 15. 35 34. 14. 664 35. 6*
7 686* 687 36. 22. 524 38. 25. 263 41. 29. 365 Psalms.
Psalm. Verse, Page 2. 1. 280 2. 12. 56 4. 4. 89 4 6. 605 5. 3. 437 7. 14. 279 8.
4. 651 9. 18. 133 10. 18. 30^ 11. 4. 553 16. 10. 605 18. 26. 191 19. 12. 531
22. 15. 489 23. 5. 203 33. 6. 257 25. 16. 174 30. 6. 7. 192 32. 1. 312 32. 2. 8
32. 9. 627 34. 6. 298 34. 10. 68 35. 10. 640 37. 10. 618 37. 16. 194 37. 25. 41
37. 35. 187 37. 36. 502 37. 37. 480 38. 2. 424 39. 2. 626 39. 4. 164 39. 5. 157
39. 10, 11. 154 39. 6. 647 39. 13. 461 40. 9, 10. 465 41. 3. 635 44. 4. 341 45.
5. 425 46 5. 667 49 13. 20 49. 20. 35 50 17. 716 50. 21 437 51. 4. 110 51. 13.
13 52. 2. 459 55. 12. 4^9 55. 23. 397 56. 2. 212 58. 7. 426 58. 11. 239 62. 9.
415 62. 10. 583, 662 64. 8. 288 64. 9, 10. 305 68. 9. 261 68. 9, 10. 525 68.
10, 30. 368 68. 12. 385 68. 12, 13, 14. 366 72. 17. 152 73. 12. 39 73. 14. 668
73. 22. 441 74. 11. 457 74. 19. 298, 368 75. 1. 253 75. 8. 322 76. 4. 428 56.
5. 280 78. 20. 256 78. 27. 419 78. 38. 608 79. 12. 51 84. 1. 535 84. 11. 673
86. 13. 615 88. 5. 545, 594 89. 39. 552 90. 9. 597 90. 20. 653 91. 5. 426 91.
7. 350 91. 11. 373 95. 11. 56 102. 23, 24. 397 102. 25. 393 103. 8. 56 103. 16.
157, 618 160. 15. 193 111. 2. 34 111. 4. 33 111. 7. 34 112. 7. 352 112. 10. 179
116. 3. 626 116. 6. 181 118. 22. 323 119. 59. 273 119. 113. 85 125. 2. 340 126.
4. 501 127. 2, 445 127. 2. 634 127. 4. 349 130. 5. 475 131. 1. 252 133. 1. 498
136. 4, 5, 6. 251 139. 1, 2. 677 139, 8. 615 139. 23. 553 141. 3. 626 142. 2.
231 144. 4. 647 149. 6. 346 Proverbs.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 27. 99 3. 29. 44 4. 27. 45 5. 19. 531 6. 11. 521 6. 18. 44
7. 22. 327 9. 12. 400 12. 27. 202 13. 15. 213 14. 3. 354 14. 17. 16 17. 17. 518
17. 26. 134 18. 1. 227 18. 10. 267 18. 14. 421 19. 24. 457 20. 8. 553 21. 4. 44
21. 15. 179 21. 30. 286 22. 22. 546 23. 2 478 23. 5. 648 23. 7. 420 23: 10, 11.
549 24. 10 672, 675 24. 16. 12 27. 3. 183 29. 18. 84 30. 15, 18, 21. 339 31.
10, 11. 127 31. 21. 363 31. 31. 199 Ecclesiastes.
Chap. Ver. Page 2. 10. 202 3. 13. 202 3. 19, 20, 21. 604 7, 2, 160. 8. 8. 266
9. 1 40 9. 10. 158 10. 19. 173 11. 8. 340 12. 1. 33, 392 12. 2. 341, 616 12.
13. 151 Canticles.
Chap. Verse. Page 7. 4. 27 Isaiah.
Chap. Verse- Page 1. 1. 500 1. 6. 202 1. 24. 315 1. 29. 511 2. 4 349 3. 1. 345
3. 6, 7. 331 3. 9. 510 5. 2. 374 5. 2, 5. 375 5. 6, 261 5. 19, 308 6. 5. 473 6.
8. 191 6. 9, ^0. 295 6. 13. 486 7. 13. 257 8. 19. 103 9. 6 3^8 (...) (...)
(...) 10. 18. 489 10. 19. 255 11. 4. 358 11. 7, 8. 9, 378 14. 18. 344 16. 14.
574 19. 6. 303 20 5. 512 21. 6, 11. 668 25. 9. 305 26. 9 444 26. 11. 307 26.
16. 665 27. 9. 316 28. 18, 19. 35^ 28. 21. 252 29. 4. 103 29. 6. 205 ^0. 5. 512
30. 20. 441 30. 33. 56 3^. 4. 292 33. 9, 10. 268 33. 16. 169 33. 18, 20. 383
412 33. 21. 303, 412 33. 21, etc. 694 32. 24. 7^7 38. 2. 608 38. 3. 609 38. 11.
607 38. 12. 156, 599 38. 17. 716 38. 18. 158 40. 6. 162, 389 40. 15. 244 43. 2.
344 (...). 7* 23^ 44. 22, 613 45. 7. 222 51. 6, 7. 153 53. 2. 188 53. 3. i0,
418 53. 5. 327, 332 53. 6. 708 530 15. 588 56. 3. 390 56. 12. 572 57. 1. 35,
159 57. 15. 454 57. 16. 15, 482 57. 19. 198 58, 1. 621 58. 7. 332 59 1, 2. 220
59. 6. 280 65. 11, 588 65. 17. 243 65. 22. 331 66. 24. 595 Jeremiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 10. 537 191 2. 5. 648 2. 25, 542 2. 34. 5^0 4 18. 47 5,
13. 54^ 5. 24. 264 6. 11. 391 8. 7. 440 9 4. 518 ^2 ^2 (...) 12. 2. 188 15. 1,
2. 664 17. 6. 605 18. 18. 352, 275 358 20. 9. 6, 7 22. 29. 653 33. 22. 419 38.
4. 10 50. 20. 717 50. 43. 352 Lamentations.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 12. 416 2. 14. 442 3. 1. 605 3. 23. 667 Ezekiel.
Chap. Verse. Page 7. 17. 11 13. 10. 449 16. 14. 653 18. 2. 200 23. 4. 382 34.
4. 178, 331 39. 2. 338 40. 4. 662 Daniel.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 10. 585 4. 4. 187 4. 13, 14. 166 7. 15. 181 10. 3. 445 11.
33, 34, 35. 116 Hosea.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 6. 209 2. 14. 180 4. 4. 376 4. 8. 712 5. 10. 376 5. 12.
153 9. 2. 552 11. 8 9. 315 12. 1. 543 13. 9. 2^0 14. 5. 187 Joel.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 14. 508 2. 26. 510 Amos.
Chap. Ver. Page 1. 3. 339, 340 3. 6. 221 3. 8. 7 4 6. 37 4. 8. 261 5. 21. 641
7. 8. 711 9. 1. 201 Jonah.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 17. 589 3. 9. 508 Michah.
Chap. Verse. Page 5. 5. 341 6. 6, 688 6. 15. 203 7. 19. 716 7. 3. 234, 559 7*
9. 183 7. 16* 307 7. 18. 713 Habakkuk.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 8. 598 3. 1. 532 3. 14. 190 3. 17. 552 Zachariah.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 8. 131 1. 15. 193. 1. 10. 537. 4. 7. 649. 8. 9, 13. 10 9.
12. 304 11. 15. 178. 11. 17. 294. 14. 6* 102. 2. 5. 794 Malachy.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 17. 697. Matthew.
Chap. Verse. Page 4. 6 373. 5. 22. 676 5. 45. 263. 6. 12 714 6. 33 194, 317. 7.
22. 512. 7. 29. 538. 8. 9. 568. 8. 17. 709. 11. 29. 176. 13. 21. 189. 21. 19.
507. 23. 2, 3. 538. 23. 4. 224. 24. 40, 41. 345. 26. 39. 711. 27. 19 637 27.
46. 720 Mark.
Chap. Verse. Page 6. 2, 6. 253. 6. 16. 266. 9 49. 223 Luke.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 46 650. 1. 51. 268. 1. 63. 665. 6. 25. 362 6. 38. 364. 12.
19. 572. 12. 20. 186. 13. 9 718. 13. 26. 605. 15. 32. 515. 17. 4. 714. 18. 8.
271. 18. 14. 107. 23. 31. 101. 24. 37. 94. John.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 5. 296. 2. 23, 24. 128. 3. 14. 708. 3. 16. 36. 5. 17. 237.
9. 4. 276. 9. 27. 400. 12. 19 279. 10 13. 583. 13. 7. 247. 14. 18. 302. 20. 23.
714. 21. 18. 702. Acts.
Chap. Verse. Page* 8. 23. 714. 13. 10. 275. 13. 22 470. 13. 46. 533. 13. 9. 553.
14. 17. 295. 17. 27. 264. 28. 27. 296. Romans.
1. 18. 464. 2. 14. 140. 2. 23, 24. 539. 4. 18. 477. 5. 4. 306. 5. 6, 7. 491.
8. 32. 460, 715. 8. 35, 36. 364. 367. 9. 33. 510. 11. 13. 650. 11. 33. 245. 1
Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 25. 287. 3. 2. 561. 3. 19. 285. 4. 4. 140. 7. 20. 575. 5.
1. 150. 6. 20. 521. 7. 31. 384. 8. 2. 528. 9. 9. 661. 9. 22. 448. 10. 13. 344.
13. 9. 77. 15. 32. 369. 15. 50. 96. 15. 55. 364. 2 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 17, 20. 514 3. 18. 471. 4. 3, 4. 295. 4. 7. 145, 475. 4.
8, 9. 41. 4. 17. 660. 4. 12, 17. 316. 5. 11. 434. 5. 4. 321. 5. 21. 381. 9. 6.
45. 10. 4, 5. 77, 284. 11. 14. 130. 12. 1. 86. 12. 10. 304. 13. 8. 225.
Galathians.
Chap. Verse. Page 6. 1. 6, 12. Ephesians.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 13. 198. 5. 15. 273. Phillipians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 28. 521. 2. 16. 463. 3. 21. 596. Colossians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 20. 139. 2. 15. 521. 4. 6. 449. 1 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page 5. 20. 326. 2 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 2. 74. 2. 3. 36. 3. 12. 574. 1 Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 3. 354. 3. 4, 5. 387. 4. 12. 326. 6. 16. 136. 2 Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 3. 459. 2. 15. 448. Titus.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 7. 354. 2. 15. 326. 3. 10. 533. Hebrews.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 11. 551. 3. 13. 229. 4. 15. 417, 418. 5. 7. 721. 6. 7, 8.
524. 10. 4. 689. 11. 8. 248. 11. 10. 149. 12. 1. 176. 12. 2. 175, 324. 12. 6
11. 12. 10. 317, 318. 12 5. 325. 12 14. 473. James.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 2. 367. 1. 17. 645. 1. 15. 490. 1. 27. 495. 4. 14. 614 5.
17. 262. 1 Peter.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 6. 323. 2. 22. 708. 4. 14. 364. 2 Peter.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 4. 469. 2. 18. 544 1 John.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 12. 715 2. 16. 180. 2. 20. 225 3. 9. 225 Jude.
Chap. Verse. Page 00. 12. 515. 00. 22. 449. 00. 22, 23. 527. 00. 16. 544.
Revelation.
Chap. Verse. Page 4. 6 368. 5. 8 9. 368. 7. 6. 255. 9. 12. 36. 11. 5, 10. 357.
14. 13. 47. 16. 15. 76. 18. 6. 51. 18. 21. 716. 21. 27. 48.

FINIS.

