The Necessity of Abating USURY RE-ASSERTED; In a Reply to the Discourse of Mr.
Thomas Manly ENTITLED, Usury at six per Cent. Examined, etc.

Together with a Familiar and inoffensive way propounded for the future
Discovery of sums at Interest, that so they may be charged with their equal
share of Public Taxes and Burdens, the long defect whereof has exceedingly
fomented Usury, Embased Land, and much decayed the better half of the Kingdom.

By Sr. Thomas Culpeper, Jun. Knight.

LONDON, Printed by T. L. for Christopher Wilkinson, at the Black-boy against
S. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, 1670.

TO THE READER.
THe answer lately published to my discourse concerning the Abatement of usury
was so far from surprising me, that, indeed, it was no other then I long
expected and much desired; Not from any overweening of my own cause, (which yet
perhaps would justify some degree of confidence,) But from a real wish, that
important truths may be cleared, which they can hardly be, till they have been
roundly contradicted and severely scanned: And therefore I am in the first
place to thank my plain dealing Adversary for this Opportunity of resuming the
Argument, That by due enquiry, either Convincing my Error, or Confirming my
judgment, the impartial Reader may be however satisfied.

When first I saw it, and observed its bulk, I looked at least for some
Arguments which had never been offered before, and prepared my self with much
curiosity to read it; But finding my Expectation herein disappointed, I could
not but take it for a happy Omen, that since the reasons urged for the present
fall are either parallel, or certainly more pregnant than those in former
times, and the objections against it, little or nothing Varied, the like
success would probably attend it.

It was then with equal tumult and acrimony suggested, that no wisdom could
foresee the tragical consequences; That half our cash would be buried under
ground, and the rest exported to better profit; That no young beginner could
ever hope to borrow five pounds; That we should be beggered merely by the
withdrawing of foreign Loanes; That eight per cent, was not worth whistling
after, nor scarce telling; That Brokage and securities would be intolerable,
that laws were but cobwebs to necessity, that Improvement was a brainsick
Project; That Orphans and Widows would cry for vengeance; That the Disasters
of Riot and sloth were falsely charged upon usury; And that it was frivolous
herein to quote the wise, frugal and industrious Hollander.

Suitable to the Arguments, the Adversaries were then the same, For it was
principally opposed by the Dons and Ruffes, the eminent Traders and other sages
of that time, who either being (some of them,) at least parcel-usurers, or
foreseing that it would raise that land which they were yet to purchase, or
disperse that Benefit of trade which they desired still to monopolize, or
disdaining to learn ought from their inferiors, brow-beat it as the Project of
Bankrouts, derided it as the Frenzy of Novices and State-Empyricks, and thought
it sufficiently baffled by their dis-owining it: Herein seconded by the usurer
with his numerous Gang, deeply concerned that so goodly a shrine should be
profanely touched, and shrewdly misliking the Precedent: Abetted by many
faint-hearted Borrowers, who, mistrusting the event of a good cause,
maintained, (as they thought) by Dwarfes, but assai'ld by Giants, Either cried
quarter^; and laid down their Arms, or ran over to the enemy, to the great
increase of his forces, and hazard of the enterprise.

The same Crisis had it in point of time, being moved three years before it
took effect; For in the year 1620, my Father wrote his treatise, as appears by
the Date of its first edition, and in the year 1623. I take it, the Act passed;
Now this interval was spent in eager disputes, and the daily gaining of
Proselytes; (wherein, by the way, it is observable, that, for ought appears,
that age was not yet brave enough to assert even the height of public usury in
Print,) For being first propounded by a few Country Gentlemen and Merchants,
(for the smalnesse of their party and boldness of their assertions then
censured as Fanatics in trade,) in that space of time, it won in effect all
true lovers of their Country, and convinced far the major part of unbrassed
Auditors: These Circumstances I hold it pertinent enough for me to relate, as
I received them by conversation with my deceased Father, or collected them from
his Treatises, partly to show how difficult it is to dislodge a potent
Oppressor, partly to satisfy the present Assertours of this Argument, that
they ought not to despair, though they meet with greater hardships then have
yet encountered them, but rather assuredly promise themselves, That cause must
and will at length prevayle, which has not hitherto been opposed but by flouts
and frowns.

In the Reading of Mr. Manlies answer, I find exception taken both at my
frequent mention of the term usurer, and at diverse blunt expressions upon that
subject; But I hope it may easily be salved with this candid distinction of a
rank or common usurer, and a Lender upon usury; It is the trade which I
abhor, not the bare practice; Common usurers I defy, as the scandals of the
Church, and Cankers of the State; Lenders upon usury I partly excuse, knowing
many of them to be persons truly conscientious, and such, as were they
convinced of the oppression, would not only desist but restore: yet even these
I cannot but admonish seriously to consider, whether such practice have any
better ground to support it, then general Custom, and seeming Convenience,
Countenanced by the Pulpits silence, and whether in the purpose of humane
laws, impunity come not far short of right: To such as yet further
expostulate my meaning, I answer with a late eminent Statesman in the like
case, whosoever feels himself concerned, him I mean; or with a friend of mine,
who being asked where the usurer dwelt, protested he knew not, and hoped there
was no such man.

Two capital errors in my former Treatise I must acknowledge, but withal
excuse; The first, that I did not previously clear this great problem, that
the abatement of usury has a natural and Mathematical Energy to raise Land,
and augment Trade; For that being granted, all the advantages propounded had
been sufficiently proved by but naming them; Whereas, for want of this
groundwork the foundation seemed too slight for the building, and my ensuing
assertions to unprepared Readers appeared no better then bold presumptions,
like the imposing of Authority without first proving it authentic: The second,
that charged our present sufferings wholly, (or at least principally,) upon the
rate of usury, and not as well upon our long unequal burdens, which perhaps
have had a greater share in the Embasing of land then even usury it self, and
without which usury would now much less have needed reducing: To the first, I
answer, That in truth I could not foresee the denial of that maxim, which so
immediately referres to the infallible rule of three in Arithmetic, has been
ever granted, and never till now questioned by the usurer himself, And is, by
way of admittance, solemnly declared, not only by that notable statute 21.
Jacobi, but even by an Act of this present Parliament: To the second, That I
rather chose frequently to glance, as it were, upon those unequal pressures,
than lay the main stresse upon them, if I could avoid it, Partly from my
reverence to the Authority imposing them, Partly from my foresight of an
answer, which obliging me, in my own defense, to produce them as manifest
causes of the fall of Land and Rents, will, I hope, absolve me for it.

For brevities sake, I have chosen to reply by way of Dialogue, having ever
observed that in such familiar discourses, doubtful matters are best explained;
Glosses and sophismes prevented, and taedious circum-locutions avoided, which
at best signify somewhat to style and form, but nothing to sense: Only for an
Antidote to my former omission, I shall first ground my future Arguments
concerning Land, upon the impartial narrative of our public burdens, for
forty years past, here ensuing.

A summary Account of our Public Taxes and Burdens, and how they have been
born for forty years past.
TO clear my Antithesis of Land and Usury, I shall distinguish the time into
three Stages or Periods, 1. Before the War, 2. During the War, 3. After the War.

1. Before the War, It has ever been the known grievance of this Kingdom, that
all the hardships of the Common wealth were born by Land: Our Landlords only
exposed to be Lords and Deputy Lieutenants, Sheriffs, Commanders in the
Militia, Justices of the Peace, Jurymen, with diverse other chargeable
employments general and Parochial; Our Tenants to be Constables, Bosholders,
Surveyours, Collectours, etc. Pressed to the War, and charged even in Peace; Both
of them, in their degrees, obliged to Residence and Hospitality, subject to
payment of Tithes, maintenance of the Poor, employment of Laborers at certain
cost, but uncertain profit, Repayring of Churches, Mills, Bridges, Highways,
Sewers, etc. Rarely pretending to matters of much advantage: Neither is it a
new Complaint, That usury has always sculked and shifted like the running
Gout, and like a Faery or Goblin, which tortures and scares without ever
appearing; That it was to the Commonwealth, at best, like a lame leg,
useless, deceitful, and troublesome; Profitable only to it self; Craftily
avoiding all charges and Duties, how just and Equal soever, but watching all
the Advantages of wealth and leisure for gainful Offices and penny worths:
Tithe he never paid, I will not swear he never received it, since the first
fall of Interest, in doubtful times he is presently upon the Wing, And if you
do but talk reason to him, threatens to lurch or leave you; For the world is
his Country, ^and perhaps in six months time, he can be as good Dutch or
French, as ever he was Englishman, being now, at the best, but a Denizen: With
great reason therefore my father, in his second Treatise, even then inferred,
that since the usurer paid little to subsidies, nothing to fifteens, little to
the poor man's box, repaired nor built no Churches, set no Laborers a^ work
for the good of the Commonwealth, employed none but Scriveners and Brokers, and
those at the charge of the Borrower, no man needed doubt, but there would be
enough of the Occupation, though money were brought to five, (he might now have
said to three,) in the hundred.

2. During the War, most remarkable it is, how generally and fatally the Land
was engaged, most of it actively in raising of Troops and Regiments, for the
assistance and support of the parties contending, toward which the Landlords,
as their persuasions led them, not only staked and pawned their own Estates,
but procured their neighbors and tenants to embarke with them; all of it
passively, by Plunder, Freequarter, Contribution, and other exactions so
insupportable, that an indifferent sum was then worth a fair Lordship, Taxes
being commonly in surplussage to Rents, and stock on all sides looked upon as
lawful prise, so as Landlords were ruined by hundreds, and Tenants by
thousands; Not to mention the irreparable wastes committed by fire and other
warlike violences. The usurer, in the mean time, felt none of these Earth
quakes, but (like a devout Hermit in his Cell,) retired to his Beads, little
concerned in secular or sublunary affairs, unless it were in the special case
of an Assumpsit or single band: We heard little of his Chivalry, and less of
his Martyrdom: some have been reported by the black art to be stick-free, and
others shot-free; The usurer, in the late times, was both.

3. After the War, it is but too fresh in our memories, what grievous Pressures
have ever since lain upon the Land; For the clear discovery whereof, I shall
consider it under the fourefold Capacity of Compounder, Owner, Farmer, and
Borrower: The Compounder, (of which quality were perhaps our most and greatest
Landlords,) upon payment of two years complete revenue for a Fine, the lowest
rate I have heard of, (debts being rarely considered,) was graciously restored
to his house empty and half ruined, to his Land stripped of Wood and Timber,
ill tenanted and unfenced, his Meadows perhaps broken up, his Plantations,
Hop-grounds, Nurseries, etc. at best neglected; Nor was he thus dismissed, but
exposed to the repayring of all pretended trespasses by him unavoydably
committed in the War; Still molested, and forced, (as the least of evils in
appearance, though in consequence perhaps the greatest,) by residing in London,
to shelter himself from some ill neighborhood. The owner, besides many other
ruinous losses, has for above twenty years past, commumbus annis, in
Landtaxes, Military charges, and the increase of Parochial duties, paid at
least one fourth part of his yearly income strictly valued. without the least
consideration of fall or loss of Rents, Repayrs and diverse other incident
defalcations. The Farmer having been impoverished by free quarter, and owing,
(at least in part,) for his stock, has been, and still is, by the like
sufferings, together with his growing debts, kept so low, that it is great pity
to see how painfully and innocently he cheats himself by holding on the Farm,
being neither able profitably to stock, nor afford it ordinary and necessary
amendment, nor keep his grayn for tolerable Market: The Borrower, if
compounder, and in debt before the War, (as diverse were,) must needs be
desperate; It could then be no otherwise with him then thus, take all, and pay
the Baker; For what estate almost could buoy up against such a Fine, with many
years loss of income, and growth of Interest at eight per Cent? But though
neither compounder, nor formerly in debt, can he well be imagined a clear man,
having lived so long in effect upon the main? And then let us take a survey of
his condition; Borrow he could not then, without excessive Brokage, for the
Glut of Compounders had strangely improved Extortion, besides the
Circumstantial mischiefs and traps of chargeable attendance, conveyance,
suretyships, counter-securities, and trusts, which have furnished us with suits
and Encumbrances scarce to be cleared in an Age, and which, without fall of
Interest, may amount to a reasonable Land-taxe, twenty, (perhaps forty) years
hence; sell he could not in due time, but to the loss of almost half his
Inheritance, so much was Land embased by the Miseries of the War, multitude of
sellers, and Land-taxes: subsist without selling long he could not, how ever
ought not, for Taxes and Interest money, (like heavy bruises meeting with foul
humors,) would soon gangreen: All this while, the monyed man eat the fat of
the Land, being a kind of Lord-Dane in every household; The common rate of
Interest, with Choice of security real or Personal, (for borrowers were forced
to help one another with joint and mutual suretyships,) came clear to him, for
the Acceptance whereof he was even treated as a Benefactour; But the common
Usurer, (being generally his own Broker, like Bawd and Curtesan,) was double
greased; He swaggered like the Lord of a great Manor, the Demeans whereof are
holden by Villenage, having the very Carcasses of his Betters, as it were, in
his clutches: His harvest lasted many years, betwixt pernicious Loanes and
Seisures, Dog-cheap penny-worths of goods, and half-purchases of Lands both
private and public: For like a Raven, he feasts upon Carrion, and thrives by
the calamities of his Country.

I have claimed the Losers Privilege in the blunt Narrative of these plain
truths, (irksome indeed to the memory, but in use medecinal) partly to silence
their un reasonable clamor, who most absurdly impute our present damp of Land,
to the reducing of Interest, chiefly to lay open, even to vulgar Capacities,
the Original and Groundwork of our present Maladies, so industriously
palliated by most of those that procured, so unhappily mistaken or slighted by
many that feel it, whom I daily hear lamenting the hardship of the times, but
withal imputing it to causes, either scandalous to Authority, or in themselves
so frivolous, as one would blush to mention, as if they should tell me, we are
sick for want of health, idle for want of business, and insolvent for want of
money: These I would willingly acquaint, what evil Spirits haunt them, and what
familiar spells may drive them away; For to me it seems most evident, That the
disproportion of Usury to trade, but principally to Rents, not timely observed
and Redressed, together with the advantage constantly taken by Usurers to
decline all Public Burdens, (especially in civil Broils, after them,) has
and, since our current practice of Usury, made greater havoc of noble
Families, hopeful Traders, and honest Farmers, then all other Oppressions and
Casualties, within that time, summed up together.

For the better applying of this History to my present Argument, give me leave
to propound these following Quaeries.

Does not public welfare mainly depend on the avoiding of oppression by
equality of Taxes?

Ought not every one that has a certain Revenue to contribute his share to the
common Burdens of his Country, is it not a condition reasonably annexed to
Property?

Supposing Interest of money to be lawful Rent, (as it pretends,) and admitting
it the speediest, clearest, and securest income, (as doubtless it is,) ought
it not, even in that respect, to be most strictly charged?

Are not sums of money at Usury, goods, chattels, indeed the principal ones,
were they not then comprehended in all our late laws for Taxes, even those of
the late Usurpers?

Were they not, in some of our latest Acts, since his Majesty's return,
particularly charged by name?

Admitting it assault to steal Customs and Excise, is it not at least
equivalent in the lender upon Usury to decline Taxes imposed by one and the
same Authority?

Is not the Prejudice to King and Kingdom finally as great, but the immediate
wrong to neighbors palpably greater?

Has not the increase of our Poor, Military Burdens, and Farmers Taxes, for
twenty years past, embased Farms at least ten per Cent. in Value?

Have not the like pressures more immediately cost the Landlord at least
fifteen per Cent. of his yearly income, and what has the Usurer contributed to
any of them?

Has not every Purchaser of late years, by reason of their long Prescription,
purchased with allowance for them, in the nature of Quit-rents clogging
inheritance?

Has not then every necessitous Seller clearly sacrificed the fourth part of
his Estate to his exigence, and have not Purchasers thriven to the same
proportion by their neighbors Misery, and so made double Benefit of their own
wrong?

Have not the hopes of Landlords and doubts of Tenants concerning the end or
ease of Taxes justly hindered the letting of good leases, and multiplied
Tenancies at will, to the manifest ruin of Farms, and Public detriment, but
advantage of lurching Purchasers?

Have not the like hopes suspended many sellers upon Exigence to their greater
Ruin, and the contrary doubts so amused fair Purchasers, that they knew not
what justly to offer?

Have not borrowing Landlords paid all this while six per Cent. indeed to the
Usurer, but otherwise, (considering the Clog of their inheritances,) much more
then double that rate; and have not Lenders, in effect, received near two per
Cent. overplus, which, in all equity, they should have paid to the Public?

Will not the Usurer, without due caution always, serve us with the same sauce
in all future Broils, or extraordinary Levies?

May not this Kingdom be presumed still to feel the effects of the late civil
War, As men do sometimes old Bruises or the sins of their youth very long
after?

Admitting Land-taxes should cease, may not the continuance (perhaps increase,)
of other Burdens, especially the Poor, without effectual redress, be
sufficient to perpetuate the Embasement of our Farms, now so impoverished?

Will any man now marvel at the Deadness, and not rather at the quickness of
our Lands and Markets?

Must we not impute this suspension of our utter ruin to our intermediate
growth of trade by our last fall of Usury, and its exemption from new Clogs?

May not an Indifferent Charity suppose, that the Landlord may be now
encumbered, and Tenant impoverished, without rank Prodigality?

Does not even six per Cent. grievously bite the Land, it being now Notorious,
That (all things computed) Rents in the Country do not generally answer three?

Can the Borrower ever hope, without abatement of Usury, to clear himself, but
to half Ruin in sale, or extreme mischief by delay, may not the Usurer, at his
pleasure, relieve himself, perhaps with advantage, by purchasing in time?

Can the Retrenching of Usury, which by visible experience has always proved
successeful, be ever so just and necessary, as to Farmers generally drooping,
and a Gentry encumbered by Loyal sufferings?

Is not the improvement of Land, and support of Gentry far more considerable
to his Majesty's service, then any pretense of Usurers can be?

If our Taxes and Burdens had been equally born, must not the due Rate of Land
have been maintained, to at least 24. years Purchase?

If land could have escaped all these Burdens, and money born them, without
consideration of desperate and uncertain debts, (as surely little we have had
of encumbrances or fayler of Rents.) What would probably have been the Purchase
of Land?

If all our Payments had been charged upon Customs and foreign Imposts (money
and Land being both exempted,) what would have been our Account of Trade?

May it not yet be seasonable, (because profitable, and most just,) to expose
money at Interest to public Taxes and Duties?

If Creditours at Interest be Obliged, at their Peril, to Tax themselves, so
as by their declining it, they be construed to disown their Principal, and
forfeit it, either wholly to the Borrower, or half to the King, may not this
probably be effected, without either the temptation of Perjury, or prejudice of
Informing? Where were the Inconvenience?

Were not this, Concurrent with the fall of Usury, a likely way speedily to
raise the value of Land, for want of which only the Country now droopes?

I shall now proceed in my Reply to Mr. Manly by Questions and Propositions
naturally arising from his own words, or sense, for brevities sake, collected
with the same fidelity; which I would desire him, or any other, hereafter to
use toward me.

THE PREFACE.
T. M. IS not the hiring of money, (seeing it cannot be borrowed for Gods sake,)
as necessary for the well-being of mankind, as hiring of Land or houses?


T. C. Divines will first tell you, your very Hypothesis is stark naught, De
jure, I mean, though de facto it be too true; and then withal they will direct
you to wholsomer expedients for traffic, on all sides, than hiring of money,
viz. Trading with our own stocks, honest Partnership, and discreet Factorage:
besides, as to the difference of Land and money, they will, (amongst other
things) inform you, That your Letting of money at the same price to all
Borrowers, looks somewhat like the expecting an equal Rent for all Lands by the
Acre, without examining their Quality, situation, etc. To vary is
impracticable, and not limit the Rate, has been found by experience, in
uncharitable times, the highway to Jewish extortion.


T. M. Do you not lay an unreasonable stresse upon the Interest paid by his
Majesty for moneys Borrowed in the late War?


T. C. My meaning was the same with yours, (though not asserted with the like
confidence and Authority,) viz. That his Majesty gave excessive Rates, now
this, say I, happened through his not commanding money, as the States did, the
reason whereof I clearly refer to the plenty and security attending low
Interest.


T. M. Does not the frugal Hollander grow rich with the gains of seven or
eight per Cent. whilst fifteen per Cent. will not support our Expensive Traders?


T. C. Five or six, I doubt, is generally fair for them, ours, I suppose, may
thank you for it; They would fain persuade the Usurer either to try himself,
or be their Ensurer; But, it seems, he desires none of their Eggs for his
money, for he lovingly thanks them, and had rather they should be his.


T. M. I desire the Reader to take notice, That all Europe exceeds us in the
Rates of Usury, the States of Holland, and some Commonwealths of Italy only
excepted? And some or all of these are unrestrained by their laws, and at
liberty to take as much for Interest as they can get.


T. C. We differ partly in fact, but more in the Issue by you put; For laws
may not only be proper but necessary in a Kingdom grievously encumbered by civil
War, and that has so much good Land for its fund; When, in Commonwealths of
unequal and slender territory, free from exigents, possessed of trade, and
chiefly founded in it; current Security, with good Policies, may both supply
the want of them, and perhaps better effect their design: As for Rates, I think
it were happy, if ours were the lowest.


T. M. I say, (speaking as a man,) it is no wrong to the Commonwealth, If men of
Estates drink, drab, live profusely, and die Beggars, so long as every penny
comes to the Natives, etc.


T. C. I say (speaking as an Englishman,) Interest Reipublicae, nequis male
utatur suis: This is indeed, a rare doctrine for Usurers, but baneful to the
Commonwealth; such a vermin, as you describe, it no more wants, then it does
the Usurer himself, or than the Farmer, in a cheap time, does Rats and mice, or
lazy and disorderly hinds to devour his fruits; For so necessity, (the mother
of Encumbrance, and Gran-dame of Extortion^ would both fatally embase our
Lands, and poison our trade with Bankrouts; besides he is a scabby sheep and
infects the Flock; I now leave the Reader to judge, who speaks most in favor
of Luxury, you or I; Cato or Seneca, I presume, taught you no such lewd and
vulgar Politics.


T. M. Well then! A Tax we must have, be it only to dispose Authority to
subdue Interest, etc.


T. C. Me thinks, Sir, we are already half agreed; The Kings debts, I presume,
you would have paid, and his real occasions supplied, Land-taxes, it seems, you
abborre as much as I, and I trust, you wish so well to trade, as you would not
have that bear all our Burdens; What then remains, but that our future levies
be upon money at Interest? If you please then, and public occasions require it,
(as it is like they may) monytaxes let them be: Let two or three per Cent. be
charged upon all Interest money for seven years, and let Usurers always
afterward be double Taxed like Aliens, as, in effect, they are, and say you
are gently dealt with: But four per Cent. with an effectual provision for the
future taxing of money its due share, seems to be the cleanlier way.


T. M. Is not this gratifying the Borrower with a vengeance for one years
payment to eternity, out of an honest Creditours Purse?


T. C. How honest I know not, I am sure, of late we have tasted little of his
Justice; Let me again acquaint him, that admitting even his fairest pretense,
and hardest measure, I suppose, it were scarce a Rowland for his Oliver, but
our soundest Divines, I doubt, will tell you, you mistake your vice for your
Estate.


T. M. Who laid this Excise, as you term it, upon your Land, the Borrower, or
the Usurer? He swears, he sought not for the Gentleman or trader, he had
something else to do with his money, etc.


T. C. I could answer you perhaps without just exception, it was the Rebel and
the Usurer betwixt them; But, pray Sir, is not this as good a plea for the
highest extortions as for common Interest? My surly host, when I question his
Reckoning, may as well reply, who sent for you? The Prostitute, having picked
her lovers purse, may as well ask him, who solicited you? I durst likewise
swear, (but that I doubt a Borrowers Oath may not be taken without a voucher,
since his Band I find will not pass without two or three sureties,) The Usurer
would never lend for pure good nature or Importunity, or if he thought he could
otherwise deal to better effects; And therefore I have a little curiosity to
know, what that something else was, For, if it were a purchase, (though a
Lurching one,) beshrew those, say I, whoever they were, that diverted him.


T. M. What would you have him do? Let his neighbor sink? Go to prison? etc.


T. C. Such a deliverance or Jubilee as this had Esops horse, protected from the
stagge, but ridden to death by the man; I Will tell you, what I would have him
do, not give his friend Poison for Physic, Or, at best, cold water in a
Calenture; What then? Why lend him money grais, or at a tolerable and saving
Rate, to be sure, what ever it be: But he who now premises that Usury is
charity, may shortly, I doubt conclued, that gain is Godliness.


T. M. He kept his money by him these six months to lend, etc.


T. C. 'Twas his own folly, he should once for all, (according to your discreet
advertisement Page 44,) have fairly laid it out upon Land, and for ever
prevented the like loss; But, it seems he knows better what to do, then you or
I can direct him.


T. M. He lends it to a man, that gains fifteen per Cent. ( for so much I
believe all traders do,) Is it not reasonable the lender should have at least
one half thereof? etc.


T. C. Nay, if once you come to reason, you are gone, stick to your opus and
usus, if you be wise; For what if he lend it to a man who looses fifteen per
Cent. (so much, I doubt, some traders do,) Is it not then reasonable the lender
should bear one half of the loss, since he looked for one half of the Gain? I
marvel, Sir, I should need, now to tell you, that trading at Interest is a
deceitful Lottery, consisting of blanks without number for a few great lots, an
errand Quack, that proclaims his cures, but conceales his murders; A few
Field-Officers it has, who by chance surviving, and carrying away the fruit
and glory of the whole service, are celebrated for their Exploits; And well
they may, for they are almost as strange as Knight-Errandry; But common
Soldiers are slain by thousands and forgotten; My comfort is, that I hope by
this time, our Merchants, and Usurers too so well perceive it, that the one is
not forward to trust, nor the other eager to be trusted; And that the blessing
of foreign Loanes has quite forsaken us; Otherwise, it would ask no
conjuring to read the destiny of our Trade.


T. M. No man will keep money by him to lend for so small a Praemium as four per
Cent. which will hardly reward selling in and out, and make good the Brass
money, much less answer the hazard of lending, which is so considerable, in this
deceitful age, that I persuade my self, the Ensurance Office would demand above
30 s. per 100 to secure all the money lent on security in England.


T. C. The Other Angel, and it is done: There is now no more, for ought I see,
betwixt your hazard and our Ensurance, troth, be good natured, and do not stand
for a trifle: But surely, Sir, you speak at a great Rate; Tell Mr. Usurer from
me, his poor Bayliffe the Gentleman, (as you rightly term him,) is content
with half the salary, sometimes with a bit and a knock from his Benefactour,
and that his worship puts me in mind of some great goodfellows, who were so
long accustomed to swill in Spirits, Brandy, Sack, Metheglin, Northdown, and
Mum, as household Beer would not down with them, it was but Rock-water, even
Cider they took but for Clarified whey: But our hope is malt will shortly rise,
and then we must brew smaller for him then of late we have done; Yet even at
four per Cent. I doubt, he will fare but too well; Better, I am sure for the
present, then many who better deserve: As for his hazards, he ensures himself
with a witness; Nor do I suppose, he desires to loose so sweet a pretense.
However, if at any time he be bitten, he is but paid in his own coin, for not
purchasing fairly, in stead of lending shrewdly, and lying in ambush, as he
does, for lurching Pennyworths.


T. M. I am yet to learn, what puts our Gentry upon considerable Borrowing,
except such things as I am not willing to record, since not one in seven
borrowes to advance any Laudable improvement.


T. C. Our late Usurpers could better resolve you then I, unless you will take
my Preface in part of payment, but in truth, the question comes strangely from
you in this place; who tell us but a Page or two before, of Marrying Daughters,
and going to Prison; good Sir, look about, or you will lose your self in the
wood.


T. M. There is another sort of men, (Gentlemen not in debt,) concerned in this
Conditional Tax, who are not to expect present advantage by subduing Interest,
but are to solace themselves with an assurance of future improvement of their
inheritances in value, as certain as if it were in their Purses, says my
Discourser, etc.


T. C. I say so indeed, and I doubt not but most of those Gentleman will
believe me, for the thing is manifest both as to the Purchase and Rents of
Land; For Purchase, the Resemblance of Land and money to two Buckets was never
questioned till now; And Rents must needs be governed by the very same Maxims
with the Land it self and Trade, the farmer being no other then a Country
Merchant, and, with your Patience, I shall offer you diverse familiar instances
to prove, the Tenant has equal benefit in the fall of Usury with his
Landlord, his stock will be so much cheaper to him, his ordinary yet necessary
Amendments, Fences, Repairs, etc. will be cheaper, he may the better afford to
sell at common and low markets, or wait for higher, and, upon the Encouragement
of a long and good lease, he (but much more the owner) will be enabled to
venture on Improvements chargeable and expectant, the profit whereof will
vastly accrue not to himself only, but the Commonwealth, viz. Building,
Planting, Enclosing, Drayning, Flouding, Marling, etc. These are so obvious, as
I cannot but admire the vulgar capacities of some, who in discourse on this
subject are apt to say, Alas! What is it to me, that neither lend nor borrow?
But say I, do you neither hire nor let? Neither sell nor buy? Neither build nor
repair? Neither plant nor enclose? Neither wear nor cloth Neither travel nor
sojourn? Neither entertain nor eat? Which way soever you turn, six per Cent.
stares in your face; You meet him on the Road and sup with him at your Inn;
His intruding you cannot avoid, yet shun, if you can, his acquaintance; And in
case you design to build a Church or Chapel, or found an Hospital, or plant a
Colony, or enlarge a Navigation, or bravely serve your Prince, or worthily
oblige your friend, or seasonably assist your neighbor, or encourage
Manufacture, or advance learning, or maintain hospitality, or uphold your
degree, or improve your Estate, or adorn your mansion, or enclose your Park, or
complete your library, or liberally breed your Son, or well match your
Daughter, or any way exemplify your Christian Profession, public Spirit, or
private conduct, to the Purchasing of Brass or Marble, nay to the bare rescuing
your name even from present oblivion, consult him not, for you will find him
sacrilegious, selfish, difficult and costly; But let me freely recommend to
your four per Cent. for besides his fidelity and dispatch, he may chance in the
upshot, (all things computed,) save you more then half in half.


T. M. But how will this Raise a Farm now 100 l. per annum to 130 l. in the
future? etc.


T. C. Me thinks the Usurer, disclayming good works, might have a little more
faith, and not argue so sceptically and perversely since nothing seems clearer,
then that what you take from Interest, you give to Land and stock; Those two
Rents being all along the same Buckets; But if he will yet suspect his reason,
let him hearken to great Authority, viz. the Stat. 21. Iacobi, which declares
its main drift to be the upholding of Rents, and encouragement of tillage, then
decaying; The Act of this present Parliament, which recites, that by notable
experience, improvements had ensued; And the Edict of that wife King; Henry the
fourth of France, Anno 1601. Recording the very same design.


T. M. But our happiness is, we have a third sort of Landlords, (whom you did
not please to think on,) and, I hope one third part of the Landlords in
England, at least in weight, who are so far from being in debt, that, by
happy conduct, they are Masters of considerable sums, and that upon Usury;
Now to deal alike with the Landlord Lender and Land-lord-Borrower is monstrous
unequal.


T. C. Excellent news, I profess! That we have so many weighty Landlords;
Seriously I have not had the honor to know many of these worthi^s, or weighty
Gentlemen; But I the less marvel, having generally converst with Royallists;
Yet if such Gentlemen there be, (which upon your credit I shall admit, let them
know, I desire their Acquaintance, not to trouble them with the impertinency of
getting in the Shire what they loose in the Hundred; but purely to tell them
this story from my deceased fathers mouth; When he went to Oxford in 1642. he
owed a considerable sum at 8 percent to a certain Creditour of Principles
different from him, (whom he ever mentioned with Respect,) at their meeting in
1647. My Father told him, he hoped for some abatement of Interest, and
forbearance of the principal, in regard of the fine he was then to pay; His
answer was, Sir, take your own time for payment, as for Interest, God forbid, I
should require any when you had no Rents, nor could my father prevail with him
to take any part of it: A rare pattern for Conscientious lenders, and a lively
decision of our present argument: Now by the happy conduct of these weighty
Landlords, I understand their dextrous shifting of public Duties, and
otherwise making hay while the Sun shined; If they can, at length, be (in some
small measure) fairly met with, let King Adonibezek acquaint them with the
Justice of it.


T. M. I humbly conceive, it were much better to keep up Usury, and find out a
way like that of a Register, (so long and Passionately desired,) which at once
might enable the solvent Gentleman to borrow easily, (which now he cannot do,)
on all occasions reasonably secure the money lent, affright men from running
greatly into debt, least their nakedness appear, prevent ten thousand frauds,
and as many law suits, defer none but insolvent and ill-minded men, and direct
the State, upon all emergencies to lay impositions on it equal to Land-taxes.

I humbly perceive, Usury is your noli me tangere; Well, however, I am glad to
find you grant equal taxing just, it savours of some ingenuity still, though,
I doubt, you may think it will not be in your time, and that you are safe
enough at your close guard: As for a Register, it has indeed been long
desired, and long, I fear, yet may be, at least, ere it operate, considering
the difficulties of agreeing, settling, and purging it: This six per Cent. well
knows, and therefore, as his last stake, drives the argument to that issue,
just in the Welshmans Rhetoric, Let her but alone, till that daycomes; We, on
the other side, desire a Register, (as surely it is chiefly our Interest,)
far more sincerely then he, and wish no time were lost, that at least the
next age may reap the fruit of it; But we hope our Redress needs no such long
Prorogation, for he that must dine late, wants a good breakfast, and we suppose
some fall of Usury, in our involved condition, to be the necessary Harbinger or
Pioneer to an effectual Register, judging it more likely and proper to begin
with the Egg, then the Hen.

By the way, I cannot but with trouble reflect, that Land and Trade should so
conspire to play the Usurers game against themselves, as by their discord all
along they have done; The trader crying, tax Land, in Gods name, for that will
bear it, trade cannot; And the Landlord of late, spare Land, for Gods sake, it
has already been taxed to death; Tax now our superfluous trade, and therein
our luxury; Giving, it seems, the Usurer over to his Reprobate sense, and
therefore freely permitting him to thrive in this World; But little, in the
mean time, considering, that tillage and trastick lay in one belly the Earth,
sail in one bottom upon the Sea, and fear one Pyrate or vermin, the Usurer,
like a sly makebate circumventing, and secretly no doubt deriding them,
withal applauding his own happy conduct, (as my Author has it:) For as when
thieves disagree, true men recover their goods, so whilst honest men quarrel,
Pockets are the more securely picked.

T. M. Do you really believe, that abatement of Usury will raise the Purchase
and Revenue of Land, and perform such wonderful feats?


T. C. I have heard of diverse great Politicians, and some, in my dealings, I
have met with, who being a little thick of hearing, kept notwithstanding one
ear constantly open to good tidings, and another shut to bad: Near of kin to
these is our Usurer; No man so nimble in apprehending, so subtle in calculating
profit as he; But if any thing be offered cross to his Purpose, he
counterfeits himself a changeling; Poor man! I dare say, he cannot tell ten: At
this close lock we have him all along: If he find purchasing commonly gainful,
in three months time he is our Landlord, however, if he meet with a lurching
Penny worth, he snaps it; He then looks big and is a man of business, he
would have you know; But if times be doubtful, taxes high, and Rents falling,
he is then a poor Orphane, a silly Cock-nay, not versed in Country affairs;
If trade be in a thriving way, and yield above his rate of Usury, (which he
Critically observes and understands as well as most that drive it, for there is
not a better Weathercock, to tell us where the wind sits,) being naturally
shrewd, and pensive: a rare Accomptant, and by conversation, at least, no
stranger to those affairs, he plies the Exchange, examines the Rates of
Impost, soon acquaints himself with Prices and Markets, and is as brisk as the
best: But finding little to be got, but hazard, and that, all things
considered, he may repose himself more profitably upon his Downbed of Interest,
he is then wholly defective in business of that kind, his Friends undid him by
not giving him more learning, or putting him early out to Prentice; Or he is a
crazy old man, weary of the World, glad to retire, and beginning to dote: Were
it not for this imposture of affected impotency, how could men the acurest and
exactest judges of advantage in their generation, at this time of the day, so
peremptorily deny the raising of Land by the fall of Usury; a Problem full of
self Conviction, compelling assent to the very mention of it, and which
themselves, I dare say, have formerly granted a hundred times over: But truly
here is the Intrigue, before the Usurer had dived into the bottom of the
Argument, and spied the vast invincible consequences of it, not only in the
Various improvements of Land, but in their immediate affinity to those of
trade, (and one would marvel so sharp a nostril should not sooner smell so
strong a scent,) his common Reflections, were these, yes indeed, this is good
for you in the Country, but it will undo us Citizens; You Gentlemen care not
what becomes of trade, so your Lands rise; Now you would fain be raising your
Rents again, and racking your Tenants to maintain your Prodigality: These and
diverse other unwary Confessions have I my self, and I dare say most that read
this Page heard from some even of those who now sing another note; For finding
themselves, by their own admission, utterly gravelled, and unable to gainsay
the necessary great and good effects of raising Land, they soon swallowed their
own spittle, and now the Cry is, it is absurd thus to argue against Experience;
We utterly deny it, prove it if you can; Well then, I am ready to prove it,
(which yet I supposed I should never have been driven to,) and not only prove,
but in good measure demonstrate it, if at least Arguments of this nature be
capable of such evidence.

Purchasing is the Exchanging of money for Land to a supposed equal Value, the
proper measure whereof is Yearly income or Revenue; He then that purchases
according to Rule, compares the income of his money which he quits, with the
Revenue of his Land which he acquires, and thereby Examines his gain or loss:
Now, in regard of the dignity and stability of Land, it has always had,
caeteris paribus, some pre-eminence allowed it in the Balance, to a fourth or
third part, perhaps more in very clear times, so as six Pounds per Annum good
Rents were counted of equal intrinsecal value to eight or nine Pounds per Annum
Interest; He then that would lay out a hundred Pounds upon a Purchase, (money
being at six per Cent.) expected Land to the Yearly value of four Pound, or at
most four Pounds and ten shillings, which is about four and twenty years
Purchase, whereas, (money being at four per Cent.) less then three Pounds per
Annum becomes his Due, which is about six and thirty years Purchase: This
estimate, I dare maintain, must generally hold, if there be certainty in the
rules of proportion; And that it does so, appears even in our present case,
which I take for a Pregnant and mavelous instance, considering the number and
extremity of sellers; For supposing Land now to carry eighteen years purchase,
(as good Rents have all along done,) and abating a fourth part for the Rent
charges of public Duties, by Purchasers cruelly defalked; the present purchase
is just reconciled to my presumed Rate: As for Rents, I must again mind you, of
five years actual War, five years Anarchie, ten years Usurpation, and above
twenty years unequal burdens, sufficient, one would think, much more to have
impoverished our Farmers, and embased our Farms.

But as for the Feats and projects which you so deride, I again affirm, they
are not Monstrous, but most natural, even so familiar? That every Country,
almost every year presents us with notable Patterns of them; Your self have
instanced in some which may only serve for a Relish of many incomparably more
important: Do but cast your eye upon our Lands now adjacent to good Towns, and
observe what the industry of man, meanly and but accidentally encouraged has
there effected; And then, (if you can) deny, that a perfect Enablement, and
withal prudent compulsion of the same Industry, doubled and redoubled, would,
through the necessary progress of improvement, make indeed a strange and happy
Metamorphosis; Even by planting Cities, in time, where are now scarce hamlets,
and multiplying Towns almost to the number of our Parishes; Since God, who
sends meat for our mouths does likewise ever send mouths for our meat, and that
not by Miracle in our vulgar Account, but the ordinary success of just laws,
and prudent Endeavors; For sure there is nothing that so fatally and
universally wastes and depopulates as Usury, if once it grow rank and rampant;
No not War or Pestilence it self, which have always had their periods,
intermissions and Exemptions; Whereas this, like a general and perpetual
contagion and secret canker, supplants the present Age, and undermines
Posterity; For who, that has common sense, observes not, that dark and
drooping times, (the fruitful harvest of our silversmiths,) drive out natives,
and keep out strangers, cut off the thread of life untimely with want, care,
anguish, and disorder, oblige even the richer sort, (as it were in their own
defense,) to decline or defer marriage, and compel the poorer, at best to
neglect, but shrewdly tempt them even to expose their Children? And who may not
easily thence conclude, that the flourishing of trade and tillage, (which to
our worms and weeds is a most nipping frost,) endeares any Country to its
people, allures forreiners, prolongs lives, and makes posterity even the
Tenants welcomest stock, but the Landlords only treasure and Jewels?


T. M. Where is now the treasure of the Nation, lying idle, locked up in Misers
chests? Or if it be now employed at six per Cent. it can be but employed,
reduce Interest to what you please.


T. C. Indeed a rare groundwork for the Raising of Interest to forty or fifty
per Cent. for, i^ seems, you make no difference betwixt the general Employment
of our stock to profit or loss: My father, I take it, in his first Treatise,
has laid down a sounder Maxim, viz. that where Particulars thrive not, the
Commonwealth is seldom greatly advanced.


T. M. Will our increase oblige foreigners to sit still, and take their food
and Raiment of our providing, granting it cheap.


T. C. Truly in many things, it is like, it may oblige diverse of them, as the
Cheapness of Polish corn hoarded by the Dutch too often obliges us to buy it at
great rates in dear years; But I presume, there are, amongst others, two
pregnant and mighty instances, wherein a cheap growth, (justified by large
crops, and flourshing improvements,) manifestly conduces to great Vent, viz.
the Foundation of Manufacture, and Victualling of Ships.


T. M. It Is well known, most of our Lands are upon their best improvements, etc.


T. C. It Is better known, that you impose herein a shameful mistake; For visibly
the better half of them are still common Fields, and perhaps near a quarter
commons or wastes.


T. M. I would appeal to the impartial and industrious, whether six per Cent.
has discouraged improvements, or whether they have nor rather feared a cheap
year, want of Vent, etc.


T. C. I would appeal to common sense, whether six per Cent. in name, but at
least twelve in effect as to the Land, computing our unequal Burdens, did not,
and must not necessarily produce this want of Vent, by impoverishing Tenants,
disabling them to wait for good Markets, and so leaving them to the buyers
courtesy.


T. M. We have vast quantities of Fruit in England, and more we might have,
without reducing Usury, would our Gallants spend more of their time and money
upon laudable improvements in the Country, instead of wasting so much in London.


T. C. Store, says the old Proverb, is no sore; But any thing must be said,
how little pertinent soever, rather then infringe the Usurers supposed charter:
I tell you, Sir, in short, Borrowers are bad Planters, and worse preservers of
Plantation, but the Usurer, methinks, might do rarely well in both; For
Planting, to success I take it, requires great leisure and continual care,
with a strong Purse.


T. M. But in good earnest, shall we undersel our neighbors, and will they
long endure it? By what rare Arts shall we keep the knowledge of this hidden
vein from them, will not they, if that will do, take the same course?


T. C. Let them take what course they please: God and Nature, with the Blessing
and freedom of a just and gentle Government, have furnished us with advantages
enough, even to some good latitude, if we abuse them not, and that the Usurer
and his gang, with their wiles, do not undermine us, and blast our spring in
its early blossom.


T. M. Will the Hollander, who lives cheaper, works cheaper, sails cheaper,
builds ships cheaper, Navigates cheaper, and has a Noble for our Nine pence,
be ever undersold by us in the same commodity? etc.


T. C. You will, anon make the Hollander a very fine Monster, of five heads,
ten hands, twenty pockets, and never a mouth; And poor England, for ought I
see, is wholly given over by the Doctor; well now, say I, may be a fit time for
the Mountebanck, (as you call him) to try a Dose upon his patient; Recover
him, with Gods Blessing, it may, for while there is life, there is hope; Hurt
him it cannot, for you have pronounced him a dead man: Sir, I have lived in
Holland, and know in point of fact, that all Provisions are there at a Rate,
near double to what they are here, as needs they must be, not only from the
smalnesse and populousness of their Territory, But from their vast charges of
Embanking, Duties, and Tolls; And then I leave it to the Reader to infer,
whether their wages, (even to keep them alive, being thrifty enough in
Conscience,) must not be greater, as I affirm they generally are, with a
Confidence, I am sure, better grounded then yours can be: Some artificial
advantages, indeed, they have of us, which, God be thanked, are reasonably
balanced by our Natural ones, and we have diverse defects, which would soon be
cured, if our best heads and stocks were employed in trade, and not in Usury,
whereby our dwarfes are put to grapple with their Giants.


T. M. Will this make the French King revoke his Edicts against our Drapery,
suffer his people to sit idle, eat our bread and wear our Manufactures, merely
in regard of cheapnesse? etc.


T. C. For the first and last of these, I suppose, it may, viz. by keeping our
wool at home for our own working, and shrewdly pinching him, as well in his
Ingredients as Vent: For their eating our bread, we aim not much at that, but
desire and hope never more to eat theirs; However we may promise our selves,
our Drapery thus encouraged will assuredly carry the Market, and that out
Gallants shall have no longer any pretense to wear French Druggets, as they now
say, for cheapness.


T. M. To what neighbors Standard would you have Usury adjusted? To the
French? No sure, they pay more then we, etc.


T. C. It is now almost seventy years, since Usury in France was abated from
eight to six Pounds and five shillings per Cent. by that wise King Henry the
fourth, as a prime expedient to repayr the breaches, and desolations of thirty
years cruel War, Judging, no other Medicine adaequate to the disease, for so
it appears by his solemn and Excellent edict in the French Story thus noted
and related: The King, by these Edicts, had nothing relieved the necessities of
the Nobility, if he had not provided for Vsuries, which have ruined many good
and ancient Houses, filled Towns with unprofitable servants, and the Countries
with Miseries and inhumanities: He found the Rents constituted after ten or
eight in the hundred did ruin many good Families, hindered the traffic and
Commerce of Merchandise, and made tillage and handicrafts to be neglected; Many
desiring, through the easiness of a deceitful gain, to live idely in good Towns
of their Rents, (mark this, for it is now become just our own ease, money having
so long escaped all our heavy Burdens,) then to give themselves, with any
pains to liberal arts, or to till or Husband their inheritances; For this
reason, (meaning to invite his subjects to enrich themselves with more just
gain,) to content themselves with more moderate profit, and to give the
nobility means to pay their debts, he did forbid all Usury or Constitution of
Rents, at a higher Rate, then six Pounds five shillings for the hundred: The
Edict was verified in the Court of Parliament, which considered, that it was
always prejudicial to commonweal to give money to Usury, for it is a Serpent,
whose biting is not apparent, and yet it is so sensible, that it pierces the
very heart of the best Families. It was yet early-day, I take it, when this law
was made in France, Anno 1601. at least twenty years before Usury had its first
reducement from ten to eight per Cent. in this Kingdom, a thing, in it self,
very observable; For had it not been for the miserable servitude of that
people, and their other insupportable taxes, (the very twins of Usury,) it is
scarce by any man's wit imaginable what effects so great and early a foundation
of wealth and trade, (as perhaps the then lowest rate of Interest,) might
before this time have produced in that ample and fruitful Territory, or what
influence it might have had upon all its neighbors: Truly I never heard, it
was since raised, and will hold you great odds it was not; And I durst
likewise hold you an even wager, (having it from very good hands,) that the
French King has newly reduced Interest to five per Cent. Sweden, our Licensed
Gazette acquainted us in a solemn narrative, the last year, brought it from
ten to six at one large stride; Little, it should seem, regarding your profound
objection of forcing nature by a law, even in a remote Northern tract, or
rather Desert, desperate, (one would think,) as to much improvement or trade:
If yet you ask me, to what neighbors Standard I would have Usury adjusted, I
answer, certainly to the lowest in Christendom, if it might be, for that is
evidently best, though somewhat more may for the present serve turn, the
rather, because we hope, that with this seasonable lift at the brow of the
Hill, it may tumble downward of it self, which, without it, it will never do,
but rather rise in Extortion; For as to high and low Interest, it is equally
natural for the one to soar with its own Wings, and the other to sink with its
proper Weight.


T. M. Have not the French beaten us out of our Hamburghs trade as to the
Manufacture of Gloves, merely by underselling us therein to a great
proportion, being favored by their cheap labor only? etc.


T. C. Quote not the French for wages, least your Countrymen stone you, their
condition indeed is worse then the Gibeonites in Israel, or Israelites in
Egypt, their King has nine pence in the shilling of their Earnings: And yet
like spiders, spinning their Webs out of their Bellies, a sorry shift they
make, and a trade they drive for their Task - masters profit; For much may be
done and paid, where men work almost without eating: But mark the consequence;
France, the happiest soil and climate for the extent now known, lies half of it
wast, the natives even loathing their own Country, and burthening all the
habitable World with their beggarly Colonies, one third of the Lackeys and
Valets in Europe being Frenchmen, witness Doctor Heylin, who tells us, that
once at Madrid, they banished them all as dangerous for their numbers, finding
the French servants in that Town only, to exceed 30000. so just and natural is
it for oppression to disarme it self; And even thus the Usurer murtherd his own
security, as appears by my Authors most genuine complaints, Page 4. and 22.


T. M. Surely we need not be long in quest after that which give the forraigner
the great advantage over us, since I believe we have as good Mechanics and as
lusty Laborers to dispatch work as any of them: How can we then avow any
other reasons, then cheapnesse of provisions, course diet, and worse drink,
Parsmonious living and small wages? Whereby, through a constant practice,
Foreigners will do that for four pence which our people will not willingly
perform for six pence?


T. C. But are wages higher with us then our neighbors? A blessed Grievance!
God continue and increase it; I do not hear that Scotland or Ireland are so
oppressed; Wages are fairly cheaper at York then at London, yet I do not find
either York greatly boast, or London much repine; Wages are the highest in Kent
of any County in England, except Middlesex, is it therefore our folly. At
Rochester you exceed those in the Weld, yet they, I suppose, would change with
you: If once you could reconcile great trade to small wages, farewell Hans, the
Philosophers stone were a trifle to it; Good Mechanics and lusty Laborers you
grant we have, and I could acquaint, (if I thought it needed,) that we have
good brains and stocks, even those Prodigious sums by you owned Page 35.
scowr this Armory bright from the rust of Usury, to employ in trade or
improvement of Land, and our work is done at once, for all these Cavills will
sink, like froth, as indeed they are, if any disproportion there be in wages,
(as some in every thing may there be, where the Balance it self is faulty, and
the main wheel out of frame,) the remedy falls in of course, and wages will,
without more ado, recover and keep their due Standard; Otherwise to dream of
augmenting trade by stinting wages, too much resembles the judicious
contrivance of that worthy Squire, whom nothing would please but to let his
meadow for forty shillings the Acre, and buy his Hay at ten shillings the Load.


T. M. Will our fuel and labor which is the main charge of Iron be ever as
cheap as in Sweden, though we knew not what Interest meant?


T. C. No man, I dare say, can define, what the total extirpation of Usury
might or might not effect; Yet probably speaking, I shall admit they never
will: And therefore in this, and possibly some parallel cases must refer you
to the common practice of rival States, when both equally possess the
ingredients of some important Manufacture, but the one, by reason of some
circumstance, (like this of cheap fuel in a remote Northern Country,) cannot
compass it so cheap for Market as the other; What do they then do but help
their own commodity, (at least as to their own Use,) by charging the foreign
with an Impost wisely proportioned to their own defect: thus have the French to
our Cost lately clogged the importation of most of our Manufactures, especially
our Draperies, and thus have we very successefully, without forbidding Flemish
Hops, in effect excluded them, to the great improvement of our own so necessary
growth; Whether any other temporary respect of league or trade with Sweden may
Balance so weighty an Interest as this of Iron, I leave to the wisdom of
Authority, acknowledging, that I cannot see into the Millstone; Otherwise I dare
pronounce, posterity may deeply repent our easiness herein, both in the future
price of Iron, neglect of woods, and increase of the poor; However, do we our
utmost, repel Swedish Iron, and recover our forges, yet the present rate of
Usury shall undermine our woods, and render the price of that Staple commodity
insupportable to us even among our selves.


T. M. The general conspiracy amongst Artificers and Laborers is so apparent,
that, within forty Miles of London, Artificers are raised, (against all
reason,) from 18 or 20 d. to 2 s. 6 d. or 3 s. and mere Laborers from 10 d. or
12 d. a day to 16 or 20 d.


T. C. Your Conspiracy of Artificers and Laborers is a dangerous Plot indeed,
much like that of Usurers, not to lend at abated Interest, but it is strange,
say I, they should conspire only within forty miles of London? Surely, the only
inconvenience as to our wages consists in the present disproportion betwixt
Trade and Land; For our manifest Growth in the Bulk of our trade since the last
fall of Usury having deserved, advanced wages in all our Maritine and Trading
Towns, has necessarily imposed the same upon the Countries adjacent, which,
under their unequal pressures and impoverishment they cannot bear, so fruitful
of mischief is error, this is at present a real and accumulative grievance,
particularly to us in Kent, by reason of the special influence we receive both
from the City and Navy; But to retrive it otherwise, then by easing Land for
the future in the Rate of Taxes and Usury were indeed a work worthy of your Art.


T. M. But since Usury has been reduced, has not the vent of our Manufactures
daily lessened, and does not tht whole nation dwindle into extrem poverty?


T. C. Usury in respect of Land has been so far from abatement, (as I have
often prooved,) that it has been, in effect, excessively raised by our unequal
burdens, though Usurers perhaps will not allow that bitter to others, which to
them was so delicious; For they have all this while, (no doubt, like true
Israelites,) dwelt in the Land of Goshen; As for trade, which, God be thanked,
has had easier fetters, and whose exemption has been our only support, by all
the measures of it that can be taken, it is, (all things considered)
miraculously advanced, as your self also confess, Page 43. where you justly
observe the prodigious riches of London, and our Merchants plentyful way of
living: But it is common with sophisters in a bad cause to contradict
themselves.


T. M. Sure I am, I know many Artificers, and Tradesmen, who now live well and
borrow, etc.


T. C. But how many do you know, that have borrowed and broke; It Is a hard
battle, say I, where none survive.


T. M. You are so sharp set in the quarrel, the poor Fisherman, who never owed
above twenty Pounds in Usury cannot escape you, etc.


T. C. Surely, Sir, I aimed not at the poor Fisherman or Huckster, (though
perhaps the use of twenty Pounds to him, in his model, may be likewise paenal
enough,) but at the Royal fishing trade, which I take it, requires even a
national stock, and cannot now be effectually promoted, but at very low
Interest.


T. M. Who shall judge what moderate benefit the Borrower may cheerfully afford
the lender? etc.


T. C. You have, by the way, (unwarily, I suppose,) urged one of the best
arguments for condemning all Usury, and reducing it to the honest participation
of gain or loss, so abhorred by Usurers; But my answer is, the Usurer does,
upon the whole matter, in our case, prejudge and conclude himself, even by his
choice.


T. M. But will you not by way of gratitude and requital allow the Usurer a
liberal reward for hazards as great as an East India Voyage?


T. C. When he has tried the hazards of an East India Vayage, he may the
better measure his demands by it: But I doubt he finds it easier and better
pastime to talk of Robin Hood, then draw his bow: Yet let him examine whether
the hazards he objects be not of his own creating by uncharitable contracts,
and whether a due abatement of his profit would not mend his security; For two
per Cent. we offer him competent ensurance.


T. M. What mean those swarms of lewd and Idle persons, who prowle about in
every part of the Kingdom, or those gangs of Gypsies, that appear amongst us at
noonday? etc.


T. C. Because your present objection seems to be grounded upon our pretended
general want of ingenuity and industry, I shall endeavor previously to remove
this vulgar Prejudice; And first for ingenuity, I say, it appears reasonable
to suppose, that People, at least, of the same or near the same Climate and
Meridian are born with the same or near the same Principles of ingenuity: that
which afterward makes the difference, is law, example, Education, Custom, and
other foreign accidents of life, either ennobling or depraving our natures:
Thus the examples of Princes and Generals active and always present in Battles
and Camps, together with Military rewards and Punishments maks Nations and
Armies valiant: Pure doctrine enlivened by diligent Preachers, adorned by holy
patterns, and advanced by wholesome Constitutions Civil and Ecclesiastical,
makes people Orthodoxe and devout; Hope of success in their affairs, with a
nimble spur to endeavor, and prudent curb of sloth, makes men inquisitive
and ingenious: I say then we are now, caeteris paribus, as ingenious as any
people living, for every one, by a kind of civil instinct, understands and
closly pursues his best interest, and what would you have more? To begin with
the Usurer, (for with him indeed we must begin) he, I am sure, of all men is in
the right; for you, in your first Page, have resolved and secured him in point
of conscience, by positively affirming, that hiring of money is as necessary for
the well being of Mankind as hiring of Land or Houses; and those, we know, were
never questioned by any Casuist: Then you lay him down a second doctrine every
whit as wholesome; that his profit should reward his hazard, which sometimes,
you say, is excessive; Be^wixt these two, what should hinder him from
concluding, that what we now call extortion, may be, in many cases, every whit
as just as common interest; The latter having no more real stamp of Authority,
then the former: Thus I have heard that Highway-men fancy they acquit
themselves and come off with honor, by pleading, that they see no difference
betwixt their courses, and some worshipful trades, but the danger, which, they
suppose, much improves their title, and so, by your rule, evidently it does.
Being thus inwardly fortified, his next consideration is profit, and surely
that affords no dispute: I have heard, that an eminent person, to prove that
beasts have Logic, would introduce a hound or Beagle thus discoursing; The
hare went not that way, for there I smell nothing; nor that way, for there I
smell nothing neither; but this way, for here, indeed, I have a seent of her.
To the Usurers choice three ways are propounded for the employment of his
stock; Land, Trade, and Usury; And thus I presume him to argue: Land I like
not, for there I smell Taxes, Duties, and loss of Rents; Trade I like not, for
there I smell Pirates, shipwreck, trusts, Customs, and Flemings; But for
Usury, surely there went the hare, for there is the sweet savor of mortgages
and vayles with Immunity Ease and Dominion. Of the borrower I have little to
say, for I look upon him all along not as a free but necessary Agent or rather
patient: What would you expect from the Labourer? He works not if he can
choose, and in effect tell us, if you find working so good, work your selves; Is
not this a witty answer from a Labourer? Has he not, think you conferred
notes with six per Cent: To thrive by pain-taking he sees little hope; live
from hand to mouth, it seems he can, tying one hand behind him. If then he work
in dear years, take his ease in cheap, and cast himself upon the Parish in age
or sickness, does he not very discreetly? Even those Gangs of Gypsies you
mention, I doubt not but the Usurers, wholesome Principles, applied to their
condition, may likewise bear then out in conscience and Prudence; the Usurer
himself being ( qua Usurer,) to the Commonwealth but a bigger and graver sort
of Gypsy Now for our Industry, it appears by the premises, that is merely
frustrate by our ingenuity from one end of the board to the other; For if Usury
and sloth be more pleasant, profitable, and secure, Industry becomes folly,
and that so it is, who can doubt seeing it by so intelligent Persons so dearly
preferred: It must then be laws grounded upon Equity and Virtue, which must
clear this endless Laborynth, and Correct this vicious habit, and that of
subduing Usury must march in the van. And for infallible high water marks to
know the tide or season, take this; When rich and experienced Citizens leave
off Trading, and betaks themselves to Interest; When monied men in the Country
generally decline Purchasing, but enquire for security and hug good mortgages;
When honest men make it the business of their lives to sell at any tolerable
rate, and pay their debts, but cannot; When the mortgage, being at first but
half, is become full or near equal in Account to the Land; When Statutes,
judgments, and Recognisances grow as familiar as Bonds, and new shaped
securities are daily minted; When the ruin of all Borrowers and most Farmers
is bespoken; When it is weightily objected, that there are many Borrowers for
one lender, (though surely as much lent as borrowed;) When Professions are
overcharged, but the Land understocked; When, by reason of the Farmers
indigence, Markets run low with mean crops; When, according to the French Kings
Edict, many good and ancient Houses are ruined, Towns fined with unprofitable
servants, and the Countries with Miseries and inhumanities, Traffic and
Commerce of Merchandise hindered, tillage and handicrafts neglected, etc. When
Usurers would pass for Orphans, and in their own defense, turn Preachers and
Patriots; When Parish duties increase, yet Vagabonds swarm; Then, then, I say,
the fruit is ripe, Gather it, or expect abundance of windfals; Yet even then, I
doubt not, but abatement of Usury, and equal Taxing, will with Gods Blessing,
and some allowance of time, (for betwixt Ebbing and Flowing is always still
water,) retrive our after-game, revive Farmers, excite improvements, and
largely answer all the Benefits specified in my former treatise.


T. M. Were our poor industrious and frugal, and wages reasonable, (which I
fear will never be, till the abused (rutch of State-maintenance be rescinded,
or better regulated,) they could not want employment, though Usury were at
eight per Cent.


T. C. I agree with you in the rescinding of State-maintenance, as a provision
only proper for the times it was made in, when Monasteries were newly
dissolved, and Trade in its infancy; But if you will take from the poor this
Crutch, you must withal cure their Lameness, and set them upright upon their
own legs, lest they lie too heavy at your doors: This, I affirm, neither eight
nor six per Cent. will do, nor any thing but the turning of our main stocks out
of the muddy Chamel of Usury into the pure streams of Husbandry and Traffic,
by a round abatement and equal Taxing of Interest-mony; For did you not mark,
how eight per Cent. in France, even seventy years since, when perhaps that rate
was less in proportion then five is now, filled Towns with unprofitable
servants, spoyld Traffic, tillage, and handicrafts?


T. M. I am persuaded, few men come into great poverty, but by their own idle,
irregular and wicked Courses, etc.


T. C. Censure not so uncharitably, at least declayme not so freely; For, I
dare say, if it were examined, there are more and severer texts of Scripture,
Canons of the Church, Sentences of Fathers and eminent Doctors, condemning
Usurers, then ^uthrifts or Vagabonds; But the truth is, if men be commonly
idle, they will be lewd of Course, (for standing waters will putrefie;) And if
poor men want work, or can live at half work, they will be commonly idle; if
farming and handicrafts decline they will want work, and yet perhaps may
miserably live at half work; all things being cheap not for real plenty, but
by reason of the seller's exigence; And if Usury still oppress Industry,
Farming and handicrafts must naturally decline: and if the Usurer, having thus
oppressed the poor, do likewise reproach them; he seems to speak in Pharaohs
proper dialect.


T. M. Who can but admire, that whilst our poor are thus lazy, wastful, and
disorderly; the Dutch and Walloons, who live under the same laws, should
notwithstanding, by some innate virtue, or peculiar rules of their own,
preserve themselves in their ancient simplicity, and be so remarkably
industrious?


T. C. No man need admire it, if he will but consider, what they were from
their first arrival here, viz. A choice band of people, who being famous
Artificers, bringing good stocks with them, and forsaking their Country for
their conscience, gave indeed abundant proof of their integrity and innate
virtue, which they have derived to their posterity; Who, (as you rightly note,)
still observe certain peculiar rules of their own; the chief whereof are, that
they dread borrowing, Cherish Industry, hate oppression and discord, provide
liberally for their real poor, and prefer honest labor and trade before
Usury, though more easy, and perhaps more profitable; which Gods blessing will
always attend.


T. M. Our Fathers could count one two and three, and some of them pay ten per
Cent. for money, and had Sons and Daughters too to provide for, and yet suffered
thriving Timber to stand to its full growth, etc.


T. C. I could allege another manner of reason, then you dream of for the
standing of Timber to full growth in our Fathers time, viz. their general
abhorrence of multiplying money by money, now so current and Orthodox; witness
the Statute 13. Elizabeth which in its Preamble recites, that all Usury, being
against the law of God is sinful and detestable, thereby convincing us of the
sense of that Age; As also the Act 21. Iacobi, which foreseeing, what perverse
use might be, made of their Limitation, by construing it to an allowance of
Usury, notably provides against the mistake; But I will admit, the
inconsiderable Value of their Timber, at least in places remote from Market,
must needs have been a second motive, (proper for such as then owed or wanted
money) to let it stand: Otherwise, if our Fathers could have had tolerable
prizes for their Timber, and yet would either pay ten per Cent. or decline the
receiving it with a safe conscience, I durst, without Irreverence to them,
pronounce, that they could not count one, two and three.


T. M. Can we well hope, that any thing but severe laws can make half the
nation wise in this particular? etc.


T. C. The only laws, in this and most other cases, are those of encouragement;
Those of Compulsion, by experience, signify little; And what encouragement so
manifest, as abating Usury?


T. M. I say this Course, (forementioned,) or the like, being duly observed,
would bring mutual benefit to the Commonwealth and Planter.


T. C. Believe me, Sir, the Planters benefit is not so clear as you surmise;
For to the planting of groves, I take it, more is required, then the bare
notion, or written direction, viz. Chargeable fencing, loss of Rent, constant
Residence, perfect leisure, and long forbearance, with allowance, not
withstanding, for Damage, so as, it seems to be the proper work only of rich
and contemplative men; Wherefore you might for the present have reserved your
good rules, till we be in somewhat a a better condition of planting, or, at
least, of preserving what we plant, by abating Usury and delivering us from the
Bondage of debt, which will either intercept or interrupt most Improvements of
this Nature.


T. M. What improvident actions, (besides the Calamities of the late ill
times,) have contracted great debts upon many of our Gentry, is too apparent to
be covered with figleaves, etc.


T. C. Methinks, Sir, I cannot better resemble most of your Arguments upon this
subject, then to the Sentence of a Country Doctor, who, in a visit to his
Patient, dying of the stone, gravely pronounced, that if he could piss freely,
he might do well, or to the right witty prevention of Vomiting at Sea by
holding a large Peble in the mouth: For, when we demand a Remedy to our present
Encumbrance and embasement of Land and Rents, you bid us look better to the
decay of our Manufacture, and exporting our coin: you recommend to us the
Reforming our Luxury and avoiding Idleness, you tell the Gentleman, he must get
and keep out of debt, reside in the Country, plant groves and orchards, and
read Seneca; The Labourer you direct to be always at work, and accept such
wages, as his Master may afford to give; The Vagabond you admonish to keep at
his home, or, if he have none, to get one, to mend his manners, and be a better
Commonwealthsman, then he has hitherto been; Why do you not likewise chide the
Farmer; because, in truth, his farm is understocked, ill fenced, and out of
heart? Seriously, your discourse is very charming, the beasts and Trees, one
would think, should again dance to such a pipe: Now, for the party here
accused, viz. the Gentleman, you advise him to sell timely, he entreats you to
purchase fairly, for unless you will buy, he cannot sell; He protests, he
offers you almost half under value, and makes it his chief business in this
World to solicit you; But you sleightingly tell him, Land stinks of taxes
nothing, is sweet but money; Thus you wish him to keep close at home, but will
you suffer him there to stay? Live he should within compass, it must be a very
narrow compass, if it be your Reversion, you will teach him to play the
Epicure, you will reform him with a witness, before you leave him; By all
means, he must plant, but is it not that you may Gather? Surely, Sir, you speak
all this while Ironically, for when you list to be a little more serious, you
have other language within call, you can tell us, Page 2. of borrowing to keep
out of Prison; Of 1500. per Annum brought to a trifle without ill husbandry,
Page 10. Of hazards by Tenants, paying Taxes of all sorts for what is really
none of his, being a sort of Bayliffe to the savage Usurer, Page 36. Of keeping
up Interest in terrorem, Page 40. You can, I presume, pronounce of a person
greatly encumbered, as of one that has plague-tokens; Nay you can foresee ruin
upon its march in a great Estate, (once dipped as you term it,) at ten,
perhaps twenty years distance without present sale, be the owner never so
provident; You require vast mortgages, and other daily new invented securities,
to borrowers as paenal as Usury it self: The fact therefore, I am sure, you too
well know, give me leave to acquaint you with the cause (since those you offer
are but accidents;) A poor man that had a very sore Leg, shewd' it the
Surgeon, and mournfully asked him, if it must not be cut off, to which he
pleasantly replied, that trouble, perhaps, might be saved, let it alone for a
while longer, and lay but Diaculum to it, it will soon enough rot off without
more ado: such Surgery, methinks, is the best you can here afford, viz.
trivial cheap, but therefore destructive to us, who, I take it, want effectual
means; For Encumbrance is to the Commonwealth an Ulcer, deeply rooted in a
viciated habit, fed by a Rebellious humor, viz. Usury, with its Accomplices,
unequal Burdens; Conquer or tame this humor, the Ulcer heals; But Plasters
shall never Mitigate, diet shall never alone correct it; Having once got this
head, it is too proud and stubborn for any thing but Cauteries, and Radical
courses; Else it will need no other inflammation then its own to fester and
spread.


Crescit, indulgens sibi, dirus Hydrops,
Nec sitim pellit, nisi causa Morbi
Fugerit Venis, and aquosus Albo
Corpore Languor.
T. M. Sure I am, nothing more argues a nation ripe for destruction, then.
Intemperance, Corruption of Manners, and Exorbitancy of expense in all degrees
of men, etc.


T. C. If you will, indeed, reclayme our Extravagants, begin with the Usurer,
it is he that needs your moralls; He is the Captain of our Banditti; Reduce him,
and they will soon disband for want of a head; His life is a State of outlawry,
no man, like him, persists in defiance of Authority; Lay what taxes you please,
be they never so just, necessary, and clearly imposed, he laughes and tells you
to your face, he will not pay a groat: Tax Usurers, in good time, Tax Princes!
All the other Brood you mention are but the litter and spawn of this Venomous
beast or Serpent; Pardon the Expression, I only borrow it from the Parliament
of Paris.

You will say, this is very odd, indeed, to arraigne Usurers for Excess; But,
alas! All our madness is not in Bedlam, nor all our Riot in Tavernes: There is
a more grave and dangerous debauch, whose thrift is the Kingdoms Prodigality: I
have heard of a plain Country fellow in a great house at Christmasse* who being
made drunk for spor^, and disgorging, called the Butler, and sold him, see, see
now, what you have done; Let the Countryman be who you please, the Butler, I am
sure, is the Usurer, well known by his box.


T. M. Have we our selves been sensible of improvements of Land in Purchase,
proportionable to the several Retrenchments of Usury?


T. C. Ask the Parliament now sitting, they tell you, our improvements of Land
are visible; whether sensible then, or no, do you consider.


T. M. When money was at ten per Cent. Land was worth, (as several discreet and
aged Persons inform me,) 15 or 16 years Purchase, etc.


T. C. This I affirm to be a bold mistake, and prove my averment, 1. from the
Balance of Land and Interest, which never fayls but to the Prejudice of Land
in bad times; 2. From the plain recital of the Act 21. Iacobi declaring then a
fall of Land, even below its due proportion, as the natural effect of high
Interest; 3 From the testimony of my father, dedicating his tract to that
Parliament, wherein he sat, and avowing twelve years purchase, then not
controuled, and sure, not modestly to be questioned fifty years after: But I
see you are one of those deaf men I mentioned, that hear only what you list.


T. M. When money was at eight per Cent. (being the time of our greatest
Prosperity) Land yielded but 17 or 18 years Purchase, and not frequently 20,
etc.


T. C. Surely a fair Rise in so short a Period, being but 13 or 14. years
inclusive at most, for about the year 1637. I take it, began our Scottish
Commotions, which might reasonably check its progress, (as my Father in his
second Treatise insinuates they did,) for civil War and Usury are closer
Confederates, then you are aware of, and both sworn enemies to the Land: 'Twas
multis utile bellum that succored his friend at a dead lift, and enabled him
thus to trample upon freeholders and Farmers; High Interest and Free Quarter,
me thinks, are first Cousins.


T. M. But now by our unhappy expense of foreign growths and Manufactures,
over and above our native commodities exported, and a succession of Taxes,
great and heavy like the Waves of the Sea are not our Landlords in debt, many
Borrowers and few lenders, and Land fallen to 16 or 17 years Purchase, where
it is like to continue, for ought I see, (though Interest were reduced) till we
have more money, fewer Borrowers, and less Land to sell: For if subduing
Interest would have done the desired feat, it is strange to me, that falling
from ten to six per Cent. which is almost one half, should not appear ere now
so visibly, as to stop the mouths of all gainsayers.


T. C. Nothing will stop the mouths of some Gainsayers; Yet to stop all mouths
but those that gape on purpose, (as Usurers, we observe, do, and that very
wide,) I will not refer you to your self for an answer, though well I might,
for surely your question amounts but to this, how come our Landlords; having
been so long and grievously oppressed; to be so deeply encumbered? Neither will I
barely thank you for so strongly and pertinently urging my arguments for me,
but will likewise, in requital, set you on your way, which it seems, you have
lost by a Fog: You allege, that there are many borrowers and few lenders, but
is there not, say I, as much lent as borrowed? Is there a Borrower without a
lender? And might not our lenders, (who, it appears, are great ones, being few
to many Borrowers,) soon become Purchasers, if, (as the phrase is,) they were
free? And is not the pinching of Usury in rate and taxes the readiest way to
make them free, that is forward to purchase? And may not such forwardness of
theirs make borrowers likewise free, that is, able to sell at tolerable
prices, for the payment of their debts, which now, it is certain, they cannot?
And may not such sales and payments soon clear and contract the number of debts
and debtours? And will not such clearing of debts in time make few exigents?
And will not few exigents make sellers thin? And will not the thinness of
sellers, even by your own confession marvellously raise Land? You reproach us
with the present fall of Land in purchase, but does not your tenant paying you
75 pound in money, and 25 pound in lawful Bills, reckon that he pays you 100
pound per Annum? And do you not believe his account? And have not most Usurers
treated and purchased accordingly? And does not this, by your own allowance
come pretty near my account? And is it not much, that it should still do so,
considering the extremities of some, and moderation of others? You object the
expense of foreign commodities above our own exportation, but have not
Land-taxes: (the Usurers darling, however you now exclaim against them, for old
friends may sometimes wrangle, and shake hands again,) dispatched many of our
Freeholders and Farmouts half undone by the War? And has not their ruin made
much of our Land lie waste, and more be ill husbanded? And must not such waste
miserably impair and decay our Growth? And must not such decay starve our
exportation? And may not trade so founded easily exceed in its importation?
Show me, if you can, the weakness of these chains.


T. M. None will lend at three or four per Cent. but upon some other special
consideration, etc.


T. C. Too many, I doubt, will still lend at four per Cent. as well for the
Rents reserved, and thereby secured, as also for diverse other good causes and
considerations; The chief whereof, I suppose, will be, that they can no other
way, for the present, get so much, so easily, safely, and to them conveniently,
yet more, it is hoped, will purchase, which I take for much the wholsomest kind
of loan, wishing that Usurers thought so too.


T. M. Must not trade, (to the infinite loss of the Nation,) be hereby
engrossed by a few, who have prodigious Sums at command, to the excluding of
small-stocked Traders, and young beginners with little money?


T. C. You are still for Pedlers and Higlers, the Usurers Cattle, whom he
milkes almost daily, and at last must eat them lean, (for fat they can never
be,) I am for the Worshipful Trader, even the Usurer himself, that has stock
to cope with a Fleming viz. those prodigious Sums at command or Interest, (so
I take your meaning) which, methinks, I had rather see generously employed in
foreign Conquests, then, like intestine war, eating our own bowels, and
praying on our vitals: As for the engrossing of Trade, that is, indeed, your
wisest Argument, for have you not noted all along, how Trade was dispersed by
high Interest, but, engrossed by lower? And may not I observe, how the Builders
tongues are confounded? Nine in ten of your brethren, at least, your sages
objecting, (directly in your teeth) the inevitable growth of a mechanic Trade,
(as they call it) meaning thereby, I suppose, a Trade, not so profitable, as
some of them now possess, nor so easy, Lordly, and secure, as the present Rate
of U sury.

Having hitherto shown, how little your general invectives against our Luxury,
and other reigning vices signify to your Purpose, I shall now, (with less
noise, but I hope more evidence) turn your own weapons against you, by proving,
that Abatement of Usury is, in its own nature, the greatest sumptuary Law,
perhaps the only effectual one, that Policy, with Justice can contrive;
Therefore, no doubt, recommended by God himself to his own People; Therefore,
by the wisest of Commonwealths, both ancient and modern, laid as the very
Cornerstone of their Fabric; Therefore, by King Henry the Fourth of France, a
Prince of vast experience, after the desolations of Civil War, aptly chosen,
both for a restorative of past, and antidote against future Distempers;
Therefore, by that Politic Emperor Tiberius approved, who, though he justly
slighted the Pedantick Notion of reforming popular excess by coercive Laws,
(as appears by his notable speech to the Senate upon that subject) yet, as a
main provision for public security and good order, from his own treasury,
erected a Bank for noble Romans, of declining fortune, (though of the Patrician
faction) to borrow for diverse years without paying Interest; By that single
Act, redeeming in great measure the scandals of his tyranny; Finally therefore,
by most familiar proofs, asserted; For who sees not that the excesses of this,
and indeed every State, are fed by three plentiful and indulgent Nurses, viz.
drooping debtours, easy gainers, and impotent Vagrants? The first of these,
(like those that project to live but from hand to mouth) loathing to day, and
fearing to morrow, resign themselves to dissolute habits, that so they may
forget those miseries which they cannot prevent, and be in part revenged on
disaster by sleighting it, perhaps they judge it nor altogether unreasonable
for them to partake with an oppressor in their own spoils, as persons
unhappily matched, sometimes think it just to share with their licentious
mates: The second, (wallowing in their superfluity, through an unweildy stock
managed to certain profit with little burden or trouble, whilst their betters
carke and droop) neigh and praunce, like high-fed horses, and by the old
Proverb, Light come, light go, care not what they squander, perhaps at Dice,
because their very sheep tails, they think will pay the reckoning, be it
what it will; And though this character may not fit the Usurer himself (who
seldom revels but wisely, and at the borrowers charge) yet his Executor,
possessing an Estate, with a curse appendant, without proportion to his quality
and breeding, oft-times consumes it as dissolutely as his Ancestour shrewdly
got it: The third and most general, finding virtuous courses servile and
unprofitable, and nothing sweet but sums usuniously improved, which they
want, and see not how to compass, first turn tail to industry, and then
meeting with common frailty in the ^, fill up the measure of our disorders: Now
whither a convenient corrosive applied to Usury may not, with allowance for
humane dross, by relieving the first, retrenching the second, and employing
the third, probably in time, reclaym and refine them all, I leave to found and
impartial judgments.


T. M. Why do you tax high Interest with injustice and oppression though the
Law tolerate it?


T. C. High Interest, I take it, is a term of scandalous sound, equivalent to
that of excessive or biting Usury, which no man that owned conscience had ever
yet the face of brass to defend: Even for common and general Rates, give me
leave again to tell you, you still abound in your wilful mistake of Limitation
for Toleration; since no Assembly of Christians, that deserved the name, or had
the face of a Church, (no not heretical) ever gave Usury the least approbation,
other then their silence, finding, perhaps, the Sons of Zerviah too hard for
them; No Christian Authority that I have heard of, Popular, or Despotick, ever
allowed it a current stamp: Mahomet himself has prohibited it.


T. M. I dare avow, that since Usury became so tame, we have two Gentlemen in
debt for one that was before, etc.


T. C. I durst refer it even to the Usurer himself, if I had any hope he
would speak out, whether Interest be now a tame beast; And whether, betwixt its
Bear-like rage, and Fox-like wiles, it has not been of late more savage then
ever: whither, if it had continued at ten or eight per Cent. it would not, long
ere this, have strewed our highwayes with carcasses; And whither already it have
not so sufficiently worried us, that it needs no longer be upheld for a
Bugbeare.


T. M. Is not this to rob Peter to pay Paul, and as bad as stealing sheep,
and giving the Trotters to the Poor for Gods sake? etc.


T. C. Boast nor too loud of this Spanish Proverb, At least, be not so fond of
it, as to bring it in by the head and shoulders; For, to my knowledge, it is
one of the best and aptest similitudes commonly used to check the arrogance of
Usurers in their pretended Alms.


T. M. Sir Francis Bacon says, It is a vanity to conceive; That there would be
borrowing without profit, that is, a proportionable reward for the disservice
the Lender oft-times gives himself, and hazard he runs.


T. C. Were Sir Francis Bacon now living, I verily believe, he would grant
three or four per Cent. to be no incompetent reward for Loans in general: It Is
true, in respect of ten, the rate wherewith he was acquainted, it seems a
trifle; But nothing upon earth is great or small, save in comparison, as the
Dog is a dwarf to an Ox, but to the Mouse a Monster: In Pagan Kingdoms,
where weekly or monthly increase is usually exacted, any thing per Cent. would
perhaps be counted moderate; In Colonies and new Plantations, where neither the
situation and Commerce of the Place, nor quality of the Inhabitants affords
security or credit, fifteen, nay twenty and thirty per Cent. has been current;
And he that so trusted, was reputed charitable, (as Charity there went) though
it beggered them all: In Tributary Provinces, and mis-governed Countries, or
remote from Traffic or Sunshine, exigence it self almost commands high Rates;
Neither, indeed is it much material in some of them, what the Rates be, where
nature scarce admits of any improvement, or employment, but for mean stocks: In
England, about sixty or eighty years since, Trade was in its early nonage,
Traders were few, Builders, Planters, and Improvers thin, and small
competition we had with our neighbors, whereby the Returns of stock must needs
be generally large, even liberally to reward any tolerable Interest; But now to
argue upon that principle, were a paradoxe, like that of maintaining the
ancient Rates of Purveyance, Statute, (or as my Author judiciously propounds)
stinted wages; For, I take it, the reason of varying them from time to time, is
the same through out, with this single, yet notable diversity, that as all
other things advance, Usury must abate; Upon which account, I verily hope, or
rather doubt not, but that (with Gods blessing) the next generation may judge
even four per Cent. an extravagant rate for money.


T. M. The Usurer says, Rather then venture at three or four per Cent. He will
keep his money, and once in a year get more by Lurching, etc.


T. C. See my mistake! I took the Usurer for an Orphane, an impotent person, at
least a very harmless fellow, till you proclaimed him, at need, an errand
Lurcher. Well! It seems, he is a good man, and a fair Gamester, that he should
not all this while, so much as think of his tricks, till he was put to his
trumpes: But let him take his course, your own Author, Sir Francis Bacon
acquaints us, that big words and menaces are the constant marks of
imbecility, and we all know the great Usurer too wise to play much, or
commonly, at that game, for fear of mischief; Yet to do him perfect Right
beyond any future cavil or exception, I shall fairly examine, upon what ground
of reason and justice he sleights the benefit of four per Cent: The Usurer, you
say, thinks that profit too small, but is not rather his eye too big? I
affirm, it is still great, perhaps excessive and offer to prove it by all the
measures of square and honest gain, whither you will consider his title, his
stock, his pains, his skill, or compare him with others; His title is merely
advantage taken of his Brothers exigence; His stock, (sever it from his Farm)
scarce equals a Barbers, or indeed a Rat-catchers, his Agents and servants
being all maintained by others; His skill comes short of a Fiddlers or Juglers,
Minors and Idiots being free of the company; His pains do not much exceed the
Vagabonds or Gypsies he so upbraids: Now to compare him with his Neighbors,
who, one would think might somewhat better mer from their Country; His
Neighbors, I suppose, are Freehc^ders, Farmers, and Traders; For Freeholders
you tell us almost in every page, what their profit is, for you wonder they are
so mad to borrow, you advise them at their peril to sell upon any terms, and
you deride their imaginary improvements: Of Farmers, I think I need not offer a
syllable, Res ipsa loquitur; We are then reduced to Traders, who are of two
sorts, Foreign and Domestic; The Domestic, being Shopkeepers and Artificers,
depending on the Casualty of Vent or Custom, have a Benefit so contingent, as
no Rule concerning them can well be framed, nor other observation made, then
this in general, that some indeed thrive, and many fayl, even of those that
set up with their own stocks, but still were Borrowers: Foreign Traders are
either in those few trades, which we naturally or politically engrosse, or
those many, wherein we intercommon with the Dutch and others; The former
indeed, I suppose, may oft-times yield good returns to the Merchant; But
neither is their foundation very large, nor, perhaps altogether so found as to
build our fortune, on them: In the latter, being of more vast and solid
advantage and behoof, the present rate of Interest must of necessity, as to
many of them, wholly exclude, in all, so encounter and curb us, that we cannot
expect any cheerful progress, or otherwise than to truckle under the
Hollander, a trade, whose benefit is not, (one would think) very hard to
calculate: Whence then is our Usurers lofty pretense, or but colorable claim
even to four per Cent.


T. M. Few will sit down so contented, having been used to greater profit, but
will rush upon several projects and undertakings, which, for want of skill to
manage, may redound to the equal prejudice both of themselves and the
Commonwealth.


T. C. Sure I think, I may now sing Nunc dimittas, For I have lived to hear the
Usurer talk of projects and undertakings too; His Business hitherto has been
only to sit warm, and unconcerned, applaud his own happy conduct, for thriving
with such ease; censure and deride the Tenant for taking such pains to be
undone, the Landlord for not falling near half of his rent, and consequently
his inheritance, but trying the most probable conclusions he could think on, to
make it; in some measure good to him, and venturing to turn farmer of his Land
himself, upon mere constraint, Rather then let it to the Grows; The stander
by, it seems, could then see more then the Gamester; But four per Cent. belike,
2 little alters the case, and infuses such metal into a roguish Usurer* poor
wretch, that all on the sudden he is on fire, and a perfect Knight Errant, for
what would you expect more of Don Quixot himself, then to rush upon projects
and undertakings? Well Sir, it is the best thing said in your book: Turn him
loose, say I, he is thoroughly fledged, having got, God be thanked, store of
Feathers upon his Back; And the Commonwealth, I dare say, will freely venture
her share in his Flight.


T. M. Is not the greatest part of Trade driven by young men with small stocks?


T. C. I hope, Sir, you mean the Costardmongers trade, or the poor Fishermans
before mentioned; Sure I am, if our principal trade be so driven, it is high
time to reduce Usury, to some purpose, and call in to our rescue the prodigious
sums you boast of; Neither will I pretend to urge a greater Argument for the
restraint of it, then you have here contrived: But our Comfort is, the Usurer
now understands trade too well to trust the trader upon mere Credit, or with a
small stock, very far.


T. M. Is not your answer to Widows and Orphans very harsh and churlish?


T. C. Really, I much marvel you should think so; For first I tell them of
other Widows and Orphans mainly concerned in Land, who, by the uneasy Rates
of Interest and taxes now receive prejudice, at least equal to the Benefit of
these; Secondly I mention a numerous train of unhappy but honest borrowers,
perhaps no less worthy of support then themselves, who, by the same pressures
have been, and are daily almost ruined; These, being evidently relievable by
restraint of Usury, I desire may likewise be considered, and put into the
Counterscale: Thirdly, I conjure them to deal as they would be dealt with, (a
hard lesson, I know, for any oppressor to learn,) in not exacting from their
borrowers, that which I calmly say they cannot afford, or which my Author
himself, in other language, (perhaps, more effectual and peremptory,) often
affirms, must ruin at least all our borrowing Landlords to give.

But wholly to silence the Rage of these masked Usurers, who exclaim as if
Christianity were expiring, when Usury only is reducing, I shall distinguish
the Plaintiffs into two Ranks, viz. truly impotent and intelligent; For the
truly impotent, or infants and Orphans properly so called, I offer these
considerations. 1. That they are certainly beholden to the several falls of
Interest for their present ample provision, which is much better even at four
per Cent. (all things computed,) then those of their Rank, generally, enjoyed
at ten. 2. The Orphans of London, (who, by reason of their assurance, fare, I
suppose the best of any,) complain not much of that rate. 3. Abatement of their
profit will certainly facilitate and improve security for other Orphans, and
may so turn to better account. 4. By raising the Value of Land, their fellow
Orphans, the children of Loyal and worthy Parents, (for number and quality,
perhaps more considerable,) may be likewise provided for, who otherwise can
never look for portions, at least, to their degrees: The intelligent I fairly
admonish, to save their stakes by purchasing betimes, which, in Mortgages,
where the title has been scanned, were, methinks, an easy exchange: This, I
hope, is no such cruel hardship, or dangerous Doctrine; for though some
Doctors hold Usury to be consistent with good conscience, yet few, that I have
heard of, maintain it necessary to good life: And further to prove it most
reasonable, thus I argue; Either the Rents of Land do now competently Balance
the Interest of money, or they do not; If not, where is their Justice? If they
do, where is their prejudice? Besides, I am directed by an honest Gentleman and
their special Advocate, one Mr. Manly, to acquaint them, That five Pounds five
shillings a year in Land once surely settled, whereby they shall only venture
their Rent, which is commonly secured by stock upon the ground, is better then
a hundred Pounds in money at six per Cent. sometimes tumbled and tossed at Usury
like a ship in a tempest, and utterly lost, and sometimes remaining useless by
them, like a vessel becalmed: If now they will not be ruled by their best
friends, what hope is there say I of persons so refractory and self conceited?
In case their genius be not for Land, let them try the Seas in foreign trade;
If they can be brought neither to fancy the Land, nor trust the Sea, let them
build granaries, to deal for grain and other commodities in cheap times, and
keep them for better Markets, and with as much ease, as a Usurers heart would
wish, sometimes double their stock, so employed; or let them advance our
national Manufactures with clean hands, and no doubt with competent gain: If
nothing but Usury will content them, tell them from me, I smell an evil savor,
and that it were great pity, but they were pinched in their superfluous, and
(to the Commonwealth) every way pernicious Revenue.


T. M. Is not Interest with us the lowest by Law in Europe?


T. C. I verily believe, there is no law in Europe for Interest, save only the
law of restraint, which you are pleased still to misconstrue for License; But I
apprehend you, Sir, you would have us stay, till Usury reduce it self without
Law: very fine! You maime us, throw us into a deep ditch, and cry, God help
you.


T. M. Will you or any other Landlord sink his Rent, because his Tenants
complain of hard pennyworths?


T. C. Are not Usurers ever the first to reproach Gentlemen at least with
folly, for not sinking their Rents, if they but seem too dear for the Land? Are
not all Landlords even now upon Abatement, and glad at any rates to get
tenants, though surely not so sufficient as yours? Do they not freely discount
for taxes and extraordinary burdens? And do not all good Land lords allow for
bad times, nay even for very bad years? I tell you, Sir, I ever did, shall,
nay, at my Peril, must sink my Rent, if the tenant produce but the tithe of
those reasons, which most borrowers now may: For though I shall never admit,
that letting of Land is Usury, yet will I not deny, that racking of Rents, and
taking extreme advantage of strict Covenants is Extortion: And yet by the way,
I must note, that the worst of Landlords will find it a harder matter thus to
extort, then the best of Usurers does, the trade of letting Land not being
driven in the Dark; And there being, I take it, no procurement, continuance,
double mort-gages, or treble Bands-men in his case to be got; Nor other
probable security, then barely the pennyworth, but the markets of Land being
free and open, and the Values, to a trifle, publicly known and allowed.


T. M. That trade will regularly bear present Interest, who has not observed,
that the careful managers thereof have had a thriving time of it?


T. C. That trade will not regularly bear present Interest, who has not
observed, that the carefullest managers thereof, (if borrowers,) have been
eaten out and undone? And that our old Foxes are so well aware of it, as to
prefer English Mutton before outlandish Venison? However the main stresse of
this Argument, I must tell you, lies upon Land, for surely few but Landlords
either do, or, now, can borrow considerably: To Land therefore the fall and
taxing of Usury is most indispensably just and necessary; to trade, undeniably
wholesome and profitable.


T. M. As for idleness sucking the Breasts of industry, it is no mor applicable
to lending money upon a valuable consideration to them, who by industry and
skill live thereon, then to my Landlords hiring his Farm to the Laborious
Husbandman, etc.


T. C. When you produce me any one Text of Scripture, Church-canon, or
Christian Sect, that deserves a civil name, disallowing the Rents of Land, or
any one temporal law restraining them, your bold assertion shall be considered:
I, on the other side, offer to prove, that the laws of this and many Countries,
(how tender soever they were of Propriety and Freehold, as indeed it concerned
them to be,) have, as they saw Occasion, from time to time, retrenched Usury
without scruple, or saying so much as, by your leave, Mr. Usurer; Which,
(notwithstanding your Categorical thesis,) shrewdly argues, that the justice
and title of them has not been reputed altogether the same; Nor does the
Usurer himself, I suppose, pretend to be our lawful Landlord, for then he
would be readier to keep hospitality, serve upon Enquests, find Arms, repair
Churches, and pay Taxes, then of late, methinks, he has been.


T. M. Is it reasonable to imagine, that all men are of equal brains or
education to traffic in one sort or other? etc.


T. C. You will prove anon, that borrowers have more brains, then lenders,
though formerly you told them, in effect, that if they had any brains at all,
they would not be borrowers: Truly it is a comfort still, thus to be cajoul'd
into our ruin; and that though we find our selves the poor, yet an Oracle, it
seems, has pronounced us the wiser: Sure, Apollo was of another mind, when he
made my Alderman his Laureat; Nor does six per Cent. I take it, much glory in
the improvement of his Sons knowledge and experience, when he runs out, and
borrowes; Nor would any sneaking Usurer, I suppose, like to be taken at his
word, and have a Guardian by the King assigned him, which methinks, were a
charitable work, he having so slender a capacity with so fair an Estate; in
which case, Landlords are of course, provided for; But, alas, too sure it is,
that when a Usurer is made, there is commonly as good a Merchant marred, as
most that walk the Exchange.


T. M. The present Interest, (admitting much were borrowed,) can be no just
scarecrow to the builders, since all builders I have yet met with, may have
eight, nine, or ten per Cent. and very good Rents for their ground besides.


T. C. I rejoice at your good news, though it be yet early day: But give me
leave, Sir, from thence to observe, how signally trade having groaned under few
or no new burdens, has thriven and flourished, even in uncertain times, since
the last fall of Usury; Whilst the Land is even sinking under the load of its
chayns; For, (not accounting losses and hazards, which perhaps would deserve
other-like ensurence then your money,) three per Cent. I must tell you, goes
far with us in the Country.


T. M. He that employes his own money, matters not much, whether it be six or
four.


T. C. Quoth the good Huswife, we have all provisions of our own, and a fig
for the Market, sure, it were happy for England, if Usurers were in all their
affayrs so indifferent.


T. M. It is a contradiction, that many lenders and low Interest live together
in a declining Commonwealth.


T. C. You say very right, a Contradiction there is throughout, for where low
Interest is, the State can scarce naturally decline, nor will there need much
lending.


T. M. For the Credit of six per Cent. I will appeal to all the World, if the
rebuilding of London goes not on much faster then could be reasonably imagined.


T. C. For the Credit of former abatements, you should say, and encouragement
of future.


T. M. What Pity is it, I must conclude, that having examined, and found how
little likelihood there is, that subduing Interest will increase the fruit and
revenue of the Kingdom, we have small reason to hope, it will augment the
revenue of the King.


T. C. Land will certainly be improved by it, if we may believe either reason,
experience, or Authority; and, I suppose, what is good for the Land, is not bad
for the Landlord; Trade will evidently be augmented by the instance of most
flourishing Commonwealths, which have ever begun with it, and the proverb tells
us, what is sauce for a Goose, is sauce for a Gander.


T. M. Your Expression of Land being in safe hands seems very Odd and dividing.


T. C. It is, I am sure, no new Maxim, that the Crown, (without competition of
title) ever was, and probably would be safe in the majority of Landlords;
Neither did, I suppose, our late experience disprove it: Doubtless in
distracted times, they have most at stake, and lie most to pawn: Usurers and
Pirates are own Contrymen.


The pretended mischiefs briefly examined.
T. M. LOw Interest will draw the Treasure of the Nation into a few hands, and
endanger the hoarding up of the same, etc.


T. C. Yes indeed Sir, money is dangerously hoarded in Holland, is it not? The
Usurer, I must tell you, thanks God, he never did, nor shall wilfully bury
his talent in that sense.


T. M. It will necessitate active young men with small stocks, (who are the
best Merchants) to sell their goods at great loss, because they cannot stay
for the best Market.


T. C. What an error was that of mine to think, that old experienced men with
great stocks were the best Merchants? They, it seems, were ordained still to be
Usurers; But what will you now say, if four per Cent should even disappoint
their Fate?


T. M. It will expose an infinite number of Widows, Orphans, and other
impotent persons to great want and extremity.


T. C. I remember often to have seen a picture full of strange sights, very odd
and uncouth to behold, viz. the horse riding the man, the Lawyer feeing the
Client, the Mouse devouring the Cat, etc. It Is pity, say I, that of the
Borrower oppressing the Usurer has not yet been added; For if four per Cent.
should suddenly pass, some think, it may come too late.


T. M. It will encourage our Gentry to run in debt, by making most of them
bolder in borrowing, (if any one will lend.)


T. C. It Is a comfort to hear you make an if of it already; Methinkes you begin
to relent and come to, as if you would have us hope, or not altogether despayr:
But surely, Sir, you are in very good jest, and will shortly persuade a man
that has the French disease, to reject his present cure, for fear of future
claps.


T. M. It will oblige the Nobility and Gentry to provide greater portions for
their younger Children.


T. C. Yes, and enable them too, I hope, after such Provision, to leave better
Estates to their eldest Sons.


T. M. It will introduce a thousand tricks among the rank Usur^rs, Brokers, and
Scriveners, whereby the hasty Borrower shall be indirectly wormed out of more
money, then when Interest was at eight per Cent?


T. C. I doubt, they must pump hard for new ones: But hold a while, say I,
raise but the intrinseal Value of our Lands, and let them do their worst;
Double our security, and a fig for his empty threats: For if once the Devil
were dead, we should not, I suppose, much regard Jackadandy.


T. M. Was not this Worshipful Brat of low Interest begot in the crafty noddle
of a great moneyed man? etc.


T. C. That were, indeed, a mighty project, much like its opposite of raising
Usury for the Borrowers case, maintained by some of our discretest Debtours:
But the right Usurer, I take it, is not for merit or penance, and therefore
sure would not mangle his own flesh.


T. M. It will cause the Dutch to withdraw their money from us to the great
stop of Trade.


T. C. Tell me the story of eighty eight; Alas! That, God be thanked, was long
since done to our hands by the fall of Interest to six per Cent. Yet, it
seems, the old Mumpsimus runs still in some of our noddles; Well! since you
have such a love to foreign chink, by all means, let Interest be raised to
eight per Cent. for a year, to decoy some Strangers money, and then seize it as
a Deodand or stray; for under, I assure you, it will not come, if then: Now
pray Sir, do you not observe, what a desperate stop of Trade we have ever
since? Was it not a foul mistake of our good friend Mr. Manly so to extol the
Riches of London page 43. Or have you the confidence still to maintain, that we
have yet a Million of Dutch Money, because you find it easy to affirm, and
think it hard to disprove? Consider, I beseech you, whither the present
difference of our Rates could in reason tempt any sober Dutchman, (not
reckoning factorage) to run so many risques as he must do; since besides the
general hazards here, which you declare equal to an East India Voyage, and
worrhy of 30 s. per 100 pound Ensurance even amongst our selves, he must
likewise trust the sufficiency and integrity of his own Agent, in a degree to
Dutchmen and Usurers very uneasy: But I am too serious for the subject; The
very Notion of Trade, (for any Bulk of it) driven at Interest, is abominable,
whither the Loan be foreign or domestic, with this graduall difference; that
the one amounts to a ruinous tribute, the other to a dangerous Impost.


T. M. Men will not quickly borrow at the intended Rate, nor willingly sell
their concernments, on reasonable terms, to such as have money, and so the
building of London will be retarded.


T. C. Has not the wisdom of the Law provided at least against such wilful
defaulters, by a forfeiture and lapse of time, perfixed? And if building be so
generally profitable, as you suppose, will any man, in case of disability,
obstinately incur it by not selling? Nay will he not make hard shift to
borrow upon security, which, I must tell you, is that which only, ever did, and
ever shall command money? Something you would fain object, if you knew what.


T. M. The Gentry, who shall be in debt at the passing of such a Law, will be
exposed to many and great Exigents; before they shall get clear of their
Creditours, it being ten to one the Debtours estates will become so many
sacrifices, ere any man will be found to come in to their Rescue, though
Chancery, or the intended Act should allow them a considerable time for
redemption; so that, I dare affirm, this Nation never saw such Seisures,
Arrests, Extents, Executions, etc. as will infallibly follow upon passing such
a Law, etc.


T. C. Is it not the known device of cruel and insulting pedants, to threaten
their innocent and awful Fry with severe correction, if they tell tales out of
school? Is it not the proper language of Orthodoxe Goalers to scare their
Prisoners with Gibets or Dungeons, if they offer to attempt an escape? Even so,
methinkes, does the Usurer treat his Poor Vassal and Tenant at will, the
Borrower: If he do but mutter at the perpetual taxes and burdens even of his
mortgaged Land, without any allowance, the finger or ferula is held up; Sirrah
look to your carcass, or if a member of Parliament, the house will one day
prorogue. If he presume to dispute the Justice or rate of Usury, and fainly
appeal to his King and Country for relief; Hough man! What? break prison? But
let the serpent hiss, so his sting be out; And what is the sting of Usury, (if
at least it be not all sting) but its disproportionable Rate? I my self have
perhaps had my share of these menaces, and more I expect for this freedom of my
Pen; But they are Music to me; For I was never yet, (I thank God) so rowted
and bereft of Judgment, as to distrust my Benefit by the fall of Interest: And
I hope, Fear, the betrayer of reason, will not so dazzle and benum any of our
Patriots (being Englishmen, though Borrowers) as not to see and feel their own
and the public concernment in it.

And now, Sir, I hope, I have in good measure re-asserted all the Benefits in
my former Treatise propounded, by Abatement of Usury; and shown, that your
Objections and Declamations upon the several heads thereof are either real
mistakes, or flourishes and digressions: Your Appendix concerning the Valuation
of our Coin I have declined, considering it as foreign to our dispute, and
leaving it to be examined, (as occasion shall require) by some abler Penman,
more versed in exchange, then I pretend to be: Offense, at least personal, I
trust, I have given none, looking upon that as a paltry way of arguing: That I
answer you under a Character, which I am persuaded you abhor, you will pardon
me, in regard I could not otherwise well direct my speech; you, in the
Conference, personating the Usurer, as I the Borrower: Other Animadversions, or
Expressions, how keen or resenting soever they be, the bitterness of my
subject will indemnifie. If either you have new matter to allege; or can
reinforce your former Arguments, or show me any thing material, by me omitted
in my reply, I heartily invite you to rejoyn, with promise, upon good evidence
on your side, to lay down the Buckler, and recant: But if nothing more be
offered, save endless repetitions and unfriendly cavills, I shall fairly spare
my paper, and demurre in Judgment.


A Brief Appendix touching the proposal of taxing Money at Interest.
FOr a more forcible inducement to this great work of discovering sums at
Interest, and subjecting them to all manner of Public Taxes and Burdens, I
shall endeavor further to clear the business, by showing, that it is most
honest, necessary, and practicable without inconvenience.

The Justice of it is, methinks, so apparent, that I durst almost refer it to
the Usurers own conscience, (and it had need be a very plain matter, (says our
late reverend Bishop Sanderson,) that one would refer to the conscience of an
Usurer,) for the question, modestly put, is, I take it, barely this, whether it
be reasonable, that one part of the Kingdom should constantly bear the Burdens
of the whole; To which the ready answer seems to be, that it is, (in Mr.
Manlies phrase,) monstrous unequal; Even to such degree, that I might well say,
no wonder if it has not thriven: Neither, having been proposed to diverse
Champions of Usury, (to give them their due,) has any of them hitherto offered
ought against it: Only they have gravely demurred; and therefore I look that
time and thought may produce somewhat to disprove, discountenance, or, at
least, divert it: For we live in an acute age, which has much improved the
Orators Maxim, oportet posse contraria persuadere, by adding, etiam velle: To
excite virtue or explode Vice is now but a School-boyes theme; He is, indeed a
wit, that argues packing the Cards more honorable (because more ingenious,)
then square play; can maintain Felony better then others can do Property, prove
the true man robbed the thief, and say more, perhaps, for keeping a
Brothel-house, then I can do for building an Almes-house; Thus, since the
publishing of my Reply, our Saviors questioning the sloathful servant, for not
putting his Talent to the Bankers, was mainly urged to convince me of the
lawfulness and expedience of Usury, leaving me to infer, (for follow it
needs must,) that Usury is necessary to salvation, the party there, (if you
take the literal sense,) being evidently condemned for not being an Usurer; A
clear case, one would think, and past control: And I expect some or other
should shortly start this Doctrine, that it is the special duty or privilege
of Christians to practice Usury, since Mahomet has forbidden it: Thus my
learned adversary has in his Preface asserted, that an Unthrift, Drunkard, or
Whore-master, (and consequently, no doubt, an Oppressor, Highway-man, or
Curpurse,) may pass for a tolerable Commonwealths-man, (if an Englishman
born,) because every penny comes to the Natives; Thus he has convinced us Page
2. That there cannot well be a more seasonable Almes-deed then an Usurious
loan; Thus, in the same Page, he acquaints us, how the restraint of Usury is
the defrauding of honest Creditours; that the State, (at least for shame of the
World,) may not still persist in picking pockets, (and that with a vengeance,)
as twice, it seems, already they have done; Thus he confidently assures us,
Page 3. the lender got his money by great industry, and thereupon surmises that
he lends it to a Trader, who certainly gains fifteen per Cent. whereas we
thought, he had gotten part of it by happy conduct, and lent most of it to a
Gentleman or Farmer, who never makes three, and who, by his own admission, must
be thereby undone: Thus he possesses us, Sect 2. That Improvement is, in
effect, ridiculous, implying, that it may shortly become a kind of Project in
the Farmer, to dung or fence his Farm, because, it seems, the wisest and
worthiest improvement is that of Interest money, whereas I took that of Land to
be the more natural and commendable of the two: Thus he blesses himself at
raising the Purchase of Land by fall of Interest, a question, which, I
presumed, might soon be determined, (as to the Value of leases,) by comparing
some of our yearly Almanacks, made, when money was at eight per Cent. with
others, since it came to six: Thus he intimates, Sect 3. That the stinting of
wages would instantly cure us, but the subduing of Usury never, whereas I
simply imagined, that in the reducing of money, wages, (being money,) were best
reduced, viz. insensibly, without exception or prejudice, nay to vast and
universal benefit: Thus he admitts, Page 18. That wages about London are raised
by mere confederacy, which makes me wonder, the Welsh, and Northern men should
not join with them, conclude, that, most callings being combined in the same
league, Catilines conspiracy was not to be mentioned in respect of this, and
only comfort my self, that Landlords in the Country, for ought I hear,
continue loyal, and are not of the Plot: Thus he makes it appear, Page 33. that
we want wherewithal to purchase, whereas a classical Author, Page 35. makes it
likewise appear, that there are prodigious sums at command: And lastly, (for
there is no end of his witty Paradoxes,) thus, with a delicate flourish, Page
17. he demonstrates, that the substracting of one third from Usury, and adding
it to industry, (which I took to be greatly important in all undertakings and
affairs,) signifies no more to trade, then the wrens pissing in the Ocean. Now
since all these Fundamentals are so cleared and reconciled, who would despair,
that the same, or some other genius of the like sagacity may not henceforth
infallibly teach us, that the redress of our hardships will no more import to
the benefit of Land, then, belike, the rate of Interest does in Manufacture,
nay further inform us, that honesty is destructive of Commonweal, and equal
taxing monstrous unequal?

For the importance, and indeed necessity, of this Proposal, hear the late
excellent Prelate, before cited, in his Sermon on the nature of callings,
where, having directed three main enquiries, 1. whether the thing be simply and
in it self lawful, 2. whether it be lawful so as to be made a calling, 3.
whether it will be profitable or rather hurtful to the Commonwealth, and
shrewdly mated the Usurer in the first two, he thus proceeds as to the third
Article; But say yet our Usurer should escape, at least in the judgment of his
own hardened conscience, from both these rules, as from the Sword of Jehu and
Hazael, there is yet a third rule, like the Sword of Elisha to strike him Stone
dead, and he shall never be able to escape that; Let him show, wherein his
calling is profitable to humane society; He keeps no hospitality, If he have
but a barred chest and a strong lock, to keep his God and his Scriptures, (his
Mammon and his parchments in,) he has Houseroom enough; He fleeceth many, but
cloatheth none; He biteth and devoureth, but eat^th all his morsels alone; He
gives not so much as a Crumme, no not to his dearest Broker or Scrivener, only
where he biteth, he allows them to scratch what they can for themselves: The
King, the Church, the Poor are all wronged by him, and so are all that live
near him; In every common charge, he slippeth the Collar, and leaves the
burden upon those that are less able: It were not possible, Usurers should be
so bitterly inveighed against by sober Heathen writers, so severely censured by
civil and Canon laws so uniformely condemned by godly Fathers and Counsels, so
universally hated by all men of all sorts, and in all ages and Countries, as
Histories and Experience manifest they have been and are, if their practice and
calling had been any way profitable, and not indeed every way hurtful and
incommodious both to private men, and public societies: If any thing can make
a calling unlawful, certainly the Usurers calling cannot be lawful. Thus
preached that accurate Casuist near fifty years since, when Land-taxes,
properly so called, were not in being, when the Militia was rather an Exercise
and Holyday sport then a burden, and when our Parochial duties were not, I
dare say, generally the fourth part in bulk to what they now are; For my
Author himself tell us, Page 25. that in his own Parish within these five and
thirty years, the maintenance of the poor is swelled from six or seven Pounds
per Annum to above an hundred, which is at least sixteen for one, even near a
great road, adjoining to Chatham, and in the very mouth of trade: And in most
places of decayed clothing, it is too well known, the rates for the poor run
from three to five shillings in the Pound, (and still, like a creeping soar,
they spread,) wherewith the Land is frequently charged, though un-tenanted and
un-stocked; However, if such Farms be eased, (as surely it is but reason they
should,) still the neighbors are the more oppressed, and so must needs gallop
into the same ruin: As for the variety of other rates and duties, the
reckoning has therein been likewise so inflamed, that, by a modest estimate, I
cannot judge Interest of money to be fairly endebted to Land, upon the Balance
of our public burdens, so little as twenty Millions principal, since the year
1641. It is therefore high time, at length, to make some hue and cry after that
notable goodfellow, which has so often, so largely, nay gallantly robbed us; And
if we cannot get him to refund, yet at least to look better to the bottom of
the bag, where his fingers are, methinks, as busy as ever.

That it is practicable without inconvenience, to me appears by this certain
measure, that it having been already propounded to many intelligent persons of
different byasse, all of which found themselves concerned, there was never yet
any thing moved, which received not its present answer; Neither indeed do I
see, what can be colourably objected: For what, I pray, is less difficult,
then that Mortgages being local and fixed, their taxes and duties should attend
the Estate, and be of course defalked by the debtour, (to his great ease,) as
well as now by the Tenant? And that the rates of other sums and debts should
always follow the person and present habitation of the Creditour, even as now,
in some small measure, they do? If any pretend, it is hard for the Creditour
to be so paenally compelled to tax himself; I answer, what remedy? Since his
debtour dares not, for fear of trouble, his neighbors cannot for want of
evidence, and himself will not for love of gain; For should he not, in good
conscience, all along have done it without compulsion, at least not have
avoided it by shifts, Covenants and threats? If they plead, men's ability or
weakness will be thereby discovered, is it not fit, say I, it should? Does
not my Adversary himself press for such discovery, Page 5? But what can this
discover? Surely not very many personal debts, and for Mortgages, either they
are now known, or it is pity they are not: If they allege, that it is too
shrewd for Creditours to tax certainly for uncertain debts, I ask, whether
there be almost any Gentleman of Estate in England, who has not taxed for
Land, when either by want of Tenants, loss of Rents, or diverse other charges
incident to Estates, it has yielded him little or nothing, and whether all
this while the lender have not thought it very just and commodious for the
half-ruined borrower, (even in such extreme cases,) to pay likewise his Taxes,
as my Author himself frankly confesses, Page 36. But some will yet, perhaps,
further object, that there the Annual income only is ventured, here the
Capital: My Reply then is, that debts upon personal security are either clearly
secured, desperate, or doubtful: Of the clear, (which must needs include all
considerable sums, the Creditour in great loanes having always diverse strings
to his bow,) there can be no question made, those being equivalent to
mortgages, and of double value, in point of steady receipt, to the generality
of our Rents: Debts really desperate should, methinks, without more ado, be
quitted, the continuance of their claim serving only to wound charity, molest
the insolvent, hurt and disturb the Commonwealth by rendering many of its
members useless, malcontent and fit only for mischief; As for doubtful, (and
therefore hopeful,) debts, whereof far the greater number, by reason of
suretyships, are finally ensured with a witness, do not they who now sue for
them effectually, venture a large Tax to Atturnies, Lawyers, Officers and
Sheriffs? And why should they grudge the Commonwealth its due to preserve
their own? Besides they have always, at the worst, their ready amends in their
own hand; For may they not honestly purchase and turn their biting Usury into a
healing Rent, to the just relief of their neighbor, benefit of their Country,
and quiet of their conscience? It being now our greatest and most general
complaint, that there is so much Land upon sale, and so few chapmen, seconded
by my Author himself, Page 33. Which way soever I look, the objections are
either frivolous or inconsiderable to our grievance and prospect; For I dare
maintain, that a tax of three shillings in the Pound, indifferently charged,
will not now so bite the Land by embasing its fund, and consequently cannot
finally so much prejudice the State, as a tax of twelve pence in the Pound,
partially imposed, must inevitably do: From whence I infer, that (comparing
our present condition and rates with the great likelihood of their future
growth, by reason of the dangerous increase of our neighbors in shipping,)
whosoever argues, that Interest of money should not, or cannot be taxed, in
effect, rings his Countries passing-bel; For it is notorious, that no good Plant
ever did or can thrive together in the same soil with Usury; Which, (being
thus exempted and cherished,) infects our Land much worse then the sowing it
with mustardseed. Wherefore, as a fair adieu to the Usurer, I shall now take my
leave of him with this hearty and Christian admonition, that he first pluck the
beam, (of avarice and sordid partiality,) out of his own eye, and then,
perhaps, he may see clearer (then as yet, methinks, he does) to take the more
(of excess or sloth,) out of his Brothers eye.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line ult. for conclued, r. conclude. page 11. line 29. for selling, r.
telling. page 12. l. 31. for Gentleman, r. Gentlemen. page 13. l. 19. for
enlarge a Navigation, r. enlarge Navigation. page 4. l. 20. for Broils, after
them) has and, r. Broils, and after them) has.


