A Cup of COFFEE: OR, Coffee in its Colors.
FOr Men and Christians to turn Turks, and think
TO excuse the Crime because it is in their drink,
Is more then Magic, and does plainly tell
Coffee's extraction has its heats from Hell.
Pure English Apes! ye may, for ought I know,
Would it but mode, learn to eat Spiders too.
Should any of your Grandsires Ghosts appear
In your Wax-Candle-Circles, and but hear
The name of Coffee so much called upon,
Then see it drank like scalding Phlegeton;
Would they not startle, think ye, all agreed,
'Twas Conjuration both in Word and Deed;
Or Catiline's Conspirators, as they stood
Sealing their Oaths in Draughts of reeking Blood?
The merriest Ghost of all your Sires would say,
Your Wine's much worse since his last yesterday:
He Would wonder how the Club had given a Hop
Over Tavern-Bars, into the Farriers Shop;
Where he would suppose, both by the smoke and stench,
Each Man a Horse, and each Horse at his Drench.
That y' are no Poets, nor their Friends, I vow
Without an Oath I Would credit: for should now
Ben Iohnson's strenuous Spirit, or the rare
Beaumont and Fletcher's in your Rounds appear,
They would not find the Air perfumed with one
Castalian Drop, nor Dew of Helicon;
But fleeing, cry out, Sulphur, Liquid Fire,
Fetched from Cocytus, and the Stygian Mire:
When they but men, would speak as the Gods do;
They drank pure Nectar as the Gods drink too,
Sublimed with rich Canary; they would move
Discourse in the Language spoke in the world above.
But pray Sirreverence Sirs, what wonder drops
Nuncle John's Kettle-house in the Coffee-shops?
Your Servant, Sir, what News from Tripoly?
Do the Weeks Pamphlets in their Works agree?
Then Dame Diurnal goes to the Pot; if you
But say she scoulds, she is duck'd in Coffee too:
Often at your Sessions b'ing arraigned and cast
For petty Thefts, pleading her Book, at last
She Is with Wax-Candle, or Tobacco-snuff,
But burnt in the hand, and so served well enough.
Hear, and admire, Oh Men! these are the new
Admirabilia of the Coffee-Crew.
Fie, Friends to the gross Turky-shore, shall then
These less then Coffee's self, these Coffee-men,
These sons of nothing, that can hardly make
Their Broth, for laughing how the Jest does take;
Yet grin, and give ye for the Vine's pure Blood,
A loathsome Potion, not yet understood,
Syrrop of Soot, or Essence of old Shoes,
Dashed with Diurnals, and the Books of News?
Nay, for ought I know, (I Would not be absurd)
A mere Decoction of the Devils -- Assafoetida.

If, as the fashion of your Clothes, you change
Your Drinks as often, to as new and strange,
Let' Pothecaries then your custom thank,
And not these Munkeys of a Mountebank.
Have by misfortune your cross-cap'ring Brains
Got either Clap, or Running of the Reins?
Guaicum's infusion take, and Turpentine,
Which but compared with Coffee, drink like Wine.
Are ye with Surfeits stomach-full? Take then
Warm Treacle-water, sweat, and well again.
Does Venus heat your Bloods too high? Allay
That fire with drops of Maiden Camphora.
Drink whole Pharmacopeia over, know this,
No Draught so loathsome as foul Coffee is,
Of which this only is a taste, and those
Would know its Virtue, may go looked in Prose,
For 't cannot stand in Verse, (though 't lie in Print)
Because there is neither Rhyme nor Reason in 't.
Yet I have heard a grave Grand-Signior tell,
Coffee does dull and yawning Sleeps expel.
Why Frenzy, Fevers, or the Poor Man's Gout,
Will do this feat as well, and that without
A God-a-mercy; nay, 'twill make 'em do
And talk as idly and as frantic too.
Though in the power of this Turkish Spell
I Am faithless as a Jew or Infidel,
Yet I believe I easily might confess
Coffee potential in such Cures as these.
First, (for example) are there amongst ye some
Have soundly had the Morbum Gallicum?
Let 'em drink Coffee, and from Whores abstain,
I Will pawn my Pen they are Pocky well again.
From Venus Racks, let us fall to Bacchus Stocks:
Are ye dead drunk? have ye caught a catching Fox?
Take me then Coffee, drink it scalding hot,
(For though it scalds, yet know, it burns not)
Sleep upon it soundly; when you re-awake,
You Are a lives man again, I Will undertake.
Is any of your sober Signiors taken
With Maggot-Meagroms, or the Worm in the Brain?
(For though such Worms in Ages heretofore
Sought their forced fortunes at men's Postern Door;
Yet as the Moon and humane Humors change,
They alter too, and now through the head do range.)
If any be thus crazed, and by the Rimples
About his Nose, you fear he will fall in the Simples,
Well worm him first, and take a special heed
No spawn remain of the sly Serpents seed;
Then to the Mistress of the great Mogul
Let him carouse a Coffee-Kettle full,
And rise a wonder of the Turkey-shore,
As wise and well as ere he was before.
Such cures can Coffee work. I could afford
Ye many more; but to the wise a word.
And now Stewed Prewen-mongers, and all you
Drink-dablers, that have so long kept ado
With China-Ale, Stupone, Virgin-Wine,
Alum and Metheglin, and a hundred fine
Devices more, all to no purpose, know,
Ye ha'nt the way; these are all things that grow
Here, here at home, when as a foreign Fart,
Mixed and miscalled according unto Art,
Sells quick as the new Perukes now adays,
Goes off as well, and takes the self-same place.
But whine not, Dunces, nor despair, ye Fools;
Ye have Back-sides left yet, and good Close stools,
Large as the Coffee-Kettles: make good use
Of these; they shall an equal gain produce.
Remember Coff', can ye but Piss and Cack?
Jumble't together, call it Scythian Sack,
Tantavelin, Fogofarto, or but some
New name, not known in English Christendom;
Or let some Jew derive its stock and stem
At least as far as from Jerusalem,
That so it be'nt smelt out; let him but frame
Ought but to called out of it is Christian Name;
Post up its Virtues every where in good
Strange Hebrew-English, which not understood
Makes much the better; there lies all the knack,
The Jest's pure Hogo, and the Conceit's smack:
For in this Age, nothing's cried up for good,
Save what is stark naught, or what is not understood.
So that, I fear, these very Rules may run
IN the compass of some commendation.
But to the scope: There must be got mad Boys
For your first setters, or as't were Decoys,
IN entice the Novists, till they have made a Rode
Unto your Door, and your Knack 'gins to mode;
When you will, I fear, be forced to have wait
Some tall-gown'd-Porter at your thronged Gate
To make distinction of your Guests, lest none
Enter but friends, and men of fashion;
And this will take the Youngsters so, you will see
A Leaguer daily at your Door will be;
You Will be besieged with Money and good Words
For the rare Juice that your Back-sides affords;
Ye shall make Coffee stink. In short, be all
Made men at length, for to make men withal.
'T shall never be said, a Turdy Turk could do
More with a mere Sirreverence then you.
London, Printed in the year 1663.


