AN ESSAY CONCERNING Church Government, Out of the Excellent WRITINGS OF CALVIN
AND BEZA

By A. C. M. A.

Printed Anno DOM. MDCLXXXIX.

TO THE MODERATE PRESBYTERIAN.
WEre Picques and Resentments kindled unto Charity, Prejudices of Education,
and Wordly Designs laid aside, RELIGION preferred to Interest, and the power of
Godliness to that of Dominion; then all the powers of Hell endued with the
Pharisee himself, should never make Protestants of this Reformed Church of
Scotland divide about matters of Ecclesiastic Government: It is clear to a
Demonstration, (such as the Nature of the thing requires) that a President
Episcopacy has the Divine Institution, the Apostolic practice, the Reception
of the Primitive Church, and the Solemn Approbation of a Revelation from
Heaven: This Demonstration (from Calvin and Beza themselves) is the matter of
this Essay; Which I cheerfully offer to your censure and ingenuity; Adding, my
Hearty Prayers, That, Our Zion may at length be at unity within her self,
serving one Lord, according to one Rule, with one Heart, and Mouth, to the
Glory of GOD, the joy of Heaven, and all good Men upon Earth; The true
happiness of the King and People; The good contentment of our Brethren abroad;
And the Melancholy displeasure of the Adversary.

DEFINITIONS
I.
THE Power of ORDINATION is that Right in the Governors of the CHVRCH, Calvin.
Instit: Lib: 4: cap. 4: Sect. 2. This is to be considered, that only the
Pastors, and not the whole multitude laid on hands on their Ministers at
Ordinations.
to separate Persons duly Qualified, unto the Holy Ministry of the Gospel.

II.
The power of Jurisdiction is that Right in the Governors of the Church,
Calvin: Titus chap. 1: verse 5: We learn indeed from this place that there was
no such Equality among the Ministers of the Church. but that some One was
pre-eminent in Authority and Council.
to make Canons which are wanting, or to Execute those already made, for the
Regulation of Church Members.

III.
The President Bishop, is he, who from his Office Pre-eminent to other
Ministers, is invested with a fixed Power of Calvin: 2 Timothy: chap 1. verse 6.
Paul himself declares, That he alone and no other Ministers with him, laid on
hands on Timothy.
Ordination, Regulated bv Canons, and of Calvin: Inst: lib: 4: cap: 4: sect: 2:
What ever parts the Consul had in the Senate, the same Office did the Bishop
always sustain in the Meeting of Presbyters.
Jurisdiction, balanced by assisting Ministers.

IV.
The Angel of any Church Representative, Beza, Rev: 2: chap: 1: and 24: v: To
the Angel, that is, To the President, as whom it behooveth, especially to be
admonished, touching those matters; and by him both the rest of his fellow
Colleagues, and the whole Church likewayes. 24: verse, But unto you, that is,
unto you the Angel the President, and the Ass^mbly of your Colleagues, and to
the Rest, that is, to the whole Flock.
is the President Bishop over the other Ministers, within the Respective
Diocese, Province, or Patriarchat.

POSTULATUMS
I.
THat the 70 Disciples (from among whom Matthias was called, Calvine, Luke 10:
chap: I, 16, verse. After the Apostles had returned to Christ, he sent out more
secondarie Preachers: And this is the great commendation of the outward
Ministry; That CHRIST Declares, that whatsoever honor is given to his Faithful
Preachers, is given to Himself.
to be ordained one of the 12: Apostles) were Persons in holy Orders in the
Ministry.

II.
That (b) Timothy in the Church of Ephesus, Calvine, 1 Timothy: 1: chap. 18: v:
and Timothy was not one of the common Ministry, but one next to the Apostles,
who in the frequent absence of Paul, was in his place, Titus 1. 5. Beside the
ord^nary Office of Pastors, Titus had th^s charge, that he should constitute a
certain Form of Church Polity and Discipline; and likewise ordain Ministers
over the Churches.
Titus in the Church of Crete, were from their Offices preeminent to other
Ministers, invested with a fixed Power of Ordination, and Jurisdiction,
regulated by Canons, and balanced by assisting Ministers.

III.
That for the avoiding of Schism, Calvin: Inst: lib: 4: cap: 4: sect: 2:
Presbyters out of their number in all the cities, chose one, to whom especially
they gave the title of Bishop; lest from a Parity, as uses to be, Divisions
might arise. Ierom says, at Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist to Heraclas
and Dionysius, Presbyters always placed one in a pre-eminent degree, whom they
called a Bishop.
the Primitive Church retained the Government of one single person, pre-eminent
in Office, unto other Ministers.

IV.
That the 7 Angels of the 7 Churches, Beza, Rev: 2: chap: 26: v: My works, that
is, he who shall faithfully perform the work laid upon him; For he bespe^ks the
Assembly of Pastors in the person of the President, to whom he promises
Victory against all the wicked, if he rely and trust in the Authority and Power
of that true and only head of the Church.
written unto, in the Book of Revelation, are encouraged against all the
devices of the ungodly, upon condition of their continuing faithful in their
Administrations.

AXIOMS
I.
THE Regular Call of any Minister already ordained, Calvin, 1 Timothy: 3: 13:
Because in one or two Centuries after the death of the Apostles, it was the
constant custom that from the Order of Deacons, the Presbyters were chosen,
therefore commonly they have exponed this place, of the Advancement to a
Superior Degree.
is from an Office of an inferior, to another of a Pre eminent Station.

II.
The Pre-eminence in any Office, See Definition, II. and III.
includes a proportioned Jurisdiction, over the Officers who are under them.

III.
The Divine Right is manifest, Calvin: Inst: ilb: 4: cap: 6: sect: 1: We have
not before touched upon the primacie of the Roman See; whence the Papists
strive to prove that the Catholic Church is only with them: because it has
not taken its Original from CHRIST'S institution, nor the custom of the Ancient
Church, as the other Offices have done, ( viz. Bish: Presb: and Deacon: cap: 4:
sect: 1:) mentioned already.
in that Ecclesiastic Government which is instituted by Christ, continued by
his Apostles, retained in the Primitive Church, and approven from Heaven by
Revelation; in subserviency to any end, wherein the well-being of Christianity
is nighly concerned.

IV.
The want of that Government in the Church, Calvin: Inst: lib 4. cap 8: sect:
2: For neither the light and heat of the Sun, Meat or Drink are so nourishing
and sustaining this present Life, as the Apostolic and Ministerial Office, for
preserving of a Church upon Earth.
which is of Divine Right, is pernicious to the Gospel, and Christian Religion.

PROPOSITION I.
The twelve Apostles were President Bishops over the 70. Disciples.
Demonstration.
THe President Bishop is he who from his Office Pre-eminent to other
Mininisters, is invested with a fixed power of Ordination, Regulated by Canons,
and of Jurisdiction balanced by assi^ting Ministers; (by Definition III.) But
in respect to the 70 Disciples, who were all in the holy Ministry, (by
Postulatum I.) and from among whom Matthias was called to be of the 12. (by
Postulatum I.) The s^cred College of, the Apostles had a fixed Pre-eminence (by
Axiom I.) Invested with the power of Ordination regulated by Canons; (by
Postulatum I: and Definition I:) And of Jurisdiction balanced by Assisting
M^nisters; (by Axiom II.) Therefore the 12. Apostles were President Bishops
over the 70. Disciples, which was the thing to be Demonstrated.

PROPOSITION II.
Timothy was a President Bishop over the Church of the Ephesians; and Titus
over the Church of the Cretians.
Demonstration.
These are President Bishops who are from their Office Pre-eminent to other
Ministers, invested with a fixed power of Ordination, Regulated by Canons; and
of Jurisdiction balanced by assisting Ministers; (by Definition III.) But
Timothy in the Church of Ephesus, and Titus in the Church of Crete, from their
Offices had a pre-eminence over other Ministers, invested with a fixed power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction, Regulated by Canons, and Balanced by Assisting
Ministers; (by Postulatum II.) Therefore Timo^hy was a president Bishop over
the Church of the Ephesians, and Titus over the Church of the Cretians. Which
was to be Demonstrated.

PROPOSITION III.
The Fathers of the Primitive Church were President Bishops.
Demonstration.
The Primitive Church retained the Government of one single person, pre-eminent
in Office unto other Ministers; (by Postulatum III.) But the pre-eminence in
any Office includes a proportioned Jurisdiction over the Officers who are under
them; (by Axiom II.) And the power of Jurisdiction is fixed in the president
Bishop, (by Definition III.) Therefore the Fathers of the Primitive Church were
president Bishops. Which was to be Demonstrated.

PROPOSITION IV.
The President Episcopacy is approven by CHRIST in the Book of the Revelation.
Demonstration.
The 7: Angels of the 7: Churches written unto by St: John, in the Book of the
Revelation, are encouraged against all the devices of the ungodly, upon
condition of their continuing faithful in their Administrations; (by Postulatum
IV.) But these Angels were president, Bishops over other Ministers within their
respective Churches; (by Definition IV.) Therefore the president Episcopacy is
approven by CHRIST, in the Book of the Revelation. Which was to be Demonstrated.

COROLLARIE I.
The President Episcopacy is of Divine Right.
Demonstration.
The Divine Right is manifest, in that Ecclesiastic Governuent which is
instituted by CHRIST, and continued by his Apostles, retained in the Primitive
Church, and approven by CHRIST, by a Revelation from Heaven, for subserviency
to any end, wherein the well-being of Christianity is nighly concerned; (by
Axiom III.) But the President Episcopacy was instituted by CHRIST; (by
Proposition I.) Continued by His Apostles; (by Proposition II.) Retained in the
Primitive Church; (by Proposition III.) And approven by CHRIST, by a Revelation
from Heaven; (by Proposition IV.) For avoiding of Schism wherein the well-being
of Christianity is nighly concerned; (by Postulatum III.) Therefore the
President Episcopacy is of Divine Right. Which was to be Demonstrated.

COROLLARIE II.
The want of the President Episcopacy is prejudicial to the cause of CHRIST.
Demonstration.
The want of that Government in the Church, which is of Divine Right, is
pernicious to the Christian Religion; (by Axion IV.) But the President
Episcopacy, is that Government in the Church which is of Divine Right; (by the
preceding Corollarie.) Therefore the want of the President Episcopacy is
prejudicial to the cause of CHRIST. Which was to be Demonstrated.


