SPIRITUAL OPTICS: OF A GLASS Discovering the weakness and imperfection of a
Christians knowledge in this life. BY NATHANAEL CULVERVVELL, Master of Arts,
and lately Fellow of EMMANUEL COLLEGE in CAMBRIDGE

Printed by THOMAS BUCK one of the Printers to that Universitie. 1651. And are
to be sold by Anthony Nicholson, Stationer there.

To the Reader
Reader,
I Here present thee with a little mirror, wherein thou may easily discern
thine own imperfections, unless they stand in thy light; and if thou will but
use to reflect upon thy self, and dwell at home, thou may easily find that
thou have little reason either to admire thy self, or contemn others. If thy
knowledge puff thee up, thou have so much the less. He was counted a wise man
who said that he knew but one thing, and that was, that he knew nothing; though
another durst not own so much; and a wiser man then both tell us, that he that
is wise in his own eyes is of all fools the most incurable; and another, that
if any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to
know. So that it seems to be agreed on by those who are best able to judge,
that the first piece of wisdom is to be sensible of ignorance. Then I hope
this Discourse may prove not unprofitable, truly nor unseasonable neither in
this confident age, when every ignorant one is so prone to lean unto his own
understanding, that he thinks himself too good to be taught, whereas indeed he
has not yet wit enough to learn. But it is the Devils subtilty to dazzle them
with new light (as boys do geese) that they may wink conceitedly while he
pulls them naked, and makes them become ridiculous. It is sad to think how he
puts out men's eyes, and then makes himself cruel sport with them; and the game
of it is, that still they think themselves seers, and know not that they are
blind, and naked, and miserable. Now if this glass prove but isntrumental to
reflect so much old light upon them, as to discover to them their own
blindness, there will be some hope of cure. But Reader, I must entreat thee
neither to condemn this piece because it is imperfect, nor yet contemn it for
being little. It is imperfect, I confess: but so is all our knowledge here,
which is the subject of it; and if we know but in part, no wonder if we
prophecy also but in part; besides, if Saint Paul himself could not utter the
words which he had heard, then truly we may very well excuse this Author for
not expressing that in words, which neither ear has heard, nor eye seen, nor
the heart of man conceived. But it may be what is here said, may at first seem
but little: it may be the sooner read: do but peruse it, and if it please thee,
it is enough; if otherwise, too much. But indeed it was intended only for a
taste, and to bear the mace into the world before that learned and elegant
tratise, which this ingenious Author has left behind him concerning The light
of Nature; which now waits only to see what entertainment this will meet
withal. Perhaps it may be expected that I should add something in praise of
the Author: but I am not ignorant that a friends testimony is prone to be
suspected of partiality; and although such an one have most reason to know the
truth, yet Cassandra-like he seldom has the hap to be believed. The best on
'ti is, he needs it not, his works will commend him most effectually: which if
I shall endeavor to bring into public view, I hope thou will find them such,
that I shall not be thought either to have abused thy leisure, or to have
wronged the memory of my deceased friend.

W. D.
Emman. Dec. 24. 1651.
I. COR. 13.12. For now we see through a glass darkly; but then face to face:
now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am known.


PAUL that was of a piercing eye, and had as clear an insight into the
mysteries of salvation, as any other; whose soul was always mounting toward
that third heaven, whither he had once been rapt, and had there heard words
that neither could nor might be uttered (for so much is employed in (...)) we
find him here granting the imperfection of his knowledge, those weak and
shadowy apprehensions which he had of the Divine Majesty, while the saw
through a glass darkly; and encouraging himself with the consideration of the
full and clear vision, which we shall have of him hereafter, when we shall see
God face to face in glory. Without any further preamble we will open the words of
the text, that we may see this glass clearly, and not (...).

Our Apostle here advances charity to the highest pitch of commendation, as a
triumphant grace, a grace that had eternity stamped upon it. It out-lives faith,
for that gives place to vision; it out-lasts hope, for that is swallowed up in
fruition: Prophecies they shall vanish, and tongues shall be silenced, and
knowledge shall pass away: for it is weak and imperfect here, in its minority,
yea, in its infancy; When I was a child I spoke as a child. It Is cloudie and
obscure here; for now we see through a glass darkly.

NOW we see etc. Now that the Gospel beams out upon us with a powerful and
glorious ray. It was likely that at the first peeping out of heavenly light, at
the Evangelicall daybreak, before the shadows were fully scattered, that then
there would be some obscurity: I but 't has shined out brighter and brighter
till perfect day, and yet still we see thus darkly.

Secondly, (which is the true and genuine meaning) Now whilst we are in this
house of our earthly tabernacle, whilst the understanding of a man, which the
wise man calls The candle of the Lord, while it is hid in the dark lantern of
the body. Till this partition-wal be beaten down, we cannot see God face to
face. There Is no reaching of perfection here, it is treasured up for a better
life. He that will shoot high may aim at a star, but he must not think to hit
it. Nihil est ab omni part beatum. Beatum and perfectum are both one. Alas!
now when the soul does but (...), try the wing, and flutter toward heaven,
it is presently pulled down with an earthy body we carry about with us; it is so
deprest here, as it can hardly look up to heaven: how then shall it see God
face to face?

Now WE see through a glass etc. We that have an holy (...) that teaches us
all things; we that have many secret (...), the whisperings and breathings of
the holy Spirit, that leads us into all truth; we that are acquainted with the
mind of God, that have had many a gracious aspect from him, yet WE see but
darkly. No wonder that the sunne's too bright for owls, when eagles are dazzled
with it, and become dimme-sighted; it is like that such as are aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel will be wholly ignorant of these Magnalia, when they
that are a secretioribus know them but in part: if (...) the sons of the
morning, the (...), children of light; if these see so darkly, then surely a
child of darkness will see nothing at all: If Paul now a glorious Apostle see
no more, what could he see when he was a furious persecutour, before the scales
fell from his eyes?

Secondly, We that are no novices in Christianity, but have made much
progress in the ways of religion, yet we see but darkly. 'T was likely at the
first opening of the souls eye, at the first cast of it upon heavenly things,
that then 't would not see so clearly. It but it has been long fixed upon God,
eying of his goodness, gazing upon the riches of his free grace, viewing all
his ways, looking at and prying into his several dealings; and yet still it
sees thus darkly. And if a tall and eminent Christian see so little, what shall
a babe see, a new born babe? If a vigorous and sparkling eye see no clearer,
what shall a weak distempered eye, a blear-eied soul, what shall that see? If
an experienced Apostle, a Paul see no more, what shall a new disciple see, a
Nicodemus that comes by night? he must needs see but darkly.

Now we see through a glass, (...). Some that would be more critical then
they need, would fain show us a difference between (...) and (...) indeed with
them is a looking-glass: but (...) is some other glass: either such an one as
is for the help of weak an aged eyes, and then it is, we see through spectacles;
or else such as presents the object though a far off, and so it is, we see
through a perspective. The Vulgar Latin, that will have it per transennam,
through a lattice: as the Spouse in the Canticles is said to flourish through
the lattices. And all these urge the force of the Preposition, (...), we see
through a glass, or through a lattice. But they might easily know, if they
pleased, that (...) here, is the same with (...): and though it be true that
(...) is the more usual word for a looking-glass; yet it is as true that (...)
signifies the same. Hesychius makes them synonyma: and the word is but once
more used in the New Testament, 1. James 23. and there can be no doubt but
there it is taken for a looking-glass. Well then, our dark imperfect knowledge
of God here is thus set forth by seeing in a glass;

1. Because it is no immediate vision: the object is not primarily and
immediately presented to the eye, but by way of resultancie, and mediante
specule, by the conveyance of the looking-glass, which is a silent interpreter
of the object. And such is our knowledge of God here, and such our communion
with him; only some broken beams of glory, some glimpses of his presence
scattered here and there, in this ordinance, and in that, glasses of his own
making, means of his proper institution.

2. It Is a weak and imperfect vision: for, First, according to some, not res
ipsa but imago rei, only the shape and resemblance of the thing is seen; the
effigies of the object drawn with the pencill of a beam is presented to the
eye. And Secondly, as the Optics tell us, radius reflexus languet, the beam
begins to be weary, and is ready to faint, it gives a weak and languishing
representation, it is an imperfect vision. And O how dark is our knowledge of
God here! what poor manifestations have we of his presence, in comparison of
that sight which we look for hereafter! when his essence shall be displayed
with a most glorious Emphasis.

3. Seeing through a glass is a vanishing and transient vision, as S. James
expresses it; A man having seen his natural face in a glass, goes his way,
and presently forgets what manner of man he was. A dying species could not make
any strong impression. One direct view of an object is more full and
satisfactorie, then the often seeing it through a glass.

Our Apostle has applied it to our purpose; Knowledge passes away, in respect
of that weak and imperfect way of knowledge which we have here; for thus S.
Paul glosses upon his own text; When that which is perfect is come, then that
which is imperfect shall be abolisht.

But besides all this, Beza and some others think that our Apostle has
allusion to that way of knowledge which the Philosophers show us, and so often
speak of; That the understanding does (...), intellectus speculatur
phantasmata, and thus sees (...). No light springs into the mind but through
the window of sense: the sense, that is the first receptacle of the species,
which flowing from a material object somewhat thick and muddy, they must be
clarified and thoroughly refined by the Intellectus agens, (for that they
suppose) poured out from vessel to vessel, and taken off from the lees before
the soul drink them in as her proper nectar. This remote and far-fetcht way of
knowledge Saint Paul opposes to the quick and present view which we shall have
of things (...), when we behold them in speculo divino; we shall see in that
glass clearly. But there is a place in 2. Cor. 3.18. where Saint Paul seems
to oppose his own expression; for there to see through a glass may seem to
import a clear and open vision; Hear what the words say, We all with open
face beholding as in a glass the glory of God are changed into the same image
from glory to glory, as by the spirit of our God.

A learned Critic has well observed that the Hebr. (...) includes both, for
it signifies both vultus and speculum. So that to see (...) may either be to
see (...), or else, (...). I know such as I formerly mentioned would have
recourse to their difference of (...) and (...). but if we look more accurately
into the words, I think we shall find that even there to see through a glass
implies a dark and imperfect vision. For the Apostle compares those present
advantages which we in the Gospel have over them which were under the Law: they
were all under a cloud, and Moses had a vail upon his face; but we (...) with
open face behold the glory of God: and yet it is but beholding it through a
glass; for thus the state of the Church under the Gospel is described, Rev. 4.
there is a throne compassed with a sea of glass, (...), verse 6. Under the Law
it was mare aereum, but now in the Gospel mare vitreum, clearer
representations, as that renowned interpreter of the Revelation observes. Well
then, in reference to them under the Law we behold with open face, but yet in
respect to that clear sight which we shall have hereafter, it is but (...).
and so it follows, we are changed into the same image from glory to glory:
which though it may be thus understood, from his glory we become glorious; yet
I doubt not but it is meant of the several degrees of glory: and thus (...) is
from grace to glory. For grace is Aurora gloriae, the dawning of the
beatificall vision. Grace is glory in the bud, and glory is grace at the full.
Surely glory is nothing else but a bright constellation of graces, happiness
nothing but the quintessence of holiness. And yet if any shall much contend,
that there to see through a glass expresses a clear and unobscure vision, it
is nothing prejudicial to our present purpose: for here Saint Paul doubles his
expression, (...), we see through a glass darkly in a riddle, (...).

Aenigma is properly obscura allegoria, an allegory with a mask on: it is a
borrowed speech and a cloudy speech. A knotty intricate speech sealed up and
locked from vulgar apprehensions, that is a riddle: and our knowledge of God here
is thus cloudy and enigmaticall, and that if you take it in those three
several ways which are usually given of it.

First, by way of removal or negation, when we take away all such things as
are inconsistent with a Deity. And thus the Scripture riddles him forth; With
him is no beginning of days, nor end of life. He is not a man that he should
lie, or the son of man that he should repent. With him is no variableness
nor shadow of turning, etc. and in this sense Dionysius tells us that (...) and
he there admires (...), the transcendent beams of Divine darkness; for so that
Areopagite is pleased to speak. Now you will easily grant that this is a dark
and cloudy knowledge, when we cannot tell you what a thing is, but what it is
not: for ex puris negativis nihil concluditur.

Secondly, when we conceive of him in a superlative way, in a way of eminency
and transcendency: and thus the forenamed author (if he be the author)
speaking of his being, says that 't is (...). Many divine perfections are
scattered and broken amongst the creatures, as the same face may be represented
in seveall glasses; and all the excellencies of the creatures are collected and
meet eminently in God, as several faces may be seen in one glass. The
creatures must be winnowed from all imperfections, and the finest and choicest
of them must be taken to give some weak resemblance of a Deity: the ruddinesse
of the rose, and the purity of the lily, nay the top and excellency of the
creation must be brought to shadow out the Spouses beauty; and yet that this
knowledge is weak and imperfect will easily appear. 1. Because these inferior
beings are so gross and material, as that the purest of them, the very
quintessence and flos creaturae is mere dregs, if compared with so pure an
essence; its gold becomes dross, its silver time. And when heavenly
perfections are set out by the creatures excellencies, it is but a stooping low
to humane capacity: the soul would be dazeled at so bright a Majesty, unless
he were clouded with such expressions. 2. This way of beholding him breeds
rather admiration then begets knowledge; for when we hear of so goodly an
essence that has all excellencies bound up in one vast volume, we wonder what
that should be: and admiration is at the best but semen scientiae or abrupta
scientia, as the learned Verulam calls it, a stupefied kind of knowledge. 3.
This rather sets the soul a longing then gives it any true satisfaction. For
when we hear there is so choice a thing, we long to know what it is: which was
a figne we knew it not before, or but very weakly. For true knowledge satiates
the soul, there is a complacency and acquiescence in it, especially when it is
conversant about so high an object: so that this way is but dark and full of
riddles.

Thirdly, When we consider of God by way of Causality, in that vast influence
which he has upon all things, as with him is (...) (as the supposed
Areopagite) Springing beams of goodness, and overflowing effusions of ight, as
he is causa fontana, a fountain essence continually bubling forth, from whence
the several drops of inferior beings have their original: and as he is the
main spring that sets the wheels of those petty entities on working: for in him
we live, move, and have our being. Now this rather shows us that there is a
God, then what he is; that there is indeed such a prime being, a self-being, an
all-being, a giver of being, a quo omnia, per quem omnia, propter quem omnia;
but still we are to seek, what this being is; so that these apprehensions of
him are very weak and shadowie, (...), we now see through a glass darkly.

But then] Then when a believing soul returns to God that gave it, it sees him
face to face, and fixes its eye upon him to all eternity. As soon as ever the
soul is unsheathed from the body, it glisters most gloriously; as soon as ever
it is unclouded from corruption, it shall beam forth most oriently; as soon as
it is let loose from this cage of clay, it sings most melodiously: nothing
hinders a Christian from a sight of God face to face, but the interposition of
a gross earthy body; it is deaths office to break down this wall of
separation, that the soul may be admitted into the presence of God.

Secondly, Then, at that general day of refreshment, when God shall sit upon
his throne in beauty and excellency as a center of light streaming forth to
the glorious circumference of the four and twenty Elders, that sit (...), as
it is in the 4 of the Revelation.

Face to face] (...). This is opposed to seeing in a glass, 1. as a more
immediate vision: 2. a clear and perfect vision: 3. as a permanent and
eternal vision: 4. as the learned Piscator, (because those things which we see
in a glass are a tergo) excepta facie and corpore proprio.

In the words there is a plain allusion to that place in the 12 of Numbers the
8, where God promises to manifest himself to his servant Moses, (...) (...), as
the Septuagint render it very agreeable to our purpose, and that which is here
(...) and (...) is in other places (...) and in Esaias (...) and is translated by
S. John (...), by our Apostle elsewhere (...), and here (...).

And yet we must not think that by virtue of this promise Moses had so full and
beatificall a vision of God, as we expect hereafter in glory. No, it is spoken
only of Gods communicating himself to him in a clearer way then he would to
any of the Prophets: he would speak to them in riddles, to Jeremie in the
riddle of an almond tree, of a seething pot, and so to the rest of the
Prophets; I but he conversed familiarly with Moses, as a man talks to his
friend face to face. And as for Moses his petition in the 33 of Exodus 18. I
beseech thee show me thy glory, it was only a desire that God would show
himself in some corporeal resemblance, so as to assure him of his presence,
that that would accompany him. And this is Gods answer, I will make all my
goodness pass before thee. Besides, there is a plain denial; God tells him
he cannot see his face: Moses saw no more of God then we do here, the
back-parts of his glory; he saw them in a corporeal resemblance, and we in an
intellectual vision. You see the allusion this place has to that in Numbers.

Now as for the meaning of the words, but then face to face.

1. It is not meant of seeing Christ in his humane nature face to face, as Job
speaks, With these very eyes I shall see my Redeemer: for thus the wicked also
shall see him with terror and amazement, when the mountains shall be esteemed
an easier burden, if they could but cover them from the face of an angry
Savior that will frown them into hell,

2. As for the error of the Anthropomorphites, it is so gross as it neither
deserves to be repeated, nor needs to be confuted.

3. I take it be meant of an Intellectual beholding the very essence of God,
according to that, 1. John 3.2. When he shall appear we shall be like unto
him, and see him as he is, (...). and yet it can by no means be a comprehensive
vision: for that is a mere repugnancy, that a finite creature should grasp an
infinite essence. Or by the face of God may be meant his glory and perfections;
for the face is the throne of beauty.

In the following words S. Paul gives a plainer expression of that which before
he had spoke more darkly.

Now I see through a glass darkly, now I know in part; but then face to face,
but then I shall know even as also I am known. As when two see one another face
to face, the one knows the other by sight, as he is known by him.

Now I know in part] S. Paul on set purpose changes the person, that he may
acknowledge his own imperfection. He had included himself before, Now WE see
through a glass darkly. I, but he will do it more apparently, now I know in
part: and when so great an Apostle inculcates his own defects, me thinks none
should boast of their self-sufficiencie.

2. Now I KNOW in part] Here is a reason of our imperfection here: If the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? Knowledge is a
leading principle, and all graces follow it in a just measure and proportion:
if we knew God more, we should obey him more; if we knew more of his goodness,
we should love him more; if we knew more of his Majesty, we should fear him
more; if more of his faithfulness, we should trust him more: nay, if we knew
him perfectly, all these would be perfect: when knowledge is complete,
obedience will be exact.

3. Now I know IN PART: according to the Syriack, parum de multo. 1. little of
that I should know. 2. little of that I might know. 3. little of that others
know. 4. little of that I desire to know. 5. little of that I shall know
hereafter in glory.

4. Now I KNOW in part. 1. Religion is no fancy, opinion, or conjecturall
thing: no, we have a certain knowledge of God and his ways here; we see
through a glass, though it be but darkly: there is truth in a riddle, though
it be obscure. 2. A Christian begins his acquaintance with God here: he that
knows him not in part here, shall never see him face to face in glory. We have
here the first glimpses of heaven, a prospect of Canaan, the (...) of
happiness, the initials of Glory.

But then I shall know, (...) differ. (...). It is bringing me better
acquainted with a thing that I knew before, a more exact viewing of an object
that I saw before afar off. That little portion of knowledge which we had
here shall be much improved, our eye shall be raised to see the same things
more strongly and clearly. Our knowledge here was but scintilla futurae lucis.
When the soul shall say as the Queen of Sheba did to Solomon in the 1. Kings
10. It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thine acts and of thy
wisdom; howbeit I scarce believed the words until I came, and mine eyes had
seen it; and behold the half was not told me. Happy are thy men, O happy are
these thy servants that stand continually before thee!

Even as also I am known. (...). The words if they be put to it will endure a
double Hebraisme. I shall know as I am known.

1. I shall know as I am approved, sicut and agnitus sum; nay Chrysostom makes
(...) Causall; I shall know because I am approved.

2. I shall know as I am made to know. (...), that is, (...), says Beza; and
(which is a wonder) Heinsius agrees with him. (...) says he; and indeed (...)
is the same with the Hebrew (...) and he tells us if we would render the words
Hellenistically, they would run thus, (...). I shall so know as God is pleased
to be known by me, to manifest himself unto me. And yet Piscator rejects both
these senses; the words themselves being sufficiently tempered with the
particle (...), which is not a note of equality, but of similitude, as in many
other places.

And thus much may serve for explication of the text for clearing the glass,
for opening the Aenigma. If you now look into the words, you will find them full
of spiritual Optics. Here is Visio reflexa; for now we see through a glass
darkly: and here is visio recta; but then face to face. We will begin with the
Catoptrica: Now we see through a Glass darkly; and here I shall present many
glasses to your view.

First, In the glass of the Creature, in speculo mundi. This is a common and
obvious glass presented to every ones view, and there are some glimmerings of
common light, a lumen naturae diffused among all, by which they may see into it.

Our Apostle shows us this glass in 1. Romans 20. (...), The invisible things of
God from the creation of the world are clearly seen. The words in the fountain
run thus, (...), and deserve to be cleared from an unjust interpretation: for
some would have (...) to be a creatura mundi: others a creatione mundi, ex
creatione mundi: so Beza. But all these are far enough from the meaning of
the place: for their sense is, That the invisible things of God are seen by the
creatures, or by the creation. It is true, our Apostle says so much in this
verse, but not in these very words; for then it should be (...), when as I
doubt not but (...) is the same with (...), a mundo condito. Piscator and
Drusius both meet in this, and the Syriack translation is clear for it (...) a
jactis mundi fundamentis. And then the words speak thus much, From the first
infancy of the world, ever since it was created, the eternal power and (...),
which are the (...) mentioned in the former verse, and the (...) in the
beginning of this verse, the eternal power and Godhead have manifested
themselves, and the Prime cause has been very apparent in those effects of
his, which are here styled (...), and could not possibly be produced by any
inseriour being. And as for that which we render is clearly seen, in the
Original it is no more then (...). I know not how it comes to denote so clear
a vision; sure it may well consist with (...), and yet withal they are so
clearly seen (...), which though some would have the same with (...), yet here
I shall easily yield to the learned interpreter, and grant that it includes
somewhat more.

This vast volume of the creatures set out by God himself without any errata in
it, was printed in so fair a character, as he that ran might read it: and the
least letter in it made show of a most Divine impression. But alas! sin,
besides weakening of the souls eye, has soyled and defaced the book; and hence
we come to see in it so darkly. And yet still the letters are visible, and
carry with them the print of a Deity. The world is, as one calls it, Aenigma
Dei. And it is full of looking-glasses: for God has communicated several
resemblances of himself to the creature, as the face sheds that image or
species upon the glass whereby it self is represented. I need not speak of the
blessed Angels, those pure and crystal mirrours, what glorious representations
they give of their Creator: look but into your selves, and you will find
immortal souls showing forth that image according to which they were made: or
if you will look up to that vast and polished looking-glass, you will see The
heavens declaring the glory of God, and the firmament showing his handy work.
Or cast but an eye upon the poorest and most abject being, and even there you
will find some faint resemblances of a Deity. For as in the most glorious
creature, as a creature, there is aliquid nihili; so in the most contemptible
creature, as a creature, there is aliquid Dei. I, but the Atheist he shuts his
eyes, and quid caeco cum speculo? what should a blind man do with a
looking-glass? And yet sometimes there are lightening flashes of terror
darted into him, and he begins with the Devils to believe and tremble. The
Papists, as if there were not glasses enough of Gods making, they must have
images of their own to put them in mind of God; their painted glasses: but
surely they see through these very darkly. The Heathens they shall be judged
for not ordering their lives and dressing themselves according to this glass;
for resisting those relics of primitive light that shined out so strongly
upon them. Well, here are glasses, but we see in them very darkly, and that by
reason of a double defect.

1. Ex part speculi.

It Is true, some of Gods attributes here clearly show themselves: his power and
sovereigntie, I, and his wisdom, and goodness too; but those sweetest
manifestations of his love, the treasures of free grace and infinite mercy, the
whole plot of the Gospel, not the least shadow of these to be found. Now for
this very cause, the Gentiles in 2. Ephesians. 12. are called (...), because they
were without the knowledge of God in Christ. You know they had a goodly company
of gods, an whole troop of deities: I, but they were without God in Christ, and
hence they are styled (...), without God in the world.

2. Ex part oculi.

1. Adam in innocence had a glorious soul full of light, bright and sparkling
eyes, (...). He could read the smallest print, the least jot and tittle in the
book of nature. See how quickly he tumbles over the vast volume, and in a name
gives a brief gloss upon every creature, a concise epitome of their natural
histories. He had a fair portion of knowledge, if he could have been contented
with it. I, but he would fain have more, he must needs be tasting of the tree
of knowledge: and hence springs our ignorance; we have ever since had an
unhappy (...), the soul has been darkened and dim-sighted. Perhaps it can see
some goodly capital letters, some fair flourisht character: I, but there are
multitudes of beings in a smaller print that it takes no notice of.

2. The soul might see more, if it would employ it self more, and look oftener
into this glass of the creatures. Meditation would raise the creature higher,
and distill sweetness out of every object. It Is (...), as the elegant Moralist.
The soul is busy with every thing it sees, as busy as a Be: it goes from
flower to flower, and extracts most precious sweetness.

3. Some eyes have been dazzled too much with the glitterings of the creatures,
so as to take the servant for the Master: and have been so much in admiring the
glass, as they forgot the glorious beauty that it represented. What worship
and adoration has the sun had? even almost as much as the great Creator of
heaven and earth himself: strange that they should see so darkly, as not to
discern the face from the vail that covers it. For the sun is at best but
umbra Dei, and nubecula cito transitura; a mere spot, a cloud, if compared with
so bright an essence: and as he says notably, The suns worshippers must
needs be (...), Atheists in the night time. You have seen the glass of the
Creatures, and how in it we see very darkly.

Secondly, in learnings glass, in speculo scientiarum. Learning brightens the
intellectual eye, and clarifies the soul: the Hebrews wise men are (...)
aperti, men with eyes open: and it sets a man on higher ground, and gives him a
fairer prospect of beings, and many advantages over others. (...), when as
(...), they have eyes and see not: I, but these see, and yet very darkly. What
need I tell you how invincible doubts blemish their brightest notions? how the
Naturalists head is non-plust with an occult quality, and he knows not how to
take it off: how the choicest Moralists are posed with the riddle of Summum
bonum, and cannot tell how to extricate themselves. Look up higher to
Metaphysics, which some style fimbria Theologiae: I, but you may touch the
hemme of its garment long enough before you find any virtue coming from it.
Converse but with the Schoolmens Works, and there you shall meet with anigmata
in folio, voluminous riddles. It Is their grand employment to tie a knot, and
then see if they can undo it; to frame an enemy, and then triumph over him; to
make an objection, and then answer it if they can: there are speculations
enough, but if you see through them, it will be very darkly.

But if you could see very clearly in all these, yet how weak and insufficient
are they to acquaint you with the Arcana of Religion, and the great mysteries
of Godliness?

1. Some such as have been most eminent in them, and as he speaks, have had
wits of elevation situated as upon a cliffe, but how little have they seen of
heaven and heavenly things! Aristotle with the rest of the heathen, what
uncertain and fluctuating notions had they of a Deity? we are beholden to
their dying speeches for most of their Divinity.

2. Many under the light of the Gospel, and furnished with helps of humane
learning, how strangely unacquainted are they with the knowledge of Christ
crucified! A plain experienced Christian (notwithstanding all their auxiliary
forces) only by the help of a Bible, will put an whole army of them to flight:
Surgunt indocti and rapiunt coelum, when they in the mean time do but, as he
speaks, ornare Diabolum; they become learned spoils, Sapienter descendunt in
infernum, they go cunningly to hell. And yet me thinks none should be so silly
and malicious as to put the fault in learning, whereas there is no greater
vicinitie then between truth and goodness; and heaven is full of knowledge, as
it is of holiness: and it is brimfull of both.

3. Sciences themselves are weak and imperfect things, and therefore (...), as
our Apostle tells us, Knowledge shall be abolisht, and Tongues which are
vehicula scientiarum, they shall pass away. So then in this Glass we see but
darkly.

Thirdly, in the Glass of the Scriptures, in speculo verbi. This is a pure and
spotless glass, representing the will of God unto us, an eternal glass that
shall never be broken, more durable then heaven it self: David was looking in
this glass day and night.

There are many false flattering glasses in the world: I, but here the soul may
see its face in a most exact resemblance: it will show the least spot and
deformity; the sinfulness of an idle word, of a vain thought, of a first
motion though without consent, the least tendencies to sin, the first
bublings up of corruption. It deals so plainly as many are offended with it,
and swell the more against it: and thus sin takes occasion by the
commandment, as Romans 7. Fond Lais breaks her looking-glass, because it shows
the wrinkles in her face: and gives the reason, Me cernere talem qualis sum
nolo, qualis eram nequeo. Well, the Law that is a glass to show us our spots,
but it cannot wipe them off: I, but the Gospel is a pure well of salvation,
there one may see them and wash them too.

In that Evangelicall mirror you may see the face of a Savior, coming in an
amiable way with smiles of love, with offers of grace and saving mercy. Nay,
the Gospel is called the face of Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 4.6. (...). As suppose a
glass when a man had once looked into it, should keep a permanent and
unvanishing species of his face, though he himself afterward were absent; we
might well say, There was the face of such a man: the Gospel is such a glass,
Christ has looked into it, and shed his image upon it, and ever since it has
given most glorious representations of him: it is (...), that I may borrow that
expression in the Hebrews: so that when we shall come to see him (...) in
heaven, we shall be able to say, Surely this the very Savior that was
described to me in the Gospel; -- sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat. And till we
come to heaven it self, we cannot meet with more full manifestations of God and
Christ, and all the mysteries of salvation, then in the word of God; and yet
here we see but darkly.

For if we consider them under the old Testament, how long was there comfort
locked up in that Aenigma, that primitive promise, which was Aurora Evangelii
the first dawning of the Gospel, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents
head; and when truth began to show it self in some fuller discoveries, yet
still it was mixed with much obscurity.

They had a twofold glass. 1. Speculum ceremon. arum. 2. Speculum prophetiarum.

1. In the glass of the Ceremonies they saw very darkly. We could not look for
much light where there were so many shadows; where there were so many vails
they could not see face to face. That the Jews worshipped a cloud for their God,
was a mere calumny: but that they worshipped their God in a cloud we will easily
grant, for all our fathers were under the cloud, 1. Cor. 10.1. the Ceremonial
law was nothing else but an heap and miscellany of riddles: who amongst them
could tell the meaning of them? nay it is well if we that have the type and
antitype meeting together can give a just explanation of some of them. Well,
this glass is now broken: for Ceremonies like false looking-plasses represent
the object with too much shadow: and yet still the scarlet whore will be
dressing her self by them, because like flattering glasses they make her seem
fairer and more beautiful. Majoresque cadunt altis de montibus umbrae.

2. In speculo prophetiarum. Prophetia est speculum in quo videntur futura.
Here they might see the presence of a deferred deliverance, they might see the
face of a promised Messiah. Buxtorf, in his Synagoga Judaica, tells us that he
is persuaded this is one main reason why the Jews are so ignorant of the
Messiah, because they are so little vers't in the Prophets: they spend their
whole time upon the Law, but will not cast an eye upon them: he speaks of the
modern Jews. God in much mercy has given them glasses, and they will not
vouchsafe to look in them: they were always an obdurate and stiff-necked
people, rebelling against the Prophets, and they go on to fill up the sins of
their fathers. Well, but yet the Seers themselves saw but (...), and they saw
in them very darkly.

For 1. Prophesies (as the learned Verulam) have gradus and scalas complementi,
climbing accomplishments, springing and germinant accomplishments. A prophecy
in the bud is not so easily seen as when it shoots out further and spreads it
self in larger growth: such passages in Esaias as seem to us clear as the day,
were to them dark and Enigmaticall: and we see how obscure Saint John's
prophecy seems to us. And the Devil, who was always Gods Ape, he
over-imitated here; for his oracles were wrapped up in so many clouds, and
withal so full of fallacies, as none ever could tell their meaning till event
had given the interpretation. The Prince of Darkness would make all his
sayings wear his livery: Divine prophesies are as clear as crystal, if
compared with his cloudy oracles.

2. Prophesies at best are but weak and impefect things, and therefore they
also shall be abolished, no need of them in heaven: they were very beneficial
to the Church militant, to acquaint her with approaching judgments, and
prepare her for intended mercies; but when happiness is present and complete,
no need of them then, in the Church triumphant.

Thus you have seen how they under the Law saw but darkly: and if Gods peculiar
people had so little knowledge of him, in what gross and palpaple ignorance
did they live that had none of this his light shining upon them; for in Judah
was God known, and his name was famous in Israel. He has not dealt so with
every nation, neither had the heathen knowledge of his law.

And now if we look upon our selves that live under the light of the Gospel,
even we in this sun-shinne see but darkly.

1. There are many Evangelicall riddles, a God incarnate, a crucified Savior:
which are such, 1. as the Angels themselves see but darkly, and therefore they
are still prying to see more. 2. Reason that great patron of unbelief wrangles
against them; and yet reason it self will dictate thus much, That the mysteries
of religion should be above the reach of reason. 3. The greatest part of the
world reject them: the Greeks esteem them foolishness: they think there is not
so much in them as in a riddle; in that there is some hidden sense, but these
are plain foolishness in their esteem; and Evangelium to the Jews is no more
then (...), for so they blasphemously call it, volumen iniquitatis. They
stumble at a crucified Savior, and yet themselves were the crucifiers of him.
The vail of the temple rent at his death; I, but the vail is still upon their
hearts, and yet that e're long shall be rent too: and they shall see him whom
they have pierced, and shall mourn, and be in much bitterness, and confess
(...), We crucified our love, we crucified our Savior.

2. There are many Practical truths which are mere riddles to carnal spirits;
as to forsake all for a persecuted Christ, to cut off right hands, pluck out
right eyes, pray for enemies, not to do evil that good may come thereof; these
principles they can hardly digest; and there are many Christian privileges
which they know not what to make of, Assurance of Gods favor, Communion with
him, hidden Mannah, Joy in the Holy Ghost glorious and unspeakable. These and
such like puzle their apprehensions; for they never entered into the heart of a
natural man to conceive, it is too narrow for them to enter.

3. There are many passages which to Christians themselves are dark and
enigmaticall, such as we cannot easily understand. The book of the Revelation
is all veiled with obscurity, the first thing we meet with almost are seven
seals: it is full of hidden secrets, and who is there that can unseal the book?
Our adversaries the Papists catch at this, and are ready with a double
inference: The Scriptures are enigmaticall; therefore clear them with
Traditions, therefore keep them from the people.

But 1. When we speak of the Scriptures darkness, it is but comparatively in
respect of those bright manifestations we shall have of God hereafter. A pearl
may be clear and orient, and yet dark in respect of a star: a star may be
bright, and yet obscure if compared with the sun.

2. All truths belonging to the essence of a Christian are plain and
perspicuous: and there is an assisting spirit, which though they perhaps may
scoff at, and some others may unjustly pretend too, yet without doubt it shall
lead Gods people into all truth.

3. Is their Cabala so pure? are their traditions so clear and crystaline, as
that we shall see in them better then in the word? if you cannot see in a
pellucid stream, do you think to see in a muddy standing pool?

But Secondly, The Scriptures are enigmaticall, therefore keep them from the
people. Nay rather, therefore explain them to them: therefore set up a
faithful ministry, whose lips may preserve knowledge, and acquaint them with
the mysteries of salvation, and open to them these hidden oracles. And let the
people themselves search the Scriptures, dig for knowledge as for silver, and
for wisdom as hid treasure. Again, they had better see in a glass, though but
darkly, then not to see at all: truth in a cloud, in a riddle is more amiable
then a black and palpable ignorance. 3. They keep the Scriptures from them, not
because they see in them so darkly, but lest they should see in them too
clearly; and above all they lock up the Revelation, not as it is obscure, but
because it threatens the seven hills so much. And thus we have looked upon the
third particular, the glass of the Scriptures.

Fourthly, In speculo Providentiae. Here Gods glorious attributes shine forth,
his wisdom, justice, goodness, and the rest of that glorious constellation.
And Providence sets before us examples, they are glasses in which we may see
either the beauty of holiness, or else sins deformity. And it is no small
felicity of this later age that we have the use of these glasses, the benefit
of so many former examples; and yet we see in them but darkly, they are a cloud
of witnesses, as it is Hebr. 12.1. though in another sense. Providence is very
mysterious, and there is no readier way to Atheism then to question it when we
cannot give a sufficient account of it. The Indians have a custom, once a
year to cast a golden bushel into the sea: and thus they think they set a
measure and bound to its proud waves, so as it shall not invade their land.
Their custom is ridiculous enough, and yet they are far more vain that go
about Deum suo modulo metiri, to circumscribe an Immense being with the narrow
compass of their reason. Audacious men, that go about to set providence a
platform, which if it shall transgress, it presently passes the bounds of
justice.

Saint Paul that could have dived as deep as another and brought up many
precious pearly observations with him, yet dares not venture in, but standing
aloof off upon the shore, admires the vast and boundless ocean, and as one
amazed, and almost swallowed up with the very consideration of it he cries out,
(...) O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! (...), his
ways are in the deep; there is no (...) of them, not the least print or
vestigium, no tracing of a Deity. That God from all eternity should smile on
Jacob, and frown on Esau, and that before they had done either good or evil:
that the one should become (...) vas desiderii (...), and the other (...). that
God should break open the heart of a rebellious sinner by his efficacious
grace, and deny sufficient aid to one that has improved his present strength
far better; that he should shine out only upon some few spots of ground with
the light of the Gospel, and shut up the rest in palpable darkness; that he
should suffer his dearest children to be wronged and insulted over, when
wickedness in the mean while triumphs securely: these and many such like are
aenigmata providentiae; we see in this glass darkly.

Fifthly, In speculo fidei. Here we see (...), for faith is a sure
perspective-glasse, by which Abraham's aged eye saw Christ's day though afar
off; and the rest of the Saints (...), they saw them at a distance, and yet
embraced them: a glass by which Moses saw him that was invisible. It is
speculum coloratum, and does imbuere objectum color suo: it can see a mercy in
a judgment, and deliverance in a captivity, help in an exigency: and promises
they are faiths glasses, and they speak as the looking-glass in the Greek
Epigram, (...), if you look on me I look upon you; if you apply me, I belong
unto you.

And yet we see here but darkly: for faith it self (not to speak of those many
doubtings and waverings, those rollings and inquietations of spirit that
accompany it: for many cannot reach to assurance, few attain to a plerophorie,)
is opposed to vision, 2. Cor. 5.7. (...): we walk by faith and not by sight,
and non per aspectum. Faith as it lives in the mount, (for in the mount will
the Lord be seen) so it dies in the mount too like Moses, it never enters into
the land of promise; for it had its Canaan here, a land flowing with milk and
honey.

Sixthly, In speculo Sacramentorum. Such great and transcendent mysteries as
the apprehensions of Angels cannot reach unto, are here presented to the senses.

Baptism, that is a looking-glass where the first beam of Gods favorable
countenance shows it self, the first expression of his love to a sinful
creature. The laver under the Law was made of looking-glasses; and the laver of
regeneration under the Gospel is its self a looking-glass, where you may see a
God in covenant with you, and yet he does not show himself with a spreading and
immediate ray, but only in a sacramental reflex: and Baptism, though it be
styled (...), yet we see in it but darkly, in a riddle, much like that of
coelum in tribus ulnis. You may see heaven in this well of salvation. As it was
used by way of immersion, there was a riddle of the Resurrection; as by way of
sprinkling, there is a riddle of sanctification. You would say, It were no
wonder if I should tell you the infant sees in it but darkly. I, but who is
there of riper years that looks on this glass, (...) makes any use of it? Who
is there almost that spends a thought upon his Baptism?

And as for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, why here is a glass that Christ
left with his dear Spouse when he went away from her, in which she may still
see his face, and be mindful of him. (...), Do this in remembrance of me, and
do it to put me in remembrance of you for (...) includes both. There is mutual
aspect, and reciprocal glances between Christ and a believing soul in the
Sacrament. Christ looks upon the soul with a gracious eye, and the soul looks
upon him with an eye of faith. And here are aenigmatae convivalia, like that of
Samsons, Out of the strong comes sweetness.

And thus we have shown you the several glasses though which we see but
datary. There remains the visio recta, a sight of God face to face, to know as
we are known. But this Hereafter.

READER, What this to know as we are known should be
The Author could not tell, but's gone to see.


FINIS.

