THE DIVINE RIGHT OF EPISCOPACY, Demonstrated from Calvin and Beza. Together
with a LETTER TO A Presbyterian Minister For UNION.

Licensed, March the 10 th, 1689/90.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1690.

DEFINITIONS.
I. THE Power of ORDINATION is that Right Calvin. Instit. Lib. 4. Cap. 4* Sect.
2. This is to be considered, that only the Pastors, and not the whole multitude
laid on hands on their Ministers at Ordinations.
which the Governors of the CHVRCH have to separate Persons whom they find
duly Qualified, unto the Holy Ministry of the Gospel.

II. The power of Jurisdiction is that Right which the Calvin. Titus chap. 1.
verse 5. We learn indeed from this place, that there was no such Equality among
the Ministers of the Church, but that some. One was pre-eminent in Authority
and Council.
Governors of the Church have to make Canons which are wanting, or to Execute
those already made, for the Regulation of Church Members.

III. The President Bishop, is he, who from his Pre-eminence to other
Ministers, is invested with a sixed Power of Calvin 2 Timothy chap. 1. verse 6.
Paul himself declares, That he alone, and no other Ministers with him, laid on
hands on Timothy.
Ordination, Regulated by Canons, and of Calvin. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 2.
Whatever parts the Consul had in the Senate, the same Office did the Bishop
always sustain in the meeting of Presbyters.
Jurisdiction, balanced by assisting Ministers.

IV. The Angel of any Church Representative, Beza, Rev. 2. chap. 1. and v. 24.
To the Angel, that is, To the President, as whom it behooves, especially to be
admonished, touching those matters; and by him both the rest of his fellow
Colleagues, and the whole Church likewise, verse. 24. But unto you, that is, unto
you the Angel the President, and the Assembly of your Colleagues, and to the
Rest, that is, to the whole Flock.
is the Bishop presiding over the other Ministers, within the Respective
Diocese, Province, or Patriarchate.


POSTULATUMS.
Calvin, Luke 10. chap. 1. verse. 16. After the Apostles had returned to Christ,
he sent out more secondary Preachers: And this is the great commendation of the
outward Ministry; That CHRIST Declares, that whatsoever honor is given to his
Faithful Preachers, is given to Himself.
THat the 70 Disciples (from among whom Matthias was called, to be ordained one
of the 12 Apostles) were Persons in holy Orders in the Ministry. II. Calvin. 1 Timothy 1. chap, 18. v.
That ( b) Timothy in the Church of Ephesus, and Timothy was not one of the
common Ministry, but one next to the Apostles, who in the frequent absence of
Paul, was in his place, Tit. 1.5. Beside the ordinary Office of Pastors, Titus
had this charge, that he should constitute a certain Form of Church polity and
Discipline; and likewise ordain Ministers over the Churches.
Titus in the Church of Crete, were pre-eminent to other Ministers, invested
with a fixed Power of Ordination, and Jurisdiction, regulated by Canons, and
balanced by assisting Ministers.

III. Calvin. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 2. Presbyters out of their number in
all the Cities, chose one, to whom especially they gave the Title of Bishop;
lest from a Parity, as uses to be, Divisions might arise. Ierom says, at
Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist to Heraclas and Dionysius, Presbyters
always placed one in a pre-eminent degree, whom they called a Bishop.
That for the avoiding of Schism, the Primitive Church retained the Government
of one single person, pre-eminent unto other Ministers.

IV. Beza, Rev. 2 chap. 26. v. My works, that is, he who shall faithfully
perform the work laid upon him; for he bespeaks the Assembly of Pastors in the
person of the President, to whom he promises Victory against all the wicked,
if he rely and trust in the Authority and Power of that true and only head of
the Church.
That the 7 Angels of the 7 Churches, written unto, in the Book of Revelation,
are encouraged against all the devices of the ungodly, upon condition of their
continuing faithful in their Administrations.


AXIOMS.
I. THE Regular Call of any Minister already ordained, is from an Office of an
inferior, Calvin, 1 Timothy 3.13. Because in one or two Centuries after the death
of the Apostles, it was the constant custom that from the Order of Deacons, the
Presbyters were chosen, therefore commonly they have exponed this place, of the
Advancement to a Superior degree.
to that of a Superior Station.

II. The Pre-eminence in any Office, See Definition II. and III.
includes a proportioned Jurisdiction, over the Officers who are under them.

III. The Divine Right is manifest, Calvin. Inst. lib 4 cap. 6. sect. 1. We
have not before touched upon the primacy of the Roman See; whence the Papists
strive to prove that the Catholic Church is only with them: because it has
not taken its Original from CHRIST'S institution, nor the custom of the Ancient
Church, as the other Offices have done, ( viz. Bish. Presb. and Deacons, cap.
4. sect. 1.) mentioned already.
in that Ecclesiastical Government which was instituted by Christ, continued by
his Apostles, retained in the Primitive Church, and approved from Heaven by
Revelation; in subserviency to any end, wherein the well-being of Christianity
is concerned.

IV. The want of that Government in the Church, Calvin. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 8.
sect. 2 For neither the light, and heat of the Sun, Meat or Drink are so
nourishing and sustaining this present Life, as the Apostolic and Ministerial
Office, for preserving of a Church upon Earth.
which is of Divine Right, is pernicious to the Gospel, and to the Christian
Religion.


PROPOSITION I. The twelve Apostles were President Bishops over the 70
Disciples.
Demonstration.
THE President Bishop is he, who being Pre-eminent to other Ministers, is
invested with a fixed Power of Ordination, Regulated by Canons, and of
Jurisdiction, balanced by assisting Ministers; ( by Definition III.) But in
respect to the 70 Disciples, who were all in the holy Ministry, ( by Postulatum
I.) and from among whom Matthias was called to be of the 12. ( by Postulatum
I.) The sacred College of the Apostles had a fixed Pre-eminence ( by Axiom I,)
invested with the power of Ordination regulated by Canons; ( by Postulatum I.
and Definition I.) And of Jurisdiction balanced by Assisting Ministers;) by
Axiom II.) Therefore the 12 Apostles were President Bishops over the 70
Disciples, which was the thing to be Demonstrated.

PROPOSITION II. Timothy was a President Bishop over the Church of the
Ephesians; and Titus over the Church of the Cretians.
Demonstration.
These are President Bishops who are Pre-eminent to other Ministers, invested
with a fixed power of Ordination, Regulated by Canons; and of Jurisdiction,
balanced by assisting Ministers ( by Definition III.) But Timothy in the
Church of Ephesus, and Titus in the Church of Crete, from their Offices had a
pre-eminence over other Ministers, invested with a fixed power of Ordination
and Jurisdiction, Regulated by Canons, and Balanced by assisting Ministers; (
by Postulatum II.) Therefore Timothy was a president Bishop over the Church of
the Ephesians, and Titus over the Church of the Cretians. Which was to be
Demonstrated.

PROPOSITION III. The Fathers of the Primitive Church were President Bishops.
Demonstration.
The Primitive Church retained the Government of one single, person,
pre-eminent unto other Ministers; ( by Postulatum III.) But the pre-eminence in
any Office includes a proportioned Jurisdiction over the Officers who are under
them; ( by Axiom II.) And the power of Jurisdiction is fixed in the president
Bishop, ( by Definition III.) Therefore the Fathers of the Primitive Church
were president Bishops. Which was to be Demonstrated.

PROPOSITION IV. The President Episcopacy is approved by Christ in the Book of
the Revelation.
Demonstration.
The 7 Angels of the 7 Churches written unto by St. John, in the Book of the
Revelation, are encouraged against all the devices of the ungodly, upon
condition of their continuing faithful in their Administrations; ( by
Postulatum IV.) But these Angels were president Bishops over other Ministers
within their respective Churches; ( by Definition IV.) Therefore the president
Episcopacy is approved by Christ, in the Book of the Revelation. Which was to
be Demonstrated.

COROLLARY I. The President Episcopacy is of Divine Right.
Demonstration.
The Divine Right is manifest, in that Ecclesiastical Government which is
instituted by CHRIST, and continued by his Apostles, retained in the Primitive
Church, and approved by CHRIST, by a Revelation from Heaven, for subserviency
to any end, wherein the well-being of Christianity is concerned; ( by Axiom
III.) But the President Episcopacy was instituted by CHRIST; ( by Proposition
I.) Continued by His Apostles; ( by Proposition II.) Retained in the Primitive
Church; ( by Proposition III.) And approved by CHRIST, by a Revelation from
Heaven; ( by Proposition IV.) For avoiding of Schism wherein the well-being of
Christianity is concerned (by Postulatum III.) Therefore the President
Episcopacy is of Divine Right. Which was to be demonstrated.

COROLLARY II. The want of the President Episcopacy is prejudicial to the
Christian Church.
Demonstration.
The want of that Government in the Church, which is of Divine Right, is
pernicious to the Christian Religion; ( by Axiom IV.) But the President
Episcopacy, is that Government in the Church which is of Divine Right; (by the
preceding Corollarie.) Therefore the want of the President Episcopacy is
prejudicial to the Christian Church. Which was to be demonstrated.

FINIS.
A LETTER TO A Reverend Minister OF THE GOSPEL, OF THE Presbyterian Persuasion.
REVEREND SIR,
WHEN in the doctrinal Truths of the Reformed Religion, and in the substantial
parts of Divine Worship, all sober Pretestants of Episcopal and Presbyterian
Persuasion, are firmly united together; our sad Divisions about Ecclesiastical
Government (which have these many years mischief'd us) are certainly
incosistent with the Gospel of peace and love, subservient to Popery which
would swallow us up quick, and scandalous to all thinking Men. Let me therefore
conjure you by the bleeding Wounds of our Holy Mother who received us by one
Baptism, unto the profession of one Lord, and one Faith, that when the
Episcopal Clergy are of so reconciling inclinations, you neglect not this
opportunity of showing your abhorrence of wilful separation. And that my
fervent persuance after Peace, may have the honor to contribute in any way for
so happy an accommodation among Christian Brethren; suffer me in all that
tender Compassion that becomes a Minister of Salvation by a dying Savior, to
put you in remembrance of these three Matters of Fact. 1 st. That the
Representative Church of Scotland, never confessed any Divine Right in
Presbytery. 2 ly. That the Solemn League never ajbur'd the president Bishop
regulated by Canons, and balanced by assisting Miisters. 3 dly. That the
Reverend Ministers in England, for providing against violation of that
Covenant, petitioned for such an Episcopacy as is liker to our present
Establishment, than any other seen by the Christian World these thousand years.

1 st. The representative Church of Scotland, never confessed any Divine Right in
Presbytery. Since the Blessed Reformation; we have but two of her Confessions,
the first whereof in K. I. I. his Reign, avoweth in its 19 Act about the Notes
of Holy Church, that that Ecclesiastical Discipline is rightly administered as
God's Word prescribes, whereby Vice is repressed and Virtue nourished. And lest
it should be imagined that Presbytery can only afford such a Discipline; in the
21 Act it avoweth, that no Polity can be appointed for all Ages, times, and
places. And after all, Church Government is thus left to be of Human
Institution; the Civil Magistrate is confessed in the 25 Article, to have the
Supreme Power to settle it. Then for the other Confession made at Westminster,
by being voiced unto by the Commissioners which were sent from this place, and
afterward approved by the general Assembly here, it is adopted unto the
National Church of Scotland: And it is well enough known, that the 25 th. Chapter
thereof asserts the Supreme Civil Magistrate his power of Establishing the
external Polity of the Church: Yea, and the General Assembly here in the Act of
Approbation of that Confession, for all its protestation that the 31 chapter
concerning Synods and Counsels, should not encroach upon the intrinsic Power
of the Church, takes no notice if the Presbyterian Government has a Divine
Institution.

2 ly. The Soelmn League did not abjure the President Bishop, regulated by
Canons, and balanced by Assistant Presbyters. For since the General Assembly
here in Scotland, by her Acts acknowledges, that the Solemn League strikes
against the same Episcopacy, against which the National Covenant was levelled;
then doubtless the single judgment of the Royal Martyr, (the best Protestant
and Casuist of his time) about the Sense of the National Covenant, must weigh
down the Opinion of all the diffusive Church of Britain, in this Question; and
the World knows that his Princely desire of a Regulation, always hated the
Destruction of Episcopacy. Then for the Church Representative of both Kingdoms,
neither the Synod of Westminster in her Directory for Church Government, nor
the General Assembly here convened, in her Act of Approbation of that
Directory, do any thing in condemnation of a president Bishop.

But, 3 dly, The Reverend Ministers of the Presbyterian Persuasion in England,
petitioned An. 1661, the late King Charles the II. for such an Episcopacy, as
is liker our present Establishment in Scotland, than any other that has been
seen by the Christian Church these thousand years. Their Petitions are printed
in two Papers of Proposals, in which they insist upon the Form of a Synodical
Government, conjunct with a fixed Presidency, according to Archbishop Vshers
Reduction; and the last Motive inducing them to desire such a Government, is
plainly this, in words. That it will save the Nation from the violation of the
Solemn Vow and Covenant, without wronging the Church at all, or breaking any
other Oath. Now Reverend Brother, you know as well as my self, that the
foresaid Reduction by that most Reverend Primate of all Ireland, is liker our
present Episcopal Government, considered in its Nature, than has ever been
seen in any National Church since the Blessed Reformation: Yea, so very like in
the weekly Session, Monthly Presbytery, and Diocesan Synod, that with a due
Modification, whereunto the Regular Clergy will be found complying, you should
not be able to know the difference. Therefore beseeching the Author of Peace,
and lover of Concord, that all of us of Episcopal and Presbyterian Persuasion,
having one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism, may be brought to be all of one
mind and judgment, perfectly joined together without all Divisions in our Lord
Jesus Christ. I rest, though unknown as yet,

Reverend Brother, Your Affectionate Servant.
Edin. Mar. 4. 1689.
FINIS.

