AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations CONTINUED UPON The fifteenth,
sixteenth, and seventeenth Chapters of the Book of JOB: BEING The Sum of
twenty three Lectures, delivered at Magnus near the Bridge, LONDON.

By JOSEPH CARYL, Preacher of the Word, and Pastor of the Congregation there.

JAMES, CHAP. 1. VERSE. 12. Blessed is the Man that endures temptation: for
when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has
promised to them that love him.

LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons, and are to be sold by Thomas Eglesfeild
at the Marigold, and at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard, 1650.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, TO THOSE ESPECIALLY OF THIS City, who have been the
movers, and continue the Promoters of this WORK.
SOLOMON, who made Many Books, tells us (toward the end of one of them, Eccl.
12.12.) That, of making many Books there is no end, and, that much study is a
weariness to the flesh. But while Solomon speaks thus, does he not at once
blot those many Books which himself had written, and discourage others from
writing any more? Though study be a weariness to the flesh, yet ('it is granted)
that is no sufficient reason why we should desist (the flesh must be wearied and
hard wrought, it is good it should be so) But there is no color of reason, why
we should begin that, which either cannot be finished and brought to an end or
which is to no end, when it is brought to an end, and finished. How then says
Solomon, that of making many Books there is no end? His scope cleares this
scruple; for, having read his Son a Lecture upon the vanity of the Creature,
and having given him many excellent advices, for the due steering of his course
through this World, he applies all in the former part of this Verse, And
further by these, my Son, be admonished. Let what is now written take upon thy
heart, and be accepted with thee. For (Verse. 10.) The Preacher sought to find
out acceptable words, and that which was written was upright, even words of
truth. Again (Verse. 11.) The words of the Wise are as Goads, and as Nails
fastened by the Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd:
Therefore, let these words, like Goads, put thee on, and like Nails, fasten
thee to the obedience of my counsels; By these, my Son, be admonished: As if he
had said, Let not this Book, which discovers the vanity of all worldly things,
be it self accounted vain; If this Book prevail not with thee, if it master
not thy judgment, and manage not thy affections, it is to no end for me to
make many Books; seeing this is clothed with as much compleatnesse of rule to
direct, as a Book, of this Argument can be, and is stamped with as much strength
of Authority to command, as any Book of any Argument, can be: And further, why
should thou, my Son, put me to the making of many Books? What if I could
make many with as much ease to my own spirit, as I have made this one, which
was given me in immediately by the spirit? yet thou can not study (or as we
put in the Margin, read) many Books without wea^inesse to thy flesh.

So then, though Solomon might have just had ground to put the affectation both
of writing and reading many Books, upon the file of his observed vanities; yet
he does not disoblige from the study of necessary and serious Books; nor at
all condemn those many Monuments of profitable learning, which industrious
Pens have in any Age bequeathed to Posterity. He indeed (which yet is but a
second design, if it be at all the design of that place) takes us off from
vain studies, and censures those Books (be they few as well as many) which
have no tendency to make any man, either the wiser, or the better by reading
them. Nor can those Books how many soever they are, be (to their disparagement)
called Many, which center in, and promote (what is but one in every kind) any
kind of Truth, cheifely that, which we call Divine, or Holy Truth. Any One
useless, or erroneous Book is too many: Many useful and Orthodox Books are
but One. The five Books of Moses are but One Law: The four Books of the
Birth, Life, and Death, of our ever blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ, are but One
Gospel: All the Books of both Testaments are but one Book. Upon which
account we may also say, that, All those many and many Books which faithfully
interpret That one Book are but one Book. And though of making many such
Books, there should (as I conceive there will) be no end, till this World
ends, as End is taken for a ceasing to make them; yet of making many such
Books there is an end, yea many noble ends, as End is taken for the good, or
benefit which comes by making them. The making of such Books is good, and a
benefit to the Reader, as communicating to him those manifestations of the
spirit which are given to every man (to whom they are given) to profit withal:
The word ((...)) there used by the Apostle, signifies such a profit as
streameth out to community. The making of such Books is also good, and a
benefit to the Maker, as being an improvement of his Time and Talents, to his
own peace and his Masters glory. It Is reward beyond all the World can give,
for any work, that God has glory, and man peace, in doing it. As this small
piece of work is directed to these last mentioned ends, and (as it ought)
principally to the first of them; so, that it may reach the former, by adding a
Mite or two to the Treasury of the Readers knowledge in the best things, and by
being his encouragement, to walk in the best ways, is the hope and prayer,
and the reaching of it, will be indeed, a very rich reward and payment of,

Your affectionate Friend, and Servant in this Work of the Lord, Joseph Caryl.
May, 22. 1650.
AN EXPOSITION Upon the Fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth Chapters of the
Book of JOB.
JOB, Chap. 15. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and
said,

Should a wise man utter vain knowledge? And fill his belly with the East
wind?

Should be reason with unprofitable talk? Or with speeches wherewith he can
do no good?

Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before God.

For thy mouth utters thine iniquity, and thou chusest the tongue of the
crafty.

Thine own mouth condemns thee, and not I: Yea, thine own lips testify
against thee.


WE are come to the second Session of this great dispute, between Job and his
three Friends; they have all spoken one turn, and now they return to speak:
Eliphaz who led the first charge, leads the second, and that with a very
violent march, against this sorrowful man. Yet we are not to conceive Eliphaz
upon any design, to revile his person, or to vex his spirit: That were most
unsuitable in any Friend, much more (such we suppose Eliphaz to have been) in a
godly friend: Non malidicendi studio ferebatur, quod abono viro prorsus alienum
esset. Pined.
Charity suggests a fairer interpretation of this procedure, that he spoke thus
harshly, and dealt thus roughly, being moved by some unwary passages in Jobs
discourse, not well understood or misapplyed. At which stone how many stumble
at this day! First, misconceiving, and then censuring their Brethren; being
first offended without any just cause given, and then giving just cause of
offense. Had we once learned to expound each others actions, speeches, and
opinions, by the rules of Charity, we should not so often, no nor at all break
the Laws of Love. We shall make a good improvement of this failing in Jobs
Friend, if it may be our warning (in dealing) to deal better with our Friends.

There are three parts of this Speech; in the first, Eliphaz appears by way of
reproof, and reprehension, which extends it self from the beginning of the
Chapter, to the end of the thirteenth Verse; and he reproves Job upon five
points of error, or misbehaviour, of all which he conceived him guilty.

First, He reproves him of folly, or for speaking that which was unworthy a
wise man, in the second and third Verses, Should a wise man utter vain
knowledge? etc.

Secondly, He reproves him of profaneness, or for doing that which was
unworthy a godly man, at the fourth Verse, Yea, thou castest off fear, and
restrainest prayer before God. The sum of both is, Thou speak unwisely,
and thou actest wickedly: which he takes for so plain a charge, that he makes
him his own accuser, as if there needed no evidence but his conscience, though
he had (as Eliphaz mis-judged) daubed up the matter with fair words, and
colorable pretenses ( Verse. 5, 6.) Thy mouth utters thine iniquity: Thine
own mouth condemns thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips testify against
thee.

Thirdly, He reproves him of pride, and arrogance, of self-conceit, and
overweening his own parts, and positions ( Verse. 7, 8, 9, 10.) Art thou the
first man that was borne, or wast thou made before the Hills, etc. As if he had
said, Thou carryest it, as if thou had engrossed all wisdom, as if thou
had more knowledge and understanding, more learning and experience, then any
man; yea then all men living.

Fourthly, he reproves him, for slighting, and undervaluing the counsels, and
the comforts tendered to him by his Friends, at the 11. Verse, Are the
consolations of God small with thee?

Fifthly, he reproves him for his confident sticking, or adhering to his own
principles, at the 12. and 13. Verses, Why does thy heart carry thee away, etc.
Thus he reproves his morals in the first part of his discourse.

In the second, he confutes his Doctrinals, or that which he supposed Job had
asserted; sc. His own purity and perfections (Verse. 14, 15, 16.) What is man
that he should be clean? Behold he puts no trust in his Saints, etc.

In the third place, he labors to maintain his own assertion, that God does
afflict none but wicked men, Who ever perished being innocent, or where were
the righteous cut off: Eliphaz asseruisset tantum malos hic a Domino affligi,
idem ille nunc sed apertius ostendit, Merc.
Chap. 4.7. This he does both by the authority of the Learned, and from the
experiences of the Ancient, Verse. 17. to the end of the Chapter; I will show
thee, hear me, and that which I have seen I will declare; which wise men have
told from their Fathers, and have not hid it, etc. These are the parts, and
this the resolution of the whole Chapter.

Verse. 1. Then answared Eliphaz the Temanite, and said:
Then; that is, (...) excipiens, Sept. Quilibet pro suis socijs velut in
solidum respondet, ut nunc patet. Sopharis enim defensionem contra. Jobum
manifest assumit Eliphaz. Bold.
when Job had made an end of answering Zophar, then Eliphaz answered or replied
upon Job. That Is properly a replication which takes off the answer given to a
former Argument; and in this Eliphaz also makes a defense for his Brethren
Zophar, and Bildad. These three stood to one another, as much as any one of
them did for himself; as if they had all entered Bond, and given security for
reciprocal assistance. Thus the dispute grows hot, but still it is orderly,
according to that Apostolical Canon, (1 Cor. 14.29.) Let the Prophets speak
two or three, and let the other judge. Eliphaz is now up, let us consider what
he says.

Verse. 2. Should a wise man utter vain knowledge?
The question denies; he should not: No man should, least of all he.

The wise man is here opposed to the crafty man, at the 5. Verse. There is a
wide difference between wisdom and craft, between prudence and cunning; A
crafty man knows what is good, but he commonly does what is evil; he is able
to see the right, but if it be not for his turn, he turns from it, and cares
not to do wrong: A wise man is he that knows how to distinguish between
good and evil, and ever aims to act what is good; his understanding is well
enlightened, and his conscience binds him to follow the light of his
understanding; as he can see what is just and right, so he cannot but embrace
and do it. A wise, man in Scripture Language, is a holy man, and a fool, is a
wicked man; holiness is the best wisdom, and wickedness is the worst of
folly: Eliphaz seems to admit Jobs challenge of being a wise, man, that he
might check him with more advantage for speaking so unlike one: As if he had
said, Should a moral wise man, much more a spiritual wise man, should he that
is, or pretends to be thus wise (as thou do, should he) utter vain knowledge?

Job at the 12. Chapter of this Book, Verse. 2.3.4. objected ignorance, or but
popular knowledge to his Friends; I have understanding as well as you; I am not
inferior to you, who knows not such things as these? as if he had said; You
think your selves among knowing men, the highest in knowledge; but who knows
not such things as these? Eliphaz turns it here upon Job, by the way of
recrimination or counter-charge, he brings in a cross Bill: Should a wise man
utter vain knowledge? Thou do arrogate to thy self the reputation of a wise
man, but art thou wise, who speak at such a rate of folly? The Image of thy
mind is stamped upon thy words, it may be seen as well as heard what thou art,
by what thou speak.

(...) Scientiam venti vel ventosam i. e. vanam. Numquid sapiens respondebit
scientiam venti, vel scientiam ventosam. Merc. Numquid sapiens respondebit
quasi in ve^tum loquens. Vulg.
Vain knowledge. The letter of the Hebrew is knowledge of wind, or windy
knowledge: The Metaphor is elegant; vain knowledge is justly called windy
knowledge; Vain knowledge makes a great bluster, and noise, like the wind, but
it passes away, and though we cannot tell whither it goes, yet we may easily
tell whence it comes, even from the fancy, and out of the mouth of a foolish
man. It was usual of old, to call that which is vain, windy; those despisers
of holy counsels, and Divine Alarums, given by the Prophets, said, The
Prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them, Jer. 5.13. That is,
both the Doctrine and the threats which these Prophets utter, are vain and
ineffectuall; they will do us neither good nor evil; no man's finger shall
ache, though their tongues ache with talking.

The Prophet Hosea at once reproves and terrisies the Jews in this language,
They have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlewind (Hos. 8.7.) To
sow the wind, is to do a vain thing; our actions are as seed: such as we
sow, such shall we reap; they sowed sin, and they reaped trouble. Themselves
sowed the wind by what they did, and they thought the Prophets sowed the wind
in what they spoke: And indeed the words of the Prophet were wind as the
peoples works were, in reference to the issue; those produced a whirlewind to
scatter their contemners, as these did to scatter their actors. The old
Satyrist calls vain words, bubly toys, Bullatas nugas utpote similes bullis
vento plenis, Pers. Sat. 5.
because such words are like a bubble, full of wind (possibly full of wit) but
empty of wisdom and good instruction.

Should a wise man utter vain knowledge? The Scripture calls that vain:

First, which is unprofitable, these mutually expound each other, Eccles. 1.2,
3. Vanity of vanity, says the Preacher, etc. What profit has a man of all the
labor which he takes under the Sun. There Is most vanity, where there is
least profit, and where there is no profit at all, there is nothing at all but
vanity. Turn not aside from following the Lord (says Samuel) for then should
you go after vain things which cannot profit, 1 Samuel 12.20, 21.

Secondly, the Scripture calls that and those vain, which has or have no
solidity in them; vanity has so little weight in it, that when the Spirit
would express men who have no weight in them, he says, They are lighter then
vanity, Psalm. 62.9.

Thirdly, the Scripture calls that vain which is always moving, varying, and
unsettled, ( Psalm. 144.4.) Man is like to vanity, his days are as a shadow that
passes away: He is therefore like to vanity, because he is so like a shadow,
continually passing, but never continuing.

Fourthly, the Scripture often calls that vain which is sinful in practice,
or unsound and erroneous in opinion, I hate vain inventions (says David) but
thy Law do I love. Whatsoever opposes either truth of Doctrine, or purity of
Worship is a vain invention of man, and opposite to the Law of God; he utters
vain knowledge, who utters false Principles which subvert the Faith, or
superstitious forms which endanger the life and power of godliness. Eliphaz
supposed, that somewhat of vanity in all these notions, was rallyed together
into the discourse of Job, that it was light and froathy, that it was erroneous
and full of incongruity, especially (which carries all these in it) that it was
worthless and unprofitable to the receiver, as he expresses in the third
Verse, Should he reason with unprofitable talk?

Should a wise man utter vain knowledge? Hence observe:

There is a vanity in some kind of knowledge, and folly in that which not a few
call wisdom: It has been the business of some men's knowledge, to find out
a vanity in all sorts of knowledge. Eliphaz spoke well for the matter, though
ill to the man. Job did not utter vain knowledge, but, we know, too many do.
The old Gentiles waxed vain in their imaginations, (...), vani facti sunt in
ratiocinationibus suis, Baz.
their very reasonings were vain; so the Original word tells us: It was not
their fancy but their understanding which was vain. The Apostle cautions the
Colossians, Let no man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit (Col.
2.8.) Philosophy in it self is an excellent knowledge, yet it may be vainly
taught, and so deceive us, as to spoil us: I may say also, let no man spoil
you through Divinity and vain deceit. Divinity, which is in it self the most
excellent knowledge, the knowledge of God, may be vainly taught, and so
deceive us, as to spoil us: That knowledge which is best in it self, is
vainest to us, when it is unduely or falsely uttered.

Secondly, observe, It is most uncomely for those, who either have, or would
have the reputation of wisdom, to speak vainly; Should a wise man utter
vain knowledge? It Is no wonder to hear a vain man speak vainly, and for a
fool to utter folly. Do men gather Grapes of thorns, or Figgs of thistles?
The vile person will speak villainy, and his heart will work iniquity, to
practice hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord (Isa. 32.6.) If a
fool, a vain man, or a vile person, speak thus, he speaks like himself,
but if a wise, or a good man speak thus, he speaks so unlike himself, that
the Chaldee Paraphrase puts not only an undecensie, but an impossibility upon
it, Can a wise man utter vain knowledge? It is impossible. Estne possibile,
etc. Chald. Paraph.
Men act according to their principles; every thing is in working, as it is in
being; if there be wisdom in the heart, it will be heard at the tongue: A
wholesome Fountain will send out wholesome waters; He that is borne of God
(says the Apostle John, 1 Epist. 3.9.) cannot sin; though he has not a
natural impossibility to sin, Sapiens ad mensuram sermones profert libra
examinatos justitiae, ut sit gravitas in sensu, in sermon pondus in verbis
modus. Ambros. l. 1. Offic. c, 3.
yet he has a moral impossibility to sin, because the seed of God remains
in him, the frame and bent of his heart is set another way: Now, as there is a
moral impossibility that a godly man should commit sin, so that a wise man
should speak sin, or utter vain knowledge. A wise man speaks, as well as
acts, by measure; he waighs what he says, as much as what he does; the tongue
of the wise is as a Tree of life: Grace in the heart blossoms at the lips, in
savory words, which minister grace unto the hearers. Should a wise man utter
vain knowledge?

And fill his belly with the East wind? A belly full of windy meat is bad
enough, a belly full of wind is far worse: But what is here meant by the
belly, what by the East Wind?

The belly is put for the heart and affections, together with all the
intellectual powers of the mind, John 7.38. Out of his belly (that is, out of
his whole soul) shall flow Rivers of living water. This water is the holy
spirit; the holy spirit is sometimes compared also to the wind. Venture pro
cord, cor pro intellectu and mente accipitur in Scriptura.
A wise man should desire that his heart may be filled, with the sweet gales
and holy breathings of the spirit of God, by heavenly inspirations: And shall
he fill his heart with the East Wind of earthly passions?

The word which we translate East wind, (...) Pro (...) Rab. Mardoch. Observat
hunc ventum a Graecis appellari Ape^^oren quod a sole spiret atque eadem
ratione appellatur a Latinis subsolanum.
signifies only the East; Should he fill his belly with the East, we rightly
add the East wind; he compares Jobs passions unto the wind, and unto the East
wind; to the wind, because of the vanity of them, to the East wind, because of
the hurtfulnesse of them. For, as by wind in the former clause he means
worthless things, so by East wind in this he means dangerous things. There
are two reasons why he expresses such inwa^d motions by the East wind.

First, The East wind is a vehement and strong wind; we read Exodus 14.21.
Portae Eurum Appellans truculemum, rapidum, animosum, tumidum and indomitum.
that when God divided the Red Sea, to make a passage for his people, he caused
an East wind to blow all night, and divided the Sea with the force of it. Poets
describe the East wind to be feirce, heady, turbulent, and impetuous, that's
one ground of it.

Secondly, The East wind is observed by Naturalists to be a hot and fiery
wind; Ardore.
Hence the Vulgar translates, Thou fillest thy belly with heat: The East wind
parcheth and blasteth Corn and Fruits. Pharaoh beheld in his Dream seven
ears withered, Sub calidi and aestuantis aeris similitudine sermones ejus
exspaeratos and excandescentia plenos describit.
thin, and blasted with the East wind ( Genesis 41.23.) So then, under this notion
of the East wind. Eliphaz closely censures Job; First, that his thoughts were
violent, and impetuous: Secondly, that they were angry, fiery, furious; as if
coals were kindled in his bosom, and a flame ready to blaze at his lips: As
if like Paul, while Saul (Acts 9.1.) he breathed out threatenings and slaughter,
or was inwardly heated with resolutions of revenge. The Prophet Jeremie says,
The Word of God was as a fire in his bosom, and he could not refrain: Jobo
attribuit vanitatem in sententia, tempestatem in affectu, imbecillitatem in
argumento. superfluitatem in verbis. Coc.
Many a man's breast is like a heated Oven, he is ready to consume all with the
breath of it.

But why does Eliphaz charge Job with such unruly perturbations? Some assign
the reason from those words, Chap. 14. v. 14. where he desires that God would
even hide him in the grave; he was so vexed and troubled at the state wherein he
lived, that he preferred death before it, and thought a not being in the World,
better then a being in his condition. But we may rather leave the reason more
at large, to all that vehemence of spirit, with which Job had prosecuted and
pleaded his sorrowful case.

From the scope of Eliphaz in this part of his reproof, we may observe:

First, That violent passions are the disguise of a wise man. We cannot see who
he is, while he acts unlike himself: anger lodges in the bosom of fools;
and when it does but intrude into the bosom of a wise man, he (for the time)
looks like a fool.

Secondly, Passions in the mind are like a tempest in the air, they disturb
others much, but our selves more: Many a man (like a Ship at Sea) has been
overset and sunk with the violent gusts and whirle-whinds of his own Spirit.

Observe thirdly, He that fills his own mind with passionate thoughts, will
soon fill the ears of others with unprofitable words; this is clear from
that which goes before, He utters vain knowledge; and it is clearer from that
which follows after; when a man's thoughts are like a wind, his words (which
are the first borne of his thoughts) must needs be windy. A passionate man
speaks all in passion, and sometimes cannot speak at all for passion; his
extreme desire to say much stops him from saying any thing: But whatsoever he
says, is the copy of his present self, fierce and boisterous. The image and
superscription of our hearts is stamped upon our words. Some can speak better
then they are, but usually men speak according to what they are, and then
especially when they are (which passionate men always are) not themselves.
Thus it follows in the next Verse.

Verse. 3. Should he reason with unprofitable talk?
Eliphaz speaks all Interrogatories; and these speak him in anger, if not in
some distemper. Should he do this? and should he do that? do show that
either another has very much done, what he should not, or that he who reproves
him has not such a spirit of meekness, as a reprover should, Gal. 6.1.

The words show the effect of what he taxed him with before; as if he had said,
Cum interrogatione and stomacho legenda sunt haec. Merc.
Would you know what to expect from a passionate man, from a man whose belly is
filled with the East Wind? You shall have him shortly filling your ears with
an East wind, even reasoning with unprofitable words: And (as the next clause
gives it, which is only an exposition of this) with speeches wherewith he can
do no good: Some words are great doers, they do much hurt, or they do much
good, and those words usually do some hurt, which can do no good; yea, that
which is weak and unable to do good, may be strong and powerful to do
evil. However, not to do good is to do evil, because it is every man's duty,
whatsoever he does, to be doing good: Here Eliphaz reproves Jobs words as
evil, while he only says, they do no good. And yet he says somewhat more
then that, for he says, They can do no good: It is ill not to do good
actually, but not to have a possibility of doing good is far worse. When the
Apostle would say his worst of the best of man's sinful flesh, he does not
only say, It is not subject to the Law of God, but adds, Neither indeed can be
(Romans 8.7.) So here, Words wherewith a man can do no good, how bad are they?

Hence observe:

First, That which can do no good, should not be spoken: Before we speak a
word, we should ask this question, to what purpose, Cui bono.
to what profit is it? shall he that hears it be made more knowing, or more
holy by it?

Observe secondly, Unprofitable talk is sinful, and speeches which do no
good, are evil: Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an
account thereof in the day of judgment, Matthew. 12.37. and though a man be very
busy, and take much pains in speaking, yet if his words be unprofitable, and
his speeches such as can do no good, they will come under account as idle.
Now, if unprofitable talk be sinful, and speeches that can do no good, then
what is profane talk, and speeches which do hurt, (infection gets quickly in
at the ear) defiling the mind and corrupting the manners of those that hear
them. The Apostle gives us the rule of speaking, both in the negative and in
the affirmative ( Ephesians. 4.29.) Let no corrupt communications proceed out of
your mouths, but that which is good to the use of edifying, which may
administer grace to the hearer. Again, ( Colos. 4.6.) Let your speeches be
always with grace; that is, such as testifies that there is grace in your
heart, never speak a word but such as may stand with grace; yea, speak such
words as may be a witness of grace, wrought in your selves, and a means of
working grace in others. Let your words be seasoned with salt; the salt of our
words, is holiness, and truth; prudence also is the salt of words; good words,
and true, spoken unseasonably, may do hurt: Prudence teaches us the time when
and the manner how to answer every man. Belial ex (...) non and (...) quod in
hiphil significat prodesse; ut denotet inutilem, qui nec sibi, nec alijs
prodest.


Thirdly observe, It is matter of just reproof against every man to be
unprofitable, and to do no good: Every tree which brings not forth good
fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire, ( Matthew. 3.10.) Some conceive that
the word Belial comes from Beli, which in Hebrew signifies Not, and the word
Jagnal, which here in the Text signifies to do good: Because a Belialist, or a
Son of Belial is such a one as neither does good to himself nor to any other.
The unprofitable Servant who hid, and did not improve his Talent, shall be
condemned: And he who uses his talent unprofitably and vainly, shall not
escape: Should he reason with unprofitable talk?

Thus far we have seen Eliphaz reproving Job of folly in speaking unlike, and
below a wise man; he proceeds to reprove him for acting unlike, and below a
godly man: This he sets home with a particle of aggravation.

Verse. 4. Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest Prayer before God.
As if he had said, besides, or above all this, that thou have uttered vain
knowledge, words that cannot profit, thou have also cast off the fear of God,
etc. The word which we translate to cast off, signifies to make void, to
scatter, to dissolve, (...) Labefactasti, irritum fecisti, dissolvisti,
fregisti,
to break in pieces; to make as nothing, or to make nothing of. It is often
used in Scripture, for breaking the Commandments of God, employing such a
breach as makes the Commandments void, which is the proper character of an
evil heart; A godly man may sin against the Commandments, but a wicked man
would sin away the Commandments; he would repeal the Law of God, and enact
his own lusts: Such is the force of the word here, Thou castest off fear.

There is a natural fear, and a spiritual fear; we are not to understand
this Text of a natural fear (which is a trouble of spirit, arising upon the
apprehension of some approaching evil) but of a spiritual: Fear is here put
alone, but we are to take it with its best adjunct, the fear of God; for as
the word sometimes is put alone, to signify the word of God, as if there were
no word but his; and as the word Commandments is put alone, to note the
Commandments of God, as if no Commandments deserved the name, but only the
Commandments of God, so fear is put alone, by way of excellency, for the
fear of God; as importing, that his fear is excellent, and no fear to be
desired but his. This Divine fear comes under a double notion:

First, it is taken for the holy awe or reverence we bear to God in our
spirits, which is the worship of the first Commandment, and the sanctifying of
God in our hearts.

Secondly, For the outward acts of Religion, which is the worship of the second
Commandment, Their fear is taught by the precepts of men (Isa. 29.13.) that
is, their outward worship and Religion, is such as men have invented, not such
as God has appointed: Some take it here in the first sense only, thou castest
off fear; that is, thou castest off that awe, reverence, and regard thou owe
to the Name of God; others understand it in the second, Thou castest off fear;
that is, the outward worship and service of God: but I conceive we have that
expressed in the next clause, Timor hoc loco pro reverentia and tremore, potius
quam pro religione and cultu, licet utrumque cohaereat. Pined.
And restrainest prayer before God; there he taxes him with neglect of outward
worship, and here with neglect of inward, Thou casts off fear; fear is as
the bridle of the soul; fear holds us in compass, it is the bank to the Sea;
fear keeps in the overflowing of sin, Thou casts off fear.

But what cause had Job given Eliphaz to charge him with casting off the fear
of the Lord; we find Eliphaz touching upon this point before, and upbraiding
Job, (Chap. 4.6.) Is this thy fear? Nullo pudore loquutus es coram Deo.
Symmach.
Is this thy confidence? As if he had said, Is all thy profession come to this;
here he charge him expressly, thou have cast off fear; Job had not given him
any just cause to speak or think thus hardly of him; but Eliphaz might
possibly ground this accusation, upon those words ( Chap. 9. v. 23.) This is
one thing, therefore I said it, he destroys the perfect and the wicked, etc.
Which Eliphaz did interpret as a casting off the fear of God; has he awful
and reverent thoughts of God, who affirms, that God laugheth at the
afflictions and trials of his people? Again, Chap. 12.6. The Tabernacles of
Robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are secure, into whose hands God
brings abundantly: Has not this man cast off all fear of God, who dares
say, the wicked prosper, and are secure? Is God become a friend to those that
profess themselves enemies to him? Others refer the ground of this to Chap.
13.21, 22. where he seems to speak boldly, and as some have taxed him,
impudently, Do not two things to me, withdraw thy hand from me, etc. Then call
thou, and I will answer, or let me speak, and answer thou me: Hence Eliphaz
concludes, surely the man has cast off the fear of God; he speaks to God as
if he were Gods fellow, Speak thou and I will answer, or let me speak, and
answer thou me; are these words becoming the great God of Heaven and Earth;
art not thou grown over bold with God, do thou speak as becomes the
distance, that is between the Creator, and the Creature? the Greek translates
to this sense, Thou speak to God without any modesty, thou have put on a
brazen face, and hardened thy heart against the fear of the Almighty. These
shows of a ground Eliphaz might take, but Job had given him no real ground to
pronounce this heavy censure, Thou castest off fear: But passing by the rigid
hypothesis of Eliphaz, we may from his words, as they are a Thesis, observe,

That to cast off the fear of God is highest wickedness; to cast off the
fear of God is the beginning of wickedness, as to entertain The fear of God
is the beginning of wisdom; the word, here used, signifies not only the
beginning but the top, the chief, the head and highest perfection of a thing:
the fear of God is both first and last, the beginning and end of holiness. To
fear God, and keep his Commandments, is all man in goodness, to cast off the
fear of God, is all man in sinfulness: the beginning and end of wickedness;
It is ill not to have the fear of God, but it is far worse to cast of the
fear of God; it is ill not to choose the fear of God ( Prove. 1.29.) but to
reject the fear of the Lord that is desperate; if once fear be cast off, all
wickedness is let in; at the same door, at which the fear of the Lord goes
out, any sin may enter: As Abraham said, The fear of God is not in this place,
and they will kill me for my Wives sake; they have no impediment of lust to
cast off, who have once cast off the fear of God. And as they who cast off
this fear are ready to do or say any thing that is evil; so they are unready
to do or say any thing that is good; as they have no restraint upon them from
iniquity, so they can easily restrain themselves from duty: The next words show
this.

Thou restrainest prayer before him: Prayer is a principal part of the outward
worship of God, and is both here and elsewhere put for the whole outward
worship of God.

The word signifies also, meditation, musing, or thinking: Detrahis
confabulationem cum Deo. Jun.
So some render here, Thou take off conference with God; thou wast wont to
keep continual correspondence with Heaven, and maintain a sweet humble
familiarity with God by holy meditation, but now thou art like a stranger and
come not at him. But whether we translate the word by Prayer, or Meditation,
the sense is the same; (...) Meditatio, loquela, etiam oration.
for praying is speaking to God; yea an arguing and pleading with God: And so
it is used in the Titles of the 102. and 142. Psalms. The word which we render
to restrain, (...) Significat, 1. prohibere, 2. diminuere. Non est
intelligendum quasi arguatur Job, quod remiserit vel prohibuerit orandi
studium: sed potius e contra, quod multiloquio, vel battologia usus erat. Bold.
Hoc est vitium dictum a Theophrasto (...) and proprie a Graecit dicitur (...)
minutiloquium. Minuere stillas aquarum, est minutissimas frequentissimasque
pluviae guttas mittere.
signifies two things; First, to withdraw or stop; Secondly to lessen and
diminish, Jer. 48.37. Every beard clipped or diminished: we may take it in both
senses here, as reproving Job either for a total forbearance, and throwing up
the duty of Prayer, or for shortning and abating it; Yet there is an opinion
that Job is not here charged for lessening or abating, but for lengthening and
increasing Prayer; Thou castest off fear, and multiplyest Prayer: The Hebrew
word notes the cutting or dividing of a thing into small pieces or portions;
which is indeed to multiply it, and to make it, though not more in bulk, yet
more in number, Job 36.27. Thou make small the drops of rain; that is, thou
multiplyest the drops of rain; so here, thou make small thy Prayers, as so
many drops of rain, thou have never done dropping Prayers; thou do mince thy
supplications, or cut them out into many small shreads, as if thou did hope
to be heard for thy much speaking: Such were the silly devotions of the old
superstitious Gentiles, which the hypocritical Pharisees imitated, and were
therefore reproved by Christ, under the name of vain repetitions (Matthew. 6.7)
Of which fault a learned Interpreter, judges Eliphaz, reproving Job in this
place But I rather keep to our own Translation, Thou restrainest Prayer.

Here again it may be questioned, What cause had Eliphaz to charge Job with
restraining prayer? The Jewish Writers say, it was because he denied
Providence, Hebraei ad id referunt, quod putant Jobum Dei providentiam negasse,
quod nos non putamus. Mer. q d. ista tua assertio and doctrina, quod mala and
supplicia eveniant bonis and justis tollit religionem and publicum divini
numinis cultum.
and so by consequence Prayer; for if God do not order the affairs of the
World, the afflictions and deliverances of his people, why should we pray to
him about them? Others refer it not to his denial of Providence, but to that
which Eliphaz supposed a fundamental error against the Doctrine of
Providence, That God destroys the righteous and the wicked; That he laughs at
the trial of the innocent. Now will any innocent man pray to God in his
affliction, when he is told that God laughs at his affliction? Will any
righteous man call upon God for help, when he is taught that God destroys the
righteous? Who would serve a Master who gives such wages, and pays those that
honor him with disgrace, yea with destruction? So that Job is charged with
restraining Prayer according to this answer to the question, not because he
totally forbore prayer himself, or persuaded others to forbear it; but
because Jobs assertions were such as might yield those consequences, and cause
many to suspend Prayer, or give over calling upon the Name of God in the day of
trouble. We may be charged to say or do that, which flows from what we do or
say, though we neither say nor do the thing it self.

Many are guilty of those errors consequentially, which yet they never affirmed
thetically or directly. We may be so far from asserting, that we may
professedly abhor an opinion which yet lies secretly under some of our
assertions. We say justly, That the Pope is Antichrist, and that pure Popery is
Antichristianisme; yet the Pope does not deny Christ, for the Pope thinks
himself Christ's Vicar upon earth, and therefore must needs acknowledge him to
be come in the flesh, yet by consequence, the Pope is an opposer both of the
Person and Offices of Christ, and popish Doctrine fights against the truth of
Christ. As profane men Profess they know God, yet in their works they deny
him (Tit. 1.16.) So many erroneous persons profess they love and honor those
holy truths and spiritual duties, which by consequences they indeed deny, as
Eliphaz (though unduely) supposed Job had done, the duty of Prayer.

Thou restrainest prayer before God. Taking the words abstractly, they yield us
this useful observation, That it is an argument of an evil heart, to shorten,
Hic proponitur tanquam ingens piaculum quod homo afflictus remittat orandi
studium.
or restrain, to lessen, or to give off Prayer in times of trouble. That King
spoke to the height of profaneness, when he said (2 Kings 6.) This evil is
of the Lord, and why should I wait on the Lord any longer? When we have done
waiting, we have done praying. No man will ask for that which he does not
expect to receive. How long so ever affliction lasts, so long prayer-season
lasts; if the Winter day of our trouble, be a Summer day in length, if it be
continued many days, yea many months, and years, prayer should continue (
Psalm. 50.15.) Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will hear, and thou
shall glorify me; Let the day of trouble be short or long, God looks to hear
of us all that day. Is any afflicted let him pray, says the Apostle James; it
is a duty to pray, when we are not afflicted, when we prosper in the World: But
is any man afflicted, then is a special season for prayer. A sincere heart
prays always, or continues in prayer; an hypocrite never loves to pray, and
at two seasons he will restrain, or lay aside prayer: First, when he is got
out, or thinks he has prayed himself out of affliction. Prosperity and
worldly fullness stop the mouth of prayer, and he has no more to say to God,
when he has received much from God. Secondly, a Hypocrite restraines prayer,
when he perceives he has got nothing by prayer; he sees he cannot, or fears
he shall not get out of trouble, and therefore he will pray no more in trouble;
his spirit fails, because his afflictions hold out. Upon which soever of these
two grounds, the Hypocrite restraines prayer, he shows the wickedness of his
heart. If from the former, he shows, that he bears no true love to God; if
from the latter, he shows that he has no true faith in God, or dares not
trust him. Further, to cast off prayer, is to cast off God; and he that lives
without prayer in the World, lives without God in the World: Hence the Heathen
who know not God, and the Families that call not upon his Name, are joined
together, or rather are the same ( Jer. 10.25.) Further, to restrain prayer,
is worse then not to pray: The latter notes only a neglect of the duty, the
fromer a distaste of the duty. To give over any holy exercise is more dangerous
then not to begin or take it up. The one is the profane man's sin, the other is
the Hypocrites. Thou restrainest prayer: and he that does not utter prayer
with his mouth, will soon utter wickedness with his mouth, as it follows.

Verse. 5. For thy mouth utters thine iniquity, and thou chusest the tongue of
the crafty.
Here Eliphaz explaines, and proves what he said before, that Job had cast off
the fear of God, and restrained prayer; as if he had said, If thou had kept
in holy fear, that would have kept in thine iniquity: Had thou not
restrained prayer, that would have restrained, and bridled down thy sin; but
thy mouth utters thine iniquity, and that shows that prayer is restrained,
and that fear is cast off; here is a demonstration of it; If you should come
to a Princes Court, and see a great crowd about the door, you would say, the
Porter is there, he stops and examines them; if at another time you see all
going in as fast as they please, you will say the Porter is out of the way.
Thus while the fear of the Lord stands like a Porter at the door of the
soul, we keep our thoughts and actions in compass; we examine what goes in,
and what comes out: but when once that's gone, Non opus est ut te doceam in quo
pecces, cum ipse tuus sermo doceat te iniquum esse. Vatab. Reus verbis oris
tui. Sept,
order is gone. Any thing may be said, any thing may be done by him, who fears
not, who prays not. Thou have cast off fear, and restrained prayer, for thy
mouth utters thine iniquity, out it comes, as fast as it can: I need not tell
thee wherein thou have offended, thy mouth powers it out.

Hence Note, That the evil which is in the heart will out at the mouth,
unless prayer and the fear of God restrain it: As the good that is in the
heart will come out of the mouth, especially when prayer unlocks the mouth.
David prays, Lord open thou my lips, and then he undertakes for his mouth,
that it shall show forth the praise of God. (Psalm. 51.1.) My heart is inditing
a good matter (the heart does this in prayer or meditation) what follows, My
tongue is as the Pen of a ready Writer: Heavenly thoughts in the heart, shoot
out at the tongue in heavenly words. When the heart is devising of a good
matter, the tongue will be swift to speak, and set all to a good tune. Thus
also while the heart is inditing an evil matter, the tongue runs to evil:
Such a man needs not learn from others, he has a root of bitterness in
himself: Hence our Savior concludes ( Matthew. 12.37.) By thy words thou shall
be condemned, and by thy words thou shall be justified: Why shall we be
condemned by our words? Qualis vir talis oration. Men's mala linguam movet and
vos fingit ad improbos sensus neque aliud os loquitur quam quod interior
suggerit atque imperat sensus.
The Prophet complains of those who made a man an offender for a word; I
answer, our words show what we are, they declare our hearts, as a man may be
discovered of what Country he is, when he speaks, so of what spirit he is. The
tongue is the scholar of the heart, and speaks what that dictates: A man is
justly condemned by evil words, because they testify that he is evil.

Thy mouth utters thine iniquity. Observe Secondly, There are some iniquities
which are more properly ours then some others are. Thine iniquity: Job had (as
Eliphaz seems to suggest) a kind of peculiarity in it. As God ownes some
people in a special manner; though all the people of the earth be his, yet
they are his beloved people: So man ownes some sin in a special manner; though
a corrupt heart has a relation to all the sins in the World, yet some one is
his beloved sin; and may be called by way of emminency, his iniquity. It Is his,
as his Houses and Lands, as the Money in his Purse, and the Garments on his
back are his.

Observe thirdly, Every man is most ready to act and utter his special
iniquity: Thy mouth utters thine iniquity. There are some sins in a man's
heart, which possibly, he may never utter all his days: but he must be talking
of, or acting his beloved one. Hence David speaks it, as a high work of grace
in him ( Psalm. 18.23.) I have kept my self from mine iniquity: Even a godly
man who disownes every sin, has some one sin more his own then others. This
finds him work (not to do it) but to keep himself from doing it.

And thou chusest the tongue of the crafty: As if he had said, Thou wast wont
to speak prayer, now thou speakst policy, thou dealest cunningly and
deceitfully with us, not plainly and clearly. Why, what had Job spoken or
done, that should gain him the disreputation of a crafty man; some conceive
Eliphaz hinting at those words ( Chap. 6.24.) Teach me, and I will hold my
tongue, etc. Thou speak as if thou were willing to be taught, show me my
error, and I will turn from it; yet this is from craft not from conscience.
For though thou seem to be willing to receive instruction, yet thou keep
close to thy opinion, and wilt not part from it. We shall sometimes hear a man
speaking very ingenuously, convince me that I am in an error, and I will
relinquish it, Lingua pro doctrina Metonymice, causa vel instrum^ntum pro
effectu.
and yet he resolves to hold his own. To desire instruction is grown into a
complement; but it is by the tongue of the crafty: The instrument is here put
for the effect, the tongue for speech, as Isa. 50.4. Thou have given me the
tongue of the learned, what to do, that I may know to speak a word in season.
Lingua erudita vel doctrinarum, i. e. erudite, sapienter, ornate, suaviter
loquendi facultas.


Again, the word Crafty, is taken in a good sense, by some Interpreters. So
the tongue of the crafty is the tongue of the wise; as if he had said, thou
seem to speak very wisely, soberly and holily; others render it thus, Thou
should have chosen the tongue of the wise; that is, thou should have
spoken more reverently and discreetly, whereas thy mouth utters thine
iniquity; but rather the crafty, is the subtle man. As if he had said, Thou
love to play the Sophister, to put fair colors on a bad matter, (...)
versutus, malignus, calidus. Calidos hic vocat, qui cum male sentiant and
agant, inveniunt tamen causationes and colores. Coc.
and wilt not let things appear as indeed they are. Be wise as Serpents, is
Christ's advice, but he adds, Be innocent as Doves: Serpentine wisdom must be
mixed with Dove-like innocence; the craftiness of the Serpent alone, belongs
only to the seed of the Serpent.

Lastly, whereas he says, Thou chusest the tongue of the crafty; he heightens
his accusation, and would represent this good man to the eye of the world in a
blacker hue. To choose, notes a mixed act both of the understanding, will, and
affections; and it seems here to be opposed to that wicked act (but not in the
wickedness of it) wherewith he bespattered Job in the former Verse, Thou
castest off fear: To cast off, or reprobate, is contrary to electing or
choosing, and so is the fear of God to craft. The fear of God is the beginning
of wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do thereafter; but craft
is only the corruption of wisdom, and they have no good understanding who
do thereafter. Now, when Divine fear and humane craft stand in competition,
for a man to give his vote for craft, and to refuse, at least to let pass the
fear of the Lord, this is one of the highest growths of sinful corruption. He
that does thus, needs neither Judge nor witness against him, he is both
himself; so Eliphaz resolves it in the next Verse.

Verse. 6. Thine own mouth condemns thee, and not I, thine own lips testify
against thee.
This Verse has nothing in it that needs a Comment. The intendment of it may
be thus given, It is as clear as the light that thou castest off fear, and
restrainest prayer before God; for as much as thy mouth utters thine
iniquity, Testes olim manus super caput rei imponentes dicere solebant, Malitia
tua te adduxit ad mortem non nos, Lyran.
and thou have chosen the tongue of the crafty; these things are so plain that
I need not prove them, thine own mouth shall condemn thee, and not I. As the
Judge said at Christ's trial; What need we any witness, ye have heard his
blasphemy, Matthew. 26.65. Witnesses of old were wont to put their hand upon the
head of the offender, and say, It is thy own wickedness which condemns thee,
and not we; much more does their wickedness condemn them, who may justly be
condemned without witness.

Hence observe:

That self condemnation, is the strongest condemnation, Luke 19.22. Christ
tells the unprofitable Servant, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou
wicked Servant. The obstinate Heretic is condemned of himself, Tit. 3.14. Not
that the Heretic does condemn himself, formally, he does not say I am in an
error, you can hardly bring an Heretic to that, and when you do, he cease
to be an Heretic. It is his stiffenesse in opinion, which fastens the reproach
of heresy upon him; but he is said to condemn himself, because holding such
an erroneous opinion, he does virtually condemn himself, and plainly
declares that he is fallen from the truth, or has always opposed it.

The Prophet, ( Isa 44.9.) says of Image-makers, They are all of them vanity,
their delectable things shall not profit them, and they are their own
witnesses; they see not, nor know, that they may be ashamed: Images show what
both they and their worshippers are; though no man should speak a word against
them, they having tongues and cannot speak, speak enough against themselves:
their silence, or dumbness rather, proclaims aloud to all the World, that
they are vain and dunghill Deities; they can do neither good nor evil, to
show themselves Gods, and they who worship them do not so much as show
themselves men, Isa. 46.8. In all this they are their own witnesses. They
cannot but see their own blindness and folly who speak to that which cannot
hear, and lift up their eyes to that which cannot see: Every sinner has
reason to condemn himself with his own mouth, and why an Idolater does it
not, no reason can be given, but that which was touched even now from the
Prophet, he wants his reason, and is therefore in a holy scorn advised, to
show himself a man. While we acquit our selves with our own mouths, and bear
witness to our selves, our witness is of no validity, nor are we at all
acquitted; but while we condemn our selves with our own mouths, and bear
witness against our selves, our witness is strong, and we are abundantly
condemned.

JOB, Chap. 15. Verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Art thou the first man that was borne,
or wast thou made before the Hills?

Have thou heard the secret of God? and do thou restrain wisdom to thy
self?

What know thou that we know not? what understandest thou that is not in us?

With us are both the gray headed, and very aged men, much elder then thy
Father.

Are the consolations of God small with thee? is there any secret thing with
thee?


THe first part of this Chapter, is reprehensory. In the former context two
points of reproof were opened: First Jobs supposed folly in the second and
third Verses: Secondly, his wickedness, in the fourth, both which were
aggravated in the fifth and sixth.

In this Context Eliphaz gives him a third and a fourth reproof; a third, for
the high conceit he had of himself, and a fourth, for the low conceit he had
of the comforts of God, tendered to him by his Friends; he reproves him for the
high conceit he had of himself, in two things: First, as if Job had thought
his experience greater then any man's, Art thou the first man that was borne?
etc. Verse. 7. Secondly, as if he had thought himself immediately inspired,
Have thou heard the secret of God, etc. Verse. 8.

This he illustrates by a twofold opposition in the ninth and tenth Verses;
First, by the opposition of himself and his Friends in point of knowledge and
understanding unto Job: As if he had said, Thou look upon us as underlings,
as men unworthy to carry thy Books after thee, or to be named the same day,
but what know thou, that we know not? What understandest thou, which is not
in us? Verse. 9. Thou art not so weighty, but we hope we may very well balance
thee, and say (without pride or partiality) that our parts are as good as
thine. Secondly, by the opposition of their party to him and his, Verse. 10.
With us are both the gray headed, and very aged men, much elder then thy
Father: As if he had said, Our party equals thine, as well as our parts; Have
thou aged men on thy side? so have we; Have thou the authority of gray hairs
to back thy opinion? So have we. Have thou thy Fathers Copy to show for these
thy Tenets? So have we. We are able to make as great a boast of Antiquity as
thou thy self can: Do not think that we have received our Learning from
some new fangled Sect, or from upstart Opinionists of yesterdayes edition: No,
be it known unto thee, With us are both the gray headed, and very aged men,
etc.

As thus he reproves Jobs high thoughts of himself, so in the fourth place,
The low thoughts which he had of them, and the pains they had taken with him,
Verse. 11. Are the consolations of God small with thee? etc.

Verse. 7. Art thou the first man that was borne.
Numquid ante primum hominem natus es. Pagn. No natu r minus minimo. Est
asitatum in omni, ut reor, lingua ut qui in gradu aliquo ad quandam
mediocritatem non pervenere, imo qui ininfimo constitere gradu, eum eo qui
maxim excellit comparentur, cum ironia tamen, ut si de homine timido dicas,
non es cum Achille conferendus etc. neque aliud voluisse Eliphazem arbitror
quam ejus esse aetatis Jobum in qua non multum soleat esse sapientiae. Sanct.
Or, as some read it, Art thou borne before the first man? This is a high
strain of Rhetoric, it is impossible to be before the first; for as there is
nothing less then what is least, so nothing was before the first; but as we
say, Such a man will see the last man borne, when we see him resolved to stay
the longest upon a business, or desirous to live very long: So we may say,
Such a man was borne before the first, or surely he is the first man that was
borne, whom we see highly conceited of his own antiquity: And indeed when
Eliphaz asks the question, Art thou the first man that was borne? His meaning
is to tax Job for a Punie, or a young man, yet arrogating to himself the
glory of longest experience; as if he had said, Thou have told us that we are
but of yesterday, and objectest novelty against us, to derogate from our
authority, yet surely thou art none of the oldest, thou art not older then Adam
(I believe) thou wast not before the first man, that ever was, no nor the first
man: It is usual in many Languages, to compare those who are lowest in any
degree to the highest, and the meanest to the greatest, Ironically, or in a way
of scorn; thus it is said to a Coward, or a white-liverd fellow, Thou art no
Achilles; to a Dwarf or one of a low stature, Thou art no Goliath; to one of
weak parts, surely, Thou art no Solomon, no Aristotle; so of one that is but
young, Surely thou art not Nestor, thou art not Adam, the first man that ever
was.

Job gave Eliphaz and his Friends some color to twit him thus, while he said (
Chap. 13.5.) O that you would altogether hold your peace, and it should be your
wisdoms: This was as if he had said, You are but ignorant, and the more you
speak the more you discover your ignorance; And again, Chapter 12.12. With the
ancient is wisdom, and with length of days is understanding; where he
secretly upbraided them as Juniors, and that therefore little or no heed was to
be taken to what they spoke; now says Eliphaz, Art thou the first man borne?
that is, Art thou the wisest man living? He who thinks himself the first man,
takes himself for a very wise man, even as wise as Adam, who was not only the
Father, but the Teacher, and Instructor, of his posterity: In which sense the
Jews said to Christ, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen
Abraham, John 8.57. Thou speak as if thou were an old man: we know thy age,
thou art but a young man, yet thou speak at the rate of thousands, as if
thou were as old as Abraham, or the ancient of days among men, Art thou the
first man?

Or, Wast thou made before the hills?

Some conceive, that by the Hills he means the Angels, Philippus sequutus
Augustinum, contendit hoc loco angelos collium nomine intelligi. Ad facies
collium. Heb. Number formatus es ante mundum conditum, nam colles una cum terra
formati fuerunt aliquot diebus ante hominem. Drus.
but that Exposition smells too much of the Allegory: Take the Hills literally,
for the uppermost parts or bosses of the earth; the Original is, Wast thou
formed or made before the face of the hills? which is an Hebraisme. Some
interpret the Hills by a Synecdoche, for the whole earth, then the sense is,
Wast thou formed before the earth? The first man was formed out of the earth,
and art thou older then the earth? So that here Eliphaz puts him by a challenge
of greater antiquity then in the former part of the Verse, Wast thou the first
man that was borne, or wast thou made before the earth? the earth is elder then
man, both had not the same birthday.

Again, as the Hills are a part of the earth, so they may be said to be borne
the first of any part of the earth: For the earth was covered with water, it
was a great deep, till a word of command came from God, that the waters should
retire to certain Channells, and receptacles which his wisdom had assigned
them; now when the waters were thus gathered and put into those vast Vessels,
then the Hills, and Mountains, Quod prius conspicuum est antiquius esse
vide^ur.
which are the highest parts of the earth appeared first, and so the Mountains
are elder in regard of view, th^n the Plains and Valleys of the earth. That is
said to be first which appears first: So then, whether we take hills by a
Synecdoche for the whole earth, or plainly for a part of the earth, both reach
at highest antiquity. There is an opinion (I confess) which if true, takes
away the ground of this notion, That hills and mountains grew up, or were as
so many excrescencies of the earth, since it was created, and that they grow
daily (as Naturalists express it) by Juxtaposition. But I fully adhere to
their judgment (under which this notion stands safe) that the earth was
distinguished into hills, plains, and valleys, by the same immediate power
which created it, though I easily grant that many hills have been accidentally
caused, and cast up since, especially in the deluge. And this does more advance
the wisdom of God in the frame of this mighty mass, which has in it greater
ornament, and yields greater delight by this variety, then if it had been
smoothed all over into Plains and Levels.

Quod long anti suum, montium and collium comparatione indicari solet.
Further, to clear the Text, consider, that it is usual in Scripture, when a
thing of great antiquity is spoken of, to compare it to the Hills, Prove. 8.23,
24, 25. Wisdom (which is Christ) speaks thus, I was set up from everlasting,
from the beginning, ere the earth was, when there were no depths I was brought
forth; when there were no fountains abounding with water, before the
mountains were settled; before the Hills was I brought forth; while as yet he
had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the
World. Where note also by the way, a full confirmation of the opinion even now
asserted, that God made the Hills immediately, which are here also called, The
highest part of the dust of the earth. Again ( Psalm. 90.2.) O Lord thou have
been our dwelling place in all generations; which he explaines in the next
words, Before the mountains were brought forth, from everlasting to
everlasting, thou art God. Old Jacob speaks this Divine Philosophy upon his
deathbed, while he was blessing his son Joseph (Genesis 49.26.) The blessings
of thy Father have prevailed above the blessings of my Progenitors, above the
utmost bounds of the everlasting Hills: Once more, Hab. 3.6. He stood and
measured the earth, he beheld, and drove asunder the Nations; and the
everlasting Mountains were scattered, the perpetual Hills did bow: Now a
thing is called everlasting, either strictly, because it shall last for ever,
or because it lasts very long; in this latter sense, the Hills are
everlasting: The Hills were from the beginning, and shall continue to the end.
As for Job, he began to live but lately, and he must shortly dye: Wast thou
made before the Hills? Eliphaz proceeds to a second branch of his third
reproof.

Verse. 8. Have thou heard the secret of God, or do thou restrain wisdom
to thy self?
As if he had said, Possibly thou will wave or not stand to this plea of thy
great antiquity. What is it then that swells thee into such proud and daring
thoughts of thy infallible knowledge? Is it because, Thou have heard the secret
of God.

The Hebrew word signifies either counsel, (...) Secretum vel consilium.
(...), arcana, indicendae Aquil. (...), Theod.
or any thing that is secret and mysterious; some render it, Have thou heard
things unspeakable: when the Apostle was caught up to Heaven (2 Corinthians. 12.)
He heard words unspeakable which it is not lawful for a man to utter: Have
thou heard unutterable secrets? A second translates, Have thou heard the
mysteries of God? A third, Have thou had discourse with God? or have thou heard
God discourse about the great things of wisdom? The Septuagint, (...).
Constitutionem domini audivisti and consiliario te usus est Deus. Sept. Eadem
vox quae est secretum, est etiam consilium aut concilum, quod in conciliis
arcana tractantur; and consilia non nisi secreto iniri debent Pined.
Have thou heard the constitutions of Heaven, or know thou in what manner
God has settled all the affairs of mankind, natural, civil, and spiritual?
Art thou of privy counsel to the King of Heaven? or art thou a member of the
Celestial conclave? Thus he reproves him for arrogating to himself such
knowledge, as is not attaineable, but by special inspiration, or revelation
from God himself. The Prophet puts the question ( Jer. 23.18.) Who has stood
in the counsel of the Lord, and has perceived and heard his word? Who has
marked his word and heard it? So the Apostle ( Romans 11.34.) Who has known the
mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? God is able to make known
the whole mystery of his will in a moment to the meanest soul, he can let in
stoods upon the understanding without our study; he can make a fool wise, and
drawing back the curtain of ignorance, irradiate the darkest mind with the
cleareest light of all things knowable: But have thou heard such secrets?

There are two sorts of Divine secrets: First, Secrets of Providence: Secondly,
Secrets of Doctrine.


The former are of such things as God will do; the latter, such as Man is
either to do or believe: God reveals both to his people. The ordinary way for
us is by the Word written, the extraordinary by a word spoken: Thus God opened
his secrets to the ancient Prophets and Apostles. The Prophet Amos (Chap. 3.7.)
speaks of the secrets of providence, Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he
reveals his sacrets to his Servants the Prophets: And the Lord himself says
of Abraham, Shall I hide from Abraham the things that I am about to do: Now as
there is a revealing of Providence, or of the works of God, so there is a
revealing of Doctrines and of the holy Truths of God. This he promises ( Joel
2.28.) I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your
Daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men
shall see visions: Young men, cannot claim to be the first men, they were not
before the Hills, yet to them the visions of Heaven are promised: Yet we must
not neglect that command of our attendance upon the teachings of the Word,
because we have received a promise of the teachings of the Spirit. The spirit
usually teaches by the Word, never against it; and it is a tempting of God,
while he gives us means, to linger after immediate Revelations: yea, when the
Lord reveals himself immediately, he uses to do it without man's forethought
or expectations. The Prophets did not set themselves to receive Revelations
from God, but his Spirit came upon them with mighty power and irresistible
evidence. And though God does reveal some of his secrets, yet he has secrets
which he will not reveal: The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him
(Psalm. 24.14.) And his secret is with the righteous (Prove. 3.32.) This secret
is either the good will and favor of God, of which the World knows nothing,
or the good Word and Faith of God of which the World knows as little: Both
these sorts of Divine secrets are with the righteous, and men fearing God; but
the secrets of his Counsel are reserved in his own breast. He reveals to his
people the secrets of his bounty, and of their duty, what he will do for them,
and what they must do for him; but many things which himself will do shall
never be revealed but by the doing of them: Have thou heard the secrets of God?

And do thou restrain wisdom to thy self. That is, (...) Detrahis ad te;
quod sensu in idem recidit cum eo quod est tibi ascribis fraudando alios
negatam aliis sapientiam tibi assumpsisti ex divino arcano. Sapientia ultra te
suos terminos non porriget? Tygur.
Do thou think there is no wisdom besides thine? art thou at the very
border and utmost limit of knowledge and understanding? is all beyond thee
ignorance and folly? Have thou got and engrossed all the learning from others,
and reserved it to thy self alone as thy peculiar, with which none must
intermedle without a license obtained from thee? have thou the monopoly of
wisdom? or is all but enough for thee? Shall none of thy neighbors share with
thee? This is either a charge of greater arrogance then the former, Do thou
restrain wisdom to thy self? or at least a charge of greatest
uncharitableness; goodness is diffusive, and so is wisdom, and it is the
duty of good men to diffuse wisdom. When they have heard the secrets of God,
they must communicate them to others, not restrain all to themselves. But I
conceive Eliphaz intends only the former charge.

Hence observe:

It is the highest strain of pride for a man to restrain wisdom to
himself: or to think himself so wise, that all must address to him for
wisdom: God has not given all wisdom to any one man, or sort of men,
though he has trusted some with more Talents of it then he has done others.
The Priests lips of old under the Law, and so the lips of Ministers under the
Gospel, should preserve knowledge; and the people should seek both Law and
Gospel at their mouth ( Mal. 2.7.) Yet neither might the Priests then, nor may
Ministers now, restrain wisdom to themselves. The rule of the Apostle is, Be
not wise above what is written; that is, above holy Writ, or above what is
written from the immediate dictates of the Spirit of God. They are (as we say)
fools in Print, who say they are wise above what is thus written; but we may
be wise above what is spoken or written by any man, for no man ought to
restrain all wisdom to himself; to do so is the top-staire of
Antichristian pride. The Pope restraines wisdom to himself; he boasts that
he has the secrets of God, and that all must come to him if they will have
them unlockt and opened: His sentences from the Chair are Oracles, and there
he is infallible; all are obliged to receive what he says, because he says
it: no man must scruple, much less oppose or contradict it. Thus to impose
upon men is to set our selves in the place of the God of Heaven; yea, to
arrogate to our selves that we are Gods on earth. So the Apostle has
uncharacterized that man of sin (2 These. 2.4.) He opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped (that is, above all civil
powers or Magistracy) So that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. And as he out of all measure wickedly, so many others
in a very great measure have showed themselves as God, while they have taken
upon them (as we speak proverbially) To give the Law, yea, to give the Gospel
to other men's consciences, or to bind up all men's tongues and judgments unto
the rule of their apprehensions. When the Apostle had called God to record,
that he always purposed to be bold and plain with the Corinthians, he
presently subjoynes this corrective (2 Cor. 1.24.) Not that we have Dominion
over your Faith, but are helpers of your joy: As if he had said. Do not think
that I take upon me as a Lord over your consciences, to charge any command or
observations of my own upon them: No, I am but as a servant of God to instruct
you in his counsels, and to comfort you with his promises.

The Grecians, who were men of great knowledge and learning, a very witty and
Philosophical people, called all other Nations Barbarians: Such pride appears
among some (in name) Christians, they speak and act as if all knowledge and
truth were centred in them, or as if all were in the dark who see not by their
light. Knowledge is apt to puff up, how are they puffed up, who think they
know all? though indeed they who think they know any thing, know nothing as
they ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. God reveals that to Babes and Sucklings, which
he hides from such wise and prudent ones, who restrain all wisdom to
themselves. God in judgment restraines wisdom from them, who in pride
restrain it to themselves; and as God takes all wisdom from them, who in
another sense restrain wisdom to themselves, that is, who will not use it
because they have but one Talent of it, or but a little; so he will give them
no wisdom at all, who think they are possessors, or Lord-Treasurers of all
the Talents of it, as if all wisdom were laid up in them. The Bab^s and
Sucklings, such as are low, humble, and meek, are the objects of this bounty;
as for the proud, God beholds them affar off: and they can never get near
wisdom who are far from the God of wisdom. While such vainly restrain
wisdom to themselves, the hand of God is justly restrained from bestowing it
upon them.

Eliphaz having thus reproved Job for entitling himself to so rich a stock of
knowledge, either brought in by his own long experience, or from the special
inspirations and teachings of God; proceeds to challenge to himself and his
Friends a knowledge equal at least to what he really had, in the ninth and
tenth Verses.

Verse. 9. What know thou that we know not, what understandest thou that is
not in us?
He retorts what Job said, Chap. 12.3. I have understanding as well as you, I
am not inferior to you. Here Eliphaz tells him, we have understanding as well
as you: Has God revealed all knowledge to thee, surely we know as much as thou.

What know thou which we know not? The words are plain, and need no
explication; Dic age quae sunt tuae parts.
they sound as if he had said, Come show thy skill, and open thy hidden
treasures; thou have showed nothing yet, but what is common to us and others;
thou seem to speak of mysteries, of things that are unknown, and secret to
this day, but surely thou have not traded much in these; For, What know thou
that we know not? thou have not yet produced any such piece of knowledge; if
such precious matter be in thee, wrap it not up in the napkin of silence any
longer, bring it forth, that we also may know it.

Hence observe:

First, Man is apt to stand upon terms of comparison with man; Qui velit
ingenio cedere rarus erit.
he cannot bear it that another should be thought or think himself wiser or
more knowing then he: Some are not troubled because they know little, but
because they are esteemed less knowing then others, What know thou that we
know not?

Secondly observe, Though some men are of higher parts, and better natural
abilities then others, yet what one man knows, others may; No man can boast
himself beyond the line and degree of man. For as the heart of man answers the
heart of man in sinfulness, so in a possibility of goodness. One man may be
as holy as another, as wise and knowing as another; only God is more holy,
wise, and knowing then any man can be; he knows many things which no man
knows nor can know. But though it be a strain of pride, for one man to say
to another, What know thou that I know not? Yet it is a truth that one man
may know as much as another: and though some men know that which another man
(in regard of some personal impediments) neither does nor can know, yet the
humane nature in every person is capable of the same, both kind and degree of
knowledge.

Thirdly, Eliphaz is about to reprove the pride of Job, as he conceives, and he
does it (as was but now touched) in such a manner as speaks his own pride, What
know thou that we know not, is the language of a high mind: I am as good
and as wise as thou: though it may be so, yet it is uncomely to say so.

Hence observe:

Some in reproving other men's faults, run into the very same faults
themselves; the reproof of a fault may not only be faulty, but the fault
which is reproved. A man may reprove pride with much pride, and lesser
vanities, with abundance of vanity. All that good men speak for good, does not
begin at a principle of goodness; their own corruption may rise up against
the corruptions of others, and sin is often heard chiding vice. How many are
there who check passion, with passion, and are very angry in dislike of anger;
you shall have some men speak against bitterness of spirit with a bitter
spirit, and while they are taxing their Brethren with making breaches or with
an unwillingnesse to peace, discover much unpeaceablenesse, yea an
unwillingnesse to have those breaches healed.

Diogenes was observed to trample upon the pride of Plato with greater pride;
and he who to rebuke pride in Apparel, wore himself an unhandsome and torn
Coat, was rightly told that his pride was seen through the holes of his
Coat. There may be as much ostentation in wearing sordid, as there is in
wearing the gayest Clothes. It was a shame for Heathens to declare their own
folly, while they declaimed against the folly of their neighbors; how
scandalous then is this in Christians?

Verse. 10. With us are the gray headed, and very aged men, much elder then thy
Father.
This Verse is the proof of the former; some think the comparison lies
between Jobs Friends and himself. We are thy Seniors, yet thou speak as if
thou were the oldest man amongst us: Here are two terms in the Text, which
seem to distinguish old age.

First, Gray Headed. Secondly, Very aged, much elder then thy Father.
Among the Jews, a man was counted old at threescore, which they called, The
first old age: Prima senectus (...) dicitur unde (...) senex: media senectus
(...) dicitur and incipit ab anno 70. and durat usque ad 80. annum; ad quam qui
pervenit postea (...) decrepitus dicitur, quod est ultimae senectutis
vocabulum, quae durat usque ad vitae finem vel usque ad annum 100. Nam filius
centum annorum habetur pro mortuo. Drus. Etiam Eliphaz qui canus est, and
Bildad qui decrepitus est inter nos, and Sophar qui major est patre tuo diebut.
Targ.
At seventy he was expressed by the word which we translate Gray Headed, and
that was his title till he arrived at Fourscore; from that to the end of life,
the whole state was called, Decrepid old Age; and they who reached those
years, were expressed by the word which we render Very aged men, or as we say,
men having one foot in the Grave; for he that was an hundred years old, was
not numbered among the living, but among he dead. The Chalde Paraphrast applies
the distinction thus; With us is Eliphaz, who is gray headed, and Bildad who is
decrepid, and Zophar who is older then thy Father. Hierome gives Eliphaz the
precedence in age, affirming that he was the eldest Son of Esau, and that at
the time of this dispute, he was no less then a hundred and fifty years old,
Jobs Father ninety, and Job himself seventy. But I stay not upon these
conjectures.

The scope of Elipqaz in these words may be reduced to this account: As if he
had said, We need not depend on thy Authority or antiquity; For with us, that
is, on our side, or of our party and opinion, there are men gray headed, yea,
very aged, much elder, not only then thy self, but, then thy Father.
Therefore do not thou charge us with novelty, know, that we have received our
Doctrine from venerable Ancestors; if thou have learned these things of thy
Father, and drunk in thy opinion from the Aged, so have we: Nor do we esteem
the Tenets of our forefathers merely by the number of days which they lived,
but by the wisdom and piety with which they were enriched.

It is observable in Scripture, that Teman (from whence Eliphaz came) was a
famous School of Learning (Jer. 49.7.) Thus says the Lord of Hosts, is
wisdom no more in Teman? He speaks of it, as of a known place for
knowledge and wisdom; What? Is wisdom no more in Teman? As if we in England
should say, Is there no more learning at Oxford or Cambridge? are the lights
extinguished, and the fountains dry? Thus Eliphaz asserts that his ab^ttors and
instructers in the opinion he maintained, were both old, and learned old men.

From this contest about Antiquity and ancient men so often renewed and so much
urged between Job and his Friends. We may observe:

First, That they who have most years upon their backs, are, or may be
supposed to have most knowledge and wisdom in their heads and hearts.

Secondly, They who have Antiquity on their side, are apt to conclude that they
have Truth on their side. That which is indeed most ancient is most true; yet
there are very many very ancient untruths: It is no new thing to see a
gray headed error, and a false Doctrine much older then our Fathers.

But I shall not prosecute either of these points, having met with matter of
this strain before, Chap. 8. v. 8, 9, 10. Chap. 12. v. 12. to which places I
refer the Reader.

Eliphaz having finished his third reproof of Job for his arrogance, and the
high conceit he had of himself, proceeds to a fourth, and that is (as has
been said) for the low conceit which he had of the comforts tendered him in the
Name of God. Number parum a te consolationes Dei. Heb. Supplendum est verbum
reputantur. Numquid grande est ut consoletur te Deus? Vulg. q. d. facile est
Deo ut te ad statum prosperitatis reducat. Aquin. Existimasne tuis aerumnis non
posse Deum parem consolationem afferre.


Verse. 11. Are the consolations of God small with thee, or is there any secret
thing with thee?
These words undergo much variety of interpretation; the Vulgar Latin, near
which some others translate, gives a fair sense, but at too great a distance
from the letter of the Original; thus, Is it a great thing that God should
comfort thee? As if he had said, Art thou so low that all the consolations of
God are not able to raise thee up? Is it a work too big for God himself to
comfort thee? Cannot he change thy outward and inward sorrows into joys? Will
not the consolations of one that is infinite serve thy turn? Has not he
balm enough in store to heal thy wounds, nor treasure enough in stock to
repair thy losses? It Is no hard thing with God to comfort the most disconsolate
soul that ever was; he that made light to shine out of darkness, can give us
light in our thickest darkness: An minores sunt consolationes dei, quam ut te
consolari possint? Vatab.
This is a truth, but for the reason above, I stay not upon it.

The Septuagint translation is far wider then the former, Thou have received
but few wounds, in comparison of the sins that thou have committed; which is
a Paraphrase, not a translation, and such a Paraphrase as seems to lie quite
without the compass of the text: The meaning and intendment of it may be given
thus; as if he had said, Thou complainest that thou art greatly afflicted, that
thy sorrows are innumerable, Pauca prae iis quae peccasti accepisti vulnera.
Sep.
but if thou considerest thy great and many sins, thy sufferings are few,
yea, thy sufferings may rather be called consolations, and thy losses gains:
Are the consolations of God small to thee, seeing thou have sinned so much?
When God lays but a little affliction upon sinful man, he may be said, to
give a great deal of mercy.

A third gives this sense, An consolationes Dei tam contemptibiles judicas ut
projiciat eas ante blasphematores.
Are the consolations of God small to thee? That is, Do thou esteem the
consolations of God so cheap, that he will give them to such a one as thou? or
that he will lavish them out upon the wicked, and cast these Pearls to Swine,
to such as are blasphemers and contemners of God?

But why does Eliphaz call these the consolations of God? Did God administer
them to Job with his own hand, or did he speak to Job from Heaven? Some
conceive that though he and his Friends spoke them, yet Eliphaz calls them the
consolations of God, by an Hebraisme, because he judged them great
consolations. Thus in Scripture, The Mountain of God, Suas et sociorum
consolationes, vocat Dei consolationes non sine arrogantia and fastu. Drus.
and the River of God, are put for a great Mountain, and a great River; so
here. As if he had fayd, Thou have received many great consolations from us thy
Friends, and do thou account them small? But I rather take the sense
plainly, that he calls them so, because God is the author and giver, the
fountain and original from whom all consolations spring and flow.

The Consolations of God are twofold: First, Arising from good things already
exhibited to us. Secondly, From good things promised to us.


The Consolations of God in this place, are good things promised, or offered:
Promises are Divine conveyances of Consolation. The Friends of Job had made him
many promises, that he repenting, God would make his latter end better then his
beginning, etc. Hence Eliphaz tells him that he had slighted the consolations
of God. Any man who reads his story may wonder why he should: Surely Job was
not in case to refuse comfort, considering how he was stripped of all comfort.
The full soul indeed loatheth the honey Comb, but to the hungry soul, every
bitter thing is sweet; that is, those things which dainty palates distaste, he
eats very savourly. Job was kept short and low enough, he had nothing of
consolation left, either without or within; he was poor and sore without, he
was full of horror, and terror within: the arrows of the Almighty had even
drunk up his spirit, and laid all his comforts wast, and does he yet neglect or
undervalue comforts? It Is true, he had real consolations, as appears by that
profession of his assurance of Gods favor toward him, I know that I shall be
justified; yet he had no sensible consolations; his frequent complaints show he
had not. So then, the consolations of God (for esteeming which little he is
reproved) were the promises of consolation made to him in the name of God by
the Ministry of his Friends. Are the consolations of God small unto thee?

Hence observe:

First, That consolation is the gift, and proper work of God. Thou (says
David, Psalm. 71.21.) shall increase my greatness and comfort me on every side:
The Lord shall comfort Sion, he will comfort all he wast places (Is. 51.3.) And
again, As one whom his Mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and you shall
be comforted in Jerusalem. God comforts as a Mother, tenderly, and he comforts
as a Father, yea as a Master, effectually, I will comfort you, and ye shall be
comforted. As the corrections of God are effectual, and prosper in the work
for which they are sent, so also are his consolations. Ephraim said ( Jer.
31.18.) Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised. So every soul, whom God
comforts, shall say, Thou have comforted me, and I was comforted. This the
Apostle speaks out to the praise of God (2 Cor. 1.3, 4.) Blessed be God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of mercies, and the God of all
consolations; all consolation belongs to God; he has all comfort in his own
power, and dispose; there is not any creature in the World can give out the
least dram of comfort to us without the commission or leave of God; it is
possible for one man to give another man riches, but he cannot give him
comfort; man may give honor to man, but he cannot give him comfort. A man may
have a pleasant dwelling, a loving Wife, sweet Children, and yet none of these
a comfort to him.

The consolation of all our possessions and relations is from God: Whosoever
would have comfort, must trade to Heaven for it, that's a commodity can be found
upon no earthly coast, you may fetch in wealth from many coasts of the earth,
but you cannot fetch in comfort, till you address your selves to the God of
Heaven. We can procure our own sorrow quickly, but God only makes us to
rejoice; our releife from outward affliction or inward grief is the gift of
God. He only can comfort us in outward afflictions who can command the
creature, and he only can comfort us against our inward griefs, who can
convince the conscience. None can do either of these but God; therefore
consolations are from God. Luther spoke true, It is easier to make a World then
to comfort the conscience; the Hebrew phrase to comfort, used in diverse places
of the old Testament, is, To speak to the heart: Now God only can speak to
the heart; man can speak to the ear, he can speak words, but he can go no
further. Therefore the act and art of comforting belongs properly to God;
Christ is the true Noah: Lamech says of Noah, Genesis 5.29. This man shall
comfort us, concerning our work and the toil of our hands; it was not in Noah
to comfort but as God made him a comfort, and he was said to comfort as a type
of Christ, Christ is true comfort, He is comfort clothed in our flesh, he is
(as it were) comfort incarnate: Noah sent a Dove out of his Arc, which
returned with an Olive branch, Jesus Christ sends the holy Ghost who is called
the Comforter with the Olive branch of true peace to our wearied souls; and to
show that it is now the highest act of Christ's love and care as mediator, to
give comfort, he promised to send the holy Ghost, when himself was taking his
leave of the Church, in regard of any visible abode or bodily presence: being
ready to ascend and step into Heaven; he said, I will send the comforter. When
God rained fire and brimstone from Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah, it is said
by some of the Ancients, that he sent a Hell out of Heaven: But when he powers
the holy Spirit from Heaven upon his Sion, we may say he sends a heaven out of
heaven. Heaven above is nothing else but holy comfort, and the comforts of the
holy Spirit, are the only Heaven below.

How highly then ought we to esteem, how carefully to maintain communion with
God, who has all comfort; seeing comfort is more to us then all we have. If
we have comfort, let our estate be what it will we are well enough; comfort is
as the spring of our year, as the light of our day, as the Sun in our
Firmament, as the life of our lives. Have we not reason then to draw, yea, to
press nearer unto God, who has all comfort in his hand, and without whom the
best things cannot comfort us? Not our riches, nor our relations, not Wife, nor
Children, not health, nor beauty, not credit nor honor, none of these can
comfort us without God, and if God please he can make any thing comfort us; he
can make a crust of dry bread a feast of fat things, a cup of cold water, a
banquet of Wine to us. And as he can make our comforts crosses, so our cross a
comfort, as David speaks ( Psalm. 23.4.) Thy rod and thy staff comfort me, not
only the supporting staff, but the correcting rod shall comfort, if God
command it to be a comforter: Who would not maintain communion with this God
who can make a comfort of any thing, who can answer every cross with a
comfort; If we have a thousand crosses, God has ten thousand comforts; he can
multiply comforts faster then the World can multiply crosses.

Again, if God be the God of all consolation, then go to God for consolation;
as the Angel said to the women when they came to the Sepulcher enquiring for
Christ, Why seek ye the living among the dead, he is risen, he is not here: So
I may say, Why seek ye living comforts among dead or dying creatures; Seek
them there no longer. Job complains in this Book, When I said my bed shall
comfort me, then thou scarest me with dreams (Chap. 7.) Job went to a wrong
place, when he went to his bed for comfort; most souls miss of comfort,
because they go to a wrong place for it: one goes to his bed, another to his
friend for comfort, a third to his wife and Children, these, says he, shall
comfort me; alas, why seek ye the living among the dead, none of these can
comfort, though these may be means of comfort. Who or whatsoever is the
instrument, God is the author of all our comfort; whatsoever hand brings it,
God sends it; God (says Paul) who comfort those who are cast down,
comforted us by the coming of Titus (2 Cor. 7.6.) Titus was a good man and
brought good tidings, yet Paul does not say that the coming of Titus did not
comfort them; but, says Paul, God comforted us by the coming of Titus; It Is
not your friend who comforts you, but God who comforts you by the coming of
such a friend, when you are in sorrow; by sending in such relief, when you are
poor; by sending such medicines, when you are sick, such salves when you are
sore, such counsel when you are in doubt and know not what to do.

Once more, It is happy for Saints that consolation is in the hand of God; if
it were in the hand of the creature, sure they should have but little of it,
but it is in the hand of God. There are these four considerations which may
comfort Saints, that comfort is in the hand of God.

First, Considering his nature, he is willing and ready to do good; he is full
of compassion, and to show mercy pleases him more then it releeveth us.

Secondly, Considering his relation to his people: he is a Father. Will a
Father let a Child lie comfortless, when he can help him? he is our Husband,
he is our Friend, all relations provoke God to give out comfort to the Saints.

Thirdly, Considering his Omniscience and Omnipresence; he knows where the
shoe wrings, he knows what comfort we want; a friend (possibly) has the
comfort in his hand, which we need, and he may be willing to give it out unto
us, but he knows not wherein we are pinched; God tells Moses, I have seen, I
have seen the afflictions of my people in Egypt. And as he knows how it is
with us, so we are ever within his reach, he can lay his hand upon every joint
where we are pained, and put a Plaster upon every wound: here is our
happiness. Christ would take off his people from extraordinary cares about the
things of the World, by this argument, Your Father knows that ye have need of
these things, Matthew. 6.32. your Father who carries the purse knows your want.

Fourthly, Consider his Omnipotence, he is able to comfort; he can command, yea
create comforts, he can bring his comforts through an army of sorrows to a
poor soul, yea he can lead comfort through an Army of Devils and
temptations, to a poor soul; he is Almighty, there is nothing too hard for
him to do, nor is he hard to be entreated to do that which gives ease unto
his people.

Secondly, Observe:

Consolations rightly administered by men, are the consolations of God: While
man speaks, God commands; Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, speak comfortably
to Jerusalem, tell her that her warfare is accomplished, and her sin pardoned
(Isa. 40.1.) As all the counsels, reproves, and Doctrines which the Ministers
of Christ dispense according to the form of wholesome words delivered either
in the Law or Gospel, are the counsels, instructions, reproofs and Doctrins of
God; so also are their consolations. And that's the reason why God takes it so
ill at the hands of men, when his Messengers, who bring either instruction, or
consolation, are refused; because himself is refused when they are, and his
consolations are disesteemed when theirs are.

Thirdly, Observe:

To account the consolations of God small, is a very great sin: Moses rebukes
rebellious Korah and his confederates, for undervaluing the privilege which
they (as Levites) had to be near God in holy Services ( Numb. 16.9.) Seems it
a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel, has separated you from the
Congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself to do the service of
the Tabernacle? etc. If it were their sin to count it a small thing to be
called near to God in holy administrations, how great a sin is it in any man to
count it a small thing, that God draws near to him with heavenly consolations?
Though the consolations of God to us be small comparatively to what some others
have, yet we must not account any consolation of God small; and that upon two
grounds:

First, because of our own unworthiness; the least consolations are great,
considering how little we are, as Jacob speaks, ( Genesis 32.10.) I am not worthy
the least of all thy mercies: He thought little mercies too big for him,
because he was little in his own eyes, They who have great, yea any thoughts
of their own merits, lessen the mercies of God; but he who sees he deserves
nothing but ill, sees abundance of mercy in the smallest good.

Secondly, Smallest consolations are very great, because they proceed from a
great God. As no sin is small, though comparatively to another sin, it may be
small, because it is committed against the great God; so no consolation is
small because it comes from the great God. God puts an impresse of his own
greatness upon the least things that are done or given by him; though he give
but a penny, yet it has the image and superscription of him, our infinite and
eternal Caesar: therefore see you slight it not. As a good heart is careful
to perform the least duty, and to avoid the least sin, or as a good heart
calls no duty little, which God enjoynes nor sin little which God forbids, so a
good heart is thankful for the least mercy, and calls no consolation small,
which God, the great God sends.

Fourthly, Observe:

That great afflictions take away the sense of tendered mercies; Consolations
for the matter were offered unto Job, but his palate was so distempered with
the gall and wormwood of his afflictions, that he could not taste them.
Phineas his Wife regarded not the joyful news, that she had brought forth a
Man Child, while she was overwhelmed with sorrow, that the Ark of God was
taken. While the Israelites were under hard Taske-Masters in Egypt, they could
not attend to the voice of Moses and Aaron, who told them of deliverance; their
troubles and burdens were so heavy, that they looked upon Moses as a trouble,
or as a burden, when he came to mediate their release. And as the Idolatrous
Israelites who sacrificed their Children to Moloch, beat up Drumms, and used
loud-sounding-Instruments, to drown the cry of the poor Children, that they
might not be heard; so some afflictions cry so loud, and many cry so loud in
their afflictions, that they drown the sweet melody and music of those
consolations that are sounded in their ears. Great complaints render great
consolations small; Job was not without some blame in this, for though his
patience was great, yet had it been greater, he might have missed this
reproof from his Friends, Are the consolations of God small to thee?

And is there any secret thing with thee? The meaning appears thus, Et verbum
latens tecum. Heb.
Are the consolations of God which we have offered small unto thee, because
thou have some secret hidden thing in thy breast: This secret thing is opened
three ways.

First, in reference to comfort, as if he had said, Have thou some secret
comfort besides what we have offered, have thou consolations of thy own, which
cause thee to neglect the consolations of God? As in the Gospel, when the
Disciples prayed Christ to eat, he told them, I have meat to eat that ye know
not of (John 4.31, 32.) Christ had secret bread, Est ne apud te divinum aliquid
recenditum in mente tua, prae quo nostras consolationes Divinas contemnis?
Merc. Istae quas ab ipso Deo acceptas a ferrimus consolationes leviores sunt
quam ut eas probare posses: nimirum quod apud te quidpiam magis reconditum
delitescat. Bez. Aut aliquid abscondit eas apud te. Jun. i. e. Ita perstringit
oculos animi tui, ut illas non percipias, quai res involucris tectas, Jun.
Verba tua prava hoc prohibent Vulg. Apud te potius est incantatio and mendacium
etsi prae te veritatem seras. Rab. Abr.

(...) Occulium malum incantationem vel mendacium denotat.


his work was his food, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me: So
here, What? have thou meat which we know not of? Some hidden Manna beyond what
we have told thee of, that thou carest not for our provisions?

Secondly, others give the meaning thus, Have thou some secret conceit of thy
own wisdom, above ours? Or is there some unknown worth in thee, that
exempts thee from this general rule, or way of comfort; Do thou so abound
in thy own sense, that thou have no need of our Notions? Is all we speak
below thee?

Thirdly, they are supposed to aim at some secret sin or guilt, which
hindered and unfitted Job to take in their Cordialls and consolations, till it
were purged out, or vomited up by sound repentance.

So one renders the Text, Does any thing hide them with thee? The word
signifies to hide and cover (2 Samuel 19.4.) David covered his face: so here,
does somewhat hide, wrap up, and cover these consolations that thou can not
receive them? or what vayles the eye of thy mind, that thou can not behold
what we hold out to thee, or not find out the meaning of it? If our Gospel be
hid (says the Apostle) it is hid to those that are lost, in whom the God of
this World has blinded the eyes of them, etc. (2 Cor. 4.3, 4.) Thus Eliphaz
seems to bespeake Job. If the consolations of God be small to thee, does not
somewhat blind thy eyes? Does not some cloud hide them from thee? Does not
prejudice against us, or some close sin in thy self interrupt thy sight?

This is hinted by the old Latin Translator, who says, Thy evil words (or
the evil matter that is in thee) hinder this.

One of the Rabbis glosseth it thus, and the Original reaches it, Some lie,
some enchantment, or witchery has seized upon thee, though thou pretendest
truth. The Apostle speaks to this sense ( Gal. 3.1.) O foolish Galatians, who
has bewitched you, that you should not receive the truth: Witchery or
Enchantment gives a secret wound. Is there any secret thing with thee? Have
thou any secret comfort for thy self, any secret conceit of thy self, any
secret sin in thy bosom hindering the effectual working, or due prizing of
those cordialls which we have given thee?

The first of these secret things never stands in the way of receiving
consolation; he that has hidden comfort in him, will not refuse spoken
comforts; nor do I think that Eliphaz aimed at that, unless in scorn, as
some resolve it: Malo in bonum sumi, licet hoc in eum Eliphaz dicat, eum
ridens. Merc.
but rather at one of or both the latter, though mistaken in both. Yet his
suspicion gives us a ground for these two Observations.

First, That a man who is full of his own wisdom, is not fit to receive
instruction, counsel, or consolation from others; Intus existens prohibet
alienum.
that which is within hinders that which comes from without: When a man thinks
himself wiser then his teachers, he will not be taught, nor learn wisdom by
them. Some might have known much, if they had not presumed they knew enough.
There is no greater impediment of knowledge, then an opinion of it.

Secondly, Observe, A sin kept close, or secret within us, hinders the effect
and working of the Word: Though comforts, and counsels are given, they will not
operate, where secret corruption lies at heart; the filthiness and corruption
of the stomach, hinders digestion, till it be purged out: Physicians remove ill
humors before they prescribe Cordialls, else they do but nourish the discase.
It Is so in Spiritualls; the Apostle Peter gives the rule (1 Epist. 2.1.)
Wherefore laying aside all guile, hypocrisy, and envy, and evil speaking, as
new born Babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby.
As if he had said, Till you cast out these, you will never thrive under the
Word; if a man be to sow Seed in his Garden, he will pull up the Weeds, and
throw away the Stones, else the Seed will not spring up to perfection. The
Prophet tells the Jews ( Jer. 5, 25.) Your sins hinder good things from you:
as sin hinders good from coming to us, so it hinders the Word from working
good in us. Though the proper business of the Word be to cast out, or pull up
this secret sin, yet there is a great stop given it while any secret sin is
nourished, or not cast out. That Is the reason why so many precious promises
take not upon the heart, some sin, some corruption obstructs their operation;
and (like the thief in the Candle) wastes away their strength and light.

As the Lord said to Joshua when the people of Israel fled before the men of
Ai, There is some accursed thing among you, therefore they cannot stand before
their Enemies. So I may say, when any stand up against the Word of God, or
resist the consolations which are offered them; sure there is some accursed
thing, some hidden Wedge of stolen Gold, or some Babylonish Garment treasured
in, or wrapped about your hearts, and therefore ye can neither see nor submit to
the counsels of God for your good.

This is a useful truth for us, though an undue charge on Job; and yet his
Friend proceeds (if a higher charge can be) to charge him higher, as will
appear in the two Verses following.

JOB, CHAP. 15. Verse. 12, 13. Why does thine heart carry thee away? and what
does thine eyes wink at?

That thou turnest thy spirit against God, and let such words go out of
thy mouth? (...) admirantis est; (...) Capere, sumere, capit pro rapit,
flectit, allicit. (...) est animus (...), q. d. permittis te abripiendum and
transversion agendum affectu tuo nimis animoso. Quis te furor cordis exagitat,
quae te extra te rapit sapientiae jactantia. Pined. Tam superbus apud te es ut
vix temet ipsum capere possit; nec quidem tui ipsius capax es. Bold.



ELiphaz insists still upon that unpleasant subject of reproof, the fifth
ground whereof here proposed, is Jobs over-confident sticking to his own
Principles, or his overweening his own opinion. This reproof is couched in
the 12. and 13. Verses.

Verse. 12. Why does thy heart carry thee away?
He speaks by way of Question, or as some expound him, by way of admiration;
as if he had said, It is strange, even a wonder to me, that thy heart should
thus carry thee away: The word which we translate, to carry away, signifies to
take up, or barely to take, and lay hold upon; Why does thy heart? the heart is
the whole inward man; here more specially, the affections; Why do thy
affections, master thy judgment, why are thy passions too hard for thy reason?
Others give the sense thus, How can thy heart hold thee? As if Job had grown
too big for himself; as if he had been so proud and arrogant, so transported
with self-conceit, that he could not contain himself, and keep his bounds,
or as if he had not stowage enough for his own thoughts. A third, thus (which
comes near the same sense) What does thy heart attribute or ascribe to thee?
Sure thy heart does give thee some great titles, such as these, Job the wise,
Job the holy, the just, the sincere; thy heart sets thee out sure, Possit per
dativum ita verti, quid attribuit tibi cor tuum. Bold. Quid docet te cor tuum.
Rab. Sol. (...) significat doctrinam sed ita dicitur a discendo potius quam a
docendo. Drus. Quid docuit te cogitatio tua, Targ.
and gildes thee over with attributes beyond thy deserving.

Master Broughton following one of the Rabbis, presents us with a different
translation from either of these, What Doctrine can thy heart give thee, or
what can thy heart teach thee? The word which we render to take, to carry, or
hold up a thing, signifies also to learn or teach Doctrine, but rather to
learn then to teach, as Grammarians tell us, which somewhat abates the
clearenesse of that version; yet the Chalde Paraphrase follows the same sense,
What has thy own thought taught thee? What learnest thou there, as if Eliphaz
had said, Thou have an evil heart, and surely an ill Master will teach but ill
Doctrine; when the heart is inditing of a good matter (Psalm. 45.) then we may
learn good lessons from the heart: and then we speak most effectually to the
hearts of others, when we speak from our own hearts, they having first been
spoken to by the spirit of God. But a corrupt heart can teach no better then it
has, and that is corrupt Doctrines. These are truths, yet too much strained
for upon this Text, and therefore I pass from them, and abide by the ordinary
signification of the word as we read it, Why does thy heart take thee up, or
carry thee away; as if he had said, Thy heart has seized upon thee, and
arrested thee, thou art led away prisoner, or captive by the violence and
impetuousnesse of thy own spirit.

The word is applied ( Ezekiel. 23.14.) to the motion of the spirit of God, sent
unto Ezekiel to instruct him; The spirit lifted me up, or caught me away; that
which the good spirit did unto Ezekiel (not only upon his spirit, but upon his
body, for he was corporally carried away from the place where he was) that the
heart of Job (as Eliphaz conceived) did unto him, it lifted him up, and carried
him away. There is a kind of violence in the allurements and inticings of the
heart. As a man is said to be carried away by the ill counsels of others, so
also by his own.

In the former sense the word is used, Prove. 6.25, Where Solomon advising to
take heed of the Harlot, says he, Keep thee from the evil Woman, from the
flattery of the tongue of a strange Woman; lust not after her in thy heart,
neither let her take thee with her eye lids: There he makes use of this word,
let her not take thee, or let her not carry thee away upon her eye lids, let
not her wanton eye flatter thee to the sin of wantonness and uncleanness. As
the eye of a whorish Woman, so the whorish heart of a man, often takes and
carries him away.

Hence observe:

The heart has power over, and is too hard for the whole Man; Passions hurry
our hearts, and our hearts hurry us; and who can tell whither his heart will
carry him, or where it will set him down, when once it has taken him up. This
is certain, it will carry every man beyond the bounds of his duty, both to God
and man: Take it more distinctly in these three particulars.

The heart quickly carries us beyond the bounds of grace.

Secondly, the heart often carries us beyond the bounds of reason; When
passion works much, reason works not at all.

Thirdly, it may carry us beyond the bounds of honesty, yea of modesty: It Is
very dangerous to commit our selves to the conduct of passion; that (unless
kept under good command) will soon run us beyond the line both of Modesty and
of Honesty, of Reason, and of Grace. He that is carried away thus far must
make a long journey of repentance, before he can return and come back, either
to God or to himself. Some have been carried visibly away by the Devil, by an
evil spirit without them (if God give commission or permission, the Devil can
easily do it) very many are carried away by the evil spirit within them. An
evil heart is as bad as the Devil; the evil spirit without, and the evil
spirit within, carry us both the same way, and that is quite out of the way.

Consider further how the heart carries us away, even from spiritual duties
and holy services; and this is not only the case of carnal men (who are given
up to their hearts lusts) but of the Saints; their hearts are continually
lifting at them, and sometimes they are carried quite away from Prayer, and
from hearing the Word: the heart lifts the man up, and steals him out of the
Congregation, while his body remains there, the body sits still, but the
mind, which is the man, is gone, either about worldly business and designs,
or about worldly pleasures and delights. He stirs not a foot, nor moves a
finger, and yet he is carried all the World over: He visits both the Indies,
yet steps not over his own threshold. Thus the heart being carried away,
carries the man away. And that's the reason why God calls so earnestly, (...)
Cum omni custodia.
My Son give me thy heart; for where our hearts go, we go, or we are carried
with them; Keep thy heart with all diligence (Prove. 4.24.) or, With all
keeping, or above all keeping; it must have double keeping, double guards,
keep, keep, watch, watch, thy heart will be gone else, and thou will go with
it; if thou look not to thy heart, thy heart will quickly withdraw it self,
and draw thee along also: Why does thy heart carry thee away? is a deserved
check upon every man, when his heart does so; and Let not thy heart carry thee
away, is a necessary caution for every man, lest his heart should do so. Jobs
heart was too busy with him, though not so busy as Eliphaz judged, when he
thus checked him, with, Why does thy heart carry thee away?

And what does thine eye wink at? But is it a fault to wink with the eye;
(...), nutu utor, quia nutus ficri solet vel capite, vel oculis.
it is said ( Joh. 13.24.) that Peter beckned to, or winked at John (the Greek
word signifies an inviting gesture by the whole head, or by the eye) he winkt
at him I say, to ask Christ who it was of whom he spoke: There was no fault in
that, but Eliphaz finds fault with this: What was the supposed fault? There is
a twofold faulty winking.

First, When we wink at faults, our own faults, or the faults of other men,
to bear with, or approve them.

Secondly, When we wink at the virtues and good deeds of others to slight or
undervalue them; possibly Eliphaz taxes Job for both these, as if he winked at
his own faults, (...) Est vox hoc tantum loco reperta, cujus significationem,
Rab, Mardochai dicit esse insinuationem vel indicationem. Quid annuunt quid
innuunt oculi tui.
or would not see them, and that he winked at their faithful dealings, as
slighting, or not regarding them: Yet further and more distinctly.

The word which we translate to wink, is found only in this text all the
Bible over. It properly signifies to insinuate by the eye, to speak or make
significant tokens by the eye; there is a language of the eye, as well as of
the tongue; here Jobs eye gave some ill language to the eye or apprehension of
Eliphaz. There are various opinions about it.

^^^st, Some interpret it, as a note of opposition against, or of
dissatisfaction with the counsels which his Friends gave him, as was lately
hinted. Shutting of the eye, imports shutting of the mind, or a refusal of
what is spoken. When God judicially closed the eyes of the Jews, Aegre, qui
sibi sapientes videntur, ferunt, sive concionentur, sive disceptent, non auditi
cum exteruis modestiae attentionis and aestimationis signis. In auditione vitia
sunt supercilia, torvitas and ^istitia vulius obtuitus vagus, nulus, etc. Plut.
lib. de And. (...), de fixis, immotis intentis oculis esse interpretatar. Nictu
oculi prodis nos nostrasque orationes a te contemni. Pined. Cordis contum^cia
ex oculis tuis emicat. Nictu te ostendis elatum. Merc. In oculis veteribus
religio fuit, siquidem in iis imago hominis est and tacitus sermo mentis. Bold.
In oculis, loculis and poculis, homo cognoscitur. Sent. Hebr.
saying to the Prophet ( Isa. 6.10.) Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; this showed the shutting of their
minds against the truth: so also does a voluntary or an affected shutting of
the eye in some men, though in others it is an act of stronger attention or
intention of their spirits to what is spoken, which some take to be the English
of Jobs winking, as we shall see a little after.

Secondly, This winking with the eye, is expounded by others, though not as an
opposition against what he heard, yet as the gesture of a negligent and
careless hearer. They who speak, take it ill to have either ill looks, or not
to be looked upon by their hearers. The attentiveness of the ear may be much
discerned by the eye: One of the old moral Philosophers, in his discourse
about hearing, numbers winking among the vices and offensive behaviors of a
Hearer. When the Lord Christ Preached ( Luke 4.20.) It is said, That the eyes
of all that were in the Synagogue were fastened on him. A fastened eye is the
note of a fixed heart, as a wandering eye is of a wandering heart. They fastened
their eyes upon him, as if they meant to hear with their eyes as well as with
their ears. A winking eye is a moveable and an unsettled eye, and therefore may
well be the discoverer of an unsettled Spirit.

Thirdly, This winking with the eye is also a sign of disdain and scorn. As
if Eliphaz had said, The pride of thy heart sparkles at thine eye; while we
are counselling and comforting thee, thou art scorning us. The Ancients were
very critical about the eye, much of a man may be seen at his eye. As a man
sees, so he is seen by his own eyes. The frame of the heart appears much in
the eye; a joyful or a sorrowful frame of heart, an humble or a proud frame
of heart, a contented, or discontented, an amicable, or a scornful frame of
heart appears at the eye. As the ear and nostrills of the Horse, discover him
most, according to the rules of Naturalists, so the eye of man is the greatest
discoverer of man, whether we consider the constitution or the actions of it.
And that this action of winking, is an argument of a scornful spirit, or the
action of a scorner, appears from David's Petition, or deprecation ( Psalm.
35.19.) Let not them that are mine Enemies wrongfully rejoice over me, neither
let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause; it may seem to be a
strange piece of prayer, why would not David have his enemy wink? What was that
to him? The meaning is this, let not mine Enemies have any occasion to scorn
and deride me, to boast and insult over me.

There are two sins which are very visible in the eye: The first is wantonness
( Isa. 3.16.) Because the Daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with
stretched forth necks, and wanton eyes, the Hebrew is, Deceiving with their
eye; and the Apostle Peter in his second Epistle, Chap. 2.14. gives this
character of some, They have eyes full of adultery, you may perceive the
filthiness and uncleanness of their hearts staring out of their eyes. The
second sin which is so visible in the eye, is Pride; Solomon speaks of a proud
look ( Prove. 6.17.) Six things ths Lord hates; yea, seven are an abomination
to him; And the first of the seven, is, A proud look; the Hebrew is, Haughty
eyes: Pride and haughtiness are seated, yea, conspicuously enthroned in the
eye.

Fourthly, These words, Why winkest thou with thine eye? Ad simulatam quandam
innocentiae significationem and sanctitatis specimen, quod hypocrism redolet
referri potest.
are expounded as a reproof of hypocrisy and seeming holiness; as if Eliphaz
had said, Thou look very demurely, and innocently, as if (according to our
old Proverb) Butter would not melt in thy mouth, or as if thou were speaking
familiarly to God. For as lifting up the eyes or looking to Heaven is a gesture
of holy worship. ( John 17.1.) Then Jesus lift up his eyes to Heaven: So also
is winking with the eye. It is very usual with many to shut or wink with their
eyes in prayer, that so their spirits may be more composed, and freer from
distraction. It Is not unlikely that Eliphaz observed Job winking with his eyes,
as if he had set himself to seek God; this provoked him, What? such a one as
thou, a hypocrite, a wicked man, what thou go to God? Will thou wink with thy
eyes, as if thou were wrapped up in some Divine meditation; whereas we have
ground rather to conclude that thou art devising mischief: There are two Texts
in the Proverbs, which give some light to this Interpretation, Prove. 6.13. He
winketh with his eye, he speaks with his feet, teaches with his fingers,
frowardness is in his heart, he devises mischief continually: Solomon puts a
winking eye and a froward mischiefe-devising heart together: As if he had said,
A wicked man (for of him he speaks in the former Verse) winkes with the eye,
as if he had some high rapture, whereas his mind is set upon mischeife, and
pursuing the worst of evils. Again, Prove. 10.10. He that winketh with his eye
causes sorrow; but how does a man that winketh with the eye cause sorrow? what
dependence is there between these two, sorrow, and winking, that the one
should cause the other? These words, he that winketh with his eye, are the
description of a deceitful man; such a one may cause sorrow enough, Qui annuit
oculo suo cum fraud.
both to himself and others. Solomon intends, not a simple, but a subtle sly
winking with the eye; and so the Syriake reads it; He who winketh with his
eye deceitfully, causes sorrow: Deceit makes the deceived sorrowful, and it
will make the Deceiver sorrowful; he must either be sorrowful to repentance,
or feel the sorrow of punishment.

Fifthly, This winking with the eye, is conceived to be a metaphor taken from
those who shoot with Guns or Bows, Quid collimant oculi tui, Jun. Metaphora a
jaculatoribus sumpta. id.
Gunners and Archers wink when they shoot, that they may take aim the better:
The contracting of the sight, strengthens it. So here, What do thou wink at?
that is, what do thou aim at? The eye of a man's mind aims at some mark in
meditation, and hence it is usual for a man in vehement meditation, to wink
with his eye. As if Eliphaz had said, surely thou have some great design, some
grand plot in thy brain, thou pretendest to some deep wisdom, or unheard of
policies; thou have set up some fair mark before thy fancy, and thou will be
sure to hit it; what is it that thou aymest at? We find the phrase used in
this sense, Prove. 16.30. He shuts his eye to devise froward things, moving
his lips he brings evil to pass; he shuts his eyes, as if he would make
his thoughts more steady and fixed, to hit or reach that froward device which he
is casting about how he may effect. And as a wicked man shuts his eyes to
devise froward, that is, sinful things, so a good man shuts his eyes (lest
variety of objects should divert or call off his mind) when he is devising and
studying what is best both for himself and others. Et quasi magna cogitans
attonitos habes oculo^. Vulg.
The rendering of the Vulgar Latin, though it be far from the letter of the
Original, and is rather a Paraphrase then a Tranasltion, yet it reaches this
sense fully, Wherefore does thy heart carry thee away, Oculos in caelo defigere
solent cogitabundi and quibus gravis inest solicitudo. Sanct.
and why liftest thou up thine eyes, as if thou were thinking of some great
matter? Or as if the affairs of Kingdoms, and States depended upon thy care,
or were committed to thy trust.

All these interpretations are serviceable to the Text before us; and though we
cannot positively and particularly resolve which of them was here intended by
Eliphaz, yet considering that his scope was to reprove Job, we may take in the
sense of them all, and conclude that he censured Job in this one word of all
those miscarriages of the heart, which may be signified at the eye; as appears
by the inference which he makes in the next Verse: For having said, What does
thy eye wink at? he presently subjoynes:

Verse. 13. That thou turnest thy spirit against God, and let such words go
out of thy mouth?
So that this Verse is an explication of the former, Explicationem continet
praecedentis versiculi. Bold.
and gives us more clearly what Eliphaz meant by the Carrying away of the
heart, and the winking of the eye: His heart is carried out of all bounds, who
turns his spirit against God: His eye winks sinfully whose mouth presently
upon it speaks unduely. Thou winkest with thy eye, thou art very thoughtfull,
and what the fruit or birth of thy thoughts is, we may discern by thy speech,
while thou let such words go out of thy mouth.

Thou turnest thy spirit against God. As if he had said, In stead of humbling
thy self under the punishment of thy sin, thou with an incensed mind
contestest against God himself: and though while he says against God, he does
not mean God directly, but God in his judgments and counsels in his Word or
in his Works; yet this is a very high charge, one of the highest that is in
the whole Book, but very unjust. Indeed Job used some passionate speeches to
his Friends, and these Eliphaz judges to proceed from an opposition against
God.

Thou turnest thy Spirit against God. There is a twofold turning the spirit
against God:

First, Natural, Romans 8.7. Enmity is the turning of the spirit. The wisdom
or lust of the flesh is enmity against God.

Secondly, Improved when we heighten this opposition in our practice, and are
enemies to God in our minds, or Gods hearty enemies by wicked works, Col.
1.21.

Quod rediri feceris ad Deum spiritum tuum. Heb. Quia respondit ad Deum
spiritus tuus. Mont. Pedire facit verbum qui re spondet. Drus.
The Hebrew is, Thou make thy spirit to return to God, which is expounded two
ways; first, thou make thy spirit to turn upon, or against God: Secondly,
thy spirit answers or replyeth upon God; both meet in one meaning; for though
there may be a turning away of the spirit without answering, yet (in one sense)
all answers are the turning of our spirit: if any man ask a question, the
answer is the return of his mind who makes the answer, so some render, Why
does thy spirit return answer to God; as if he rebuked him for his boldness
in replying. Thy spirit returns upon God, if he speak one word, thou will have
two; in that sense the word is used, Titus 2.9. where the Apostle giving rules
(among other relations) to Servants, charges them, Servants be obedient to your
own Masters, and please them well in all things, not answering again. But, is
it a fault for a Servant, when asked a question, to make an answer? no, it were
a fault not to answer. The meaning is, that a Servant being reproved for a
fault must not answer; that is, his spirit must not rise, and return against
his Master; or if a Servant be directed to do any warrantable work, he must
not answer again; that is, he must not contradict or murmr at the orders
which he has received, but address himself to the fulfilling of them; this
is the answering again, reproved as a fault in Servants, which is rather gain
saying then answering, as we put in the Margent of our Bibles: in which sense,
answering is taken here according to this interpretation. Thy spirit answers
God, or turns against him. We may clear it also by that of the Apostle ( Romans
9.20.) Where having showed the absolute sovereignty of God in his Decrees and
purposes, by the example of Jacob and Esau, as also by that of Pharaoh: He
concludes, Verse. 18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
whom he will he hardneth: Saint Paul soresaw that this Doctrine would raise a
great deal of dust, and cause many to turn their spirits against God, which
he thus represents ( Verse. 19.) Thou will say unto me, Why does he yet find
fault? for who has resisted his will? Nay, but O man who art thou that
replyest against God? What? will thou chop logic with God himself? Will thou
(as the Margent says) answer again, or dispute with God? Hold thy peace,
quiet thy self, What Is the matter that thou turnest thy spirit against God?

Spirit is here put for the will, thoughts, and counsels, Spiritus pro
arrogantia. Latin diciur magnos gerere animos qui superbia tumet. Merc. Quid
tumet adversus Deum spiritus tuus? Vulg. Quid torva convertis in caelum Lumina?
quid in Deum refundis stomacum and evocas conceptam iram. Pined. Animum
indignatione accensum. Jun. Omnem spiritum suum depromit stultus. i. e. iram.
Aben Ezra. Rege animum. i. e. iram. Horat.
of Man, clothed and elated with arrogance, stoutnesse, and pride: In all
languages, Spirit imports that which is high. And to say, Such a one is a man
of spirit, notes not only the activenesse of that man, but often his pride and
haughtiness.

Besides, Spirit is sometimes put for indignation, for fury, and wrath; in all
which acceptions, the word may be rendered here, Thou turnest thy spirit, that
is, thy anger and wrath, thy fury and indignation against God. So the word is
used, Isa. 25.4. When the spirit, or blast of the terrible ones, is as a storm
against the Wall; that is, while the fury of the terrible ones is in its
highest march and motion, God promises to be a strength to the poor, a
strength and a refuge to the needy in his distress: So Prove. 29.11. A fool
utters all his mind, or all his spirit; that is, all his anger, he lets it
out, and discovers himself presently; but a wise man (if there be cause of
anger) keeps it in till afterward; that is, till a fit season. He has a
retentive faculty which a Fool has not. Now, in which sense soever of these
explained, we understand Spirit in the present Text, the charge is as high as
it can go upon any man, when it is said, He turns his Spirit against God.

Hence Observe:

To turn the spirit against God is the very spirit of ungodliness; there is
no greater wickedness then this. A godly man may do an act which is against
God, but his spirit cannot act against God; that's the character of the wicked.
A godly man delights in the Law of God according to the inward man, whilst the
outward man sins against the Law of God; an ungodly man turns his inward man
against the Law of God, while his outward man pretends obedience to it; and as
it is an act of highest disobedience, so of the proudest pride to turn the
spirit against God. The Vulgar Latin translates it well, Why does thy spirit
swell against God, Thou have an impostumation in thy spirit against God; yea it
is not only an act of the proudest pride, but of the maddest madness to turn
the spirit against God; Furorem erupisti ante dominum. Sept.
so the Septuagint gives it, Thou have caused thy fury or thy madness to
break forth before God; he that acts against God is a mad man indeed, Will ye
provoke the Lord, are you stronger then he? is the Apostles chiding question to
such mad men: are you so mad after your lusts, has sin made you so foolish,
Have you lost both grace and reason at once? that you dare thus provoke the
Lord, and challenge the Almighty? God resists the proud, and the proud assault
him; Grace turns the spirit to God, repentance is the return of our spirits
to God; then what is the turning of our spirits against God, but a clear
demonstration of a totally impenitent and graceless Spirit?

Again, when Eliphaz says, Job turned his Spirit against God, he does not
mean it of a direct or professed opposition against God, as if Job had openly
defied him, and blasphemed his Name; but his meaning is, that Job showing so
much impatience and unsatisfiednesse of spirit, under the dealings of God with
him, did not submit to God, as he ought. Eliphaz (I conceive) did not so much
as suspect that Job turned his spirit immediately, or as we say, point blanke
against God himself, but only against his dispensations.

Hence observe:

That while we speak, or our hearts rise up against the dealings of God with
our selves or others, we may be said to turn our spirits against God himself:
Many who think they have not neglected Christ, will be found to have neglected
him, because they have neglected those by whom, or that wherein Christ is
offered. The Evangelist brings in Christ speaking thus ( Matthew. 25.) I was
hungry and ye fed me not, thirsty and ye gave me no drink; they to whom he
speaks wonder at this, Lord (say they) when saw we thee hungry and gave thee
no meat, or thirsty and gave thee no drink, surely we have not been guilty of
such a wickedness: Yea, says Christ, In as much as ye did it not to one of
these, ye did it not to me; when ye refused to feed these, ye refused to
feed me, I was in these, and these were in me. Now in the same manner many will
say, when we charge them with turning their spirits against God, with fighting
against, and opposing God: Who? we oppose God? we never opposed God as we know
of; yea, peradventure, they will say, we have honored God, and do you charge
us that we have turned our spirit against God? to many such God will say, In as
much as ye opposed my word, and murmured against my works, in as much as ye
were angry with my dispensations, and discontented with what I have done, ye
have turned your spirit against me. We may become guilty of this sin before we
think of it; for as there is a direct and litterall contending with God, so an
equivalent, or constructive contending with him. As some men commit plain open
Treason against a State, but others commit only constructive Treason: It Is so
here, the God of Heaven knows when spirits turn against him directly, and
when by consequence, and he will take vengeance not only of direct and avowed,
but also of consequentiall and constructive Treason against his Sovereignty,
unless the offender repent and be humbled before him. He will judge thousands
at the last day, for opposing him, who, it may be, in some things have pleaded
for him; yea, who have in some things not only acted, but suffered for him;
though usually when the spirit of any man turns against God, that man's works
and words turn against him too: So Eliphaz further taxes Job in the latter
clause of the Verse.

And let such words go out of thy mouth? As if he had said, Such stuff as
thou have in thy heart, even such flows out of thy mouth; the word Such is
added by most Translators; the Hebrew is, And let words go out of thy
mouth; it is no fault to let words go out of the mouth: it is no sin to speak,
but to speak such or such words, may be very sinful; and therefore we, and
others, for explication sake, (...) Faeminine vel ut animum muliebri impotentia
labo antem fodicet, aut forma Chaldaica. Pungit etiam voce (...) Logos, nugas
verba? Coc.
make this supplement, Such words; But what words were they? Eliphaz does not
quote any passages in his speech, but leaves them as we and others translate
under a term of general distaste, Such words; as if they were not worth the
naming, or as if no epithet could be found worthless enough to name them by.
For as when Ezra would describe a deliverance in the realilty of it beyond
words, he does not tell us what it was, but says only, Seeing our God has
given us such deliverance as this, (Ez. 9.13.) So when Eliphaz would describe
words in the vanity or sinfulness of them below words, he does not tell us
what they were, but says only, Such words as these; yet possibly the words he
means were these, Why have thou set me as a mark, so that I am a burden to my
self (Chap. 7.20.) or these ( Chap. 9.30.) If I wash me with Snow water, and
make my hands never so clear, yet thou will plunge me in the ditch, or these (
Chap. 13.26.) Thou writest bitter things against me, and thou make me to
possess the iniquities of my youth: These, or such as these, were the words
which Eliphaz leaves under this note of disdain, Such words. Yet these Eliphaz
should have mollified with a charitable construction, and not have sharpened his
own tongue against them, much less should he have interpreted them, as the
turning of Jobs spirit against God himself. For as some draw near to God with
their lips, and give him smooth words, while their hearts are far from him,
and their spirits turned against him: So others may seem to depart from God
with their lips, and give him harsh language, while their hearts are near, and
their spirits cleave unto him.

I shall further give you a fourfold character of these words, suitable to the
misprision which Eliphaz and his Friends had of him all along. Such words, or
words so apprehended, must needs sound harshly in their ears, and in the cares
of any man fearing God.

First, Proud words of himself, insisting upon his own righteousness as they
conceived, for in the next words Eliphaz says, What is man that he should be
clean? they thought Job spoke much to paint and bedeck himself with his own
goodness and innocence.

Secondly, Blasphemous words of God, though not directly, yet by consequence,
against his works and dealings.

Thirdly, Reproachful, scornful words against them, as if they were neither
able nor worthy to be his counsel; You are the men, and wisdom shall dye
with you.

Fourthly, False words upon the whole matter in controversy, maintaining (as
Eliphaz judged) contrary to the truth; that he was not punished for his sin.
Words under this fourfold notion are reproveable and sinful enough; such
Eliphaz esteemed the words of Job to be, proud, blasphemous, reproachful,
false, Why let thou such words as these go out of thy mouth?

Hence Observe:

First, Passion within will vent it self by words without, when the heart is
carried away, and the spirit turned against God, no marvel if the tongue be
carried away, and the words of such a man be turned both against God, his truth
or people.

Secondly, Note:

Our words are suitable to our spirits; some can dissemble much, and speak
golden words, while themselves are dross; but ordinarily, our words are such
as we are: The vile person will speak villainy, (Isa. 32.6.) A man that is all
for the World, speaks worldly (1 John 4.5.) They are of the World, therefore
speak they of the World. Every man is of the World so, as that he is a part of
the World, but some are so of the World, that the World is all them; they who
are thus of the World must needs speak of the World if they speak any thing,
for they have nothing else to speak of. Thus a covetous man speaks
covetously, and a proud man proudly ( Jerem. 43.2.) Some told the Prophet to
his face, Thou speak falsely, the Lord our God has not sent thee to say, Go
not into Egypt to sojourne there; These were proud words indeed, but who spoke
them? The text tells us, Then spoke Azariah the Son of Hoshaniah, and all the
proud men: The proud men spoke proudly; so on the contrary, a sober man will
speak soberly, an humble man humbly; The poor speak supplications, says
Solomon; rich men speak their commands, poor men speak their wishes and
desires.

Thirdly, Observe:

He that dares to speak evil, is arrived at a great height of evil: Eliphaz
puts this as an effect of a heart turned against God; such words as these, show
that thou art not only a sinful man, but impudent in sinning. For though an
evil heart is worse then an evil tongue, and an ill thought then an evil
word; yet when ill words spring from ill thoughts, and are as branches growing
from the root of an evil heart, this shows a man hightened in sin; Sin has
got the mastery of the heart when it freely vents it self at the tongue. Some
keep their sins down by hypocrisy, and some by common modesty; they are
either so cunning that they will not, or so bashful that they dare not speak
out the filth that lies within. But they are beyond, not only modesty, but
hypocrisy, whose tongues can speak all the evil that is in their heart;
though the sin of the heart be worse then the sin of the tongue, yet when
tongue sins are steept in the puddle of a corrupt heart, they are most
unsavory: David sinned when he said, in his have, all men are liars: How
greatly then do they sin who tell lies at their leisure, and speak evil
with deliberation. That which is said in have, is said by the tongue alone,
without the privity of the heart, but the heart is always privy to that which
is said at leisure. The Prophet taxes those, the show of whose countenance did
testify against them (Is. 3.9.) They fall justly under as severe a censure,
the sound of whose tongues does testify against them, for they also (as it
follows in the Prophet) declare their sin as Sodom, they hid it not. Further,
this also argues the evil of evil speaking, because it wrongs others, and
infects the Auditors: The vanity or error of the mind spoken out, is
contagious; better keep it in, then speak it out, but both are naught: it is
only good, when we purge it out. Though it be some allay and lessening, yet it
is no excuse for sin, that we keep it in; God hates it, let it lie as close
as it will; and though a sin kept close, does not hurt others; yet it is not
only hurtful, but deadly to its keeper. They only are out of danger, who as
they do not let evil go out of the door of their mouths, so not lodge in the
chambers of their heart.

Thus I have opened the charge contained in this part of the Chapter; in all
which, Eliphaz has reproved the speech of Job, as vain, empty, proud,
passionate, and erroneous. He now proceeds to show him (as he supposed) the
error of his opinion, and to confute it.

JOB, Chap. 15. Verse. 14, 15, 16. What is man that he should be clean? and he
that is borne of a Woman, that he should be righteous?

Behold he puts no trust in his Saints; yea, the Heavens are not clean in
his sight:

How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like water?


ELiphaz has done reproving Job for his unprofitable words and uncomely
carryage; Jam rem aggreditur, and Jobi praecipuum firmamentum quo ille
nitebatur evertit, quod ille se innocentem and justum diceret Qua front inquit
^audes id dicere. Merc.
he now proceeds to convince him of his supposed error in judgment, and
unsound opinion; namely, That he boasted himself free from error in practice,
and sound at heart: This he looked upon as the Bulwark in which Job defended
himself, and against this he now raises his battery to beat it down. And this
takes up the second part of the Chapter, which I called Confutation.

Verse. 14. What is man that he should be clean?
As if he had said, Though I should grant that thou art not conscious to thy
self of any crime or wickedness acted, for which thou art thus afflicted, yet
this is enough to prove thee a sinner, that thou art a man, and that thou art
unrighteous, because thou art borne of a woman; What is man that he should be
clean, and he that is borne of a woman that he should be righteous?

What is man? He speaks contemptuously, What is man? As Hiram said of the
Cities which Solomon assigned him, What Cities are these which thou have given
me my brother? And he called them the Land of Cabul, that is, displeasing, or
dirty (1 Kings 9.13.) Thus Eliphaz speaks of man, as if he were displeased
with the sight of him, or remembered only the dust and clay out of which he was
made, What is man (my friend Job) that he should be clean?

Job had spoken the same language before ( Chap. 7.17.) What is man that thou
art thus mindful of him, etc. He also empties man of all worth, which should
attract the least respect from God upon him: What is man? puts a fivefold
slight upon man.

First, In his nature: Secondly, In his birth. Thirdly, In the matter out of
which he was made. Fourthly, In reference to his present condition. Fifthly,
and chiefly, In reference to his corruption, or sinful depravation, What is
man that he should be clean?
But had Job any where asserted himself clean? Did he not assert his own
uncleanness, while he proclaimed that Negative Question ( Chap. 14. v. 4.) Who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, not one? Why then does Eliphaz
charge Job with this boast of cleanness, who never thought himself clean, as
his discourse every where demonstrates, but under two notions: First, as
righteous by another, or through Faith in the Messiah: Secondly, as not
scandalous to others by any notorious crime, or conscious to himself of any
close hypocrisy; in any other sense then this, Job never asserted himself
clean, and in this he was, yea every believer is clean. Yet Eliphaz fastens
it upon him, as if he had trimmed up himself with his own ornaments, or had
advanced the Doctrine of Selfe-perfection.

Hence observe in general.

That, When persons are engaged in a dispute, specially in a difficult
controversy, they seldom understand, but seldomer report the truth of each
others position.

Calvino-turcismus. Hun. Calvinus Judaizans. Osiand.
Some of Calvin's adversaries called his Doctrine by the odious names of
Turcisme, and Judaisme: And the Papists call us Solifidians, as if we denied
all good works, because we affirm that a man is justified (though not by that
faith which is alone) yet by Faith alone without works. Job indeed had spoken
much to vindicate himself, but he spoke much more to abase, and lay himself
low in the sight of God; and therefore Eliphaz might have made a fairer
collection for him, then this, that he affirmed himself clean.

What is man, etc. The Hebrew is, Miserable man. Miserable is his name, and
misery is with him, frail is his name, and frailty is with him. Hence Mr.
Broughton translates, What is woeful man to be cleared?

What is man that he should be clean? The words contain a great and necessary
truth, (...) Nomen humanae fragititati significandae appositum.
but because we met with it, Chap. 14.4. where the point was opened, and the
impossibility of selfe-cleannesse cleared from those words: Who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? (which question answers for Job, that he was
positive for the universal pollution of the nature of man) I shall not
therefore stay upon it; take only this brief hint. Here is a strong proof of
original sin, we are clean but not of our selves; we are clean under a
fourfold notion.

First, Clean meritoriously by Christ.

Secondly, Clean efficaciously by the spirit uniting us to Christ, and
sanctifying our hearts.

Thirdly, Clean instrumentally by the Word, which discovers Christ the
fountain to us, and so purifies us ( John 15.4.) You are clean through the
word which I have spoken unto you.

Fourthly, We are clean impulsively and attractively by faith ( Acts 15.8.) He
made no difference purifying their hearts by Faith; thus many are clean, and
but thus there is no man clean; What is man that he should be clean?

And he that is borne of a woman that he should be righteous? Both parts of the
Verse import the same thing. (...) and (...) Quando conjunguntur distinguenda
sunt, illud latius patet; hoc dicitur cum reus a judice absolutus dimittitur.
Illo autem non tantum innocentia sed and dignitas notatur. Coc.
Clean and righteous are near of one signification, yet in this place we may
distinguish them; To be clean, refers to the purity of man's nature; to be
righteous, or to be justified (for so the word may be translated) refers to the
integrity of his life; from both it follows, Man cannot merit, for he is not
clean: he cannot answer God, for he is not righteous. As if Eliphaz had said,
What is man that he should either have any cleanness in himself, or that he
should be reputed and looked upon as righteous by others. (Both which he
intends as applycable to Job.) If God should search thy nature, what art thou
that thou should be clean? If God should search thy life, what art thou
that thou should be righteous? The point of man's utter inability, to stand
before God in himself for justification, has been met with, more then once
before, and therefore I will not stay upon that neither, only consider the
form of expression, or the periphrasis of Man.

He that is borne of a woman. In the first clause he says, What is man, in
this latter, What is he that is borne of a woman: Emphatice mulieris meminit,
Vt. cap. 14 1. Merc.
He speaks of man in both, yet with an additionall emphasis, to mind us of
our birth and original, as was showed upon those words ( Chap. 14.1.) Man that
is borne of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble: where the Reader may
find what that teaches, even an aggravation of man's sinfulness, in that he
is borne of a woman who sinned first, or was, as the Apostle speaks (1 Timothy
2.14.) First in the Transgression. How prone is man to sin, being born of a
woman, who was so prone to sin that she was the first sinner? What is he that
is borne of a woman that he should be righteous? The whole race of mankind
has yielded but one exception to this general Rule, and that was in the
person of our Lord Jesus Christ: He indeed was borne of a woman, and yet
righteous, because his Mothers conception was of the holy Ghost (Matthew. 1.20.)
and by the power of the most high overshadowing her, Luke 1.35. But we may say
of all men except him (who was also infinitely more then man, even God-man)
What is he that is borne of a woman that he should be righteous?

Secondly, Eliphaz proceeds (though the point be clear in it self) to give a
proof of it which he ugeth from the greater to the less.

Verse. 15. Behold, he puts no trust in his Saints, and the heavens are not
clean in his sight: How much more abominable and filthy is man, etc.
The Argument rises thus:

If they who are the purest, the holiest creatures, are not able to stand
before God in their own purity; how shall he who has no purity, no holiness
at all in him?

But the Heavens, yea the Angels in Heaven, who are the purest, the holiest
creatures, are yet unclean in the sight of God:

Therefore man who is abominable and filthy, drinking iniquity like water,
cannot be clean in his sight.

Behold he puts no trust in his Saints, Eliphaz urged this argument for the
substance of it ( Chap. 4.18.) here he repeats and re-inforceth it.

Behold, is usually a note of attention, here it is more, a note of admiration;
as if he had said, Would you think it, that God puts no trust in his Saints?
yet he does not: or is not this a wonder, that God puts no trust in his Saints?
whom will he trust, if not his Saints? (...) Vid. cap. 4.18. (...) Est credere
tanquam rei fideli and constanti aut fidele and constans cui credi debeat.


The word which we translate, to put trust, signifies properly to believe, he
does not believe in his Saints, or not give credit to them; he does not (as our
word has been) confide in them; a person is confided or trusted in, either
because of his faithfulness, or because of his strength and stability; the
word which we render here to trust, signifies sometimes strength or firmness,
as also a Pillar, which is not only firm, but upholds and confirms the
Building, or that which leanes upon it. The same word does elegantly signify,
both to trust, (...) Genus columnarum, 2 Reg. 18.16. In Sanctis suis non est
fides, i. e firmitas vel immutabilitas naturae. Aug. Ecce inter Sanctos ejus
nemo immutabilis. Vulg. Aliqui legunt, Non credit sanctis suis. 2. in sanctos
suos. 3. in sanctis suis. Sic credere in Deum, in Deo, and Deo, Synonymai sunt.
Drus.
and to be firm, because every thing (that is trusted) is trusted upon
supposall, either of a natural, or moral firmness. Hence the Vulgar
translates, immutable; Behold among the Saints there is not one immutable, or
unchangable: And another of the Ancients, There is no faithfulness in his
Saints; that is, firmness, or unchangeablenesse of nature is not to be found
in them.

There are three different uses of the word.

First, To trust. Secondly, To trust in. Thirdly, To trust upon. So the
translation varies here.
For first some read, He does not trust his Saints.

Secondly others, He does not trust in his Saints.

A third, He does not trust upon his Saints.

Thus, some put a difference between believing God, and believing in God, and
believing upon God; though we find them used promiscuously in Scripture. It is
said by Moses (Genesis 15.6.) Abraham believed in the Lord, and it was accounted
to him for righteousness; but the Apostle ( Romans 4.3.) says plainly, Abraham
believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness: So that there is
not any material difference between those two expressions; yet ordinarily to
trust in or upon, is taken in a higher construction then barely to trust:
Behold he puts no trust in his Saints.

Here it is questioned, who are meant by Saints; (...) Est ab usu communi ad
divinum separare.
there are three opinions about it. The word Saint in general signifies a
person separated, or one set apart from others; Holiness is our separation
from the world unto God: holy persons are separated persons; that is their
state. But more distinctly, who are these holy persons, these Saints? The Greek
Interpreters restrain the Text to the old Patriarks, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, as also Moses and Aaron, with whom God at some times was angry, or found
fault with some of their actings: Secondly, others by the Saints understand the
confirmed Angels, who are called Saints, by way of excellency; Angeli vocantur
Sancti Dei quasi ei familiarissimi atque illius obsequio addictissimi. Dan. 4.8.
because among all creatures they are (in one sense) the most holy, as having
ever been without the least spot or taint of sin, whether in their natures, or
in their lives; and having ever continued as the Household servants of God,
observant of, and obedient to all his commands.

But we may rather take it in general, both for the holiest of men, and for
the holy Angels: Behold he puts no trust in his Saints; no, not in those who
are most holy.

Hence Observe:

There is no created holiness sure, stable, and perfect in it self: The
glorious Angels which are, and ever shall be Saints in Heaven, and the Saints
in Heaven who are like Angels, stand not in that holy and happy estate, by
their own sufficiency, but by the decree and grace of God. Those Angels which
fell at first were holy, and they who now stand, might have fallen
notwithstanding their created holiness, if God had not superadded confirming
grace, which establishes them for ever. Yet this is not all, that the Angels
are imperfect, because they might fall if not supported, there is somewhat more
in it; for though the Angels are perfectly righteous in reference to the Law,
(for the whole bent of their hearts is to God, and they love God with all their
hearts, which is the fulfilling of the Law:) So that the obedience of the
Angels in Heaven, is made the copy and pattern of our obedience here on earth,
as Christ has taught us to pray, though (I say) the Angels are thus perfectly
righteous in reference to the Law) yet there is a higher righteousness and
holiness in God. There Is but the holiness of obeying a Law, God has the
holiness of being a Law: They have a holiness without spot, yet it is but a
finite, a created holiness; now what comparison is there between finite, and
infinite, created, and uncreated; therefore though there be no blemish in the
obedience of Angels, none in their nature, none in their lives, yet God puts no
trust in them, he cannot lay the weight of his confidence upon them, because
they are creatures.

The next clause doubles this point.

And the Heavens are not clean in his sight. There is a difference among
Interpreters what these Heavens are; The Chaldee Paraphrast, and some of the
Ancients, understand the Angels, as in the former part of the Verse, and they
say the Angels are called the Heavens under a twofold consideration:

First, Because Angels are like the Heavens, in their spirituality and
incorruptibility, in their order and subordination among themselves, as also in
their power over sublunary or earthly bodies.

Secondly, By a Synechdoche, because the Angels have their habitation in
Heaven, that's their dwelling place; so Master Broughton translates, Nor they of
Heaven be clean in his eyes; that is, the Inhabitants of Heaven are not clean
in his eyes. Caeruleus Tibris caelo gratissimus amnis. i. e. diis vel
caelicolis. Virg. l. 8.
The Heathen Poet calls those whom he supposed dwellers in Heaven by the Name
of Heaven; describing a pleasant River, he calls it, A River pleasant to
Heaven; that is, to those who are in Heaven.

Others by Heaven understand the Saints in Heaven, not the Angels; and that
also upon a twofold reason.

First, Because God is said to dwell in the Saints, Sancti in quibus tanquam in
caelis habitare dicitur Deus, caeli dicuntur, quae allegoria frequentissima est
inter antiquos patres, Pined.
they are his habitation, and wheresoever God dwells he makes a Heaven.

Secondly, Because the Saints, not only those in Heaven, but they on earth,
have their conversation in Heaven; (Phil. 3.20.) As carnal and earthly minded
men are called Earth, because their hearts and conversations are fixed to the
earth; so spiritual and heavenly minded men may be called Heaven, because
their hearts and conversations are fixed in Heaven.

Thirdly, We may rather understand it in a proper sense; the heavens, that is,
The heavenly bodies are not clear in thy sight; the heavens are the most
excellent and purest part of the Creation: And therefore this interpretation,
or rather plain construction of the words, suites the scope of Eliphaz fully,
who as he spoke before of the Angels, who are the purest of all rational
creatures; so here of the heavens, which are the purest of all inanimate
creatures, Caeli qui maxim sunt lucidi suas habent maculas, partesque
crassiores magisque opacas and materiales, in re igitur er fectissima vidit
Deus ma ulas, Pine^.
yet these are not pure in the sight of God, therefore no man is. The heavens
have a kind of uncleanness in them: the Moon has her spots, yea the Moon
is but a spot, if Philosophers may be credited, who tell us that all the Stars
(in their sense the Moon is a Star) are but as the spots of Heaven. A Star
(as they define) being the thicker and grosser part of its Orb: The heavens
themselves are so fine and liquid, so thin, and fluid, that they cannot hold
the light; therefore the Lord made those Celestial bodies the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, more compact and gross, that so they might both receive, and
retain the light, as also transmit and give it out to the World here below.
These are spots in the Heavens; and though they appear as the glory or
Beauty-spots of Heaven to our sight, and are so indeed; yet these are not
clean in the sight of God.

Again, the heavens are furthest removed from all earthly dregs and dross, In
conspectu ejus. Aliud est purum esse simpliciter, and aliud purum esse coram
Deo; ut justus, and justus coram Deo differunt. Luc. 1. 6. Drus.
so that they are clean, not only in regard of their nature and constitution,
but also in regard of their site and position; being placed so far from the
sinck of the World, the earth, they never received any stain or defilement
from it; yet these heavens are not clean in his sight. God does not make that
which is clean, not clean by his seeing it; but his sight is infinitely above
all the cleanness which he sees. That may be clean, considered simply or in
it self, which before God, or to the eye of God, is as an unclean thing.

Hence Note:

God is so clear-sighted, that the cleanest creatures are unclean in his
sight; the very cleanness of the creature, is uncleanness before him, much
more, compared to him. For if one creature may be so clean that another
creature which is clean may be said to have no cleanness in comparison of it:
Then surely God is so clean, that the cleanest creatures have indeed no
cleanness in comparison of his. The Stars are very beautiful bodies, and full
of light, yet the Sun has so much light, that it darkens all the Stars, and
causes them to disappeare, when it appears: Now, if the Stars have no light
in the sight of the Sun, what light has the Sun in the sight of God? he
that puts all the perfections that the creature has into the creature, has
infinitely more perfection in himself: Those excellencies which are divided
and scattered all the Creation over, are not only contracted and united in
God, but unconceiveably exceeded by him.

Job having thus laid down the former part of his argument he applies it:

Verse. 16. How much more abominable and filthy is man, who drinks iniquity
like water?
Concerning the Saints, he said only, God puts no trust in them, and
concerning the Heavens, They are not clean in his sight: But now that he
speaks of man, he does not say, God puts no trust in him, or he is not clean
in his sight; but he lays load upon him, He is abominable and filthy: and as
if that were not enough, he aggravates it, with, How much more abominable, etc.
If he put no trust in glorified Saints in whom yet there is no iniquity, then
no marvel, if man be called abominable, who drinks iniquity like water.

The whole Verse is a description of man's sinfulness: First, of the
sinfulness of his nature, in those words, He is abominable and filthy:
Secondly, of the sinfulness of his life, He drinks iniquity like water.

How much more. Some read, Much less: So Mr. Broughton, Much less the
unclean and loathsome. The Original may bear either (as also a third
reading, Surely then) without any impeachment to the scope of the place. The
heavens are not clean in his sight: Much less is abominable and filthy man
clean in his sight. Again, (...) Abominabilis proprie quem nemo dignari
debeat auditu, visu, familiaritate, contactu. (...). Abominari nos dicimus,
quae in cogitatione nostra non patimur. Bold.
The heavens are not clean in his sight; how much more abominable and filthy
is man in his sight. We may take it also as a direct inference without any
comparison, either from the greater or the less. The heavens are not clean in
his sight; surely then, man is abominable and filthy.

The word which we translate abominable, notes that which is most abhorring to
the nature of man; that which is not only so nauseous that the stomach cannot
digest it, but so base that the mind is burdened to think of it; yea the word
imports that which is rejected by all the senses, abominably rejected; that
which the eye cannot endure to look upon, that which the ear cannot endure to
hear of, that which is a stink in the nostrils, and which the hand will not
touch: Such an abominable thing the word bears, and such is man; God loathes
him, and is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, much more a lump of
iniquity; he is as a stink in the nostrills of God, nor will he touch him (for
any thing in him) unless with a hand of justice to destroy him.

Hoc videtur dictum per antithesm, propter Sanctorum and caelorum
pulchritudinem, quorum species, mundicies, lux, ordo, conc etus mirabilis,
conspectus multo jucundissimus.
Further, some explain abominable by that of the Apostle (1 Cor. 16.26.) If any
man love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha: that is, let
all abominate, and cast him out of their society: When the Lord would show the
worst thought that he had of the best services of the Jews, he tells them,
Incense is an abomination to me; and when the Psalmist would convince us how
the people of Israel had defiled themselves with their own works, and
polluted the Land with blood, he gives it in the word of this Text, Therefore
was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, in so much that he
abhorred his own inheritance (Psalm. 106. v. 40.) His Inheritance was so
abominable to him that he would not touch it, nor take it into his own hands,
but as it follows in the Psalm, He gave them into the hand of the Heathen.

Hence Observe;

Sinful man is loathsome, and abominable unto God. How much more abominable is
man; This is not to be understood of some particular man, or of some sort of
men who are more vile then others, but take the best of men, the most
accomplished and complete in the whole course of nature, these are abominable;
they are deprived of the Image of God, they are stamped with the Image of Satan,
they are not only unable to do that which is good, but they are totally
averse from it, yea, enemies to it; is not all this enough to render man
abominable in the sight of God? And so abominable is man, that he does not
only displease the eye of God, but the very eyes of those who have received
the grace of God. A godly man turns away from the wicked, as the wicked man
does from the godly. ( Prove. 29.27.) An unjust man is an abomination to the
just; and he that is upright in his way is an abomination to the wicked. The
distaste is mutual; it is called enmity ( Genesis 3.15.) here abomination. The
wicked man says (as the Devil to Christ) What have I to do with thee thou
Son of David. The godly man says, What have I to do with thee thou son of
Belial. It Is the sin of the wicked man to abhor the righteous, for he abhors
him for his righteousness: It Is the duty of a godly man to abhor the wicked,
and he abhors him only for his wickedness. To do so is a piece of his
character, Who shall dwell in the Mountain of God: He is a man, in whose eye a
vile (that is, a wicked) person is abhorred, Psalm. 15.4. Much less can he
look pleasedly, or pleasantly upon a wicked man; his heart rises against him,
not out of pride, or high thoughts of himself, or from the lowness of his
condition, if he be poor; but from the odiousness of his disposition, and his
opposition of goodness: Such a man is vile in his esteem, how honorable so
ever he is in the eye of the World.

Again (which shows yet further, that a man in nature is abominable) when any
man repents and turns to the Lord, he is an abomination to himself; he is
abominable to God, and good men, before he repents; and upon the same account,
he is abominable to himself when he repents. For as God and good men before,
so he then sees his own vileness, and deformity, then he smells the
filthiness of his own corrupt heart: This the Prophet assures us ( Ezekiel.
36.31.) where the Lord promises to power out the spirit of repentance upon his
people, To take away the heart of stone, and give them a heart of flesh: and
then They shall loath themselves for all their abominations, as not being able
to endure the stench of their own corruptions: When Job at the sight of God,
saw himself more clearly, then he cries out, Wherefore I abhor my self, and
repent in dust and ashes: If a good man seeing himself, is an abomination to
himself, how much more is sinful man abominable in the sight of God?

And (which aggravates the point to the highest) Not only is a man repenting
abominable to himself, but even a wicked man upon a clear discovery of
himself to himself becomes an abomination to himself, though he be far
from repentance. That's the reason why a wicked man cannot abide to search his
own heart, or return into his own bosom. ( Isa. 46.8.) Remember this, show
your selves men, bring it again to mind; The Hebrew is, Bring it to your
hearts: They who love their sin, love not to look to their sinful hearts:
they dare not turn their eye inward or upward, not upward, because there is so
much holiness in God; not inward because there is so much filthiness in
themselves. Hence the Lord threatens ( Na. 3.5, 6.) because they would not
look on their own filthiness, that he would show their filthiness to all
the World, He would show the Nations their nakedness, and the Kingdoms their
shame: And howsoever a natural man hides his abomination from his eye now, or
will not see it, yet all shall be laid open to him in the day of judgment,
which will be as a day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God: So
a day of the revelation of the unrighteousness of man: And then he shall
(though too late) abhor himself for ever. There has been a dispute whether
the sins of Believers shall be opened at that day, but there is no question but
the sins of Unbeleevers shall, and that not only to shame them, but to punish
and torment them; yea possibly, the sight of sin will be a greater torment to
them then all their other torments, and to be led about (as the Prophet was in
reference to others) from one unclean room of their hearts to another, there
to behold all the abominations of their hearts, will be the very pit of Hell, O
how abominable, and as it follows in the Text.

Filthy is Man: (...) Putridus, foetidus graveolentus, translatio a carnibus
rancidis non despumatis. Drus. Pagninus existimat deduci a (...) rubigo ollae.
Spuma, excrementum.
The word is derived from a root that signifies corrupt, rotten, putrified, the
scum of a Pot, the rust of Mettalls, the dunge, or excrement of man and beasts;
there are no words filthy enough to express the filthiness of man. The word
is found but three times (as some observe) in the Scripture in this
construction, and in all of them it is applied to show the abominable
wickedness of Man, the first place is this of Job; it is found also, Psalm.
14.3. Psalm. 53.3. Which Psalms are most pregnant descriptions of the corrupt
state of man, as if this were a word picked out on purpose as a glass to show
man his face and natural complexion in.

There is a second translation of the word which gives more light to this, How
much more abominable and unprofitable is man: One word signifies filthy and
unprofitable, because that which is corrupt and filthy, ^^^^lis. Vulg. ^^x
putrida sunt. inutilia su^.
is also unprofitable, and unfit for use. It is an extreme debasement unto
man, that he is unprofitable, so filthy, that he is good for nothing: The
Apostle puts thse together ( Tit. 1.16.) Abominable, disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate; that is, unfit for every good work: We may say of
man (in this sense) as the Prophet ( Ezekiel. 15.3.) does of the Vine, Son of
man, what is the Vine tree more then another tree? excellent to yield Wine; but
in the third Verse we have another answer, Shall wood be taken thereof to do
any work, or will men make a pin of it to hang any Vessel thereon; will you
build a house of Vine Timber, or will you so much as make a Pin of it? The Vine
is not fit to make a Pin of; thus we may say of a carnal man, he is
unprofitable, Qui sibi nequam est cui usui bonus est?
will the Lord use him in any work? no, he is reprobate to every good work;
will he serve the Lords turn, so much as to make a Pin of? That is, is he
profitable for the least service? No, he is not. He is also like the Corn
growing upon the house top, whereof The Reaper fills not his hand, nor he
that binds up the Sheaves his bosom. The reason why man appears thus filthy,
is, because he deals so much with filth; and he is thus unfit to do any good,
because he is continually doing evil, as it follows in the last clause of
this Verse.

Which drinks iniquity like water. Will you know what declares man abominable
and filthy in the sight of God? It is not his poverty, his sickness, his
rags, or any external defilement, nothing but sin makes him so: He drinks
in iniquity like water; this makes him as filthy as the dirt and mire he treads
upon, or as the vomit and dunge which he casts out.

Hence Note in general.

Sin, and sin only makes man abominable, and filthy in the sight of God;
nothing can defile the soul but sin; though a man be clothed with filthy
garments, though his skin be overrun with filthy sores; though he lie in a
stinking Channel, yet the Lord will not say, he is abominable or filthy, in
these respects: for even in such a state, or at such a time, Christ may have
taken him in his arms and kissed him with the kisses of his lips. But though
he go clothed in Scarlet, though he lie in a bed of Ivory, and is perfumed
with all the spices of Arabia, yet sin makes him filthy and abominable in the
eye of the Lord.

Secondly Observe.

The multiplied acts of sin are an evidence that man is habitually sinful, or
that he is abominable and filthy. He that does righteousness is righteous, and
he that does unrighteousness is unrighteous. If man were not filthy, he could
not drink iniquity; that is, feed upon, and delight in sin, which is but
filthiness.

This expression of man's sinfulness is further considerable, he does not only
commit iniquity, but he drinks iniquity, and he does not sip at it, but he
drinks it like water. Elihu speaks thus ( Job 34.7.) What man is like Job who
drinks up scorning like water; and so does Solomon (Prove. 26.6.) He that
sends a message by the hand of a fool, cutteth off the feet, and drinks
damage; that is, he shall have damage enough, a full draught of it, his
belly-full of it, by sending such an empty-headed messenger upon his errand. So
to drink iniquity, and to drink it like water, is to do abundance of
iniquity. I shall give seven observations, which will discover the intendment
of this manner of speaking, and draw out the meaning of He drinks iniquity like
water.

First, thus, Men naturally has a strong appetite or desire to sin, Man's
natural desire is to nothing else but sin. Drinking implies appetite; a man
does not drink (ordinarily) till he is thirsty: And though Drunkards have
sometimes no thirst, yet they have always a strong desire to drink. Sinful
man is a thirst for, and desires the drafts of sin ( Ephesians. 4.19.) He commits
iniquity with greediness, which is a Metaphor taken from eating and drinking:
And because man has not a greater desire after any thing then to drink,
therefore it is gone to a Proverb among us, when we would show our
willingness to do a thing, we say, We will do it as willingly as to drink
when we are a thirst. Such is the bent of man to sin, that he has no more
reluctance to commit it, then the thirsty man has to drink: He thirsts after
it as vehemently, as David did after God ( Psalm. 42.2.) My soul thirsts for
God, for the living God; as the Hartpanteth after the water brooks, so pants
my soul after thee O God. Or again, the heart of man thirsts after the
waters of iniquity, as David thirsted after the waters of the well of Bethlem,
who will give me to drink of the waters of the Well of Bethlem. At which word,
some of his mighty men brake through the whole Host of the Enemy, to fetch that
water. When man thirsts for this water of iniquity, his own heart or hand will
break through all oppositions, through Law, through conscience, through
counsel, through an host of threatenings armed against him, through judgments
inflicted on him, he will break through all these, that he may have a draught
of his beloved iniquity-water.

Secondly, To drink, notes a strong desire, so pleasure and content; and where
there is a great deal of desire, there is also much content, and pleasure in
drinking.

Hence observe:

That it is a very pleasant thing to a carnal man to sin, he drinks iniquity,
not only like water, but in this sense, like the sweetest Wine; a draught of
sin is the only Merry-goe-downe to a carnal man. A drunkard likes his drink
well, but he likes his drunkenness better: His liquor is sweet to him, but O
how sweet is the satisfying of his lust! When he has his desire he is pleased,
when he is frustrated of his desire he is sullen, and like Ahab, when he could
not obtain Naboaths Vineyard, he is displeased, and refuses (as he did) to
eat bread, because he cannot have this water of iniquity to drink.

Thirdly, Consider the easiness of it, to drink is no hard labor; hence we
speak proverbially, I can do^ such a thing as easily as I can drink; there
are no bones in drink: Good liquor (we say also) needs no chewing: Besides, it
is easy to drink, because it is natural to drink; Children have no Tutors to
teach them to drink: Again, to drink water is easy, because we may get it
easily; water is not kept under Lock and Key, but in the common Storehouses or
Cellars of nature.

Hence Note:

A natural man sins with ease; it is no pain to him to sin: Sin is not easy
in the effects, so it leaves us in Little-ease, q.d. Facillime laxatis
conscientiae habenis in omnia omnis generis scelera se dat praecipitem. Bold.
pain and sorrow enough are the fruits of it; but it is easy in the act of
it; it is to a wicked heart, as easy as to drink water which is every way
easy.

For first, Sin is a common thing, every where to be had; sin may be found
(like water) in every Ditch; sin also is like those waters which flow
naturally, you need not pumpe for it, or fetch it up with Buckets.

Secondly, No man needs be taught to sin, children learn that lesson (and till
the spirit of God teach them, they cannot unlearne it) without a Schoolmasters.

Thirdly, Most sins in the act of them, have little labor or difficulty in
them ( Psalm. 50.20. Quasi per in curiam and otium, quasi nihil agens.
) Thou sattest and spakest against thy Mothers Son. A man may both speak and
do evil, while he sits still, and does nothing; an idle posture may serve the
turn for such work as that.

Fourthly, Water is but small drink, water has little pleasure in it and
less strength in it. And therefore when Christ would show that the lowest
courtesy or charity done to one of his, shall be highly esteemed by him, he
says, Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of
cold water only, in the name of a Disciple, he shall not loose his reward,
Matthew. 10.42.

Hence Observe:

Man will sin upon very easy terms, and smallest considerations. Though
there be little got by it, though he get but a draught of water by it; though
his sin bring him in scare any thing of advantage, yet sin he will; the act of
sinning pleases some, more then the consequence or gain of sin. They care not
much whether it be water or Wine which they drink, Eo improbitatis evadit
impius, ut vel solo peccati and impietatis nomine, nulla praeterea mercede
proposita, peccato inserviat.
so it be iniquity which they drink. As the Saints, in a height of holiness,
will do good, though they do themselves little good, or get no outward
advantage by it: They resolve to do good for good sake; the duty abstractly
considered, or the act it self, is the thing that pleases them; so to a
natural man, the very committing of sin satisfies him more then the outward
Income or Revenue of his sin: He does evil for evil sake, and serves his lust
for love, not for wages.

Fifthly, Drinking is a frequent act; a temperate man drinks every day, and
often every day; healthy men eat often, and most men drink oftener then they
eat: So that to drink iniquity hints also the frequency of committing
iniquity.

Hence Observe:

A carnal heart sins often: He sins, and sins, he cannot but sin, Inveteratum
ac inseparabilem peccandi habitum and consuetudinem denotat.
it is a continual, yea a continued act; he has never done, he is like the
Drunkard that must always be tippling. Or like the covetous man, who is always
having, and the more he has the more he desires to have: Covetousness is a
dry drunkenness, and drunkenness is a wet covetousness: both return often
upon the same acts; and so does every sinner naturally. He cannot cease from
sin, as the Apostle Peter speaks, Every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart is only evil, and that continually. The cup of iniquity is never from
his mouth.

Sixthly, To drink iniquity like water notes not only the frequency of sinning,
but the abundance of sinning; they take great draughts of sin, who drink
iniquity like water: Such as are accustomed to drink water (in many places it
is the common drink) such, I say, drink more then men usually do of Wine, or
strong drink; first, because Wine and artificial liquors are costly; but you
may drink water good cheap, and none will grutch you. Secondly, Water is not
strong nor vaporous, it does not burden the brain like your heady liquors. Now
though iniquity be somewhat unlike water in both these respects (for to some
their sins are costly enough at present, and they will cost all very dear
(except they repent of them before) at the day of reckoning; sin also flies up
into the brain, and does as much besot, as defile the soul. Now, I say,
though sin be thus unlike water) yet the natural man drinks it like water, he
takes in and sends out abundance of it; what cares he what it costs him, or how
it besots him, neither the present distemperings of it, nor the after
reckonings for it, trouble him.

Seventhly, Eating and drinking are the support of nature, by these the body is
maintained in life; now as the body of nature is maintained by eating and
drinking, Perbibisti iniquitatem and ita visceribus immiscuisti, ut nisi cum
ipsis exire non possit. Sen. lib. P. de ira.
so the body and life of sin, the corrupt state and strength of man are
maintained by the continual actings of sin: The old Adam is nourished by these
waters of iniquity. We say in nature, we are nourished by that out of which we
are made, that which is the matter of our constitution is the matter of our
nutrition; so in this case, a man in nature is composed or constituted of sin,
and a natural man is nourished, and preserved by sinning. Vt deficienti humido
resarciendo, nihil aptius est aqua, and utilius; ia hominis beatitudini, quae
ipsi de est, consummandae, natura nihil suggerit nisi peccatum. Coc.
Continual acts increase the habit; and as a godly man is nourished by holy
acts, and strengthened in spirit by spiritual obedence; doing the will of God
is the food of the soul. As Christ speaks ( John 4.21.) so does every true
Christian in his degree, It is my meat and drink to do the will of my Father
which is in Heaven; or as Job professes of himself ( Chap. 23.12.) I esteem
the words of thy mouth more then my necessary food: Thus also the old man
says, It is my meat and drink to do the will of the flesh, and that is indeed
the will of his Father which is in Hell. The words of his mouth, his Counsels
and Laws I esteem more then my necessary food.

So much for the opening and illustration of this Scripture Phrase, Drinking
iniquity like water: I shall propound one Quere in general, concerning the
whole Verse, and so conclude it. Here is a full description of sinful man: But
whether Eliphaz speaks this strictly of a person unregenerate, and so applies
it to Job, or whether this description be not also applicable to a man who is
regenerate and godly for the maine, and was so intended by Eliphaz, is here a
question.

Some conceive that the words will suite none but an unregenerate man, and it is
granted upon all hands, that they are most suitable to him. An unregenerate man,
is abominable and filthy, he drinks iniquity like water; And yet in a qualified
sense, we may say all this of a man regenerate: Even He, in reference to the
remains of corruption, is abominable and filthy, and He, under some distempers
and temptations, drinks iniquity like water: Agit Eliphaz cum Jobo non ut
improbo, sed ut errante. Coc.
which words of Eliphaz, a modern Interpreter paralels with those of Paul
concerning himself ( Romans 7.25.) With the flesh I serve the Law of sin. And
delivers his opinion in this case, That though Eliphaz aimed at Job in all
this, yet he deals with him not as with a wicked man, but as with an erring
brother. For whereas he had said ( Chap. 13.23.) How many are mine iniquities?
Eliphaz might judge by his words, that surely he thought his iniquities were
not very many: and whereas he had said at the 26. Verse of the same Chapter,
Thou make me to possess the iniquityes of my youth; Eliphaz might collect,
surely this man thinks his elder years have been so free from sin, that God
can find nothing in them, which might justify him in these severe
punishments. Now Eliphaz opposes these apprehensions, and would both teach and
convince him, that as original sin pollutes every man wholly, till he is
washed and borne again by the spirit; so no man is so far washed by the
spirit, but that many spots and pollutions of the flesh, do still cleave to
him, and often appear upon him. And Eliphaz may be conceived to handle Job in
this manner.

First, To show him, that though a man be in a state of regeneration, yet he
can deserve nothing at the hand of God, because his holiness is still
imperfect, and his corruptions are abominable.

Secondly, That the greatest sufferings and afflictions of good men in this
life, are very consistent with the Justice of God.

Thirdly, That he might humble Job, who (as he feared) was still too high in
his own opinion, and thought better of himself then did become him.

Fourthly, To provoke him to resist his own corruptions steadfastly.

And lastly, To bear the cross (which the Lord had laid upon him for his
good, especially for the taming and subduing of his corruptions) patiently.

So that Eliphaz doeh not dispute with him upon this hypothesis, or
supposition, or not upon this only, That man by nature, and without the grace
of God, is filthy and abominable, drinking iniquity like water; but upon this,
or this in consort with the former, That man in a state of grace, or a godly
man is filthy and abominable, in reference to the flesh that dwells in him;
and that in reference to his frequent sinnings, he may be said to drink
iniquity like water: And therefore Job had no reason to be proud, how good so
ever he was, or how much good soever he had done; and that there was all the
reason in the World he should be patient, and take it well at the hand of God,
how much evil so ever he should suffer.

This resolution of the Quere, as it is profitable, so probable. For howsoever
Jobs Friends had branded him in diverse passages of this dispute, as a wicked
man and an hypocrite, and were so understood by Job, as appears in his answers
and replies; yet it is most likely his Friends spoke so in reference to his
actions, not in reference to his state. That he had done like an Hypocrite, or
a wicked man, was clearly their opinion; but there is no necessity to conclude
from what they said, that they judged him absolutely to be one.

JOB, CHAP. 15. Verse. 17, 18, 19, 20. I will show thee, hear me, and that
which I have seen, I will declare.

Which wise men have told from their Fathers and have not hid it.

Unto whom alone the earth was given, and no stranger passed among them.

The wicked man travelleth with pain all his days, and the number of years
is hidden to the oppressor.


ELiphaz having argued against Jobs supposed opinion, of Selfe-cleannesse, and
personal righteousness, proceeds to the confirmation of his own position, to
which he leads us, by a new Exordium, or Preface, in the 17, 18, and 19. Verses
of this Chapter: Secondly, he largely handles, and illustrates it from the 20.
to the 31. Verse: Thirdly, he applies the whole Doctrine to Job by way of
dehortation, at the 31. Verse and so forward to the end of the Chapter.

The general argument which he brings to confirm his Tenet, may be thus
formed up; That is true which continued experience, and the consent of wise men
in all ages have taught and delivered to us:

But the experience, and consent of wise men in all ages, have taught and
delivered this, that a wicked man travels with pain all his days, that he is
punished outwardly by want and sickness, and inwardly by the gripes and
scourges of his own conscience:

Therefore this is a truth. The major proposition is the sum of the Preface
contained in the 17, 18. and 19. Verses; The minor, or second Proposition, is
held forth in the 20. Verse, and is prosecuted to the one and thirtieth.

I will show thee, hear thou me, and that which I have seen I will declare.
So the Preface begins: He lays down a double proof in this Preface; a
proof first from his own experience, secondly from the consent of others.
From his own experience, in this Verse, I will show thee, hear thou me, that
which I have seen I will declare; the consent of others, is expressed in the
18.19. Verses, Which wise men have told me from their Fathers.

I will show thee, hear thou me; as if he had said, Thou art out of the way,
thou art in the dark, and therefore in charity, Caecutienti tibi and in
maximis tonebris versanti, verissimae doctrinae lumen praeferam. Accipe a me.
Targ.
I will lend thee a thread of true Doctrine, to lead thee, out of that
laborinth of error, wherein I see thou art entangled; I will show thee, and
all that I desire of thee as a reward of my pains, is but this, Hear thou me,
be attentive, or (as the Chalde Paraphrast renders) receive it, take it of me;
he that speaks truths, deserves to be heard, and that is all I desire.

I will show thee, hear thou me: But what will Eliphaz show him? Not that
which he had phansied, but that which he was assured of.

That which I have seen I will declare: Seeing is a sure and particular sense;
yet as the act of one sense, is often put for the act of another; so Seeing,
which is the most noble of the senses, is often put for all. That which I have
seen; is, that which I have learned, that which I have fetched in, or
collected by the help of all my senses; yea, by my reason and understanding,
That do I here declare unto thee. More strictly, Seeing may be taken two
ways: First, as noting experience; I have not only heard some reports about
these things, but I have seen, and observed them my self; there is a stronger
conviction in this, because the sense of seeing is less fallible then that of
hearing; and we say, One eye witness, is better then ten ear witnesses:
Secondly, as I have seen, Certius est, vidi, quam audivi, oculatus testis
potior est aurito. Drus.
may be taken for common experiences among men: so for special revelation from
God. Some Divine revelations were made in visions; and all Divine Revelations
were so clear and evident, that they were or might be called Visions, as if
the matter of them had been represented to the eye; and hence such as God
honored and trusted with those Revelations were called Seers (1 Samuel 9.9.) He
that is now called a Prophet was before time called a Seer: And he was called
a Seer, because the clearenesse of those messages and manifestations was so
great, that they might be judged as objects of the eye, rather then of the
ear, or of the understanding. Thus the whole Book of the Prophecy of Isaiah
is called, A Vision, or a thing seen; The Vision of Isaiah the Prophet, which
he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, (Chap. 1.1.) Yet the Prophet did not
receive all the Doctrines which he Preached, and Prophesies which he published
in that Book, by vision: but the manifestation from God, was so full of light
to his understanding, that it was as if he had seen it with his eye. Some
expound so here, That which I have seen; that is, that which I have had a
special revelation about. As if he referred to the fourth Chapter, where
Eliphaz reports to Job what a dreadful Vision he had, and what the matter of
it was, even much like that which is represented in the following part of this
Chapter. A learned Interpreter agrees, that it was a Vision; but, says he,
Mihi non videtur improbabile aut delusum fuisse a diabolo, vel ipsum somnium
aliquod aut inspirationem commentum esse, ut sibi conciliaret authoritatem.
Sanct.
it was either a fained, artificial Vision (such are frequent in Popery) or it
was a delusion of the Devil. I do not at all admit, this latter branch of his
opinion; but I must reject the former, as altogether unworthy of Eliphaz, who
was surely a man of integrity, and fearing God, and was therefore above such
affected falsehoods, and studied deceits, to gain respect and credit among men.

I shall therefore insist upon the former sense, That which I have seen; that
is, by common experience, that will I declare unto thee.

Hence Observe.

First, What we declare, or communicate to others, we should be well assured
of our selves; That which I have seen, declare I unto thee: while we declare,
either by way of instruction, to teach true Doctrine, or by way of information,
to report the truth of action, it is our duty to declare upon knowledge. So the
Apostle John, in his first Epistle, Chap. 1.1. That which was from the
beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we
have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life, that which we
have seen and heard, declare we unto you: He brings in the operations of
three senses, Seeing, Hearing, and Feeling, as witnesses to avouch for, and
ascertaine that which he had declared; we must take heed of declaring upon
surmises, and probabilities, upon a bare Hearsay, or I thought so: That which
we have clearly learned, we may teach confidently, and nothing besides that.

Observe,

Secondly, As we must have a ground for what we declare to others, so when we
have a good ground we must declare; That which we know, we should make known;
That which I have seen I declare unto you; holy knowledge must be
communicated, such light must not be put under a bushel, nor must such a
Talent be wrapped up in a Napkin: He that is taught should teach. When thou art
converted (says Christ to Peter) strengthen thy Brethren: Let others partake
of thy experiences. Come (says David) and I will tell you what God has done
for my soul: Philip (John 1.43.) being found by Christ, finds Nathaneel, and
says unto him, We have found him of whom Moses, and the Prophets did write,
Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Joseph: He quickly declared what he had seen, and
so should we. This is the first proof, That which I have seen, I declare,
experience is my ground.

The second proof, is from the consent of others, from the authority of the
Ancient.

Which wise men have told from their Fathers, and have not hid it.
Eliphaz treads the same steps, as in his first discourse with Job. For after
he had there delivered the contents or sum of his Vision, he appeals to the
judgment of the Saints, Chap. 5. So here, having told Job that he would
declare what he had seen, he referrs him also to the judgment of others, That
which wise men have told their Fathers, and have not hid it. I referr you to
men, and those not men of a mean rank, but to godly wise men; in which,
Eliphaz seems again to answer what Job had objected, that the points he had
offered were of common and vulgar observation ( Chap. 12.3.) Who knows not
such things as these? Eliphaz replies, these things are no common discourse,
they are such as wise men have told from their Fathers; as if he had said, Do
not despise what I say, as ordinary, or as a novelty, no, nor as received from
corrupt antiquity, for besides what I have seen, Rambam subtitius a patribus
suis exponit, a patribus eorum. Vt hic tres aetates considerentur una sapientum
haec indicantium, altera patrum tertia majorum and atavorum. Merc.
I have good authority for what I speak: the ancient and the wise vote with
me; Wise men have told it from their Fathers, here is the conveyance.

Wise men: He does not mean worldly wise men, Philosophers and Politicians;
but godly wise men, these have told it from their Fathers; their Fathers told
it them, and they told it me; so that this position claims by two descents at
least. One of the Rabbis gives it three, if not more: for by the Fathers of
the wise men he understands, not their immediate Fathers only, but those who
were more remote and further off; yea, possibly those who were furthest off,
even as far as Adam.

Hence Observe:

First, It is an ingenuity to acknowledge by whom we profit, wise men have told
me this, I received it from others, as well as collected it by my own
experience.

Secondly Note:

Truth should be conveyed down to our Posterity: Truth is a more precious
inheritance then Land or Money; if Parents are careful to secure (as much as
they can) earthly things to their Children, how much more should they be
careful to secure heavenly? In the first Ages of the World, till the Law was
given on Mount Sinai, faithful men were in stead of Books, and Tradition
supplied the want of Scripture: But now, our recourse must be to what God has
commanded to be written, not to what men have said. No Tradition is of any
force, but as consentient with Scripture, and none of so much force as
Scripture. The Council of Trent, in the fifth Session, thunders out Anathemaes
against those who receive not Tradition with the same godly affection, and
devotion, with which they receive the Scripture it self; Bellarmin in his
controversy about Tradition, entitles his Book thus, Of the Word of God not
written; as if the Word of God were to be divided into these two orders, The
Word written, and the Word not written: Tradition with him is the Unwritten
word, and must be held of as much authority as the Word written; This is (as
Christ taxes the Pharisees) to make the word of God of none effect, through
man's Tradition: It is still a wise man's duty to to tell Posterity what the Word
and Truth of God is, but we must not receive any thing, as a truth of God, upon
the bare Word of the wisest men, Wise men have told their Fathers.

And have not hid it.

There is a twofold hiding; first, a hiding to keep a thing safe, that we loose
it not; secondly, a hiding, that we keep it close, and not communicate it: In
the former sense, we must hide the truth of God, but we may not in the latter.
When David says, I have hid thy Commandments in my heart: when Mary hid the
sayings of Christ in her heart; and when the man that found the treasure ( Ma.
13.44.) Went away and hid it, and for joy thereof sold all he had, and bought
the field: All these hid it, that it might be forth-comming for their own use,
they did not hide it, as unwilling to bring it forth, for the use of others; so
the idle Servant hid his Talent, and was justly condemned for hiding it, Matthew.
25.

Hence Observe:

Truth must not be hid from others: Truth is a common good, no man has the
sole property of it; every one may challenge his part of this poffession; and
the more we part with it to others, the more we increase our own possession.
Truth multiplies in its degree to us, while we make division of it to
thousands. A Candle gives not the less light to the owner, because many
standers by, see by it, and this Candle gives a clearer light to us when we let
many see by it: Our knowledge is perfected while it is communicated. This
Candle therefore is not to be put under a bushel, but must be set upon a
Candlestick, that all may see by the light of it. Shall I (says the Lord, (
Genesis 18.) hide from Abraham the thing that I am about to do? No, I will not,
For I know Abraham will not hide it: He will command his Children and his
Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord. The Israelites
were charged to communicate the wonders which God wrought for them, and the
Ordinances which he appointed them, when they were delivered out of Egypt,
Exodus 12.

I will open my mouth in a Parable (says the Psalmist) I will utter dark
sayings of old, which we have heard and known: And our Fathers have told us,
we will not hide them from their Children, showing to the Generations to come,
the praises of the Lord, and his strength, and the wonderful works which he
has done (Psalm. 78.2, 3, 4.) It Is our duty to preserve memorialls of the
works of God, and to declare his word to all that are about us. What wise men
know from their Fathers, they will not hide.

Eliphaz yet goes on to describe the men whose consent, in opinion he had
received about the controversy in hand.

Verse. 19. To whom alone the earth was given, and no stranger passed among
them.
If any man ask who were these wise men? He answers, They were wise men, To
whom alone the earth was given.

In these words Eliphaz seems to remove a prejudice that might lie in Jobs
Spirit against the testimony of those Ancients: For suppose they were Wise men,
yet he might say, it is like they were but mean men, men of no rank or
quality, men of small credit or authority, and (we know what Solomon says,
Affertur hoc ad amplificandum authoritatem horum sapientum, q. d. hi tales and
tanti fuerunt ut etc. Merc.
Eccles. 9.16.) A poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words not heard:
Therefore says Eliphaz, you shall not put me off thus, nor disable my
witnesses upon a supposition, that these wise men were mean men, for these
were Cheifes and Princes in their Generation; And he advances their honor two
ways; First, in regard of their riches and power, To whom alone the earth was
given: Secondly, in regard of their righteous and just administrations, No
stranger, or strange thing passed among them; as if he had said, Job, I speak
of men that were fit to sit at the helm of a Kingdom, and govern Nations;
yea, to have the raines of the World put into their hands; I speak of wise men
who by their wisdom, and the blessing of God, have kept the earth quiet, and
so have possessed it alone.

But it may yet be said, who were these Monarchs of the world, and sole
possessors of the Earth? To whom alone the earth was given: Some conceive that
Eliphaz means it of Noah and his Sons, who indeed had the World to
themselves; for the Flood having swept away all mankind, except that Family,
to him and his Sons the earth was given alone; these were the wise men (says
this opinion) from whom Eliphaz received the Doctrine which he communicated to,
Ista ph^asi circumlo ^uitur mihi patriarcham Noe cum tribus ejus filiis. Bold.
Methodius, aliique patres antiqui vocant Noe tres filios, Mundi chiliarchos.
and pressed upon Job; there was never such a Monarch (except Adam the first
man) as Noah was, he had the whole World given him: Hence the Ancients style
Noah's three Sons, The Commanders and Colonels of the whole World: But I
conceive, we need not determine it upon those, though possibly Eliphaz might
have an aim at them. Most Interpreters take it in general, of the old good
Princes, of whom it may be said, The earth was given to them, and to them
alone; Abraham was a great Prince, and to him, The earth (in one sense) was
given alone. But who made this great deed of gift, even the most high God, whom
Abraham calls ( Genesis 14.) The possessor of Heaven, and Earth: He it is that
then gave, and still gives the earth, and he gives it two ways; first, by an
act of common providence, thus (as Job expresses it ( Chap. 9.24.) The earth
is given into the hand of the wicked: Secondly, he gives the earth by an act of
special providence, or by virtue of a promise, so Canaan was given to Abraham
and his seed, the people of Israel; and thus the Kingdom of Israel and Judah,
was given to David and his seed.

When it is said here, that the earth was given to such alone, Sapientibus
solis terra data esse dicitur, quia bonorum terrenorum, ipse sunt domini,
utentes iis ad suum bonum. Aquin. in loc.
the meaning is not that none had any of the earth given them but they, but
none had the earth given them as they, by peculiar promise, and special
providence. Further, the giving of the earth may be considered, either as the
giving that which is good, or as the giving it for good; as a gift of bounty,
or as a gift of mercy; in the latter considerations, the earth is given to good
men alone: None have it for good but they who are good, and they only make a
good use of it.

Hence Observe:

That the earth, or earthly things, are disposed to the Sons of men, by a deed
of gift from God:

Secondly, Wise, holy men, receive the earth and the things of the earth, by
special gift.

These alone receive the earth from a Fathers hand and good will; it comes to
them in the Covenant of grace, to which the promise of the earth belongs, as
well as of Heaven, Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which
is to come; Optimorum principum circumloqutio est, quorum administratio
respublicas suas tuebatur, omnemque hostium injuriam propulsabat. Pined.
Authoritate sua usi sunt ad jus bonum and aequum tuendu^, and ad injustum
quodvis and alienum propulsandum. Jun. in loc.
Saints have the earth and all earthly things given to them, in reference to
their being in Covenant with God; and thus the earth is given to them alone.

Again, we may expound that term Alone, by the next clause, To whom alone the
earth was given; that is, as they had great possessions in the earth, so they
had those possessions to themselves without any to trouble, vex, or molest
them, which Eliphaz thus expresses:

And no stranger passed among them. Some read, No strange thing passed among
them; Both readings are a description of wise and godly Princes, who having the
earth given them, No stranger, or no strange thing passes among them.

Strangers are here taken under a double notion: First, no stranger, that is no
enemy: To clear which notion of the word Stranger, we must remember that as
the Grecians (conceiting themselves the best bred people in the World) called
all other Nations Barbarians; so the people of Israel, the stock of Abraham
(being Gods peculiar Vovenant People) called all other Nations aliens, or
strangers, and because they were hated and maligned by all other Nations,
therefore they called all professed strangers enemies; so the word is used (
Isa. 1.7.) Your land strangers shall devour; that is, enemies shall invade and
prevail over you ( Psalm. 144.7.) Deliver me out of the hand of strange
Children, or out of the hand of strangers; that is, Alienus hoc loco idem est
qui hostis. Sanct. Hostis apud majores nostros, quem nunc peregrinum dicimus.
Cic. lib. 1. Offic.
out of the hand of mine enemies: The Latin word Alienus, is often put for
Hostis, and the Roman Orator tells us, That he who is now called a stranger,
was called an enemy by our Ancestors. The reason was, because strangers proved
unkind to, yea turned enemies against those that entertained them: As formerly
Kings were called Tyrants, but because many Kings oppressed their people,
therefore now oppressing Princes only are called Tyrants. So then, to say no
stranger passed among them, is as much as to say, no enemy, none to molest or
afflict, passed among them.

Satis apparet non de host temporali; sed de eo qui alteri quam verae
religioni addictus est, vel qui numina extranea ^olit. Bold.
Again, the word Stranger is taken for one that is erroneous, or idolatrous;
for a man unsound in Doctrine, or superstitious in Worship: Wise men to whom
alone the earth was given, had no such stranger passing among them; they were
not mixed with idolatrous and uncircumcised Nations, they did not communicate
with them in worship, as in after times the people of Israel did.

This notion of the stranger, is an advantage to Eliphaz; as if he had said,
The wise men whose authority I produce in this cause, were sound in judgment,
and pure in worship they did not mingle themselves with Idolaters and
Heretics, they neither learned their works, not received their Doctrines, and
are therefore witnesses worthy of credit, and against whom there lies no just
exception. No stranger passed among them.

If we take stranger in the first sense for an enemy, then the word Passed
signifies as much as invaded, and may well be translated to a military motion:
No stranger or enemy passed; that is, none matched among them, or through their
Land, to disturb, or plunder them; when God is said to give Laws to the Sea,
or set it bounds which it should not pass; this imports that the Sea like an
enemy would march through the earth, and overwhelme all, unless bridled by a
Divine decree.

But if we take Stranger in the second sense, for an Idolater, or a man of
unsound Principles, then, No stranger passed among them, is, such were not
received, and embraced by them, nor admitted among them.

From the first Observe.

That it is (as the honor of a people to relieve oppressed strangers, so) the
happiness of a people to be freed from the oppression of strangers.

From the second Observe.

That it is the happiness of a people to be free from the mixture of evil
men, whether such whose worship is impure or Doctrine untrue: The Lord made
frequent promises of this happiness to his people ( Isa. 52.1.) From
henceforth there shall no more come into them, the uncircumcised, and the
unclean; which is as much as to say, The stranger (for all uncircumcised
persons were strangers) shall not come into thee. We have the like promise (
Joel 3.17.) So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Sion, my
holy Mountain, then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no stranger pass
through her; Why not any stranger? Forget not to entertain strangers, says
the Apostle (Heb. 13.^.) Jerusalem in her best days shall have strangers, to
be visited and releived by her, but Jerusalem should have no strangers in those
days to defile and pollute her ( Na. 1.15.) Behold upon the Mountain the feet
of him that brings good tidings; for the wicked shall no more pass through
thee, for he is cut off: The Hebrew is, Belial shall no more pass through
thee. Belial is he that cannot endure to serve; he will not yield obedience to
the holy commands of God, he casts off the yoke of Christ, and pulls the
shoulder from his burden. This Belial shall no more pass through thee. The
purest times of the Gospel are presented under a like promise ( Zach. 14.21.)
In that day there shall be no more the Cananite in the house of the Lord of
Hoasts; That is, the stranger and uncircumcised, the wicked and ungodly, shall
no more be mixed with his people.

Thirdly, in that he puts such under the notion of strangers, we learn, That
wicked and Idolatrous persons should be as strangers to us; we must not lay
such in our bosom, to maintain any spiritual society with them, though in
some cases, we may have civil society with them. (2 Cor. 6.13, 14.) Be not
unequally yoaked together with unbeleevers, for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness, and what communion has light with
darkness, and what concord has Christ with Belial: etc. These can never agree
together: Let no such stranger pass, or be approved among us in the fellowship
of the Gospel; there is not only sin in letting such pass with our
approbation, but danger; and that a double danger. Both which are assigned as
reasons why we should come out of Babylon ( Revel. 18.4.)

First, we are in danger of partaking of their sins, and that both by
contracting the spot of their sins, as also the guilt of their sins.

Secondly, we are in danger of partaking of their punishments, as it there
follows, That ye receive not her plagues. There is no safety in being near
those, who are under the curse of God: The companion of fools shall be
destroyed (Prove. 13 20.) though possibly he be not a fool in any other
respect, but because he is in such company.

Fourthly, Taking it for a strange or wicked thing.

Note:

That, It is the honor of Magistrates, when no evil passes quietly in their
Territories: When neither Idolatry in the things of God, nor injustice, nor
oppression in the things of men, find any favor with them, this is at once
their duty, and their glory.

Eliphaz having by way of preface, given proof of what he was about to press
upon Job, both from his own experience and the consent of Antiquity: He now
proposes the point it self.

Verse. 20. The wicked man travels with pain all his days, and the number of
years is hidden to the Oppressor.
In this general Position, Eliphaz intends Jobs personal conviction, that he
was wicked, whom he had heard appealing to God ( Chap. 2.10.) Thou know that
I am not wicked.

As if he had said, Thou would make us believe that God will be thy
compurgator, and give witness for thee upon his own knowledge that thou art
not wicked: But we who are but men may know the contrary, for we see all the
marks and brands of a wicked man upon thee: The wicked man travelleth with
pain all his days, and so do thou: These soars and sorrows speak who thou
art, though we say nothing.

Master Broughton reads, The wicked kills himself all his days; he is a
self murderer; that was the report which Eliphaz made of him at the fifth
Chapter, Verse. 2. Envy slays the silly one. Both Job and his Friends repeat
the same thing often, yet with such variety of illustrations, that though for
the matter it be the same, yet it is new for the manner: Such repetitions do
not only delight, but profit.

The wicked man travelleth with pain all his days: Who is a wicked man, has
been opened at large, Chap. 10.7. where Job affirms, Thou know that I am
not wicked; There see the temper of a wicked man, I will not stay upon it here.
Only consider how his appellation and condition suit one with the other, The
wicked man travells: the Original word for a wicked man signifies an unquiet
motion, and so one whose life is a continual, not only motion, but
unquietness. Unquiet is the name, and unquietness is the state of a wicked
man; he is always raising stirs, and acting Tragedies, His life is always in
a hurry, he travells with pain all his days. (...) a (...) Proprie significat
cruciatum, languorem, pavorem vel dolorem parturientium, vel enitentis and
molientis facinus aliquod. Omnis vita impii in solicitudine. 70. in dolor.
Aquila. Dolet ut parturiens. Page


He travelleth with pain. This sentence is but one word in the Hebrew; the
word signifies any grief, or sorrow, any torture or torment: The translations
are various, but all meet in this one sense, that a wicked man's life is a
miserable life; All the life of a wicked man is spent in carking care: So the
Septuagint. Another renders, It is spent in sorrow. But all may be reduced to
that which is most proper to the word: He is in pain as a woman in travail;
and whereas we have heard of some Women in travail many days; here is a man
in travel all his days.

The wicked man travelleth in pain all his days; his whole life is nothing
else but continual pain, or painful throes toward the birth of some filthy
Monster-sin, which sin when it is finished, brings forth death: Somewhat he
has conceived, the Psalmist tells us what; He has conceived mischief, and
he would bring forth iniquity.

Cunctis diebus suts impius superbit. Vulg.
The Vulgar Latin translates, The wicked man is lifted up with pride all his
days; which is as much as to say, He travelleth in pain all his days; for
though as some say, Pride feels no cold, yet there is nothing feels so much
pain as pride does: And because a wicked man is proud all his days, therefore
he travelleth with pain all his days.

Hence Observe:

The life of a wicked man is a very painful life; or thus, The pain of a
wicked man's life is the greatest pain: It is like the pain of a Woman in
travel; when the holy Ghost would set forth great pain, he expresses it by
the pain of a woman in travel. But what kind of pain is it, with which a
wicked man travells? He has two sorts of pain.

First, external: Secondly, internal.
His external pain is of two sorts:

First, Such as God lays upon him, or casts him into; for though many are the
afflictions of the righteous, from the hand of God, yet the righteous have not
all the afflictions, wicked men have some: They are not only beaten with
scourges, but smitten with scorpions; God raines down upon them snares, fire
and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this is the portion of many of their
cups, even in this life.

Secondly, Such as a wicked man brings upon himself; Master Broughtons reading
aims at these pains. The wicked kills himself all his days. A wicked man is
often very active, sometimes extremely malicious against others, so malicious
that he murders them; and yet it may truly be said he only kills himself all
his days. The self-love of a wicked man destroys him, and his very
earnestness to avoid trouble, tumbles him into it: And this is clear, if we
consider either the way which a wicked man takes, or the end which usually he
comes unto; his way is a very sad way: A godly man is described ( Psalm. 118.2.)
Eating the labor of his hands; that is, the very work which he does, feeds
him; and before he has any reward for his work, he finds a reward in his
work, in which sense, he may well be said, to Eat the labor of his hand: On
the other side, the labor of a wicked man eats him, the labor of his hand,
and the labor of his head, eat him out. The way of sin is a wearisome way (
Jer. 9.5.) They weary themselves to commit iniquity (Ezekiel. 24.12.) She has
wearied her self with lies: A Lie is not taken strictly there for an untruth
told to deceive others: A Lie is any sin, for every sin is a Lie. Sin tells us
a fair tale, but it will deceive us at last.

Again, ( Isa 47.13.) Thou have wearyed thy self, in the multitude of thy
counsels. (Isa. 57.10.) Thou art wearyed in the greatness of thy way. Those
counsels were sinful counsels, and these ways were sinful ways, both were a
weariness, and tired their undertakers. The Lord challenges the Jews ( Mic.
6.3.) To show wherein he had wearyed them; O my people what have I done unto
thee, and wherein have I wearyed thee, testify against me. God is very tender
in laying burdens upon us, but we are very cruel in overburdening our selves.

And whereas the pain of a wicked man is compared to the pain of a Woman in
travail; it is not only like it, but exceeds it: For though when her pain
comes upon her, she has sorrow because her hour is come, yet when she is
delivered, she remembers her anguish no more, for joy that a Man is borne
into the World (John 16.21.) The Woman's pains end in joy, but the pain of a
wicked man is so far from ending in joy, that it has no end at all, and
therefore he is said to travel in pain all his days. A wicked man has the
pain, but not the deliverance of a travailing Woman; a Son shall not be borne
to him. And though he sometimes seems to prosper, and attain his end, yet
there is somewhat or other, that sticks still in the birth, and paineth him in
the midst of all his prosperity. The Author of that useful History, The
Travels of the old Patriarks, Kings, and Prophets, when he comes to write the
motions of Antiochus Epiphanes, who was a great King, but of a most malicious
spirit, against the people of God, he observes that this Antiochus in
pursuance of his bloody designs, had run more hazzards, and taken more tedious
journeys to satisfy his malice, and reach his ambitious ends, then any of the
Saints had done, upon any command or service of God; upon which consideration,
he makes this excellent conclusion, That wicked men take more pains to go to
Hell and eternal destruction, then godly men do in the way to eternal life,
and salvation. A wicked man cannot go to Hell with ease; he goes with pain to
eternal pains. Those ways of sin which have most pleasure in them, have much
vexation in them. ( Prove. 23.29.) Who has woe, who has sorrow, who has
wounds without cause? The answer is at hand in the next words, They that tarry
long at the Wine, they that go to seek the mixed Wine: The Wine is sweet, but
it bites like a Serpent, and stings like an Adder, Verse. 32. The voluptuous man
drinks larger draughts of sorrow then he does of Wine; and while the Adulterer
goes to the Harlots house, he goes as a fool to the stocks, or as an Ox to the
slaughter (Pro. 7.) As pleasure is the Epicures God, so gain is the covetous
man's God, yet to get it, he pierces himself through with many sorrows, and
falls into a snare (1 Timothy 6.) Further, as a sinful conversation among men, so
a superstitious service of the true God, and the serving of false Gods is full
of trouble.

The false worshipper travelleth in pain all his days: All false worship has
a tang of baseness and slavery in it; they that worship the Devil, in what a
wretched servitude do they live? In Popery, what vexatious penances do they
put upon their blinded Votaries? The Gospel is noble, and the service of it
ingenuous, as well as pure or spiritual: Christ has not called us to
drudgerie, but to liberty. They are most free, who serve him most.

What pain the Jews traveled in when they Apostatized from God to Idols,
Tophet, and the Valley of Hinnon, where they offered their Children in the fire
to Moloch, are abundant witnesses. Did God put them to such pain in his
service? God called them to offer their Beasts in Sacrifice to him: But they
offer their Children in Sacrifice to that abominable Idol. Wicked men live
under a hard task-master.

Now besides all these outward pains which either are concomitants, or
consequents of wickedness: There is an inward pain far worse then these.
Inward pain arises sometimes upon the disappointment of his hopes. A wicked
man is exceedingly pained with labor in the attaining of his end, but he is
much more pained with grief, when he cannot attain his end; he hangs between
hope and fear, while he is at work (for he that cannot walk by faith to his
end, shall meet with fears enough before he comes at it) but when his sense
tells him that he cannot come at it, he falls into the gulf of despair.
Besides this pain of fear that he shall not, and that of despair, when he
cannot compass his designs or ends: He is often afflicted with a feircer
pain then either of these, even with the gripes and gnawings of his own evil
conscience for the evil he has done. This pain follows some wicked men all
the days of this life; and it shall be the portion of all wicked men after
death. Eliphaz aims at this in the next Verse, while he says, A dreadful
sound is in his ears; there I shall further insist upon it. We have yet
another very considerable part of the wicked man's misery held forth in the
close of this Verse.

And the number of years is hidden to the oppressor. The word which we
render, Oppressor, (...) Violentus, crudelis, robustus tyrannus, qui suis
nititur opibus, and aliis terribilis est.
signifies a man exceeding powerful and terrible, or by his power terrifying
others; He that oppresses must have power, and some desire power for no other
end, but to enable them to oppress. Solomon speaks of a poor man that
oppresses (Prove. 28.3.) but he oppresses only those who are less powerful
then himself. A poor man that oppresses the poor, is, etc. One poor man
may be as much above another poor man in power, as some rich men are above the
poor. Equals in power cannot oppress.

But who is this Oppressor to whom the number of years are hid? The Oppressor
in this part of the Verse, is the wicked man in the former part; Eliphaz
speaks still of the same person, though under another name, whom he there
called wicked, he calls here an Oppressor.

Hence Note:

That to oppress is a very great wickedness; For an oppressor and a wicked
man are the same man.

Again, in that the word which signifies an oppressor, signifies also a mighty
man, or a man of great strength; we may further Note:

That men who have much power are apt to abuse it for the oppression of others;
it is in the power of my hand said Laban to Jacob, to do thee hurt; And Laban
had hurt Jacob, if God had not stopped him; They that have much power in their
hands, need much holiness in their hearts, Pauci anni reconditi sunt violento.
Jun.
that they may use it well; much power is a temptation to do much hurt.

Nume^us annorum i. e. facile numerabi^es.
The number of years is hidden to the Oppressors. The number of years, say
some, is an Hebraisme, for few years, or years that are easily numberable; a
Child may tell the years of an Oppressor, they are so few: Hence the words
are also rendered thus, Few years are laid up for the Oppressor. Master
Broughton translates plainly to the sense, Soon numbered years are stored to
the Tyrant.

Hence Observe:

First, That wicked Oppressors are often speedily cut off by the hand of God
(Psalm. 55.23.) Blood-thirsty and deceitful men, shall not live out half their
days; If God should lengthen out the lives of men set upon mischief, who
could live? It Is a comfort for us, as well as a curse on them, that Soon
numbered years are stored to the Tyrant, his treasure is not great in days,
who daily treasures up wrath against himself.

Another resuming these words, He travelleth with pain; out of the former
part of the Verse, reads it thus, And in the whole number of years which are
laid up for him, he travelleth in pain: That is, his whole life is miserable:
As if that which is a truth of all wicked men, were more specially applicable
to oppressors; That they travel in pain.

Hence we may note.

Qui vult a multis metui. multos tirre a oportet.
They who love to trouble others, shall be sure to meet with trouble
themselves. He that desires to be feared, shall be often affrayd. Oppressors
and Tyrants in all ages have experimented this truth; which flows both from
the nature of their unjust actions toward men, as also from the just
retaliation of God.

Our reading leads us to a further consideration; The number of years is
bidden to the Oppressor: That is (as some expound) they are determined, or
defined in the secret counsel of God. It is under a hidden decree how long his
oppressing power shall continue, and when he shall receive the reward of his
oppressions: Or rather thus, The number of years of his own life is hidden to
the oppressor; that is, he knows not how long he shall live.

But is that any special judgment upon the Oppressor, that the number of his
years, or how long he shall live is hidden to him? Is not the number of a good
man's years hidden to him? Are not the number of every man's years hidden to
him? Does any man know how long he shall live? David indeed prays, Teach me to
number my days (Psalm. 90.) and Make me to know mine end, and the measure of my
days, what it is, Psalm. 39.4. Yet he does not desire to know precisely the
number of his days, or time of his end, he only desires to know their
general number, or utmost extent spiritually; namely, that at the most they
were not many, that so he might make a wise improvement of his life, and a
holy, preparation for his death.

Seeing then the number of every man's years is hidden to him, how is this
reckoned as the peculiar punishment of a wicked man, that the number of his
years are hidden to him? I answer, It is true, the number of years is hidden
from all men, both from good and bad, the Lord has made that a secret. Two
numbers are secret.

First, The number of the years of the World, when that shall end; Of that day
and hour knows no man, no not the Son of man, but the Father only.

Secondly, The number of the years of a man's own life, or the day of his
death is a secret which no man knows, though many have been busy to pry and
inquire into it. But though godly men know not the number of the years of
their own lives, yet this is no affliction to them, under which notion it is
here said of the Oppressor; The number of years is hidden to him.

A wicked man is thoughtfull about this, how he may live long, not how he may
live or do well; he would fulfill many days and years in the World, that so
he might have his fill of worldly profits and pleasures. He is therefore
troubled to think his life hangs upon uncertain terms, because he is
uncertain of any good beyond this life. A godly man knows not the number of
his years, but he knows by whom they are numbered; that satisfies him, be they
longer or shorter, more or less. But a wicked man would have the account in
his own hand, he would be Lord of all, even of time too, but he cannot, The
number of years are hidden to the Oppressor.

Observe hence.

That the number of the years of man's life is a secret which none knows but
God himself: And as it is so, so it is best for man, that it should be so, The
certain knowledge when our lives should end, would hinder us in many duties
and services of our lives. Men would be at a stand in their worldly callings,
if they were acquainted with the precise date of their standing in the World.
Our not knowing this, is not ignorance, but nescience; and were it not for this
nescience, we should be taken off from the study of much profitable knowledge.
Besides, our not knowing the number of our days, stirrs up in us a care of
improving every day, and to pray with David, Lord teach us to number our days.
Our not knowing which day shall be our last, should provoke us to spend every
day so, that we may have comfort if it prove our last. It is best for us not to
know that, the not knowing whereof is a motive to be always doing good.

Secondly, Observe.

That it is a great vexation to the oppressor, or wicked man to think of the
uncertainty of his own life: The Vulgar makes this Observation from the Text,
his translation of the Text, The years of his Tyrannical power are
uncertain. Numerus annorum incertus est tyrannidis ejus. Vulg. Ex ista
incertitudine, sequitur suspicio and timor. Aquin. in loc. Cum ait numerum
annorum absconditum esse, intelligit annos quibus victurus, aut regnaturus sit
improbus tyrannus. Drus.
If such could but live long enough, what work would they make? Yea what a
world would they make? The Jesuits say, Take time and you may do any thing. So
also says the oppressor, If I had but time enough, I could do any thing;
though I am disappointed now, yet I shall have a day to act what I project, and
to pour out my revenges, But this cuts the oppressors heart, he doubts his life
may end before he can accomplish his ends. A wicked heart is not more pleased
in doing evil, then troubled when he is but under a suspicion that he shall
want either opportunity, or time to do it. This is added to the painful
travel of a wicked man, that he knows not how long he shall travel in this
pain; for though all his be painful days, yet he had rather continue in
pain, then not continue his days. But the number of years is hidden, or a
hidden thing to him.

JOB, CHAP. 15. Verse. 21, 22. A dreadful sound is in his ears, in prosperity
the destroyer shall come upon him.

He believes not that he shall return out of darkness, and he is waited for
of the Sword.


ELiphaz having laid down this position, That pain is the portion of a wicked
man, goes on to the proof, and illustration of it; first, in reference to the
terrors of his conscience; and secondly, in reference to the troublesomenesse
of his outward state, and the sad changes that are incident to him. That a
wicked man travells with inward pain, or terror of conscience; the first
words of this context tell us.

Verse. 21. A dreadful sound is in his ear.
The Hebrew is, A voice of dreads; the word is Plural, (...) Sonnitus
terrorum, numerus multitudinis significationem auget, i. e. sonitus maxim
terrificus, vel non unius sed multiplicis terroris. Merc.
because, not one single terror, but a multitude of terrors, an Army of
terrors incamp about the spirit of a wicked man: and these charge him without
intermission; as soon as one has done, another draws up against him.

And he says, A sound of terror, because a sound carries fear with it; Fear
is a perturbation of the mind, arising from an apprehension of some
approaching evil: Now, by how much the nearer evil draws to us, by so much
does fear increase upon us; and then an evil may be said to be very near us,
when we hear the sound of it. We quickly see and feel an Enemy, when once he
is come within our hearing. When the King of Israel sent a messenger to take
off the head of Elisha, Shut the door (says Elisha) and hold him fast at the
door, is not the sound of his Masters feet behind him? (2 K. 6.33.) That is,
is not his Master near. And when Eliah saw the rain at hand, he thus bespeaks
King Ahab, Get thee up, eat, and drink, for there is a sound of abundance of
rain (1 Kings 18.41.) So here, The sound of terror, notes the speedy approach
of it; the Prophet ( Jer. 4.19.) complains lamentably, My belly, my belly, I
am pained at my very heart, my heart makes a noi e within me (and why all
this?) because thou have heard O my soul, the sound of the Trumpet, and the
alarm of War; that is, because now it appears that the enemy is at hand.
When once we hear the sound of the Trumpet, War is not far off, yea it is
even at the door, and death is ready to climb up at our windows. Usually the
care receives the first blow; we first hear, and then feel the Sword.

When Diphaz says, A dreadful sound is in his ear, we may understand it two
ways; either first, that a wicked man hearing the sad reports of approaching
evil, is greatly troubled; or secondly, that a wicked man frames to himself
an imaginary sound of evil. His fancy makes a noise, he thinks he hears the
sound of Drums and Trumpets, the clattering of Armor, and the clashing of
drawn Swords, he hears (as the Prophet Nahum elegantly describes it) The
noise of the whip, and the noise of the rattling of the Wheels, and of the
pransing Horses, and of the jumping Clarrets. Now, whether we understand it of
the approach of real dangers, the sound of which, are a terror to him, or
whether we take it for those fantastic, pannick fears and Satanicall
delusions, both or either of them render his life uncomfortable, and are the
effects of an unquiet, or of a guilty conscience.

Hence Observe.

A wicked man is always subject to fear; he that is a servant to sin cannot
but be a slave to fear: And he that has done much evil, suspects much.

While we have Peace within, War without does not much trouble, though it much
afflict us. And while our hearts, touched by the spirit of God, make us music,
a sound of terror to the ear is not terrible.

Impius tantum metuit, quantum nocuit.
It is said of a godly man ( Psalm. 112.7.) No evil tidings shall make him fear
(though there be a dreadful sound in his ear, a sound of danger, yet) his
heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. A wicked man is terrified with conceited
danger; a godly man is not afraid when there is real danger. A godly man has
a witness for him in himself; a wicked man carries a witness against him in
himself; Nemo se judice nocens absolvitur.
and this witness is also his judge to condemn him, yea his executioner to
torment, and vex him; as soon as our first Parents had sinned ( Genesis 3.8.)
They heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden, in the cool of the
day, and Adam and his Wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord: Here
was no appearance of terror, it was the voice of God walking as a friend, not
marching as an enemy, and it was in in thr cool, not heat of the day; these
circumstances argue the guiltiness of Adam and his Wife, who fled and hid
themselves at this appearance of the Lord. The voice of God walking, was a
dreadful sound in their ears, because they had not hearkened to the voice of
God commanding. Wicked Pashur, who opposed the good Prophet, is branded with a
new name ( Jer. 20.3.4.) The Lord said, his name shall no more be called
Pashur, but Magor-Misabib; that is, Fear round about, and in the next Verse,
the reason is given why this name was given him, For I will make thee a terror
to thy self: He that is a terror to himself, can no more be without terror,
then he can be without himself. Nor can any thing be a comfort to him, who is
his own terror. And therefore a guilty conscience hears a dreadful sound,
what sound soever he hears: he ever expects to hear bad news, and he puts
fearful glosses and comments upon that which is good.

A wicked man interprets all reports in one of these two mischievous senses,
either To the discredit of others, Pessimus in dubiis Augur timor -- Stat
or to the disquiet of himself: Bring what text of providence you can to him,
he corrupts it with one of these glosses. Yea, the faithful counsels of his
own Friends, are dreadful sounds unto him for he has a suspicion that while
they are counselling him for good, it is but a contriving of evil against him,
or a setting of snares to catch him.

Again, sometimes God creates a sound, or causes the wicked to hear a
dreadful sound (2 Kings 7.6.) The Lord made the Host of the Syrians to hear a
noise of Charriots, and a noise of Horses, even the noise of a great Host,
etc. Upon this dreadful sound, they arose and fled. Sometimes a wicked heart
creates a sound, and what the Prophet threatens, he hears, the stone out of
the Wall, the beam out of the Timber crying against him. The Story tells us of
one who thought that the Swallows in the Chimney spoke, and told tales of him.
We say in our Proverb, As the Fool thinks, so the Bell clinketh; much more
may we say, As an evil conscience thinks, so every thing clinketh. As he
that has a prejudice against another, takes all he hears spoken of him, and
all that he hears him speak in the worst sense, and most disadvantageous
construction to his reputation; so he that has a pre^udice against himself,
construes all that he either hears or sees against his own Peace: Hence it is
that he does not only flee when he is pursued, but when none pursue ( Prove.
28.1.) The wicked flies when none pursues (except his own fears) but the
righteous is as bold as a Lion: This terror was threatened in the old Law (
Levit. 26.36.) They that are left alive of you in the time of your Captivity, I
will send fainting in their hearts, in the Land of their Enemy, and the sound
of a shaking leaf shall chase them; What poor spirits have they who are
chased by the motion of a leaf? The sound of a leaf is a pleasant sound, it
is a kind of natural music. Fear does not only make the heart move, Homines
tui non expectato adventu hostis, velut transsossi examinantur metu. Jun.
As the Trees of the Forest are moved with the wind (Isa. 7.) but it makes
the heart move, if the wind do but move the Trees of the Forest. The Prophet
Isaiah tells Jerusalem, Thy slain men are not slain with the Sword, not dead
in Battle (Isai. 22.2.) With what then were they slain? And how dyed they; a
learned Interpreter tells us how: They were slain with fear, and dyed with a
sound of Battle before ever they joined Battle. This answers the judgment
denounced by Moses in another place ( Deuteronomy. 28.65.) The Lord shall give thee
there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind, and thy life
shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night, and shall
have no assurance of thy life.

But here some may object, Is this the portion of wicked men? Does a dreadful
sound in their ears afflict their hearts? Have not many such, much peace? and
do they not either smile or wonder to heart others complaining of an afflicted
spirit, and beg prayers for the appeasing of their troubled conscience? which
are matters they have no acquaintance with, nor knowledge of.

I answer,

First, We are not to understand the proposition, as if all wicked men have, or
that any wicked man at all times, has this dreadful sound in his ear; but
thus it is very often, and thus it may be always: thus it is with many, and
thus it may be with all wicked men. A wicked man has (as we say) no fence for
it, no privilege nor promise to secure him from it.

Again, though some wicked men have not this dreadful sound in their ears;
yea though they have pleasant sounds in their ears, like them who sang to the
Vial, etc. (Amos 6.) yet first, their peace is not a true peace; secondly, it
is not a lasting peace; thirdly, that which they have, arises from one of
these two grounds; either from neglect of their consciences, or from some
defect in their consciences. The neglect of conscience from whence this arises
is twofold, either first, when they neglect to speak to conscience; conscience
and they never have a word, much less any serious conference, or discourse;
either concerning the state of their hearts, or the course of their lives, and
then all is peace with them. Secondly, when the speakings of conscience are
neglected, conscience has a double voice of direction, and correction;
conscience tells a man what he ought, and what he ought not to do: conscience
checks a man for not doing what he ought, or for doing what he ought not. Yet
many over power and restrain conscience from this office, and never leave
opposing, till they have silenced, yea conquered it: Such as these have peace,
such a one as it is, and hear nothing but a sound of delight in their ears,
while this silence lasts.

Again, this may arise from some defect disabling conscience, to do its
ordinary, or natural duty. (the conscience of an evil man may have some
goodness in it) Conscience may be considered two ways, either morally, or
naturally; that only is a morally good conscience, which is pure and holy, a
conscience cleansed from the guilt of sin by the blood of Christ; thus no
wicked man can be said to have a good conscience. That is a naturally good
conscience which performs the office or duty to which conscience is appointed;
conscience is set up in man to perform certain offices: if the conscience of
a bad man perform them, his conscience (in that sense) is good.

The first office or work of conscience is to observe, and take notice of what
we do, conscience should, as it were, keep a Day-Book, and follow us up and
down with Pen and Ink, to write all our motions.

A second work of conscience is to testify what we have done, and which way
we have moved.

A third, is, to accuse us when we do evil, and to acquit us when we do
well: Now as a wicked man's conscience is always morally evil, because
stained, and polluted with sin: So many times his conscience is naturally evil
too; that is, it will neither take notice of, nor check him for his sin. When
the wicked man's conscience is in this evil state, he thinks his state good
enough, and so he is at quiet.

Casuists tell us of four sorts of evil consciences, all which may live out
of the hearing of these dreadful sounds.

First, A blind ignorant conscience that cannot discern between moral good
and evil.

Secondly, A secure conscience, which thinks not of any penal evil.

Thirdly, A dull, lazy, sleepy conscience, which has little or no sense,
either of what is done or suffered.

Fourthly, A feared conscience, which is altogether senseless.

A conscience thus disabled to perform its work, being either blind, secure,
sleepy, or feared, is tame and quiet with the worst of men. But all this while,
though this wicked man has some ease, yet he has no peace; his conscience
while seared, is far enough from being settled; his conscience while asleep is
far enough from rest. It is with such, as with some sick men, ask them how
they do, they will say, Very well, when as indeed they are so sick, that they
know not how ill they are; they take death it self for health, and their not
feeling of pain for the curing of their disease.

But when the conscience of a wicked man is once enlightened, softened, and
awakned, he cannot but have these dreadful sounds, which will neither give nor
let him receive any rest. Conscience will awake at last, and speak terrible
things, conscience will be a Bounnerges, a terrible Preacher, thundering out,
not only a chiding reproof, but a sentence of condemnation, and then the
wicked will even gnash their teeth, because conscience did no sooner use its
teeth, they will gnaw their tongues for sorrow, because conscience had no
tongue to speak, or they no ears to hear what it spoke, till it was too late:
A dreadful sound is in his ear.

In prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him. (...) In pa^e.
The Hebrew is, In peace the destroyer shall come upon him. Peace is so near
allied, and so great a friend to prosperity, that one word may well serve both.
The wicked man's destroyer shall be to him like Joab to Abner, and Amasa,
shedding the blood of War in Peace, and putting that blood upon the Girdle
about his loins, etc. 1 Kings 2.5.

But some may demand, How does this suite with the former Verse? Where Eliphaz
told us, that A wicked man travells in pain all his days: How is he in
prosperity, if he travells all his days in pain? I answer, The denomination
is given from the greatest part of a wicked man's life, and that is trouble and
pain. Or secondly, if an instance can be given of any wicked man, that has
had more good days then evil, or that has had no ill days at all, in regard
of any outward trouble and pain, then we may reconcile the Text thus; his
prosperity is beside his state, yea, Est amplificatio malae cujusdam impiorum
securitatis q. d. si contingat impium nihil timere sed secure agere tunc and
inopinato opprimetur. Pined.
in his very prosperity he is in pain: In the midst of laughter his heart is
sorrowful, and the end of his mirth is heaviness (Prove. 14.13.) His is but a
seeming, not a real prosperity.

Further, these words are an aggravation of his misery, because if at any time
he appears prosperous, and free from fear, then sudden destruction overtakes
him.

Or lastly, The destroyer may be said to come upon him in prosperity, because
in his best days he fears the destroyer: he suspects danger, when he sees
none; and is therefore never out of danger. Who this destroyer is, is left here
at large; Et cum pax sit ille insidias suspicatur. Vulg. Omnia etiam tuta
tyranni and impii timent. Merc.
no particular one is specified, but any terrible one is intended; Eliphaz does
not say, A Destroyer, but The Destroyer. One both powerful and skillful to
destroy shall come upon him. He shall not only come to him, but come upon him;
to come upon, is to invade or to assault: A friend comes to a man with
kindness and embraces, to visit or salute him, an Enemy comes upon a man with
blows, and violence to wound and destroy him. In prosperity the destroyer
shall come upon him.

Hence Observe.

When wicked men think themselves most safe, they are nearest to destruction.
It Is seldom that they think themselves safe, and when they do, they are
furthest from safety. When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the
workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever
(Psalm. 92.7.) Their temporal, short spring, is not only an antecedent, but an
argument of their eternal Winter. And their Winter is not the going down of
the sap to the root, but the pulling of them up by the roots; they shall be
destroyed.

( Job 20.22.) In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits: When
it is full Sea with him, his Channel shall be dried up. It was said to that
Fool ( Luke 12.20.) This night thy soul shall be taken from thee: The
destroyer came upon him, indeed in his prosperity, when he sang himself
asleep, with Soul thou have goods laid up for many years, he could not keep
his soul one night. (1 These. 5.3.) When they shall say peace and safety, then
sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with Child, and
they shall not escape: The general destruction of wicked men in the day of
judgment, shall come as a thief in the night. We have a representation of
this, in that woeful tragedy which the Lord acted upon the Egyptians ( Exodus
12.30.) At midnight there was a grevious cry (he came upon them as a thief in
the night) for the Lord smote all the first borne of the Land of Egypt; they
dyed in their warm beds, in prosperity the destroyer came upon them. This is
bad enough, yet not the worst of the condition of wicked men:

For,

Verse. 22. He believes not that he shall return out of darkness, he is waited
for of the Sword.
This is a further account of the inward misery or pain which afflicts the
spirit of a wicked man.

He believes not that he shall return out of darkness. He looks not that
he shall escape from darkness. So Master Broughton. There are five
interpretations given about this darkness, out of which the wicked man
believes he shall not return.

First, Some understand it of the darkness of sin; but a wicked man cannot be
said to despair of that about which he never had any hope, Pii spe se armant
and in spem contra spem sperant. Merc.
or desire.

Secondly, Some understand darkness literally, and plainly of the darkness
of the night, and interpret thus, He believes not that he shall return out of
darkness; that is, he is so haunted with fears every night, when he lies
down, that he thinks he shall never live till the morning: This is a good
sense.

Thirdly, Others understand this darkness, to be death, he has a perfect
sound of dread when death comes, because he believes not that he shall return
out of that darkness. The resurrection is the consolation of the Saints, in
the midst of greatest dangers and thickest darkness; because, though they dye,
yet they believe they shall return out of darkness. But a wicked man, who
believes, or hopes for nothing beyond the time of this life, if he be once cast
into the Grave, either thinks he shall lie there for ever, or if he believes
he shall rise, yet he does not believe that he shall rise out of darkness, for
he shall rise in darkness, and go down to everlasting darkness.

Fourthly, A fourth expounds it of internal darkness, the darkness of his
spirit, or of those mists and clouds which hang about his mind. A godly man
falling into this darkness, does not actually believe he shall return out of
it (for such a faith were his return out of it) but a wicked man as he has no
ground, so no possibility (continuing in the state he is) to believe it. Saul
had a woeful dark spirit, and believed not that he should return out of it, by
the help of God; therefore he went to a Witch (a Counselor of the Prince of
darkness) for help.

But fifthly, I rather conceive, as often elsewhere, so here, by darkness is
meant, outward affliction. When the destroyer comes upon him, and he is cast
into a sad dark condition, he has no faith for himself, that he shall
return out of it, or be delivered from it. This is an extreme agravation of
the miserable state of a wicked man, who either has no outward prosperity, or
his prosperity is nothing to him, he enjoyes it not; but if ever he fall into
outward misery, how great is his misery, so great that he gives himself for
gone, a lost man for ever: He believes not that he shall return out of
darkness.

Observe hence.

That a wicked man neither does, not can believe deliverance from evil.

First, He has no ground to believe, promises are the foundation of faith. A
wicked man may be under promises of conversion from his sin, but he is not
under any promise of mercy while he continues in his sin; the whole Book of God
yields him not (in hat state) any special promise, for so much as a bit of
bread; when he has bread, he has it from providence, not from a promise, or
but from a general promise. He is fed as a Beast is fed, the Lord being the
preserver of Man and Beast: He cannot have a special promise himself, not
being an heir of promise: Therefore when he falls into darkness, he has no
ground to believe. Whereas a godly man never has so much ground to believe, as
when he falls into darkness, because then he has more promises then before;
his outward losses gain him the advantage of many sweet promises, which till
then he could not plead, for the succor and nourishment of his faith. As a
wicked man has no promise of God (in the sense explained) at any time; so a
godly man has most promises of God in evil, yea in the worst of times.

And as a wicked man has no ground to believe, so he usually has no heart to
believe: as he has no reason to hope for better things, so he has no courage,
his spirit sinks and fails, when his state does. Abigall had no sooner told
Nabal that the destroyer was coming upon him in his prosperity, but his heart
sunk within him, like a stone, and he dyed away presently.

Secondly, The best of a wicked man's faith (that he shall return out of
darkness) is but a presumptuous fancy, or mere Foole-hardinesse. A good man
is like a Child in his Fathers house, who takes no care, but casts all upon
his Parents; in the greatest storm, he commits the helm to Christ as Pilot;
he can say as David (Psalm. 42.) when he is in trouble, Why art thou disquieted
O my soul? He calls his soul to question, and would have his soul give him a
reason, Why art thou troubled, my soul? hope in God, for I shall yet praise
him: But a wicked man has no God to hope in, therefore he cannot say, I shall
yet praise him: That man cannot cast his burden of cares upon the Lord ( Psalm.
55.22.) who cares not how he burdens God with his sins; therefore he must bear
and sink under both burdens himself: He cannot believe that he shall return
out of the darkness of trouble, who delights and sports in the darkness of
iniquity.

Again, Consider, this is brought as a proof of the woeful condition of a
wicked man. It is misery enough, that the destroyer shall come upon him; but
this is more miserable, he cannot believe deliverance from destruction.

Hence Observe.

That want of faith in time of affliction is more grievous then affliction: It
is worse not to believe deliverance, then to fall into trouble; as the life of
faith is the best life, so the life of unbeleife is the worst life. Despair of
good is the greatest evil: Faith is not only the support and relief of the
soul in trouble, but it is the victory and triumph of the soul over trouble.
Faith does not only keep the soul alive, but lively; Faith keeps the soul
fat and in good plight: Faith is a shield, both against temptation, and
affliction. But every blow falls upon the bare skin of an unbeleever; Faith is
a shield both against the fiery darts of the Devil, and (with a difference)
against the fiery darts of God also. Let God himself cast his darts at a
Beleiver, Faith secures him from hurt, though not from wounds, yea his very
wounds, through a work of faith, shall work his good.

It is the comfort of a man that fears God, and obeys the voice of his
Servants, that while he walks in darkness and has no light, he is bid to
trust in the name of the Lord, and to stay upon his God (Isa. 50.10.) But while
a man that does not fear God, walks in darkness and has no light, his
misery is, that he can neither trust in God till light comes, nor that light
will ever come. How happy are the righteous, to whom light arises in
darkness? How unhappy are the wicked, who being in darkness, conclude that
the light will never arise.

Faith makes all evil good to us, and all good better; unbeleife makes all
good evil to us, and all evil worse. Faith (like the Horse, Job 39.19.)
laughs at the shaking of the Spear; unbeleife trembles at the shaking of a
leaf. Faith finds food in Famine, and a Table in the Wilderness. In greatest
dangers, faith answers, I have a great God; when outward strength is broken,
and all lies a bleeding, faith answers, The promises are strong still, they
have not lost a drop of blood, nor have they a skarre upon them. When God
himself apreares angry, faith answers, I know how to please him, and I can go
to one in whom he is, and will be wel-pleased for ever. Thus faith pulls out
the sting of trouble, draws out the gall and wormwood of every affliction. But
where faith is wanting, every affliction is full of gall and wormwood, and
every trouble vexes with a double sting. It stings such, as it is a trouble,
and it stings them more, as they see no comfort in, nor way out of trouble. The
darkness of darkness is this, Not to believe, that we shall return out of
darkness.

And he is waited for of the Sword. This clause is near in sense to the latter
part of the former Verse, and yet in this variety of expression, there is some
variety of intention. For the clearing of it, two things are to be enquired:
First, What is meant by the Sword. Secondly, What is meant, by, waited for of
the Sword.


The Sword is taken two ways in Scripture.

First, literally for That weapon of War, and by a Synechdoche the Sword is
put for all weapons of War; as also by a Metonymie, for War it self: When
the Sword is threatened in Scripture, War is threatened.

Secondly, The Sword is taken for the power of the Magistrate, who bears not
the Sword in vain: Christ is described as a King armed with his Sword. ( Isa.
11.4.) By the Sword (that is with the Word) of his mouth he will slay the
wicked: Nempe sua sententia tradens eum justitiae ministro.
Christ will pronounce a sentence of condemnation, and deliver them up to
execution: Thus the Judge slayes the Malefactor by the sword of his mouth.

Further, by a Synechdoche, the Sword is taken for all manner of evil and
trouble; Quicquid pungit and percutit, and torquet, and cruciat, in scripturis
sanctis gladius appellaturs Hieron. in cap. ult. Isa.
whatsoever hurts or afflicts is comprehended under the notion of a Sword (
Luke 1.35,) Old Simeon tells the holy Virgin in his song, Also a Sword shall
pass through thy soul; his meaning is not, that she should be cut off in
War, by the hand of the Soldier, or in peace, by the sentence of the Judge,
but that sore troubles and afflictions like a sharp Sword should pierce her
soul.

Here the Sword may be taken either for the Sword of War, or of Peace, or for
any evil, that befalls the Wicked Man.

But how is he waited for of the Sword; the Original word is rendered two
ways.

First, Actively, Secondly, Passively.
Some render actively, He is waiting for of the Sword: He stands expecting the
Sword, and that in a double sense; Circumspectans undique gladium. Vulg. Sc.
vel quo pereat vel quo se defendat. Tanquam exspecula expectat. Tigur.
Hebraizantes tenent esse participium passinum: hinc Rab. Levi. exponit.
Conspicitur a gladio. Aspectus gladio Vatabl. Est Hebraismus, ut videeri a
gladio sit ab hostibus observari per insidias. Decretus in manu ferri. Sept.
Conspectus ipse ad gladium. Mont. Nempe a Deo conspectus and destinatus ad
gladium. Praevisus enim est ad gladium. Sym.
he waits for the Sword which he fears will destroy him, or he waits for a
Sword, which he desires to defend him. Mr. Broughton gives this sense, Having
watch, he thinks upon the Sword.

Again, others render it passively, He is waited for of the Sword, when he
thinks not of it: The Sword lies in ambush to surprise him. A man is said to
be waited for by an Enemy, when he intends to assault him unawares, To be thus
waited for by the sword, is to be waited for by swordmen. And it is as great a
disadvantage to be seen of the Sword, before we see the Sword; as it is
(according to the old Proverb) to be seen of the Wolf, or of the Crocodile,
before we see either.

The wicked is waited for of the Sword, not for any service, but for the
revenge it owes him, the Sword lies behind the door, or under a bush to snap
him as he passes.

The Septuagint in stead of, he is waited, or watched, or looked for by the
Sword, render thus, He is decreed into the hand of the Sword; leading us to the
appointment and destination of God, who has set him out, and marked him for
judgment. He is appointed to the Sword: Such a decree the Prophet seems to
point at ( Jer. 15.2.) where he brings in the Lord, as resolved to proceed in
judgment against all prayers and entreaties, though made by his greatest
Favorites; Though Moses and Samu^l stood before me, yet my mind could not be
into this people, but such as are for death, to death, and such as are for the
Sword, to the Sword: That is, such as are decreed into the hand of the Sword,
let the Sword take them; the decree shall stand, the sentence is irrevocable.

Taking the Text actively, Observe:

That a wicked man thinks every one his enemy: He dreams of danger when he
sleeps, and where ever he comes, he waits for the Sword, He that has a mind
to hurt others, fears it is in the mind of every one to hurt him: He that is
harmless is fearelesse; Nunquam non divin^m ultionem expectat vel metuit.
Merc. Ex omni part inimicos sibi imminere videns. Aquin. Qui de nullo confidit
de omnibus timet. id.
and while we go about doing good, we are free from the suspicion of evil.
Cain having murdered his Brother, complains of the Lords sentence against
him, Thou have driven me out this day from the face of the earth, and from thy
face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and a Vagabond on the earth, and
it shall come to pass, that every man that finds me shall slay me, (Genesis
4.14.) Cains complaint is the Comment of this Text, Every one that finds me
shall slay me, is, I wait for, or I expect the Sword: Cain speaks as if an Army
were continually pursuing him, or as if the avenger of blood, were always
ready at his heels. And that which aggravates the wonder of this jealousy, is,
that we can give account but of one man alive in the World besides himself at
that time, and that was his own Father Adam; we read not of any Son that Abel
left behind him, nor had Cain any Son (upon record) at that time; and yet he
cries out as if the World had been full of Inhabitants, and every one of them
his Enemy; Every one that meets me will slay me. What is said of Ishmael, is
true of Oppressors, Their hand is against every man, and therefore they have
cause enough to suspect that every man's hand is against them, they are ever
waiting for the Sword.

Secondly, from the passive sense, He is waited for of the Sword.

Observe.

That a wicked man is in danger wheresoever he is: He cannot set his foot over
the threshold but mischief may arrest him; the Lord said to Cain, If thou
do ill, sin lies at the door; that is, (according to the ordinary
interpretation) punishment lies at the door, it lies at the door, yea it will
draw the latch, or turn the Key and come in at the door; There is no evil
but a wicked man is subject to it; as there is no good, but is the inheritance
of a godly man, who is therefore called an heir of the promise. He that is an
heir of the promise, has all the good things of this life, and of the next
for his inheritance. When he goes forth, mercy has him by the hand, yea mercy
lies under his feet, and holds a canopy of protection over his head. A wicked
man is an heir of the curse, and therefore he always stands under the
droppings of Divine anger; his breast is the Butt or Mark at which God levells
the deadly Arrows of his indignation, and he is waited for of the Sword.

Thirdly, Observe.

That the expectation of evil is more afflictive then the feeling of evil; He
does not say, he is slain with the Sword, or cut off with the Sword; but he is
waited for, or he waits for the Sword: All evil attends him who is thus
attended, or who gives such attendance. He that is always looking for evil
cannot enjoy the good which he sees. For as the assured hope of approaching
comfort swallows up our present sorrows, so the continual expectation of
approaching sorrow swallows up our present comforts.

Fourthly, It is not said either by what Sword or by whose Sword he is waited
for, but he is waited for of the Sword; here is the Sword, but here is no hand
named, neither the hand of God, nor the hand of man, drawing and weilding this
Sword.

Hence note.

That the destruction of a wicked man is inevitable. When we neither know,
whose the Sword is, nor whence the Sword is, how shall we prevent it or provide
against it. Cum Supplicium dicitur and non dicitur a quo inferendum sit,
inevitabile supplicium significatur. Sanct.
When the Lord would assure us that an unavoydable overthrow shall come upon
the Kingdoms of the earth, which oppose the Kingdom of Christ; he says, A
Stone cut out without hand, shall do this; it shall be done no man knows how
or which way; and therefore no man can know how or which way to hinder the
doing of it. As there is a Stone cut out without hands, so here is a Sword to
cut without hands. The judgment of Babylon is thus expressed by the Prophet (
Isa. 47.11.) Therefore shall evil come upon thee, thou shall not know from
whence it arises; and mischief shall fall upon thee, thou shall not be able
to put it off. The former words expound the latter: Why should not Babylon be
able to put off the mischief? Because it comes upon her, she knows not from
whence. We say in our Proverb, when we threaten a mischief, from which there
is no escaping, You shall never know who hurt you: He that knows not who hurts
him, shall never know how to help himself; and while the hand that strikes us
is not seen, how shall we see to defend our selves against the stroke. He that
waits for the Sword is always in fear, and he that is waited for by the
Sword, is always in danger. Either of these is bad enough; and he that is
under both, cannot be worse.

JOB, Chap. 15. Verse. 23, 24. He wandreth abroad for bread, saying, Where is
it? He knows that the day of darkness is ready at hand.

Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid, they shall prevail against him, as
a King ready to battle.


THese two Verses are a further description of the perplexed condition of a
wicked man, A dreadful sound is in his ear, etc. He is waited for of the
Sword. And what more?

Verse. 23. He wandereth abroad for bread, saying, Where is it?
In Hebraeo tantum est movetur propane.
We put in those words, Saying, and Is it; the Hebrew being only this, He
wandreth abroad for bread, where; as if he had said, No man knows where, and
he knows not whither himself.

There is a twofold interpretation of this Wandering; some understand it of a
powerful roaving abroad for bread; he takes what he can from those who are
next, Tyrannorunt farta and rapinas hic de scnibi putat Cajetanus.
or he takes what comes next to hand: He must have it, it matters not much with
him, how or from whom. Such are called Rovers, they rove abroad for bread, they
spoil and plunder others for the supply of their wants, shall I say, or of
their lusts. But I conceive this Exposition unsuitable; and the reason is,
because Eliphaz is not here describing the sin of a wicked man, but his
punishment; to spoil and plunder for bread is his sin; to wander for bread is
his punishment, and implies the evil and misery that comes upon the wicked,
not the evil and mischief that is done by the wicked.

Secondly, To wander, is the condition of a man who has no settled dwelling.
Paul was once in such a state, Even to this present hour we both hunger etc.
and have no certain dwelling place (1 Cor. 4.11.) This also was the lot of the
Jewish Martyrs, They wandered about in Sheeps-skins, etc. (Heb. 11.37.) These
were holy wanderers: They wandered in the World, that they might not wander
from God. Here we have an unholy wanderer, who having gone astray from God,
found no rest among men, a downright Vagabond; for so the word is applied to
Cain (Genesis 4.) A fugitive and vagabond shall thou be; and we in our Law, call a
sort of idle Beggars, Vagabonds, such as go from Country to Country, from
house to house, to seek their bread. Such also were among the Jews, who are
therefore called Vagabond Jews, (Acts 19.13.) To be a wanderer was one of the
sharpest threats that God ever denounced against his people, My God will cast
them away, because they did not hearken to him, and they shall be wanderers
among the Nations.

He wanders about for bread. In Scripture sense, bread takes in all good
things, Panis hoc loco non significat, ut alias saepe, quodcunque esculentum;
sed vilissimum quemque cibum quo possit sustentari. Pined. His verbis notatur
aliud Dei flagellum nempe extrema inopia. Bold.
even the best which concern this life: So Christ teaches us to pray, Give us
this day our daily bread. But here by bread, we are to understand the meanest
provision, distinct from flesh, and other Food; a man that lives merely upon
bread, has but poor fare; though bread be the staff of life, yet he that
has nothing but bread to eat, lives meanly, and has only enough to keep
life and soul together.

Yet further, they that wander for bread, must be content with the coursest
bread, and with a little of that; they are often glad if they get but a dry or
moldy crust of bread to satisfy the cry of hunger. So then, To wander about
for bread, is to live a beggars life, or to be driven to the utmost shifts to
sustain life, and keep from starving.

To be brought to a piece of bread (of our own) is to be brought to the lowest
ebb in worldly things, Exul, inops erres alienaque limina lustres Ovid. in Ibin.
( Prove. 6.26.) By means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of
bread; That is, he is made very poor. And if he be at a low ebb, who has but
a piece of bread of his own: what are they who are forced to ask so low as a
piece of bread of others? To want bread is ill, but wonder about for bread is
far worse. He that wants bread is pincht, but he that wanders for it is
disgraced.

Observe hence, first.

To want and wander about for bread, is a sore affliction; Such an affliction,
as David professes he never observed the rightous man's seed fallen into (
Psalm. 37.25.) I have been young, and now am old, yet never saw I the righteous
forsaken, nor their seed begging their bread: The righteous are often troubled,
yet never forsaken, or if forsaken of men, yet not of God; when all men, even
godly men, forsook Paul, yet God did not: The Lord (says he) stood by me, (2 Timothy 4.16, 17.) And though a righteous man may be brought to beg, yet his seed
(that is, his whole posterity) is not; or if we take seed for a single person,
to see him beg for bread is very rare; so rare it was in those times, that
David had not observed it; for he speaks not of that which cannot be, but of
that which is seldom or never seen to be. It Is a mercy to be denied
superfluities, but it is an extreme misery to be denied necessaries. The Jews
had poor amongst them, Casus transitorii non reddunt mendicum. Musc. in Psa.
37.
but the Law made such provision, that they had no Beggars or wanderers for
bread. ( Deuteronomy. 15.) He is not a Beggar that asks bread upon a pinch (for so
did David himself, more then once) but he that makes a trade of it.

Poverty or want is not a mark of Gods disfavour, no more then riches are a
mark of his love: Yet some want and poverty, that especially, which is
accompanied with a continual wandering for bread, is a mark of Gods disfavour.
it was a Prophetical curse upon the Traitor Judas and his Posterity ( Psalm.
109.10.) Let his Children be continually Vagabonds and beg, let them seek
their bread out of desolate places. And experience tells us, that though
sometimes a Lazarus, a good man beg, yet the race and generality of professed
Beggars are the worst of mankind.

Secondly, whereas Eliphaz speaks specially of the Oppressor, and tells us,
that he wanders about for bread.

We may observe.

Oppression is the nearest way to poverty: They who make Beggars to satisfy
their lusts, shall be forced to beg for the satisfying of their hunger. It is
very dangerous to make provision for the flesh by lawful means, to fulfill
the lusts of it; but it is most dangerous to make provision for the flesh by
unlawful means (by wrong and oppression) to fulfill the lusts of it. They who
so fulfill their lusts, shall soon be brought to want. Hannah sung out this
sudden change (1 Samuel 2.5.) They that were full have hired themselves out for
bread, and they that were hungry ceased. Not that they ceased to be, but they
ceased to be hungry, or their hunger ceased. Godly empty ones were filled, and
wicked full ones were emptied; and that which makes the want and emptiness of
a wicked man so great a misery, is his want of faith and patience when he is
empty; he has done so much evil, that he has no faith to believe, that any
man will do him good, therefore his poverty fills him with impatience, and his
mind is more unsettled then his estate.

Thus such as he are described ( Psalm. 59.14, 15.) At evening let them return,
and let them make a noise, like a Dog, and go round about the City: Let them
wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied: A good man
may want meat, but he does not grudge. He that waits upon God, and believes,
shall be satisfied, though not filled.

Again, it is prophesied of wicked men ( Isa. 8.21.) They shall pass through
it hardly bestead and hungry, and it shall come to pass, when they shall be
hungry, that they shall fret themselves, and curse their King and their God,
and look upward: When an unbeleever has nothing to eat, he eats himself.
His own fretting wastes him more then his hunger. He then looks upward, not as
submitting himself to God in his hunger, not as depending upon God, for the
satisfying of his hunger: In which sense it is said ( Psalm. 145.15, 16.) The
eyes of all wait upon thee, or (as we put in the Margin) look unto thee, and
thou give them their meat in due season, thou openest thine hand and
satisfiest the desire of every living thing. A wicked man cannot look upward,
thus, when he is hungry, he cannot look up and pray, he cannot look up and
trust in God; but he looks upward to curse the God of Heaven in his heart, if
not with his tongue; he looks upward, because he is vexed with all that is done
below; he looks upward, not because he has any pleasant sights in Heaven,
Terroribus conscientiae ita divexatur ut in maxima abundamia sum egeat,
laboret de victu supra modum. Jun. Vagatur, vel in mediis opibus, egestatis
metu, nec partis secure fruitur. Merl.
but because he is displeased with all he sees on Earth.

He wanders abroad for bread. Where? or whither does he wander? That which
Eliphaz is conceived to aim chiefly at in this passage, is not so much the
real, as the imaginary and conceited want of a wicked man. He wanders while he
stays at home, and seeks for bread, while his Barns and Tables are filled
with it. He is terrified with fore-thoughts of poverty, in the midst of his
riches, and when he has bread, says, Where is it? He is so troubled with
suspected evils, that he cannot take comfort in his possessed goods.

Hence observe.

First, That abundance cannot satisfy: God only is fullness to us. A man may
wander about in his thoughts for bread, when he has bread enough about him,
and say he shall be undone, and dye a beggar, when he has abundance. A
coveteous man is an unsatiable gulf; He only is well who has enough, and he
is best who has (in temporalls) the least enough: But a coveteous man has not
enough, though he has more then enough, and much more then needs; he always
dreams of dearths, and suspects the Earth will be barren: with these fears he
pines, yea martyrs himself, and is not at all enriched with all his riches; he
has sufficient to maintain twenty, yet is told by his unbeleife, that he has
not sufficient for one. This is vanity and vexation of spirit; The life of man
does not consist in what he has, but in what he is, and hopes to be: his life
does not consist in abundance, either for the continuance of it, or for the
comfort of it. A man does not live more days, nor more cheerfully any day,
because he lives plentifully. The creature were a God to us, if it could do
this to us; but this, God has reserved in his own hands (how much soever of
the creature he gives out) that we may know our dependence on him.

Secondly Observe.

That imaginary wants, or to have an unquiet spirit in the midst of our
enjoyments, is more afflictive then to be in real want: The worst worldly
poverty is to be poor when we are rich; as it is the excellency of our
spiritual estate to be poor in spirit, in our greatest spiritual plenty, to
be little or nothing in our own eyes, when we have a great stock of grace: So
it is the misery of our temporal estate to be thus poor in spirit, when we
have plenty in the Purse, to say we have little or nothing, when we have a
great stock of worldly goods.

Zophar concludes of the Hypocrite ( Chap. 20.21.) In the fullness of his
sufficiency he shall be in streights; which may be understood, either first,
That when he is full, troubles shall empty him; or secondly, That while his
fullness continues, even in his fullest fullness, he shall live, as if he were
indeed as empty of wealth, as he is of goodness, always spending himself
with fears that all will be suddenly spent, and saying in his heart, This will
not hold out, I shall never be able to bring the year about, or bring (as we
say) both ends together. Hence his cares are endless, and he grudges himself
ordinary comforts, his worldly sorrow consumes him, and he is willing to dye,
only to save charges: That man is in an ill case, who is grudged what he eats
or spends, by others, but it is far worse for a man to grudge himself his
necessary expenses.

Some worldly men, whose Barns are full, are ready to say every one to his
soul, as he ( Luke 12.19.) Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for
many years: Another has his Barnefull, and yet says, This will not hold one
year, and so gives his soul no ease at all. What the Apostle says of
himself, is true of all those who have an interest in Christ, (2 Cor. 6.10.)
As poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all things:
But there are some rich, who make many poor, and themselves poorest of all;
for though they have all those things, yet they are as if they possessed
nothing. It is an affliction to be poor for want of riches, but it is a curse
to be poor in the possession of riches. He that loves Silver shall not be
satisfied with Silver ( Eccles. 5.10.) To be satisfied, is more then to be
rich, and he is always poor who is unsatisfied; he that expects satisfaction
from the creature, shall never find contentation in the creature; and he that
expects no satisfaction from the creature, has contentation in any portion of
the creature. A godly man learnes in every estate to be content; a carnal man
is content in no estate; when he is poor, he sees he has nothing, and when he
is rich, he says he has not enough. Thus he wanders as well when he is rich,
as when he is poor, and is therefore never satisfied.

Again,

He wanders about for bread, Where? Or saying, Where is it?

Hence Observe:

A man that is not good, is uncertain where to receive any good; Where is it?
Though a Believer want bread, yet he knows whither to go for it, and where it
is to be had. The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, he goes to
Heaven for bread as well as for grace; he knows there is bread in the promise,
and to the promise he goes. The promise has all things both concerning life,
and godliness. Christ who is the bread of life, gives us bread for this life;
and having Christ, with him, we have all things else; Bread and clothing, Gold
and Silver, are laid up in Christ.

An Unbeleever (as has been showed) has nothing to do with promises, nor
with Christ the fulfiller of promises, and therefore he is ever in doubt, when
he is in want; and says, Where is it? He knows not whither to go, nor to
whom for the supply of his wants. A wicked man is never in his way, and, in one
sense, he is never out of his way. They may go any where, who know not whither
to go. They are never out of their way, who have no home. East, West, North,
or South, it is all one to them; which way the Staff falls, they go, they
have no rule nor line to go by; but though a wicked man know not his
particular way, yet he often knows his general end, and that is misery, as
the next words tell us.

He knows the day of darkness is ready at hand. At the 22. Verse, He
believes not that he shall return out of darkness; that is (as was opened) in
case he falls into evil, he thinks he shall never get out of it; he has no
faith that he shall recover out of trouble, but he has a strong faith, that he
shall fall into trouble: He knows that the day of darkness is ready at hand:

Here are three things to be cleared.

First, What is meant by knowing. Secondly, What by the day of darkness.
Thirdly, What, by being ready at hand.
To know, it is here opposed to an uncertain guess, or to conjecture; to know
is as much as to be fully persuaded, to know, is to be assured; the highest act
of faith is often expressed by knowledge. Novit in seipso quod maneat in
ruinam. Certo sibi persuadet atque hujus rei praesagium ex sui cordis sensu
sacit.
Hereby we know that we know him (1 John 2.4.) that is, hereby we are assured
that we know him; so here, He knows, that is, he is assured; it is settled upon
his spirit, that the day of darkness is ready at hand. This knowledge rises
not from reports abroad, but from his own breast; so the Septuagint
translates, He knows in himself that evil shall be upon him; As a godly man
has a witness for him in himself, so a wicked man has a witness against
him in himself.

What the day of darkness is, learn upon the former Verse, He believes not
that he shall return out of darkness; there I showed a fivefold darkness,
here I shall reduce it to one of these two.

The day of darkness is either the day of death, or the day of affliction; so
it is taken ( Eccles. 5.17.) All his days he eats in darkness; that is, he
is in sorrow all his days: Though he has Sun light, or Candle light enough at
his Table, yet he has no light in his heart. So the Prophet Amos (5.20.) Shall
not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? Even very dark, and no
brightness in it? There is a day of the Lord which is nothing but light, and
there is a day of the Lord which is nothing but darkness, that is of
tribulation and anguish upon the soul that sins. The Prophet Joel calls it, A
day of darkness, and of gloominesse, a day of clouds and of thick darkness.
He knows that the day of darkness is,

Ready at hand. The word which we translate ready, signifies two things. (...)
Paratum, firmum, stabilem, certum esse denotat. Drus.


First, that which is prepared. Secondly, that which is established, or
confirmed.
We translate to the former, the day is ready or prepared; others render to the
latter sense, the day is established, and settled; his day of darkness shall
certainly come upon him. And whereas we translate Ready at hand, noting the
neernesse of the danger. Others, Tygurina per manum intelligere videtur ipsa
impiorunt scelera, and per paraphrasim sic sententiam elucidat. Scit quod suis
factis periculosa tempora accersierit.
to note the cause of the danger, render, He knows that his own hand has
made a day of darkness; that is, The villainies and wickednesses which he has
committed, cause the clouds of judgment to gather, and look black upon him;
his unrighteousness has hastened on his ruin, and wrapped him up in darkness,
He has brought an evil day upon himself, by his evil deeds; or as the
Prophet speaks, His destruction is from himself: He has pulled down his
House with his own hands, and is the sole author or contriver of his own
sorrows.

This is an experienced truth; but I rather take the words as we render, The
day of darkness is ready at hand; that is, it is near, and will shortly seize
upon him.

Hence Observe.

First, Many a wicked man grows into an assurance of his approaching misery:
It is as hard to persuade some wicked men that their state is naught, as it is
to persuade some good men that their state is good; yet as many of the Saints
conquer unbeleife, and come not only to have some hopes, but high assurances,
that there is a day of mercy at hand for them, that they are in a present happy
state, and eternal happiness wait for them; so a wicked man (after long
debate) may have his unbeleife conquered, and though he has been sowing
pillowes under his own elboes, though he has slighted all the Counsels,
Admonitions, and threatenings of faithful Friends, though notwithstanding all
this, he continue long, speaking peace to his own soul, and saying, all is
well, yet (I say) this man may have his unbeleife conquered, and know at last
that there is a day of darkness ready at hand; when his eyes are opened to see
what he has done, and what he has been; he sees that God has rejected all
his confidences, and that he shall never prosper in them.

Secondly, Observe,

That for a man to be assured of his own misery is the height of misery:
Eliphaz puts it here among the punishments of wicked men. This assurance makes
his heart shake, this knowledge is full of fear, and therefore full of
torment. As to know that a day of light and deliverance is ready at hand, is
light while we are in darkness, and deliverance while we are in trouble: So to
know that a day of darkness and misery is ready at hand, is darkness to
wicked men while they are in external light, and misery in the midst of all
their mirth. And as it is the highest comfort of the Saints to know that they
have eternal life, to know that they are in the favor, and live in the love
of God; (a man may be in it, and not know it, and then though he shall do well
at last, yet his state is but uncomfortable, and he that is an heir of Heaven,
may walk as an heir of Hell, with a troubled spirit) but to know that it is
so, this is Heaven before we come at Heaven; so it is the deepest sorrow of any
man in this life, to know that he has eternal death; an assurance of this,
settled upon the spirit (though I conceive a man cannot have an absolute
assurance of it, yet to have strong impressions upon the spirit, that he shall
never be saved, or that Hell is prepared for him) this is Hell before he is
cast into Hell.

A soul that doubts of mercy and of the favor of God, is in a very sad
condition, but the condition of that soul is unexpressibly sad, which is
assured of judgment, and of the wrath of God.

Thirdly, Observe.

That as a wicked man may know that he shall be miserable in the end, so he
may know that his misery is near at hand: An evil conscience awakened is the
worst Prophet, it is full of sad presages; like Micah to Ahab, Haec est paenae
impii pars nou modica quod cogatur ipse sibi ominari malum. Pined.
it never Prophesied good but evil; and it does not only Prophecy of evil
afarr off, but near, or ready at hand: It Is true, an evil conscience usually
puts the evil day far off (2 Pet. 3.4.) There shall be scoffers, saying,
Where is the day of his coming, etc. The day of darkness is far enough off,
it has been long talked of, but we do not see it, say these despisers: But
when an evil conscience is awakened, then he sees evil near, and himself
dogged at the heels, or (as the former Verse speaks) Waited for of the Sword.

As a Believer, when the eye of faith is clear, sees mercy near at hand (Faith
makes God near, and then all good is near.) So an Unbeleever when the eye of
his conscience is cleared, sees misery near.

Observe Fourthly.

The misery of a wicked man is unmovable: His day of darkness is established
by an irrevocable decree, there is no getting it off; he is under a Divine
Fate. A day of darkness may come over the Saints, but that day blows over:
David said once of his day of light, It shall never be dark; and of his
Mountain, it shall never be removed; yet he was deceived: But a wicked man's
day of darkness shall never be light, nor can he use any proper means to
turn his day of darkness into light. He cannot pray, and it is p^^^er that
turns darkness into light; he cannot believe, and it is Faith that turns a
day of darkness into light; he has not a Christ to go unto, and it is Christ
only who can turn darkness into light, death to life, and the Waters of
sorrow into the Wine of joy; his darkness shall never be removed, who has not
Christ (who is light) to remove it.

Verse 24. Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid, they shall prevail upon
him, as a King ready to Battle.
In this Verse, we have a double effect of those troubles, which are the
portion of a wicked man; the first effect is, They shall make him afraid; the
second effect is, They shall prevail upon him; both which are illustrated by
an elegant similitude, they shall make him afraid, and they shall prevail upon
him, as a King ready to Battle.

Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid. Trouble without, and anguish within
(so some expound) He shall have straits in his state, and a strait upon his
spirit; both meeting, shall not only afflict him, but make him afraid. The
word may be translated to fright, rather then to make afraid: (...) Idem quod
(...) angustia.
They shall scare him, not only out of his comforts, but out of his wits and
senses. There is a threefold fear:

First, Natural.

Secondly, Spiritual.

(...) Perter^uit, pertuibavit.
To be spiritually afraid, is good, and to be naturally afraid, is not evil: So
Christ was not only afraid, but amazed ( Mark 14.33.)

Thirdly, There is a distracting, vexing fear, which is both a passion and a
perturbation: This is at once the sin and punishment of wicked men.

Consider, with what weapons and instruments God fights against a wicked man:
he does not say, Sword and fire shall make him afraid, Armies of enemies shall
make him afraid, but trouble and anguish shall do it; God can create and form
weapons in our own hearts, to fight against us: Inward anguish is far more
grievous then any outward stroke. ( Romans 2.9.) Tribulation and anguish shall be
upon every soul that sins, whether of Jew or Gentile: Anguish is the edge of
tribulation both joined, wound soul and body; yea strike thoroug^ both at
every blow.

Hence Note.

It is worse to be afraid of evil, then to feel it: Every thing is to us as
we apprehend it, good is not pleasing to us, nor evil afflictive to us,
unless we think it so: They who are not afraid of death, welcome it when it
comes; others through fear of death, are held in bondage all the days of
their life.

Secondly, Observe.

Distracting fear is the portion of a wicked man: The troubles of the
righteous are many, but their fears are few ( Psalm. 112.) His heart is fixed,
he shall not be afraid: It Is not said he shall not hear evil tidings (I know
no man whose ears are priviledg'd from such reports) but he shall not be
afraid. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set
themselves against me round about, (Psalm. 3.6.) Though I walk in the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, Ps. 23.4. are the resolves of
faith: Whosoever has much fear, has but little Faith, Wherefore are ye
afraid, O ye of little Faith? Mat. 8.26. and how can they but be afraid (when
storms arise) who are of no faith; when Faith increases, fear decreaseth,
and when Faith is come to the height, fear is gone; where there is no Faith,
there can be nothing but fear, trouble and anguish shall make him afraid,
that is the first effect.

But that's not all, anguish does not only fear the wicked man, but prevails
against him: (...) a radice (...) circumivit. Angustia vallabit. Vulg.
Some render Trouble and anguish entrench about him; The sense is the same, it
is such an intrenchment as concludes in a conqeust; the beseiger prevails. A
second reads it thus, Trouble shall make him afraid, and anguish shall entrench
about him. The Original joins the two Substantives together, and the Verb is
plural, Terrebit eum tribulatio and angustia vallabit eum.
Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid, they shall prevail against him.

From this second effect, Observe.

Evil shall get the upper hand of evil men: A good man, possibly, may be
afraid, and afraid sinfully, excess of fear may take hold of him, but he
shall not be prevailed against ( Pro. 24.16.) The just man falls seven times a
day (into affliction and trouble) and rises up again; trouble may throw him
down but it cannot keep him down ( Mic. 7.8.) Rejoice not against me, O mine
enemy, when I fall, I shall rise; the Church rises in her falls, and she
sometimes foresees her rising, when she is fallen: The wicked fall, and rise
no more. And whereas the Saints are more then conquerours through him that
loves them, wicked men are more then conquered, they are utterly ruined, lost,
and vanquished, because not beloved. There are two battles wherein we cannot
stand without the strength of Christ.

First, The battle of inward temptation.

Secondly, The battle of outward affliction.

We are no match for either, unless Christ be our Second. Satan has desired
thee (says Christ to P^ter) to winnow thee as Wheat (hoping to find, or make
thee Chafe) But I have prayed that thy Faith fail not: Peter fell into
temptation, yea he fell in the temptation, yet because Christ undertook for
him, the temptation could not prevail against him. And as there is no conquest
over Satan's temptation, but by the strength of Christ; so none over affliction
(which is Gods temptation) but by the strength of Christ (1 Cor. 10.13.) There
has no temptation (that is, no affliction) taken you, but what is common to
man (yet no man can stand under that alone, which may befall any man, therefore
it follows) But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that you are able, etc. Man alone is not sufficient, so much as to think one
good thought, how then shall he think good thoughts enough alone, either to
scatter a temptation, or to bear an affliction? To carry the soul out in such
a conflict requires more then one good thought, yea more then many good
thoughts, it requires good actings; yea and sufferings too; how shall he do
this without the strength of Christ? No wonder then if the lesser of these, yea
the least of the lesser, the least affliction prevail against a wicked man;
and if while he runs with Footmen, they weary him, how shall he contend with
Horses, with trouble and anguish, shall not these prevail against him, as a
King ready to battle? Which is the illustration of the wicked man's downfall:
Trouble and anguish prevail against him: But how? Not a little, not with
strength only enough to turn the scale of the conflict, but mightily, even
with much strength to spare.

As a King ready to battle. There are four interpretations for the making out
of this similitude; some place it between a wicked man's trouble and anguish,
and the trouble and anguish of a King ready to join Battle with a potent
Adversary: For, then his spirit is much troubled, knowing how great an
adventure he makes, in reference to his state, and how great a hazard he runs,
in reference to his life, and person. The charge being sometimes given to fight
neither against small not great, but only against the King. So a wicked man
when trouble comes, is like a King going to Battle, full of fears and anxious
thoughts what the issue and event may be: He looks upon himself as the mark,
both of the wrath of God and Man, and that every blow shall be directed against
his breast.

Trouble and anguish single out wicked men; when God sends out his Armies of
judgments, he charges them not to fight against the small or great of his own
people, but against the wicked of the World: Wrath aims at them, and therefore
they are terryfied at the approaches of wrath. Praeliaturum regem circundare
solebat globus militum ut lectio Tygurina indicat. Angustia and circumvallatio
eum circumstant ut regem consertis globis praeliaturum.


Secondly, Others give out the similitude, thus, Trouble and anguish shall come
upon him, as a King ready to battle: As when a King goes to Battle he is
compassed with a strong guard. (Every General has his Lifeguard, much more
Kings) So, trouble and anguish shall compass a wicked man, as yet with widest
difference; for the Guard compasses the King for the safety and preservation
of his person; whereas trouble and anguish gather about wicked men for their
destruction: But the Text will hardly admit this explication, and therefore I
pass it.

Thirdly, The Hebrew word which signifies a day of Battle, signifies also a
Sphere, or round Globe, we translate it, (...) Significat globum pilam aut
Sphaeram. Apud Latinos Globus est hostium aut Armatorum militum cuneus. Live.
lib. 1. Annal. Romulus cum globo Juvenum. (...) Erit. (...) Ad praelium a forma
orbiculari, Castra in orbicularem formam disponuntur ut fortiora sint. Merc.
a Ball (Isa. 22.18.) where it is prophesied against Shebna, that the Lord
would make him an example, and that (as the Hebrew is) Tossing, he would toss
him with a tossing; that is, he would surely toss, and turn him like a Ball,
into a far Country; as a Ball is tossed or thrown, so the Lord would throw
him into Captivity. Now because it is a usual way of embattailing, to draw an
Army into the form of a Globe, or Ball; therefore the same word which
signifies a Sphere, or Globe, signifies also a Battle, from the form of it.
Taking it in this sense, for any thing that is round, or circular as a Ball, or
Sphere. This third interpretation of the similitude rises thus, Trouble and
anguish shall make him afraid, they shall prevail upon him, as a King put in
Chains, or into a hoop of Iron; some labor much for the maintaining of this
interpretation, That Eliphaz intends to show how wicked oppressors shall be
surrounded and held fast with trouble, like some great Kings, who falling into
the hands of their Enemies, have been shut up in round Iron Cages, as Tamerlane
carried Bajazet the Turkish Emperor; or bound in Chains, as it is Prophesied
in the 149. Psalm. It was the use of those times, Declarare volens extremas
impii angustias ut illum eo pacto undique stringi tribulationibus, quo Rex ab
host superatus and captus; pro spectaculo public ponebatur in Ferricernio.
Bold. Ita etiam textum explicat, Vatablus.
to make hoops of Iron, for the securing of Kings and Princes taken in Battle;
the forms of which, and how those captivated Kings were locked up in them, with
the posture of their bodies in that base imprisonment, may be seen in Boldue
upon this Verse; and he annexeth diverse texts of Scripture, in which he
conceives there is an allusion to this coorse way of handling Kings.

Fourthly, Our reading compares trouble and anguish to a King, ready to
Battle; as if he had said, Trouble and anguish shall prevail upon him
irresistibly: This is but a high expression of greatest preparation for a
Battle; for when a King goes forth to Battle in person, he will have all the
strength of his Kingdom with him, which Job himself cleares in the 29.
Chapter, Verse 25 where describing his own former felicity, he concludes, I
chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a King in the Army: That is,
in great strength and power. So the Apostle speaks (1 Cor. 4.8.) You have
reigned as Kings without us, and I would to God ye did reign; that is, you
conceive you have had the confluence of all comforts, and strengths, You have
reigned as Kings, I would you had, that we also might reign with you, or share
in your felicity. So that when Eliphaz says, Trouble and anguish shall
prevail, as a King armed, and ready to set forth to Battle; his meaning it;
They shall prevail strongly, yea irresistibly. The wicked man shall not be
able to stand their charge, much less repulse is. These several explications
of the similitude meet in one common truth: That as the wicked shall not stand
in judgment, when God comes to judge all the World; so when the Lord sends
forth his judgments upon any part of the World, they are the men that shall
surely fall; trouble and anguish shall terrify them, as a King going to join
Battle, or as a King taken and captivated in Battle, or as a King conquering
and prevailing over his Foes in Battle. Sin prevails always upon wicked men,
as a King commanding and ruling over them; at last, trouble (which is the fruit
of sin) shall prevail upon them as a King oppressing and destroying them. They
who will not submit to the rule of the Law as a King to guide them: shall be
forced to submit to the curse of the Law, as a King to punish them.

JOB, Chap. 15. Verse. 25, 26. For he stretched out his hand against God, and
strengthened himself against the Almighty.

He runs upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his Bucklers.


ELiphaz having explained much of the inward punishment of wicked men, the
torture which they endure upon the rack of conscience, as also some of their
outward punishments, he subjoynes the reason of both, their sin, in these two
Verses, and that not an ordinary sin, but a sin committed with a high hand.

Verse. 25. He stretches out his hand against God.
And is it any wonder then that God should stretch out his hand against him?
Every sin deserves punishment, and shall be punished either upon the sinner, or
upon his Surety; but extraordinary sins call for extraordinary punishments:
they who have done much evil, shall endure much. Justice has an eye to the
quantity, as well as to the quality of our works; and that is a work of
wickedness in Folio, or of the largest size, which is done with a hand
stertbhed out: What revenge is bigg enough for a sin thus bigg?

He stretches out his hand against God. Here are three things to be opened:
Tanto supplicio nunc scelus dignissimum explicat. Pined.
First, What is meant by the hand. Secondly, What is meant by stretching out
the hand. Thirdly, How the hand may be stretched out against God.


The hand may be taken properly, or improperly; properly for that member of the
body, which is so useful and isntrumental in all the services of this life;
and then to stretch out the hand, must be taken in a proper sense; for so
wicked men sometimes do; they stretch out the hand of the body against God, by
acting sins of violence, and by acting violently in many sins.

The outward members, especially the hand and tongue, are made the weapons of
unrighteousness, both against God and Man.

Theod. l. 3. cap. 20. Niceph. l. 10. cap. 35.
The Church-Historian reports of Julian the Apostate, that when he was wounded
in the Battle against the Parthians, he took of his blood, and threw it up to
Heaven, he stretched out his hand against God, saying, in derision of Christ, O
Galilaean thou have overcome: This outward gesture of his body, expressed the
secret indignation of his mind. And it is observed by Jerome, Amalachitae
Israelitas in Exitu de Egypto vel ob lassitudinem vel ob legalem immunditiem
extra castra degentes occiderunt and eorum circumcisionem amputatam in
subsannationem Dei projecerunt in caelum. Hieron.
who says, he received it from the Tradition of the Jews, that the
Amalakites, who were professed Enemies to the Jews, did lie upon the watch, to
take all advantages against them, in their march from Egypt to Canaan, and
when at any time they turned aside out of the way, either because of legal
uncleanness, or upon any natural necessity, they would fall upon them and
slay them; which being done, they cut off that member which had the Seal of
the Covenant (Circumcision) upon it, and with their hands stretched out, threw
it up toward Heaven, as if they would challenge God himself to revenge their
blasphemy of him, and the contempt of that sacred Institution.

Secondly, The hand is taken improperly, or metaphorically; so, the power of a
man is his hand, the strength of his whole body, state, and mind, may be
called his hand; his riches are his hand, his credit is his hand, his wit, and
parts, Learning, and Eloquence, are his hand, as there is a power in all these.
And when it is said here, He stretches forth his hand against God; we may
understand it in that latitude; for a wicked man improves the strength of his
body, the power of his Estate, his Credit, his Wit, all his accommodations in
the way of Rebellion against God. A man is said to stretch out himself,
Extendere manum est omnem adhibere conatum ad percutiendum hostem aut aliquid
aliud aggrediendum.
when he does his utmost to attain his end, and makes the most of himself to
any purpose: In such cases he stretches all that he is (as we say) upon the
Tenters; and this all of his put together, is his hand stretched out against
God.

Further, To stretch out the hand, imports four things.

First, To do a thing with the utmost intention of mind and body, to do it
with all our might and fullest resolution. Joshua being resolved to bring
total destruction upon the men of Ai, Drew not his hand back wherewith he
stretched out his Spear, till he utterly destroyed all the Inhabitants of Ai
(Josh. 8.26.) The stretching forth of his hand was emblematicall, speaking, or
implying that his spirit kept up to the height of resolution, for the ruin of
that City and people.

When the Scripture speaks of God, acting toward Man, either in a way of
judgment or mercy, this phrase is often used, ( Exodus 6.6.) Wherefore say to
the Children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I will bring you out from under the
burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will
redeem you with an outstretched arm. (Exodus 14.8.) The Children of Israel
went out with an high hand; and at the sixth Verse of the same Chapter, the Lord
bid Moses, Stretch his hand over the Sea; to show that he was purposed to work
a Miracle, for the deliverance of his people. The Prophets are frequent in this
language ( Isa. 5.25.) Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled, against his
people, and he has stretched forth his hand against them: Read Chap. 9. Verse
12, 17.21. Chap. 10.4. Jer. 51.25. Ezekiel. 14.13. Chap. 15.7. In all these places
when the Lord went with full purpose to punish, he is said, To stretch out his
hand. Now as when God stretches out his hand against Man, it shows his
resolvednesse to smite, so when man stretches out his hand against God, it
shows his resolvednesse to sin, or his actual sinning with full intention and
strength of spirit.

Secondly, Man's stretching out his hand, Extendere manum est habitus
considentis and potentiam viresque ostendentis.
speaks the confidence of a man, that he shall carry all before him, and win
the day; it is usual with contenders, especially with Soldiers, before they
join Battle, to stretch their hands out, to draw and brandish their Swords,
in token both of their courage to fight, and of their confidence to prevail.
Obstinate sinners are full of false hopes that they shall obtain what they
design, and prosper in their projects of wickedness, and therefore they are
said to stretch out the hand against God.

Thirdly, Stretching out the hand, is a posture of pride and impudence; pride
is written upon a stretched-out-hand. To sin presumptuously, Anima quae in manu
superbiae. Sept.
is in the Original to sin with a high hand (Numb. 15.30.) The Septuagint
render that place, The soul that in the hand of pride thinks so, shall be cut
off: The Caldee Paraphrase gives it thus; He that sins with an uncovered head;
An uncovered head is an argument of boldness, and that he who acts, cares not
who sees him. Modesty causes us to hang down, or cover the head, when we have
done ill, and shame makes us cover the head when we receive evil, or are
punished ( Jer. 14.4.) The Plowmen were ashamed, they covered their heads
because the ground was chapt: for there was no rain in the Earth: So that to
do, or suffer with an uncovered head, is like doing or suffering with a high,
or stretched-out-hand, boldly, presumptuously, and as it were, hanging out a
Falg of defiance against the God of Heaven.

Fourthly, Stretching out the hand, is the posture of a furious maddman; he
that wants the use of his reason, makes this use of his hand, laying about him,
as if he would do wonders; such madness lodges in the hearts of debauched
sinners, they do they know not what; they rage and are furious, as if they
would pull God out of Heaven, and throw the House, yea the World, out at the
Windows: These stretch their hands against God, and they do it three ways.

First, Against the very being of God; such a wicked man opposes God as God,
he wishes there were no God, or that himself were God; he would have all
power in his own hand: Francis Spira in his despayring distraction said, I
would I were above God: In him nature spoke her mind plainly, and not in
Parables: Nature heightened in wickedness would be above God; therefore a
carnal man is called, A hater of God: Now that which we hate we would destroy,
and take out of the way.

Secondly, There is a stretching out the hand against God, not only in this
open bold challenge, or professed opposition; this very few will own. Few
Atheists will speak out their blasphemy, or send their Trumpet to defy God;
and most wicked men take a suspicion of this, as the highest dishonor and
affront that can be put upon them. What? They oppose God? They stretch out
their hand against God? They will tell you, they love God, and it may be they
will tell you that God is their God, and yet will be found s^retching out their
hand against God: therefore not only do his professed Enemies stretch out
their hand against God, but even those his professed Friends, who live in the
open violation of his righteous Laws; they who oppose the will and Word of God,
the Statutes and Ordinances of God, these will be found to stretch forth their
hand against God himself.

The Lord complains ( Mal. 3.13.) Your words have been stout against me: Who?
we stout against God? when did we speak against God? we never had such a
thought in our hearts, much less, such words in our mouths: So it follows,
Yet ye say, What have we spoken so much against thee? The Lord tells them
(because it seems they could not) Verse. 14 Ye have said it is a vain thing to
serve the Lord, and what profit have we, that we have kept his Ordinances, and
ye call the proud happy, etc. To speak, or think thus (though such a word be
not spoken formally, as it is probable they did not) is to be stout against
God. To say, It is a vain thing to serve the Lord, is not only a disservice,
but a Rebellion against the Lord: To say, There is no profit in keeping his
Ordinances, is the highest profanation of his Ordinances; to call, The proud
happy, is to stretch out the hand against God, for he stretches out his hand
against, and resists the proud.

Thirdly, The hand is stretched out against God, when it is stretched out
against his people, his Servants, or any that are under his tuition, and
special protection; to oppose, or stretch out the hand against these, is to
stretch out the hand against God. The Prophet Zachary sets forth both the care
of God to keep his people from trouble, and his Sympathy with them in trouble,
by an elegant Similitude: He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye
(Zach. 2.8.) What part is more sensible of the least hurt, then the eye, or
being hurt, causes a greater smart? God is as tender of his people as any man
is of his own eyes. He that touches them, sc. to wrong or vex them, touches
the apple of Gods eye, he lifts up his hand against Gods face, and against the
most excellent part of his face, his eye, and against the most excellent part
of his eye, the apple of it or ball of the eye which is the proper instrument
of seeing. We use to say, There is no sporting with the eyes; men do not like
it, to have their eyes played with: Surely then God will not bear it, Dicimus
vulgo cum oculis non ludendum est.
that any should smite or wound his eyes. And he interprets any hurt done to
his people, as done to his own eye, yea to the apple of his eye. When it was
under debate in the Council what should be done with the Apostles, Gamaliel
advises, Refrain from these men, and let them alone, etc. Lest happily ye be
found to fight against God (Acts 5.38, 39.) Some possibly would reply, We
fighters against God? We love God; here is a company of turbulent Fellows
called Apostles, who disquiet the City, may we not punish them, but we must
presently be judged fighters against God? No, says Gamaliel, you fight against
God, if they and their Apostleship be of God.

Saul was zealous of the Law, and (as he thought) for God; yet Christ rebukes
him from Heaven, with Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Thou stretchest
forth thy hand against me, when thou do it against the Saints; then, there is
a stretching out the hand against God, not only by a boisterous opposition of
God, As Pharaoh, Senacharib, and Julian did, but by opposing the ways or word,
the Messengers or Servants of God.

Hence Observe.

First, Though every sin be against God, yet some sins are more against
God: We cannot say that every one who sins, stretches out his hand against
God; there is a difference of sins in degree, though they are all in their
nature deadly; there is a presumptuous sin, a sin committed with a high hand,
which has these two things chiefly in it.

First, A sinning against clear light. Secondly, A sinning with full consent
and swindge of will.
In that place of Numbers, where this sin is described ( Chap. 15.30.) There
are two other Characters put upon it: First, it is called, A reproaching the
Lord: And secondly, a despising of the Word of the Lord; Every sin is a
transgression of the Word of the Lord, but every sin is not a despising of the
Word of the Lord; every sin is displeasing to God, but every sin is not a
reproaching of God: Every sin, even the least, is a departure from God, but
some sins are full of activity against God.

It is conceived, that the presumptuous sin in the old Testament, is the same
with, or answers to, the sin against the holy Ghost in the New; and that which
leads to this apprehension is, because no sacrifice was appointed for that
under the Law, as this is said to be unpardonable under the Gospel. And the
Author to the Hebrews is express ( Chap. 10.26.) If we sin wilfully after we
have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sins. The Gospel knows but of one Sacrifice for sin, and that but once
offered; they who despise that, have despised all, for there remains no more
Sacrifice for sin. God will not send his Son to dye a second time for those who
have trodden the Son of God in his death under foot, and have counted the blood
of the Covenant an unholy thing. God indeed stretches out his hand all the day
long, to a gainesaying and rebellious people, that is, to those who stretch out
their hands against him in his Law: But he will not stretch out his hand
(unless to smite) to a gainsaying and rebellious people, who (in this sense)
stretch out their hands against him in the Gospel.

Secondly, From the connection of this Verse with the former:

Observe.

That God proportions the punishment of man unto his sin: There is a twofold
proportionating of punishment to sin.

First, In the quality, or manner of it. Secondly, In the quantity, or degree
of it.
The Justice of God is visible in both, according to the exact rules of
retaliation: As I have done, so the Lord has requited me, said Adonibezek
(Judge. 1.) He was punished in the same manner that he had sinned, and so have
many others. But all shall be punished in the same degree that they have
sinned. If sin be great, so shall the punishment of it be. When the iniquity of
the Amorite was full, he had his fill of wrath. When God himself was pressed
with the sin of Israel, as a Cart with Sheaves: then he laid on load in
judgment. If any wonder why the wicked man should be hurryed, troubled, vexed,
why he travelleth in pain all his days; he may cease to wonder, when he
reads, that the wicked man stretches out his hand against God. Is it any
wonder God should show himself an Enemy to them, who practice the Enemy
against him? Or that they should be highest in suffering, who have been highest
in sin? The Prophet Amos reproves and complains of those, who made the Ephah
small, and the Shekel great (Chap. 8.5.) That is, who abated the measure, and
enhanced, or raised the price of their commodities: But if man make the Ephah,
or measure of his sin small, God will not make the Shekel of his punishment
great. The wages which the Justice of God pays the sinner, shall not be a
penny more then his sinning work has deserved.

Thirdly, In that the stretching out the hand against God, is a sin against
light.

Observe.

That sins committed against light, leave the soul in the greatest darkness:
A sin committed in the darkness of ignorance, deserves yet to be punished with
darkness, even with everlasting darkness; much more those sins which are
committed, not only in, but against the light of knowledge. Some shall perish
for want of light; they cannot but perish who live and dye in the abuse of
light. Many shall perish because they have not stretched forth their hands
according to the light received, to work for God; how deeply then shall they
perish, who in the midst of received light, stretch out their hands to work
wickedness against God?

Fourthly, Eliphaz describes the wicked man stretching out his hand; that is,
all the power which God has trusted him with, to provoke God with.

Hence Observe.

That wicked men abuse the good gifts of God, and turn them against God
himself: They use their hand, properly taken, against God; as also their
metaphorical hand, their whole strength against God; they stretch their
authority, their high places, their parts, and wits against God; they form
weapons out of all the good gifts of God, to fight against God; such sinning is
out of measure sinful. The idle Servant was condemned, who did not employ and
improve the one Talent which he had received, to his Masters advantage; of how
much sorer condemnation shall they be thought worthy who employ their many
Talents to their Masters loss, and disadvantage?

Lastly Observe.

Sin is the greatest evil. That must needs be the greatest evil which
opposes the greatest good: God is the greatest good, every sin is against God,
and some sins directly oppose God. The Apostle argues the evil of sin, from
the opposition it makes against us (1 Pet. 2.11.) Dearly beloved, I beseech
you as strangers, and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts (he does not say,
which fight against, or dishonor God, but) which war against the soul: We
have no reason to be dallying with lusts, or to be friends with them, when we
hear that our lusts war against us; but when we remember that our lusts war
against God, we should not only abstain from them, but abhor them. Every
thing is by so much the worse, by how much that is better which it is contrary
unto: There are four considerations which heighten the evil of sin upon
this account, that it is a stretching out of the hand against God.

First, Stretch out a hand against God! No man should dare so much as to lift
up a word against God.

Secondly, Stretch out a hand against God! No man should dare so much as to
lift up a thought against God.

Thirdly, Stretch out a hand against God! Every man ought to fall down before
God, and be well pleased with whatsoever God says or does.

Fourthly, Every man is bound to stretch out heart and tongue, and hand, to
think and speak and do for God, and when all this is done, we have done but
our duty, and the utmost that any man does or can do in these, is not half
his duty. How wide then is he from, how opposite to his duty, who stretches
out his hand against God? And (as it follows in the next words.)

Strengthens himself against the Almighty. (...) Roboravit, fortem bellatorem
conatur se praebere, virum atque masculum; in Deum se erigere and insultare
praesumpsit. Contra omnipotentem se virum exhibuit. Jun. (...). 1 Cor. 16.13.
That is, As the Original imports, who makes himself a strong Warrier, and
will show his valor against the Almighty: So Master Broughton, He would be
valiant against the Almighty. Or as another translates to the letter of the
Text, He shows himself a man against the Almighty; as if he had said, This
wicked man strains all the strength he has, to show himself a man of his
hands, or to play the man against God. The Apostle uses that word, in
reference to temptation, Play the men, or quit your selves like men: Saints
play the man against Satan; wicked ones play the man against God: he
strengthens himself against God. But how? What does the wicked man to
strengthen himself? Does he gather Armies, lay in Ammunition, fortify Cities,
and Castles? Does he thus strengthen himself against the Almighty? All these
are no strength against God, and this is not the way the wicked man takes to
strengthen himself against God; how then? He strengthens himself against
God, by hardening his heart, by stopping his ears, by setting his face, by
debauching his conscience against the call and command of God. Thus, He
strengthens himself against the Almighty.

Before we had the word God, the strong God, here the Almighty, (...)
which word in the Hebrew, signifies not only one that has great power: But,

First, All power; Shaddai is he that has power to do all things: Omnipotency
is one of the incommunicable Attributes of God: Qui omnia potest.
All the power of man is of his giving, but he has not given all power to any
man, no nor to all men. Only Christ as Mediator, or God-man has all power
given to him. It is not the will of God to do all that is in his power, but it
is in his power to do whatsoever he will. If the wicked man's power were such,
what work would he make? If he could do as much as himself pleases, he
would do nothing, which should please either God or good men.

Qui sibi sufficit and nullius open indiget, nullis externis armis aut
munimentis.
Secondly, The word signifies, such a one as has a sufficiency in himself to
do what he will; God needs not to go out for any aid, or call in the
assistance of any creature: Shaddai is the Original of power, he has all his
power laid up in his own compass, and his compass is infiniteness; he is
self sufficient. Some Princes think they have power enough to do what they
will, but they must do it with other men's hands. Though they have a civil
power or authority to command all, yet they have not a natural power,
strength, or ability to execute all. God has both these powers, he has
absolute authority to command all to serve and help him; and he has such an
absolute ability, that he needs none to serve or help him: He that made the
World alone, what cannot he do alone? God calls for our help that we may have
the honor of it, not that he has any want of it.

Qui sufficit omnibus aliis.
Thirdly, Shaddai is he who has not only enough for himself, but for all
others; the five wise Virgins had Oil in their Lamps, and they had enough for
themselves, but they had none to spare, they could not furnish the five foolish
Virgins. But the Lord God Almighty has strength and wisdom for all that come
to him, and call upon him: As he is selfe-sufficient, so he is all-sufficient;
his Ocean can quickly fill all our empty Vessels, and his treasury supply and
bear all our charges. This Almighty God, who has power to do what he
pleases, who has all this power in himself, and who has power enough to
give out to all that need, and ask it of him; this is the Almighty, against
whom the wicked man strengthens himself.

Hence Observe.

First, That the heart of man is very busy to arm against God: As when a
people are threatened with an invasion, they then strengthen themselves, they
lay in their Provisions of War, and get Forces in a readiness: even thus does
the heart of man: Man has three usual ways of strengthening himself against
the Almigty. First, By carnal pleas and reasonings. He pretends reason for
what he does; and he strengthens himself against all that God says, by
reason: he sets up reason against that Law which is the quintessence of reason,
and will not be madd but by reason, such as it is, and that is, such as he is,
a madd one. These reasonings are the strong holds spoken of by the Apostle (2
Cor. 4.5.) The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God
to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every
high thing, that exalts it self against the knowledge of God: As the weapons
of this warfare are not carnal but spiritual, so the strong holds which these
cast down, are not corporeal, but carnal; they are not made of Stones, and
Timber, of Earth, or Iron, but of the subtiltyes, slights, excuses,
subterfuges, and arguings of fleshly minded men. All which the Apostle wraps up
in the latter words calling them imaginations, or ratiocinations, and high
things; that is, such things as are formed in the high and proud conceits of
the creature exalting it self against the sound and saving knowledge of God:
Such as these:

First, Others do so.

Secondly, Great ones do so.

Thirdly, This is the custom of the World.

Fourthly, If I should not do so, I should dishonor, yea and undo my self:
And why should I refrain what others do, or what would be my own undoing? No
reason for any of these. Thus he strengthens himself against the Almighty: his
reason (such as it is) will bear him out.

Secondly, He strengthens himself against God upon presumption of mercy from
God; why may not I do thus? God has mercy for sinners, why not for me though
I sin? The Apostle cautions the Ephesians (Chap. 5.6.) against such
presumptions. Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of these
things, the wrath of God comes upon the Children of disobedience: It is good to
plead mercy to strengthen Faith, that sin committed shall be pardoned; but woe
be to those, who plead mercy to strengthen themselves in the committing of sin.

Thirdly, Others strengthen themselves against the Almighty with hopes of
worldly gain, and they encourage themselves in an evil matter, with promises
of good; We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with
spoil, cast in thy Lot among us, let us all have one Purse: Thus Solomon
personates the inticements of sinners ( Prove. 1.13, 14.)

As a gracious heart strengthens it self for God:

First, By the promises of God.

Secondly, By the experiences which himself, or others have had of Gods
dispensations.

Thirdly, By considering the nature of God, how gracious, how good, how
powerful, how faithful he is.

Fourthly, By remembering his relations to God; he is my Father, my King, etc.
Shall I not venture to do or suffer for him?

Now (I say) as a gracious heart strengthens it self for the Lord, or (as the
Apostle advises, Ephesians. 6.10.) Grows strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, putting on the whole Armor of God: So a wicked heart strengthens it
self against the Lord, or grows strong against the Lord, and the power of his
might, yea of his Almightinesse, putting on the whole Armor of the Devil,
that he may be able to stand against all the encounters of the Word, and of his
own conscience. For as the Word of God, and the graces of the spirit are the
Armor and weapons by which the Saints strengthen themselves against Satan; so
carnal reasonings and the lusts of the flesh, are the Armor and weapons by
which wicked men strengthen themselves against God.

A wicked man's chief care is to fortify and encourage his lusts; to put warm
clothes to his sinful heart, and make it stout against God: Sin begins with
turning the heart from God, and sin ends in turning the heart against God: The
first step in sin is a neglect of God, the second step is contempt of God, the
third and last is a War with God: He strengthens himself (for the Battle)
against the Almighty.

Secondly Observe.

Sin runs us against reason, and causes us to act not only wickedly, but
foolishly: Is it not folly and madness for weakness to contend with
Omnipotency? When a sinner has strengthened himself the best he can, the very
weakness of God (as the Apostle speaks) is stronger then he. What King (says
Christ, Luke 14.31.) going to make War against another King, does not first
sit down, etc. As if he had said, The Kings of the Earth are not so foolish,
so brainlesse, and counsellesse to contend with those, whom they cannot match;
they will hardly venture a Battle with ten thousand against twenty thousond,
they will rather make a disadvantageous Peace, then proceed in a War upon such
disadvantages. The King of Israel reproved the challenge which the King of
Judah sent him, by the Parable of the Thistle in Lebanon, aspiring to match
with the Cedar in Lebanon (2 Kings 14.9.) What Is a Thistle to a Cedar? Then what
is man to God? See then what a reasonlesse, yea senseless creature man is, who
will needs go out against God to Battle, though all the number he can muster,
is not only as disproportionable as ten thousand to twenty thousand, as a
Thistle to a Cedar, but more then one single man is to a Million of men, or
then a bruised Reed to the strongest Oak. God with ease made all the power of
man alone, and he, though alone, can more easily destroy it: it cost him but
the speaking of a word to set it up, and he can pull it down with, yea without
a word speaking. Many men have been styled, The great, The strong, The mighty:
But no man ever durst own this style, The Almighty: This title of God in the
Text, The Almighty, should make the mightiest of men, the Nimrods of the World
afraid to meddle, yea to think a thought of meddling with God. The absurdity of
men in strengthening themselves against the Almighty, may appear yet more
distinctly in three particulars.

First, He that is Almighty is stronger then All; there cannot be two
Almighties. Hence the Apostle argues (1 Cor. 10.) Will you provoke the Lord to
anger, are you stronger then he? It is base and cowardly to provoke those that
are weaker then our selves; it may give us trouble enough to provoke those who
are as strong as our selves, but it is either madness or desperatnesse to
provoke those who are stronger then our selves. And when the Apostle demands,
or rather expostulates, Are ye stronger then he? His question calls for this
positive assertory answer, we are infinitely weaker then he; and therefore
there is no prevailing against him, not only not in all things, but not in any
thing. It is possible for a weak Enemy to prevail sometimes upon a mighty
Enemy. The Romans who commanded the world for many ages, and were too strong
for any Nation, did yet receive some foyles; though they were never conquered,
yet they were sometimes worsted, not only by surprisals and Ambuscadoes, but in
the open field; and even petty Princes gave checks for a while, to some of
their designs. But El-Shaddai, the Almighty God, never received any defeat,
nor is he within the possibility of a surprise.

Secondly, Not only cannot the Lord be defeated, but he cannot be endammaged;
he never lost (as we say) so much as a hair of his head, nor did he ever
suffer so much as the scratch of a Pin. The Romans obtained some Victories with
such extreme loss and hazard, that it has been said, Two or three more such
Victories, would utterly undo them; they who were never defeated or foiled,
have yet been greatly endammaged in Battle; and their clearest gains have not
bin without some loss: but the Almighty never lost the worth of a thread, or
drop of blood, in all those innumerable Victories which he has gained.

Thirdly, Man cannot so much as hinder or retard the designs of God. He
transcends all the impediments, and throws open all the Barracadoes that are
set in his way. He will work and who shall let him? (Isa. 43.13.) There is no
putting of a bar in his way; and therefore if any should answer the question,
Who shall let it? Yes, there are some will let it, the great men, the Nobles of
the Earth, say no; they will let it. But they shall not, says God, in the next
Verse ( Verse. 14.) For your sake (speaking to his people in Captivity) I have
sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their Nobles. The Original word
for Nobles, signifies also Bars, the Bars of a door, or Castle gate, as we
put in the Margin of our Bibles; to note, that Nobles and great men should be
the strength of a People, and a stop to the entrance of any evil among them:
but if in stead of that, they prove like Bars, only to hinder the good of a
People, and to lie cross in all public proceedings; then the Lord, the Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings, brings them down, and breaks them all to pieces. I
will work, and who shall let it? The Nobles, the Bars shall not, though Bars
of Iron, to Gates of Brass.

It was said in opening the words, that stretching out the hand is the posture
of a madd man: Consider this, and then say, Is it not the maddest madness to
stretch out the hand against God, or to strengthen our selves against the
Almighty, to oppose him, against whom it is impo^sible not only to prevail,
but to do him the least hurt, or give him the least check or stop in his way?
If we should see a man set his shoulder against a Wall of Brass, or blow a
Feather against it, hoping to overturne and batter it down, would not we say,
this man is either a Fool, who never had the use of reason, or a Madman, who
has lost his reason? He that opposes the counsels and ways of God, can no
more overthrow them, then a Feather can a Wall of Brass, or the touch of a
little finger, the strongest Tower. The Psalmist represents us with these
simple attempts ( Psalm. 2.1, 2, etc.) Why do the Gentiles rage, and the people
imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the earth take counsel, etc. Come let us
break their bands and cast their cords away from us: What follows? He that
sits in Heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision: He sees how
poor, how inconsiderable, these motions and commotions, both of the Many and
of the Mighty are, to give check to that Decree of his Almightinesse, to set
his Son upon the holy Hill of Sion

Eliphaz has not yet done with his description of the impotent rage of man
against the Almighty God. O sinful vain man, whither will thou go? What will thou do next? The next Verse tells us.

Verse. 26. He runs upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick Bosses of his
Bucklers.
This 26. Verse is an amplification, or aggravation of the madness of a wicked
man, who, when he has strengthened himself against God (as he thinks and
hopes) sufficiently, then he runs upon him, etc.

Eliphaz carries on the metaphor of a Battle, which before it is fought,
Armies are mustered, and drawn up in view of each other; and then to show
their courage, they stretch out their hands, draw their Swords, and as soon as
the Signal of the Battle is given, by sound of Trumpet, beat of Drum, or
discharge of Cannon, they run on upon one another; and when the Battle comes
to the heat and hight, they charge home, even upon the necks of one another,
and upon the Bosses of their Bucklers: Here Is the description of a fierce
charge. This wicked one is a Champion for Hell, he challenges the God of
Heaven, and runs upon him, etc. with utmost violence: Quia impius manum in Deum
extendit ideo currit in eum Deus ad collum and in densitate dorsorum clypeorum
ejus q.d. in ea quibus ille maxim roboratur. Rab. Lev. Vatabl. Beza. Multo
aptior est ut describatur adhuc ille impiorum conatus adversus Deum. Pined.
Inauditam impii temeritatem describere prosequitur. Bold.
That Is the sum of the words, I shall now open them a little further.

He runs upon him, even upon his neck. There is a difference among Interpreters
about that Antecedent, some understand God: As it the meaning were, God runs
upon a wicked man, like a strong Warrier, with incredible swiftness and
irresistible force, to cast him down. The wicked man having stretched out his
hand, and strengthened himself against the Almighty, now the Almighty runs upon
his neck, even upon the thick bosses of his Buckler; Come says God, I will
have about with thee, if thou dare, I will try it out with thee, I am not
afraid of thy stiff neck, though it has Iron sinews, nor of the thick bosses
of thy Buckler, though they be of Steel.

Thus some, both later Writers, and ancient Rabbis, give the sense, but I
rather conceive (with others) that Eliphaz still prosecutes the strange
progress, and hightned wickedness of man, who having strengthened himself, by
hardening his heart against God, runs upon him, even upon his neck. etc. Taking
this sense, there is a different reading; thus, He runs upon him with his
neck; we say, the wicked man runs upon the neck of God; they say, A wicked man
runs upon God with his neck; their meaning is, He runs upon him audaciously and
proudly. The neck lifted up, is a token of pride, and presumptuous boldness:
And to run with the neck, is to run with the neck lifted up, or stretched out;
Currere collo est collo duro and erecto; sunilia sunt cum lana ponitur pro lana
alba, etc. Drus.
which is indeed the periphrasis of pride. ( Psalm. 75.5.) Speak not with a
stiff neck; that is, with a spirit unwilling to submit to my dispensations.
The Prophet Isaiah complains, and threatens ( Isa. 3.16.) Because the
Daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with stretched out necks: That is,
because they testify the pride of their hearts, by the gate and postures of
the body, as much as by the vain attire, and apparel of the body: Therefore
the Lord will smite, etc. The Lord tells Moses (Exodus 32.9.) I have seen this
people, and behold it is a stiff-necked people: He complains by the Prophet (
Isa. 48.4.) I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an Iron sinew:
Stephen the Proto-Martyr gives a breviate of all their rebellions, Acts 7. and
concludes ( Verse. 51.) Ye stiff necked, etc. The stiff neck and the proud
hard heart are the same, all the Bible over.

Thus the wicked man runs upon God with his stiff; In erectione colli
fastus agnoscitur. Merc.
that is, his proud daring spirit. As before, He stretched out his hand, so
now (which is more) his neck against God. The metaphor is taken either from
Soldiers in battle, Metaphora a milite Fortissimo in hostem impetum faciente.
Metaphora a lascivienti and procaci vitulo. Pined.
who to show their valor, hold up their heads, and stretch out their necks,
running head to head, and shoulder to shoulder, when they come to close fight.

Or, It is a metaphor taken from a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; who
therefore will not submit his neck to bear it. Wicked men are called Children
of Belial, because they endure not the yoke of obedience; when God would put
his yoke upon their necks, they lift up their necks, or run upon him with their
stiff necks.

Hence Note.

It is pride of spirit which causes man to oppose God: The Apostle James
says, God resists the proud (Jam. 4.) which intimates, yea and speaks out,
that the proud assault God. As the wicked in his pride persecutes the poor (
Psalm. 10.2.) So in his pride he opposes God. And as he that loves God,
follows, yea runs after God to obey him; so he that hates God runs upon him by
disobedience. An act of ignorant disobedience is a going from God; Per
superbiam homo maxim deo resistit and superbus propter praesumptionem spiritus
contra Deum currere dicitur. Aquin.
an act of known disobedience, is a running upon God: Running upon God, is not
only sinning, but impudent sinning. The Angels in Heaven cover their faces
before God, d^^ing not to behold him: Humble sinners on earth, such as the poor
Publican (Luke 18.) venture not to lift up their eyes to Heaven, but proud
sinners, lift up their necks against God. They who care not what God says to
them, care as little what they do to God: And they who have no faith in God,
seldom have any fear of him; these run upon him with their necks.

But I return to our Translation, He runs upon him, even on his neck: That
is, on the neck of God: that is, he sins fiercely, and fearelessely; he does
not dare God at a distance, or like a Coward, speak great words, and vaunt of
what he will do when his Adversary is out of sight and hearing; but he charges
on boldly in his very face. It is said of the Ramm (by whom the Prophet means
Alexander the Great, King of Greece) That when he saw the Hee-Goat (that is,
Darius King of Persia) he ran upon him: That is, he assaulted him speedily and
boldly, overthrowing his whole estate, and so making himself sole Lord of
Asia. The whole course of his Victories are described by this word, He ran upon
him (Dan. 8.6.) And when Job would show how fiercely the Lord handled him, he
gives it in this language, I was at ease, but he has broken me asunder, he
has also taken me by the neck and shaken me to pieces (Job 16.12. Cum eo
concurrens collum invadet. Tigur.
) As God in a way of highest punishment, or chastisement, is said to take a man
by the neck; so man in a way of highest sinning and rebelling* is said to take
God by the neck, or to run upon his neck: He that ventures upon the neck,
cares not where he ventures, and he that runs upon the neck of God, cares not
on whom he ventures. And as in height of love, a friend runs and falls upon the
neck of his friend; thus Joseph did on his Brethrens necks ( Genesis 45.14.) and
the Father of the Prodigal ( Luke 15.20.) Ran and fell upon his Sons neck,
and kissed him: So in heat of wrath, an Enemy runs upon the neck of his Enemy;
and wicked men (who are enmity against God) run upon the neck of God.

Some conceive that this running upon the neck of God, imports two things.

First, That the wicked man imagines himself, as having an equality of
strength with God. Erat paenae genus ut Magistratus si quem suo imperio parum
obedientem viderit, in collum invaderent and intorquerent. Live. l. 4.


And secondly, That he has authority above God, or that he is Gods better, and
superior.

This latter they ground upon an old custom among Magistrates, who finding an
offender contumacious, were wont to command the Officer to take him by the
neck, and dragg him out of the Court, to receive his punishment. But I shall
not insist upon that Criticisme; especially considering the incongruity of it
with the next words.

Even upon the thick bosses of his buckler. Malefactors are never permitted to
come armed before the Judge to their Arraignments.

The word which we translate Thick, signifies also Fat, because fat is thick:
Hence the Vulgar Latin translates, (...) In densitate altitudinum scutorum
ejus: in crassitiem corporum scutorum ejus. Me c. Alludit ad pervetustum
praeliandi modum cum clipeo, in cujus medio erat prominentia, quae dicitur
umbo, in quo erat cuspis quo cominus concertabatar. Bo^d.
He is armed with his fat neck: But I pass that. According to our reading
(which keeps closer to the Original) Eliphaz describes the ancient and present
form of Bucklers, which as they are defensive weapons, so also offensive, and
therefore have not only Bosses for ornament, but (one especially in the center
or middle with a sharp pike in it) for use: For as the whole Buckler secured
the body against the Arrow or Sword of the Adversary, so if he pressed near,
this high Bosse, or Pike of the Buckler served to pierce and wound the
Adversary. So that while the wicked man is said to run upon God, even upon the
thick bosses of his Buckler; it shows the highest valiancy of a wicked man in
opposing God; he fights not only afarr off, but near at hand, and presses upon
him, though within the reach and danger of his Weapon.

Hence Observe.

There is no danger can keep a wicked man off from sin: Like the Horse in this
Book ( Chap. 39.22.) He mocketh at fear, and is not afrighted, neither turns
away from the Sword; he swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage, he
says among the Trumpets, Aha, aha: though God have a Buckler, man will come
upon him; yea though God have a Bosse upon his Buckler to strike and wound him,
yet on he comes. The Buckler of God is the Law or Word of God, and the Bosses
of this Buckler, are the threatenings and curses of the Law. Now, when man sins,
notwithstanding the Law, which is the Buckler by which God saves and protects
his honor and his holiness, his name and glory from the wounds which sinful
man is ready to give him, then man may be said to run upon his Buckler. And
when notwithstanding the sharp threats, and terrible curses of the Law, which
are the thick Bosses with which he wounds those who transgress his Law, when,
I say, notwithstanding these, man adventures to sin and transgress the Law, he
may rightly be said, To run upon the thic^ bosses of his Bucklers. God gave
Adam a Law; Of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou may not eat:
Here was the Buckler, and when he added this threat, In the day thou eatest
ther^of, thou shall surely dye: Here was the Bosse. God sent a word to Pharaoh,
Let my people go; this was a Buckler; If thou refuse to let them go, I will
slay thy first borne, this was the Bosse. Adam run upon the Bosse of the
Buckler, so did Pharaoh, and so do all wilful sinners.

A wicked heart will go on sinning, whatsoever God is speaking, or doing (
Isa. 57.17.) I was wrath, and smote him, yet he went on frowardly in the way of
his heart: Neither the wrath of God, nor their own smart stopped their
progress, though smitten, yet they went on. Saints sometimes go on sinning,
though God be smiting, they have run upon the Bosses of the Buckler, to the
wounding both of their souls and of their outward comforts; wicked men will
run upon them to the damning of their souls and bodies. Though they see, yea
feel the bosses, judgment not only threatened, but executed, yet on they
will, and (like wicked Ahaz) in the time of their affliction sin more against
the Lord. This is the height of sinfulness. As it shows the truth and height
of holiness in the Saints, when they will not only run to God in fair times,
when men approve, but in the worst times, when men oppose; when they venture to
do their duty upon the Bucklers of men, yea upon the Bosses of the Buckler,
extremest danger: So it shows a like strength and height of wickedness, when
men venture upon the Bosses of the Buckler, upon the point of the naked Sword
of Gods displeasure; they will venture, let it cost what it will, though the
Lord set a flaming Sword in the way of lust, as he did in the way of the Tree
of life ( Genesis 3.) though the Lord set an Angel with a drawn Sword in the way
of lust, as he did in Balams way, when he was going to curse Israel, yet on
they will: Till the heart be changed, neither Swords, nor Bucklers, nor Bosses,
neither wrath threatened, nor executed, can cause a sinner to change his course.

This the Prophet complains of ( Isa. 9.13.) The people turns not to him
that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hoasts: Their
incorrigiblenesse under severest corrections is elegantly described by another
Prophet, enumerating five special strokes or smitings, to every one of which
he subjoynes, Yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord, Amos 4.6, 7, 8.
etc. When the bellows were burnt, and the lead consumed of the fire (that is,
when all instruments and means of refining them were spent and worn out, yet
their dross remained in them) The Founder melted in vain, for the wicked
(that is, their wickednesses, or evil things) were not plucked away (Jer.
6.29, 30.) They went into the Furnace full of dross, and they came out as full
of dross as they went in. The Founder blowed his fire, till he burnt his
bellows, but their lusts had no sent of fire upon them; his lead (by which he
seperates the dross from the metal) was all consumed and evaporated, but the
dross of their corruptions wasted no more then the purest gold does in the
fire. Hence the Lord resolved to wast no more of his judgments upon them: Why
should you be smitten any more, ye will revolt more and more (Isa. 1.5.) To
revolt from God, and to run upon him, are sins of the same strain; and they
who revolt from him, will not fear to run upon his neck, even upon the
thick Bosses of his Buckler.

Thus Eliphaz has given us an account, why the Lord afflicts a wicked man all
his days; he fights against God all his days. We have a reason of this reason
in the next words; why it is that this wicked man is such a valiant Champion
against God, why he commits wickedness with so much greediness; it is,
Because he covers his face with his fatness, etc. The fatter and fuller he
grows in fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, the more hungry and sharp set he
is to fulfill them. Full-feeding in sin, does not satisfy, but increase a
sinful appetite.

JOB, Chap. 15. Verse. 27, 28, 29, 30. Because he covers his face with his
fatness, and makes collops of fat on his flanks.

And he dwells in desolate Cities, and in Houses which no man inhabiteth,
which are ready to become heaps.

He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue, neither shall he
prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth.

He shall not depart out of darkness, the flame shall dry up his branches, and
by the breath of his mouth shall he go away.


AS the two former Verses showed sin the cause of those evils which befall a
wicked man, so here Eliphaz shows us two causes of their sin.

First, Their riches. Secondly, Their power.
The first is here described tropically by Fatness.

Verse. 27. He covers his face with fatness, and makes collops of flesh on
his flanks.
Both parts of the Verse mean the same thing, showing the wicked man's worldly
prosperity by the usual visible effects of it; a fat face, and fleshy flanks.

He covers his face with fatness. (...) prae a^pe oculus eorum. i. e. exisse
videntur prae genarum tumore and pinguedine. Bold.
That is, he is exceeding fat; a phrase like that ( Psalm. 73.7.) Their eyes
stand out with fatness: The Hebrew is, Their eyes are gone out of their heads
through fatness: that is, They seem as gone or going out of their heads. It Is
usual in the language of the Holy Ghost to describe wicked men by fatness, (
Psalm. 78.31.) He slew the fattest of them; that is, the worst of them, those
who were most rebellious, longing after dainties, Singula^i quodam infamiae
titulo impii and iniqui in scriptura vocantur pingues.
when God had given them bread from Heaven. David sets forth his Enemies (and
so the Enemies of Christ, of whom that Psalm is a Prophecy) under this notion
( Psalm. 22.12.) Strong bulls, or fat bulls, came about me: By the fat Bulls he
means the Scribes and Pharisees, the high Priest, and Rulers, who (as it were)
beset Christ with continual conspiracies. More plainly ( Psalm. 17.9, 10.)
Keep me from mine Enemies that oppress me: They are enclosed in their own
fat, with their mouth they speak proudly. Again ( Psalm. 119.70.) Their heart
is as fat as grease, but I delight in thy Law.

The Scripture speaks thus, not as if fatness had any moral evil in it, or
as if leanenesse had any moral good in it. Fatness does not discommend us,
nor does leanness commend us to God; yea a man lean in body, may have the
worst fatness, he may be proud, swollen and puffed up in spirit; and ^ man fat in
body, may have the best leanness, much selfe-emptinesse, and poverty of
spirit. But because they who have abundance, and grow fat with the Creature,
are tempted to forgetfulness of, and rebellion against God; and because a body
overburdened with flesh and fat, renders the mind more indisposed to holy and
spiritual activity; and usually they who bestow most care and cost in
pampering their bodies, go with pined, starved, and lean souls; therefore
fatness hears ill in Scripture. Hoc Aegyptii inuere videbantur, dum
s^cerdotes Isiaci solerent dare Api Bovi quem colebant potum ex quodam puteo
non autem ex Nilo, quia ejus aqua pota creditur pinguedinem carnisque magnum
facere incrementum. Plutarch. Tract. de Iside, etc. Iberi etiam and Galli
antiqui zonae mensuram habebant, quam si mulier, quae gravida non esset capere
non posset probro magno afficiebatur. Alex. ab Alex. l. 2. c. 25.


It is observed by Plutarch, that the Egyptian Priests gave their Apis (a
Deity which they worshipped in the form of an Ox) the water of a Pit, or
Well, not the water of Nilus to drink; the reason was (not as some assign it,
because they thought those waters were profaned by the Crocodile, for the
Egyptians had that River in high veneration, but) because the waters of Nilus,
were fatning, nourishing, waters; therefore their Apis, whom they adored as a
God, and from whom they expected continual help, must not drink of it, least
the grosnesse of his flesh should disable him for their assistance. Fat
corpulent men are, in common experience, unweildy, sleepy, and (comparatively)
unfit for action. It was a custom, as my Author reports, among the ancient
Spaniards and Gauls, to keep a constant measure, which if a Woman (she not
being with Child) did exceed in the compass of her waste, she fell under
disgrace, and lost much of her reputation, by having got so much of fat and
flesh about her: And doubtless it had somewhat of disrepute in it, in Jobs
time, else Eliphaz (a man of experience) had not given this as a piece of a
wicked man's description. He covers his face with fatness.

And makes collops of flesh upon his flanks. Which Master Broughton renders
thus, And makes plaites upon the panch. Master Calvin Translates it thus, He
has larded his guts. Est descriptio summae abunddamiae. Jun.


This latter clause of the Verse is of the same intendment with the former: And
that which both reprove as sinful, is the intentnesse of man's Spirit about the
pampering of his Flesh.

He covers his face with fatness, he makes collops, etc. He does not say,
Because he is fat, but because he covers his face with fatness, etc. That is,
he sets his heart upon his belly, and makes it his business to pamper his
body. He is active, yea full of activity in getting this cover, or mask of
fatness upon his face; and this mask discovers the naughtiness of his heart.

Hence Observe.

That it is a sign of an evil heart, or a lean soul, to intend the flesh,
or to study the satisfying of the bodily appetite. A carnal man gives himself
to deliciousness; his greatest labor is about that, for which Christ forbids
our labor, The meat that perishes (John 6.27.) This covering of our selves
with fatness, and makings collops of fat, the Apostle reproves in those, Whose
God was their belly (Phil. 3.19.) and in those who served not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own belly (Romans 16.18.) They who serve their belly, as they
should serve God, make a god of it; and they who serve their belly at all do
not serve Christ at all. We may provide for the belly, but we must not serve
it; and they who do so, deserve rather to be called Epicures then Christians.
That Is sinful fatness which is got upon terms of slavery, or service to the
belly: yea, a man that is intentive upon that question, What shall I eat? and
careful how to feed his flesh, though he do not grow fat by it, yet he shows
himself full of sin by it. The design of such is for the flesh, though their
flesh do not thrive under that design. As a man may be very covetous though
he continue poor and lean in purse; so a man may be very luxurious, and a
great servant to Bacchus, and Belly-cheare, though he continue lean and poor
in body.

The blessing of God fattens some, and such fat ones bless God. David
Prophesies, that when The Kingdom shall be the Lords, and he the Governor
among the Nations (which is very parallel with what those great voices said
after the seventh Angel had sounded ( Revel. 11.15.) The Kingdoms of this
World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall
reign for ever and ever; and when this shall be, says David (Psalm. 22.30.)
Then all they that be fat upon the Earth, shall eat, and worship; that is, the
great ones shall submit to Christ; his Kingdom shall be enlarged, and not
only the poor, who are described in the latter part of that Verse in the
Psalm, under the name and notion of such, as go down to the dust, but the
rich shall receive the Gospel. Kings and Queens, persons of Authority and
wealth, shall come to the participation of the grace of Christ ( Isa. 60.3.10)
They who have their bellyes full of the meat that perishes, shall have their
souls full of that meat which endures to everlasting life. ( Psalm. 45.12.) The
rich among the people; What people? The first words of the Verse tell us, he
means the Tyrians who were a wonderful rich people ( Isa. 23.8. Ezekiel. 27.)
and the Tyrians are here put by a Synechdoche for all other Heathens; for
though Tire, were a City in the Tribe of Aser (Josh. 19.29.) yet it was at that
time possessed by Heathens. Now, says the Psalmist, The rich among these
people shall entreat thy favor: That is, the Churches favor. God will work
their hearts to an earnest desire of admission into the society of the Saints,
and to live under a professed subjection to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, who
have abounded in worldly possessions, and hold the World in subjection to their
power: These rich and fat ones among the people shall entreat thy favor. This
Prophecy was in part fulfilled ( Mark 3.8.) where we read of great multitudes
from Tire and Sidon flocking after Christ: So that it is not riches and
fatness precisely considered, but the intending of our skin, or our
studiousnesse to fill our selves with earthly delicates, which shows we have
weak appetites to, or rather a loathing of the things of Heaven.

Secondly, This covering the face with fat, is here presented by Eliphaz as a
cause or occasion at least of the wicked man's arming himself against God.
Bonorum abundantia vitiorum omnium materiam subministrat.


Hence Observe.

That an evil heart turns the blessings of God, into rebellion against him:
The Jews were thus charged ( Deuteronomy. 32.15.) Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked. The
Lord complains of this, as of a sin, which he scarce knew how to pardon ( Jer.
5.7.) How shall I pardon thee for this? Thy Children have forsaken me, etc.
When I had fed them to the full, they then committed Adultery, and assembled
themselves by troops in the Harlots houses. Those are great sins indeed, which
put the Lord (whose title is, The God pardoning sin, and ready to forgive) into
a querie about their pardon and forgiveness. Such kind of sinning made
Jerusalem a Sister to Sodom; that is, as like Sodom, yea and Samaria too, as if
they had been one Mothers Daughters, or as if they had been of one and the
selfsame blood, and stock ( Ezekiel. 16.49.) Behold this was the iniquity of thy
sister Sodom, pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her,
and in her Daughters: Plenty of the Creature, and plenty of sin, went together,
and whereas Jerusalem should have served God, she served her lusts in the
abundance of all things. We have a saying, when men are lifted up upon the
enjoyment of outward good things (in allusion to Beasts) Provender pricks them.
They act more like Beasts then Men, who kick against God, who feeds them, and
turn his bread of blessings into the stones of disobedience. What outward good
thing will not an evil heart abuse, and wax wanton with, when it is so apt to
abuse spiritual things, and to turn the grace of God into laciviousnesse, that
is, to grow wanton and lacivious, because God is gracious?

Thirdly Observe.

They take little care for their souls, who take overmuch for their bodies:
They who desire to please appetite, cannot endeavor to please God. When the
Apostle exhorts to put on the Lord Jesus, he dehorts from providing for the
flesh ( Romans 13.14.) Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: As if he had said, Unless you
forbear providing for lusts, you will have little leisure, and less desire to
put on Christ. ( Ephesians. 5.18.) Be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess (that
is, be not inordinate in the use of the creature) but be filled with the
spirit; as if he had said, You will never be filled with the spirit, if
overfilled with Wine, if you give up your selves to satsifie carnal appetite,
you will not have any appetite at all to spirituals. There is an inward gluttony
and drunkenness, when the thoughts run upon dainty Dishes, and full Cups, or
when men chew their meat and Wine in their thoughts, before they eat or
drink. Now as well they (or rather they more) who are inwardly drunken with
excessive desires of Wine, as they who are visibly drunken with the excessive
taking down of Wine, are far enough either from the desire or attainement of
a filling with the Spirit. The spirit of the Buttery, and the spirit of God
have no more agreement then the flesh and the spirit, yea that spirit is the
grossest part of sinful flesh, and therefore can neither take care for, nor
bear with, the things of the spirit. So far of the first cause of the wicked
man's excessive sinning; his excess in the use of the Creature, set forth by
the ordinary effect of it, Fatness, He covers his face with fatness: The
second follows.

Verse. 28. He dwells in desolate Cities, and in houses wherein no man
inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps.
This Verse shows a second cause of the wicked man's fierceness against God,
His power over men; which is described (as the former) by the effect of it, He
has made Cities desolate. It requires much power to overthrow whole Cities;
that which is strong cannot be destroyed without strength; such was the power
of the man whom Eliphaz describes, such his strength: He subdued strong Cities,
he conquered men, and he thought he could conquer God too. But though to
destroy and pull down intimate strength, yet to build and set up Cities
requires grater strength.

This strength also is here ascribed to the wicked man, who,

First, either comes to Cities already overthrown, or overthrowes Cities.

And then secondly, builds the Cities which are overthrown, that himself may
dwell in them. He will not dwell in Cities built to his hand, or in Palaces
ready made, but he will make goodly Palaces out of desolate places; a City
wasted by War, by Fire, and Sword, shall revive out of the rubbish, and
recover to its ancient splendour, if he undertake it.

Master Broughton renders clearly to this sense, Though he makes dwellings of
Cities ruinated, of houses undwelt, which were coming to heaps of stone: Here Is
the compleatnesse of his worldly power. He makes flourishing Cities desolate,
and desolate Cities flourish; he dwells in desolate Cities, in Houses where no
man inhabiteth; that is, in Cities which he himself once made desolate (having
cast out their proper Inhabitants) but has now re-edified and enlarged for his
own use and honor.

Hence Observe.

First, That a wicked man cares not wohm he ruins, so he may raise himself:
Down with Kingdoms, down with Cities, down with all, so he may stand, or
have his own ends.

Secondly Observe.

(Which is the scope of Eliphaz) A man that has great power among men, begins
to think himself strong enough for God also: He made earthly Cities desolate,
and none was able to resist him, therefore he hopes to make Heaven desolate,
and disturb the throne of God; He runs upon his neck, etc.

Again, Some expound this Verse not of the cause of this man's sin, but of the
punishment of his sin; He dwells in desolate Cities, Terrores de quibus nuper
dictum est, non patiuntur impium in familiari hominum consortio vivere ideo
desolatorum urbium ruinas and latibula quaerit. Pined.
in places where no man dwelt: that is, He shall dwell alone, he shall either
refuse, or be refused by all good company. For this miserable solitude may
arise two ways.

First, From trouble of mind; he having oppressed others, shall find himself
at last so oppressed with the witness of his own conscience, that to avoid
it, he retires into desolate places, into waste Wildernesses, into old ruinous
buildings, where none dwell but the Owl, and the Screech-owle (Isa. 34.) He
that finds not his own conscience good company, never finds any.

Secondly, This wicked man is cast out from the company of men, he has been a
scourge to many, and now all are a scourge to him. Tyranny grows intolerable
to mankind (Dan. 4.33. Hujusmodi tyranni eiiciuntur in exil^um.
) Nebuchadnezzar was the greatest Monarch in the World and a proud Tyrant; at
last he was turned out to grass: his Nobles, Lords, and Subjects forsook him,
and he who ruled men, lived among Beasts; or as the same Prophecy of Daniel
reports it ( Chap. 5.20.) When his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened
in pride, he was deposed, or (as the Chaldee) made to come down from his
Kingly throne, and they took his glory from him, and he was driven from the
sons of men, etc. Which we may answer with Jobs text, He was forced to dwell
indesolate places.

The Roman Story tells us of Nero, that perceiving himself a lost man, by the
revolt of some Provinces, and the general complaint of the people against his
insolent Government, he wandered up and down, and crept first into a thicket,
by and by into a Cave with Sporus his filthy Favorite, and at last when he
heard of the sentence of death given against him by the Senate, and that their
Officers were hasting to attach him, he with a little help of one of his
Servants, cut his own Throat.

Thirdly, Others interpret these words, as noting the wicked man's worldly
decay; he shall not have a House to put his head in: His strong Cities and
goodly Palaces, shall go to ruin; or he shall be forced to dwell in a ruinous
House, a House ready to fall about his ears, who before lived in ceiled
Houses; He has pulled down other men's houses, and now he dwells in houses
ready to fall down; he impoverisht others, and now himself is turned out
among the poor.

Hence Observe.

That God often makes the punishment of man suitable to his sin: The Lord is
known by the judgment which he executes, the wicked is snared in the work of
his own hands (Psalm. 9.16.) The judgments of God are always just, and
sometimes their justice is visible. As the wicked feel them, so all may see
them, and say, Righteous art thou O Lord. The Prophet describes this
retaliation of Divine judgment ( Isa. 5.8, 9.) Woe to them that add House to
House, and lay Field to Field, till there be no place (that is, no place for
others to dwell in) that they may be placed in the midst of the earth: What is
the danger of this? In mine ear says the Lord of Hoasts, of a truth, many
Houses shall be desolate, many and fair without Inhabitant: Here is
desolation, the reward of desolation; and as they took bread from others, and
pulled the cup from their mouths, so their bread shall be taken away, and their
cup left empty. Thus it follows in the Prophet ( Verse. 10.) Yea ten Akers of
Vineyard shall yield one Bath: A Bath was a measure among the Jews, of Liquids,
containing, as is conceived, about eight Gallons; So that when he says, Ten
Akers of Vineyard shall yield one Bath; the meaning is, there shall be a great
scarcity of Wine: An Aker of Vineyard should not yield a Gallon of Wine, that is
a miserable Vintage. And the seed of an Homer, shall yield an Ephah; An Homer
was a measure for dry things, containing ten Ephahs: So that when it is said,
The seed of a Homer shall yield an Ephah, the meaning is, they shall reap but
the tenth part of the seed sown, which is a miserable Harvest, and the highest
threat of ensuing Famine. Thus the Lord punished them as they had sinned; they
starved the poor, and God threatens to starve them. Hunger never pinches so
terribly as when it is a punishment sent at the cry of the hungry.

Again ( Isa. 33.1.) When thou shall cease to deal treacherously then they
shall deal treacherously with thee: When the deceiver is deceived, and the
treacherous dealer ruined by treacherous dealing men, then the truth and
faithfulness of God are eminently exalted. And as it is in punishments, so
often in rewards, God does us good in the same way wherein we have done good.
The Midwives saved the Males of the Israelites in Egypt, and by this act of
pity built the house of Israel, which the Lord took so well at their hands,
That he built their houses, or made their houses flourish (Ez. 1.21.) As the
destroyer shall be destroyed, so the builder shall be built; mercy loves to be
exact as well as judgment.

Again Eliphaz tells us of Cities and Houses, ready to become heaps.

Hence Note.

The most flourishing Cities, the strongest structures in the World, are
subject to ruin: Art cannot prevent the decays of nature, much less the
decrees of divine Justice. Material Jerusalem was threatened, that one stone
should not be left upon another, which should not be cast down; the event
answered that prediction. Mystical Babylon is under a more dreadful doom, and
the event will in due time answer that prediction, Babylon is ready to become
heaps, and one stone shall not be left upon another: There is no cement can
hold that together, to which God says, Fall.

Eliphaz having showed the causes of the wicked man's impudent opposition
against God, and (according to the two latter Expositions of this Verse) some
part of his punishment, proceeds further to show his punishment.

Verse. 29. He shall not be rich, neither shall he prolong the perfection
thereof upon the earth.

Verse. 30. He shall not depart out of darkness, the flame shall dry up his
branch, and by the breath of his mouth shall he go away.


Here is complete misery in externalls. The judgment is laid down two ways.

First, Negatively. And secondly, Affirmatively.
Negatively, what the wicked man shall not be, what he shall not attain to;
and then affirmatively, what the wicked man shall be, or what shall come upon
him; the Negative part has a gradation of four steps.

The first is this, He shall not be rich. The second is, His substance shall
not continue. The third is, He shall not prolong the perfection thereof upon
the earth. The fourth is this, He shall not depart out of darkness.
Those are the Negative parts of his punishments, the Affirmative are two.

First, The flame shall dry up his branch. Secondly, By the breath of his mouth
he shall go away.
1. He shall not he rich.

The words seem to carry an opposition all along to the wicked man's purposes
and projects. The wicked man says in his heart, if not with his mouth, He will
be rich; to which God answers, He shall not be rich. The Apostle (1 Timothy 6.9.)
speaks of such a sort of Rich Will-bees, They that will be rich fall into
temptation, etc. When a man comes to this hight of resolvednesse, He will be
rich what ever comes of it, or who-ever stands in his way, he will be rich and
ask no man's leave, no nor Gods leave, then God rises to his high resolves, He
shall not be rich: Let it come to trial whose word shall stand, his, or mine:
And when once this word is gone out of Gods mouth, then he, and all his trees
which should bear him that golden fruit, are blasted and mildew'd. Then,
though he lay the strongest projects for riches, yet he shall not be rich,
though he sweat and toil to be rich, though he digg deep into the ground, and
turn every stone above ground, to find riches, yet he shall not be rich;
though he cares not whom he makes poor, yea though himself live poorly all
his days, that he may dye rich, yet he shall not be rich.

Hence Observe.

It is not in the power of man to get riches: A man may make it his design to
be rich, but he cannot make himself rich. Moses (Deuteronomy. 8.18.) gives it in
charge to the people of Israel, Thou shall remember the Lord thy God; for it is
he that gives thee power to get wealth, etc. Man is very apt to forget the
author, not only of his spiritual, but of his temporal good things, and is
readier to ascribe his riches to his own getting, then to Gods giving.
Temporal good things lie more level to the power of nature and humane
industry, then spiritualls, yet we can no more attain temporalls then
spiritualls without the power of God. Christ teaches us, that our care can no
more add a penny to our estate, then a cubit to our stature (Matthew. 6.27.) How
often have we seen experience sealing to this truth? Many have endeavored
after, and reached at riches, in good and hopeful, in fair and probable ways,
yet they have not reached to riches. Others have striven for riches in base and
unwarrantable, in unjust and sinful ways, yet they could never get a step
beyond beggary.

The Lord gives them a stop, and says, Ye shall not be rich; evil men do
not always thrive, Ex quocunque piscatu non evadet ditior.
Peter fished all night, but got nothing, till Christ bid him put down the
Net. Some have cast their Net in all sorts of waters, yet could never catch the
great fish of worldly wealth. It is the blessing of God that makes good men
rich; and it is a permission from God that makes evil men rich. Godliness is
profitable for all things, having the promise of this life, and of that which
is to come, yet every godly man meets not with the profit of this life;
ungodliness is profitable for nothing, having neither the promise of this life
nor of that which is to come, yet some ungodly men meet with the profit of this
life. Though sinners are never on the thriving hand, yet they often thrive in
their way; and though Saints are ever on the thriving side, yet they do not
always thrive in their way: Neither the one sort nor the other thrives, if the
Lord says, They shall not be rich: When he says so to the Saints, it is to
humble them; but when he says so to a wicked man, it is to punish him; He
shall not be rich, that is the first step of his misery.

But suppose he get riches, yet he cannot keep them; The wages which he earnes
is put into a bagg with holes, or pierced through, all is gone (Hag. 1.6.)
Carnal men are like leaking Vessels to the Word of God, they (as the Apostle
cautions Believers lest at any time they should ( Heb. 2.1.) always let it run
out. Now as they let out what they have heard of the Word of God, so God lets
out what they have got of the World: He makes all the Vessels which hold their
earthly substance leaky: So it follows.

2. Neither shall his substance continue.

This is his second woe: (...) robur, pro opibus saepe sumitur. Latin copias
possis vertere. Merc.
The word which we render Substance, signifies also Power, and strength;
because riches empower and strengthen men to do great things; but how strong
and substantial soever they are in the opinion of men, their time is but
short, They shall not continue; and this arises two ways.

First, From the nature of the things of the World, which are all frail and
momentany, Summis negatum est stare diu.
and though we call them Substance, yet indeed they are but a Shadow, there is
no continuance in them.

Secondly, This arises from the judgment and curse of God, both upon such
rich men, and upon their riches; if the Lord does not stop them from getting
riches, yet he can speak a word, and blast all that they have gotten.

Hence Note.

That the most substantial of earthly things are of small or no continuance:
More particularly,

That ill gotten goods are not lasting, or long-lived: Sometimes they melt
away, and dye in the same hands that got them; they always dye and melt away
in some of their hands, for whom they were gotten. There is no tack in their
estate, in whom there is no Justice. That which is gathered by the
unrighteousness of man, shall be scattered by the wrath of God. As the little
which a righteous man has is better, so it is surer then the great riches of
many wicked. Sin makes no provision at all for the soul, and it makes very
ill-provision for the body. The title by which we hold worldly things, is more
considerable then worldly things themselves. To hold in Capite from Christ is
as the purest so the strongest Tenure: Only he who continues the same for
ever, and changes not, can give continuance to that which is changeable.

But suppose the wicked man's substance does continue long for bulk and matter,
yet the beauty and comfort of it shall not continue for a moment, which is the
third step of this Gradation.

3. Neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth.

Riches are one thing, the perfection of riches is another; as in spiritual
things there is the substance of them, and the perfection of them; so in
temporalls: The word signifies, the consummation of any thing, (...) perfectio
eorum a (...) perfecit, alii Minlam vincam, dictionem perinde ac si duae essent
exponunt, qu^si (...) ex eo quod est illorum, i. e. res illorum non extendentur
per terram. Merc.
or the bringing it to its perfective end ( Isa. 33.1.) When thou shall make an
end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee: The
Prophet does nor mean it of making an end by way of cessation, as if hand,
heart, or tongue, did cease dealing treacherously (for so wicked men will never
make an end of wickedness, if they might have an eternity to act evil in,
they would act it eternally) but he means it of making an end by way of
consummation, as if he had said; When they are come to a full stature in
treachery, and have completed their conspiracies against goodness, and good
men, then they shall be dealt with in their kind, and as they best deserve. Now
as a wicked man would complete his sin, and often reaches the very perfection
of it, so he would complete his estate, and does sometimes reach to the
perfection of it. The wicked man would be perfectly rich, he is not satisfied
to have a complete estate, or enough for meat, drink, and clothing, he must
have a great estate, enough for pride, pomp, and glory; Manna pleases him not,
he must have Quails, superfluities as well as necessaries: He thinks a
little, too much in spiritualls, but a great deal is not enough for him in
temporals: His internal imperfections trouble him not, his aim is at
perfection in externalls. That is perfect only in a strict sense, to which
nothing can be added, and from which nothing can be taken away; The wicked man
would attain to such perfection, but he cannot; his own heart forbids the
first, for how much soever he has, he would have more added to it; he says
not it is enough, though it be too much; God forbids the latter, his portion
shall be abated, or (in the words of the Text) He shall not prolong the
perfection thereof.

The utmost perfection he can attain unto, is but the shadow of perfection,
and though shadows toward the setting of the Sun, grow longer and longer, yet
no shadow can be prolonged, they quickly pass and fly away. Solomon tells us
( Prove. 12.3.) A man shall not be established in wickedness, Nec mittet in
terra radicem ejus. Vulg.
but the root of the righteous shall continue: A wicked man may be set in the
ground, but he has no root in the ground; Their stock shall not take root in
the earth, and he (that is, God) shall blow upon them, and they shall wither
(Isa. 40.24.) A tree not rooted, falls by a puff of wind, or withers while it
stands. The tree of a wicked man may have a great body, but he has no good
root, he is not rooted in Christ, he has no hold of the Covenant, therefore
his perfection cannot continue.

Hence Observe.

That as there is no worldly perfection of any long continuance, so the
perfection of wicked men is of shortest continuance: Athenasius said of Julian
the Apostate, when he was in the height, in the very zenith and perfection of
earthly felicity, having ascended the Impereall Throne, and giving the Law to a
great part of the then known World, He is but a little cloud, Nubecula est,
cito transibit.
he will soon vanish. And indeed his glory and the perfection of it did not
continue, for when he was but thirty years old, in that prime of his natural
course and constitution, he was out off; his power could not protect his
Person, nor prolong his perfection on the earth.

David professes; as from his own experience ( Psalm. 119.96.) I have seen an
end of all perfection: The term of universality, All, does not compass in
every kind of perfection, but all the perfections of one kind. The end of
Divine perfections cannot be seen: when we have seen the most of them, there is
more of them unseen; but the end of all humane perfections may be seen. There
is a twofold sight.

First, Of the eye. Secondly, Of the understanding.
David's eye had seen the end of many humane perfections, and his understanding
saw the end of them all; he had seen some ending, and he saw all must end.
Never dream of prolonging your perfection here. No worldly thing can continue
long, for the World it self shall not continue long: If the Scaffold or Stage
upon which these perfections are showed or acted, must fall, the perfections
themselves cannot stand. There have been but few that ever advanced so far as
to an earthly perfection, but there was never any one that prolonged his
perfection on the Earth. Adam did not continue in that created perfection,
which had no imperfection in it, how then shall any of his Children continue in
an imperfect (such is their best) perfection.

As Eliphaz has showed us the wicked man's misery in the not prolonging of his
perfection; so now he shows us a further degree of it, by the prolonging of
his affliction.

Verse. 30. He shall not depart out of darkness.
Here is the fourth step of this gradation. The wicked man's misery in misery:
He cannot stay in a good, nor get out of an ill estate. Eliphaz seems to take
off an objection, for some might say, What if the wicked man do not grow rich
for the present? What if his substance does not continue? What if he prolong
not his perfections, or fall from the top-stayre of his high condition? Yet we
hope at last he may outgrow all this, and get riches which he had not, or
regaine those which he had? No says Eliphaz, Either the wicked man shall not
rise to riches, or if he rise he shall fall, and when once he is fallen, he
shall rise no more; eith^^ he shall not get into the light, or if he do, he
shall be soon overtaken with darkness, and when once he is in the dark, he
shall come out no more, He shall not depart out of darkness.

When the wicked man is in the light, he sings, Loath to depart, but he must,
and when he is cast into darkness, he cries, Have to depart, but he cannot: The
wicked man, like the evil Angels, is held in chains of darkness, which he is
neither able to break off, nor to file off: He has said to God, who is light,
(yea because he is light) Depart from me, and God says to him, Thou shall not
depart out of darkness.

There is a twofold darkness.

First, Inward. Secondly, Outward.
Both metaphorical. By darkness, some understand inward trouble, or grief of
spirit, others expound it of outward troubles and calamities upon his estate:
It Is true of both, for he shall depart neither out of the one nor the other;
but rather take it here for outward trouble; and then, Not to depart out of
darkness, imports abiding misery, irrecoverable sickness, decays and losses,
which shall never be repaired.

Hence Note.

Wicked men falling into trouble, shall not know the mercy of a resurrection
out of trouble. The just man falls seven times, and rises again (Prove.
24.16.) The just man is subject to take falls of two sorts, and both of them
Seven times; that is, often.

First, He falls into sin.

Secondly, He falls into trouble.

He rises from both these falls: He rises from the first by repentance; he
rises from the second by deliverance. Solomon's Text is to be understood of
this second sort of falls, and may therefore be expounded by the direct words
of David, (Psalm. 34.19.) Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the
Lord delivers them out of them all: The righteous have as many resurrections
as falls, But (as Solomon makes the Antithesis in the place forecited) the
wicked shall fall into mischief. Solomon does not tell us expressly, what the
just man's falls into, but he tells us he shall rise again: He tells us
expressly what the wicked man shall fall into, but he does not tell us, that
he shall rise again; nay, he tells us implicitly, that he shall never rise
again. He that rises again, did not fall into mischief, how great soever
the evil was which he fell into; and he that does not rise again, fell into
mischief, how little soever the evil was which he fell into. Nothing makes
our falling either into sin, or trouble, a mischief to us, but our continuing
in it. He goes far (we say in our Proverb) who never returns; surely, he
falls low, who never rises, and he stays long in darkness, who never departs
out of it. Darkness is the portion of a wicked man, and he shall never depart
out of darkness; neither out of that darkness of sin, nor misery; he has no
desire to depart out of the former, and he has no promise to depart out of the
latter. Thus we have seen the negative punishment of a wicked man, what he
shall not be, what he shall not receive; this is enough to make him miserable,
but positive evil will make him outright miserable. This Eliphaz prosecutes in
the next words.

The flame shall dry up his branches. The flame is taken two ways: either,

First, For the wrath of God which goes forth, causing judgment to take hold
of sinners: or,

Secondly, For the judgment it self, which is an effect of his wrath.

The wrath of God burns against the wicked as a flame, and then judgments
burn up the wicked; there is no heat to the heat of Divine wrath, neither is
any thing, punitively hot, till Divine wrath heats it.

Sunt qui eius liber^s intelligunt sed no^ allegori^e intelligimus omnem ejus
splendorem opes, etc. Me^c.
The flame shall dry up his branches; Some, by his branches understand his
Children, they shall dye, Children are branches, they stand, says the
Psalmist, like Olive plants, or branches round about the Table of a man fearing
God: Such branches Job had, but they were dried up, and probably Eliphaz might
give him a rub upon that soar, in this expression.

Secondly, Others by branches understand His followers and flatterers, who live
upon him as branches upon a Tree; but to pass these restrained
Interpretations: Flamma exurens, in Heb. est vehementissimi supplicii atque
adeo aeterni symbolum. Duci videtur translatio a more hostium vastantium
regionem aliquam qui sege^^ and arberes succendunt.
I conceive we may take the Branch in general, for all that belongs to a
wicked man, his Children, his Friends, his followers, his flatterers, his
Honor, his Riches, his Power; all these look green, and are his beautiful
branches; and all these the flame dries up. The Prophet complains ( Joel
1.19.) O Lord to thee will I cry, for the fire has devoured the pastures of
the Wilderness, and the flame has burnt all the Trees of the Field: The
flame, of which he cries out, and which did not only dry the branches, but
devour the Trees of the Field, was the extreme heat of the Sun; which as it
usually sends out refreshing beams, so when God is angry, it can send out
scorching flames, and those beams, which tempered with showers of rain,
nourish the Earth, in the long withholding of rain scorch the Earth. And what
then befell the Trees properly taken, and their branches, does often befall
both Trees and branches taken in the metaphorical sense, as herein the Text, a
flame dryes them up. A godly man is compared to a Tree flourishing and growing
by the water side; wicked men are compared sometimes to flourishing Trees, but
they grow by the fire side: The flame dryes up their branches.

Hence Note.

First, The wrath of God is a drying, yea a devouring flame, the flame of Gods
displeasure, puts all into a flame. That flame will burn up branches, how
goodly, how strong, how high soever they are grown; though as strong as the
Oaks of Bashan, though as high as the Cedars in Lebanon, yet this flame will
dry them up. The Prophet Zechariah speaks this point, while he thus bespeaks
Lebanon ( Zech. 11.1.) Open thy doors O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy
Cedars: It Is interpreted as a Prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem, and
Judea, by the Roman power; as Christ after threatened them for rejecting him and
his Counsel: The words of the Prophet may be understood two ways, either
literally, for the destruction of that Forest of Lebanon, which the Romans
cut down for the service of their Seige against Jerusalem; or figuratively, for
the flourishing estate of Jerusalem, whose branches, though like the branches
of the Cedars in Lebanon were dried up by the flame of that dreadful War. In
which style and figure the Prophet Isaiah denounces the judgments of God (
Chapter 2.12, 13.) The day of the Lord shall be upon every one that is proud and
lofty, etc. And upon all the Cedars of Lebanon. And the Prophet Ezekiel puts
forth this Riddle and Parable ( Chap. 17.3.) Thus says the Lord, A great Eagle
(that is, Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon) with great wings, long winged, full
of feathers, which had diverse colors, came unto Lebanon (that is, unto Judea
and Jerusalem) and took che highest branch of the Cedar; Namely, Jehojakim the
King of Judah, and carried him Captive to Babylon.

The Lord can make any affliction a consumption to the most beautiful branches
of a sinful people, or person: Whatsoever he uses as an instrument of his
indignation, is his flame: In this sense, the very waters which drowned the old
World, were the fire and flame of God: He can by poverty, as by a flame,
consume and dry up riches; by disgrace, as by a flame, consume and dry up
honor; by sickness, as by a flame, consume and dry up health; God has
special flames for every special branch, nothing can continue to do us good,
when God gives Warrant or Commission to any of his flames to scorch and consume
it, The flame shall burn up his branch.

And by the breath of his mouth shall he go away. We have the flame of God in
the former clause, and the breath of his mouth in this: Some Interpreters
conceive that Eliphaz mentions these two, The flame, and the breath, purposesy
to put Job in mind, what God had done to him; for we read in the first Chapter
of this Book, of the flame of God, a fire from Heaven consuming that branch,
his flocks of Sheep, and a breath from God, namely, a mighty strong wind,
destroying a more precious branch, his flock of Children: Eliphaz clothes this
discourse in such terms as might easily reminde and represent to Job, what God
had done to him, in the day of his calamity.

And by the breath of his mouth shall he go away. There is yet a difference
among Expositors about the Antecedent to his: His mouth, whose mouth? Most
understand it, of the breath of Gods mouth, as has been hinted already: Some
expound it of the breath of the wicked man's own mouth; I shall touch upon both.

First, By the breath of Gods mouth he shall go away; the breath of God may be
taken two ways.

Either first (as the flame before) for his anger, which is often expressed by
puffing the breath.

Secondly, It may be taken for the decree, or determination of God.

Both these ways a wicked man goes away by the breath of God; first, by the
anger of God, if God do but breath angerly upon him, he is blasted and gone,
His glory and greatness lang^ish before the least puff of Divine displeasure:
God needs not make great preparations of Armies, or Forces, to contend with
wicked men, he needs not raise Mounts and Batteries, to overthrow their best
Fortifications of Riches and Honor. The Channels of waters were seen (says
David, Psalm. 18.15.) and the foundations of the World were discovered, at thy
rebuke O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils. The Prophet tells
those, who neglected to build the House of the Lord ( Hag. 1.9.) Ye looked for
much, but lo it came to little, and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon
it: God did but blow upon it, and by the breath of his mouth all their expected
increase went away. When Pharaoh pursued the Israelites in the height of pride
and presumption, the Text says, It came to pass in the morning watch, the
Lord looked upon the Host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire, and of
the cloud, and troubled the Egyptians, and took off their Chariot wheels,
that they drove them heavily (Exodus 14.24, 25.) God confounded them by a look;
how easily can the Lord rise up and destroy all the power that rises up
against his people? He can do it with a breath from his mouth, With a cast of
his eye. When Christ was apprehended by the Officers armed with Staves and
Swords; he said, Whom seek you? They answered, Jesus of Nazereth: He says, I
am he. (Christ was not afraid to confess himself) As soon then as he had said
unto them, I am he, they went backward, and fell to the ground (Joh 18.6.) What
a strange power was here, that Christ could cast them down with a word, and
that not an angry word, not a word of conviction but confession; he did not
chide them, and say, Ye wretches, how dare you lay your hands upon me, who am
an innocent person; how dare you carry me to judgment, who shall one day be
your Judge; Christ spoke no such terrible language, but only said, I am he,
and down they fell. If these words of submission had such a force in them, as
overthrew those Officers to the ground, how shall his Enemies stand before the
thunder of his severest increpations, and final sentence? As the Lord needs
not make great provisions for comforting of his people, if he speaks a word, it
is done; if he give but a good look, their hearts revive; Lord lift up the
light of thy countenance upon me, thou have put gladness in my heart (Psalm.
4.6, 7.) So if God do but darken his countenance against wicked men, and
frown upon them, if he do but breath at them, he puts sorrow enough into
their hearts, even consuming killing sorrow; By the breath of his mouth they
go away.

Again, take the breath of God, For the decree of God: Verbo vel mandato ex
ore Dei procedente. Jun.
for the word or command which goethout of his mouth, by this breath of God,
they go away. The destruction of the wicked is under a Decree; God has spoken
in his holiness (Psalm. 108. 7, 8, 9.) That is, he has given out his word from
Heaven, the habitation of his holiness, and of his glory; or, He has spoken
it certainly, there is nothing but holiness in his word (and that is the
strength of words) David having received this word, stands assured, That as
Shechem, and Succoth, Gilead, and Manasseh, Ephraim, and Judah, would willingly
submit to him, and yield obedience: So also, that Moab, Edom, and Philistia,
who were his professed Enemies, should be subdued to him. He expected to
conquer and triumph over them, to put them to the basest offices, as his
Vassals, because God had decreed and spoken it in his holiness. God has
spoken the word (says he) therefore it shall be done, yea it is done; and
therefore David cried, All Is mine, Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine, Moab and
Edom are mine, as soon as God had spoken the word. All that ever was done in
the World, has been done by the breath of Gods mouth; that is, by the word or
decree of God: So some understand that of the Apostle (2 These. 2.8.) And then
shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit,
or breath of his mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his coming:
Antichrist has stood long, and he has been for some time declining; his
downfall hastens; the breath of God will leave him breathless: As he has
stood by the flattering breath of men; so he shall fall by the consuming breath
of God.

This consuming with breath, notes either (as before) the easiness of that
consumption, it is done with a breath, or the way and manner of doing it; it is
done by the command and decree of God, or by the Preaching of the Gospel,
which indeed gives Antichrist his fatal blow, and shakes all the Towers of
mystical Babylon, and is called by the Prophet, The rod of his mouth, Spiritu
oris, sc: ipsius impii, credo potius referrendum* esse ad impium quasi ille
sibi ipsi fuerit mortis causa dum contra Deum loquitur confidenter and libere.
Sanct.
and the breath of his lips ( Isa. 11.4.) He shall smite the earth with the rod
of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. Life
and death sit upon the lips of Christ, he has a reviving breath, and a killing
breath; he quickens the deadest heart, and deads the quickest, the proudest
heart with a word speaking. By the breath of his mouth the wicked go away.

Further, The breath of his mouth, say some, is the breath of the wicked man's
own mouth; By the breath of his mouth shall he go away: That is, by the words
which breath out of his mouth. His passionate distempered speeches shall undo
him, while he speaks, either outragiously, and blasphemously against God, or
falsely and seditiously toward man, his ruin enters at the opening of his
lips.

The motion of the breath is the preserver of life, Spiritu oris sui. i. e.
suis verbis quae spiritu and halitu in ore ormantur.
and while breath lasts, life lasts; yet many a man's life had lasted longer had
it not been for his breath. The wicked man's breath proves his death, and his
tongue which has been a scourge to others, becomes a Sword to himself. His
words possibly have wounded, and his breath has been the death of many: But
now he is wounded by his own words, and crushed to death by the weight of his
own breath, or by the fall of his own tongue upon him: So the Psalmist gives
it ( Psalm. 64.8.) They shall make their own tongues to fall upon themselves;
that is, Their own words shall be brought as a Testimony against them, and
condemn them. The tongue is a little member (says the Apostle James, Chap.
3.5.) and therefore a light member; yet it falls heavy, as heavy as lead. A man
were better have his House fall upon him, then that (in this sense) his tongue
should fall upon him. Some have been pressed to death, because they would not
speak, but stood mute before the Judge; but more have been pressed to death by
their sinful freedom, or rather licentiousness in speaking; this has
brought them to judgment, and cast them in judgment: Their tongue has fallen
upon them, and by the breath of their mouth, they have gone away.

Lastly (but I will not stay upon it, because the Original does not well bear
it) these words are cast into the form of a similitude, describing the manner
how the wicked man, and all his glory shall go away; even as a breath, or as
his breath; As the breath of his mouth he shall go away; that is, he shall go
speedily, he shall go suddenly: A breath is soon fetched, it is both come and
gone in a moment; A breathing time, is a Proverbiall, for a little time (much
like that, In the twinkling of an eye.) Thus man comes and goes, is come and
gone (especially a wicked man who is driven by the wrath of God) as soon as
seen by others, as soon as he has breathed himself: It will not be long ere
he goes, and he will not be long a going. For as the breath of his mouth he
shall go away.

The breath of man goes continually, and so does the life of man; while man
sleeps, his breath goes, and so does his life; while man stands still, his
breath goes, and so does his life: The breath, indeed, is sometimes in a hurry,
and goes faster then it does at other times; but though the life of man does
not go faster at one time then at another, yet it always goes.

Or if at any time our life may be said to go faster then at another, it is
when our breath is (by some stop in its passage) at a stand; and when ever our
breath comes to a full stop, our life is not only going, but quite gone.

The life of man has so much dependence upon his breath, that it is called
Breath, and the breath of life: When God formed man out of the dust of the
ground, he breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a
living soul (Genesis 2.7.) And as soon as God calls back this breath of life, man
becomes a dead body, or a carcass: The life of man must needs go as his
breath, for it goes with his breath; and when the life of a wicked man is gone,
all (that he called his) his worldly glory, goes with him: In that day all his
thoughts perish: For, As the breath of his mouth he shall go away.

Eliphaz having laid down the wicked man's sad condition, and the causes of it,
concludes with a use or application of the whole Doctrine, at the 31. Verse,
Let not him, that is deceived trust in vanity, etc.

JOB, CHAP. 15. Verse. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. Let not him that is deceived trust in
vanity; for vanity shall be his recompense.

It shall be accomplished before his time, and his branch shall not be green.

He shall shake off his unripe Grape as the Vine, and shall cast off his flower
as the Olive.

For the Congregation of Hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall consume
the Tabernacles of bribery.

They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly prepares
deceit.


ELiphaz laid down his Doctrine, at the 20. Verse of this Chapter, That a
wicked man's life is a miserable life, he travells in pain all his days; and
having insisted long upon the proof, he now gives us the application of it, in
a use of dehortation.

Verse. 31. Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity.
He inforceth this dehortation by a summary repetition of the Doctrine before
delivered; which he does:

First, Plainly in the close of the 31. and in the beginning of the 32. Verses,
For vanity shall he his recompense; it shall be accomplished before its time.

Secondly, He does it allegorically, in the close of the 32. Verse, and in the
33. His branch shall not be green: He shall shake off his unripe Grapes as the
Vine, and shall cast off his flower as the Olive.

Having thus pressed his Doctrine by this powerful motive, he concludes his
whole Sermon, with a fresh assertion of his Doctrine, against two sorts of
wicked men in particular, which yet may comprehend all wicked men.

First, Hypocrites, who corrupt the worship of God, or are corrupt while they
pretend to worship God. Verse. 34. For the congregation of Hypocrites shall be
desolate.

Secondly, Of oppressors, who pervert Justice, or deal falsely among men; The
fire shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery.

Under these two heads, we may reduce all sorts of sinners; sinners against
God, under the notion of Hypocrites: And sinners against men, under the notion
of Oppressors, who pervert Judgment by giving or taking Bribes: All which
Eliphaz concludes, by a description of their evil actings (the cause of all
their sufferings) under that elegant metaphor of Childbearing; They conceive
mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly prepares deceit: Thus you
have the resolution and scope of the latter part of this Chapter.

Verse. 31. Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity. These words contain
the dehortation; here are three terms to be explained.

First, What is meant by being deceived. Secondly, What by trusting. Thirdly,
What we are to understand by Vanity.
Let not him that is deceived. The Original word signifies, either the turning
of the foot, or the turning of the heart, or both out of the way ( Psalm.
119.176. (...) Deceptus usurpatar, de errore cordis and pedis.
) I have gone astray, like a lost Sheep: That is, I have been deceived, and so
have gone out of the way of thy holy Commandments. Satan is an ill guide, and
our hearts are no better: He that follows either, quickly loses himself: And
until God seeks us up (as David prays in the next words) we cannot find
our way when we are once out of it ( Ezekiel. 44.15.) The Priests, the Levites,
the Sons of Zadock that kept the charge of my Sanctuary, when the people of
Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me: When the people walked
in by places, and were entangled in the briars of their own corruptions; then
the Priests kept the charge of the Lord: It was a great mercy, that when the
people were deceived, the Priests were not; that when the Sheep went astray,
the Shepherds did not? If Priests and people go astray together, who shall
reduce them? But to the point, Israel went astray. They who led them did not
cause them to err (once they did as the Prophet complains) Who then did? Many
go astray, when none lead them astray: Man can deceive himself fast enough,
if none else do; yet the word implies also the cunning activity, of an
external agent, to lead poor souls out of the way. We may take in both here;
Let not him that is deceived, whether by the fallacious arguings of his own
heart, or by the subtlety of any other, whether Men or Devils.

Trust in vanity. Or, Let him not believe in vanity: Trusting is an act of
faith, (...) Credet, ne credat in vanitatem.
and though a man may believe, and not trust; yet no man can trust, who does
not believe. We translate the word not as signifying only bare beleiving, but
as it reaches that higher act of trusting: He that is most deceived, is most
apt to trust that which will deceive him more; and gives not only his consent,
but confidence to that which either is not at all, or is that least which it
pretends to be, fit to be trusted, Vanity.

Let him not trust in vanity. The word which we render Vanity, (...) Temeritas
falsitas menda cium eadem est vis vocis quae apud Latinos vocabuli Vani quod
tam pro mendacio qua pro re ^^dicu^ accipi solet.
is not Habel used by Solomon (Eccles. 1.2.) Vanity of vanities, which
signifies only a light thing, such as is a vapor rising from the earth, a
bubble swelling out of, and floating a little upon the water, or more strictly,
a puff or breath of the mouth; but it signifies rashness, falsenesse, a lie,
a deceit; vain things are false, lying, and deceiveable; therefore, one word
serves for both.

Again, Vanity may be here taken two ways, either for the s^n, or deceit,
with which a man is mislead; and then the meaning is, Let not him that is
deceived by sin, trust in sin: Or secondly, Vanity may be taken for any
creature comfort, and contentment, especially those which are the revenue, or
income of sinful practices. Sin leads to profit, to pleasure, to honor, to
these frail and transitory things sin leads us, in hope of satisfaction by
them, and then the meaning is, Let not him that is deceived, trust in that
which sin promises, and professes it will do for him, or advance him to: Sin
in its nature is vanity, and all the fruits or issues of it are vain too.
Therefore, as nothing, and nothing, added together, make nothing, so vanity and
vanity put together, make but vanity: The total sum cannot exceed the Items
or particulars; Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity, for vanity shall
be his recompense.

Hence Observe.

First, Man is very apt to be deceived; so apt to be deceived, that he is
scarce ever undeceived: Eliphaz speaks here, not only of a possibility to be
deceived, but of being actually deceived; and this arises two ways, first
from the impotence and weakness, from the blindness and ignorance that is in
man; he that is blind and weak, is easily mislead; every man naturally, how
strong, how wise, how knowing soever he seems to be, is yet weak, blind, and
ignorant in a very great measure; and therefore very deceivable: Man is full of
craft, this makes him deceitful; he is empty of true wisdom, this renders
him deceiveable.

Secondly, As man may quickly be deceived, by reason of the ignorance which is
in him, so also by reason of those subtle enemies, who are always about him,
yea and within him. We live (as I may so speak) among Cheaters, and Cozenners,
and there is a great Cheater lives in us; how hard is it then not to be
deceived? If a man be in a Crowd among many Cut-purses, and Cheaters, he is in
danger to lose his Money every moment; it is so with us: though carnal men are
not at all aware of it, nor they who are most spiritual, so much aware of it
as they should It is dangerous to live among deceivers, though we know them,
and are aware of them; it is most dangerous to live among deceivers, and not to
know them, for then we cannot be aware of them; but it is madness to know we
live among deceivers, and yet not to be aware of them.

There are three notorious Deceivers, who labor to ensnare us; we need not
wonder though some who are watchful against them, are deceived by them: but it
would be a wonder, and such a wonder as yet was never seen, if they should not
be deceived, who never watch against them.

First, Our own hearts which have not only an impotence or weakness (as I
noted before) whereby they are apt to be deceived, but there is in our hearts
an activenesse, yea an efficacy to deceive; we are not only passive, but
active; we are seldom, if at all, deceived, till we deceive our selves: And
as some men are very active in deceiving others, so all men are active in a
degree to deceive themselves. ( Jer. 17.9.) The heart of man is deceitful and
desperately wicked: The heart is deceitful in reference to a threefold object.

First, The heart would deceive God himself, and impose upon the All-wise:
That's the design of a Hypocrite, his business is to deceive God, though the
issue be the deceiving of himself.

Secondly, The heart of man is deceitful in contriving ways to deceive, and
supplant other men. The complaint of the Prophet goes very high upon this (
Mich. 7.2.) The good man is perished out of the Earth, and there is none
upright among men; they all lie in wait for blood; they hunt every man his
brother with a net. To lie in wait, is the act, and a Net is the instrument of
a Deceiver, The Prophecy of Christ goes yet higher ( Matthew. 24.24.) For there
shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and
wonders; insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect.
Deceit works to its utmost possibility, when it puts hard to deceive those,
whom to deceive is impossible. If Elect men could be deceived, God should be
deceived in his Election; But this is impossible, and therefore that is; the
man who is elect is deceiveable, but because he is an elect man, he cannot be
deceived: And though an elect man may be deceived in some things (for even he
is subject to error, because he is still (while in this World) the subject of
sin) yet he cannot be so far deceived in any thing, as to null or frustrate
his election. How restless is man to deceive man, seeing he cease not his
endeavor to deceive, where he cannot prevailingly deceive.

Thirdly, (Which I conceive the Text in Jeremiah specially aims at) the heart
of man is very busy to deceive himself. It Is bad enough to deceive others,
but to deceive our selves is worse, and that not only because it makes us more
miserable, but more sinful: Selfe-deceit is the most sinful deceit. The heart
of man is desperately wicked, there is no hope that, it will leave off to do
wickedly, seeing it is of counsel against its own peace. And surely, man is
not only under a possibility to be deceived, in regard of the impotence and
blindness of his heart, but also under an impossibility, not to be deceived,
in regard of the skill and unwearyed activity of his heart to deceive himself.

Secondly, Man has another deceiver continually about him, The World, and all
that is in the World, The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride
of life; all these are but as so many snares and juggels to cozen, and deceive
poor man.

Thirdly, The Devil, who is The Deceiver; of whose devices we are not ignorant
(says the Apostle) he is full of tricks and plots; he has his methods, his
arts to deceive. Ever since the Devil deceived himself, he has been studying
how to deceive man; he does not only go about like a roaring Lion, but like a
subtle Serpent, and a cunning Fox, seeking whom he may devour; or he is a Lion
to devour those whom he has first deceived as a Fox, or as a Serpent: Man is a
perswadable creature (Genesis 9.27.) God shall persuade Japhet to dwell in the
Tents of Shem: The Original word there used to persuade, signifies also to
deceive, because persuasions are often made as Engines, or baytes to deceive.

There is also a kind of holy fraud in the Gospel, and man is as it were
deceived into the obedience of it, Being crafty I caught you with guile (I
fetched you over, did I not?) says Paul (2 Cor. 12.16.) Now as man is sometimes
deceived for his good, so he is often and easily deceived for his hurt, by
these three deceivers. Satan, the World, and his own Heart, persuade him by an
unholy deceit to dwell in the Tents of sin.

(...) Bis potest sumi and cum (...) credet, ne credat in vanitatem, and cum
(...) deceptus, deceptus inquam per vanitatem, ne in eam fida*
Again, Some who by vanity understand sin, read the word Vanity twice, Let not
him that is deceived by vanity, trust in vanity; that is, Let not him that is
deceived by sin, trust in sin; which interpretation yields us this truth, Sin
is deceitful, or thus, Sin does nothing but deceive.

The Apostle, ( Heb. 3.13.) charge sin with deceit to its very face, Exhort
one the other, while it is called to day, least any of your hearts be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin; there are three eminent evils in sin,

First, There is a pollution in sin, it defiles.

Secondly, There is baseness in sin, it dishonours.

Thirdly, There is a deceitfulness in sin, it would make us believe we shall
be, and receive, that which it is not able to perform.

Hence the Apostle ( Romans 6.21.) puts the question to those who were once the
servants of sin, What fruit had ye then in those things whereof you are now
ashamed? He asks them, and bids them ask their own hearts, what fruit had
you? as if he had said, I know when you were servants of sin, your sins
promised you great matters, great rewards: the Tree of sin seems to be loaded
with fruits, the bows of it look as if ready to break with goodly fruits;
fruit pleasant to the eye, sweet to the taste, and desirable to make one wise;
but I beseech yon tell me what fruit had you in those things wh reof you are
now ashamed? If you be ashamed to tell me; I will tell you, The end of those
things is death; that is all the fruit which the Tree of sin bears. Sin deals
with us, as Jaell with Sisera (Judges 4.18.) She stood at the Tent door, when
he came panting from the Battle, and said to him, Turn in my Lord, turn in;
she took him into her Tent, and laid him down, covered him warm, and when he
asked her for Milk, she gave him Butter, Butter in a Lordly dish; here were
fine words, and seeming promises: yet she honestly deceived him, She put her
hand to the Nail, and her hand to the workmans Hammer, and nailed his temples
to the ground. Thus sin bids us turn in, promises to cover us warm, gives us
Butter in a Lordly dish, but never tells us of that woeful end, and wretched
catastrophe which it intends unto us: Sin deals with us as Dallilah with
Sampson, takes us into its bosom and embraces; but then it has a plot to cut
the lock of our strength, to deliver us over to the Philistims, to call in
Legions of Devils to seize upon us, and make us grind at the Mill of their
basest drudgery.

More distinctly, sin deceives by a threefold promise.

First, By a promise of profit ( Prove. 1.13.) Come cast in thy lot with us, let
us lie in wait for blood, etc. We shall find all precious substance, we shall
fill our houses with spoil: but this precious substance, proves only a
pernicious shadow, and these spoils taken, spoil those who take them.

Secondly, Sin deceives by promising content, and sweet delight; what thoughts
had Ahab concerning Naboths Vineyard? If he could but get it, he were a made
man; what pleasure should he have in those shady walks? what Grapes and Wine
from those fruitful Vines? Sin promises as largely as God does, to give us
not only delight but satisfaction; that we shall not have so much as an empty
corner in our souls; all shall be filled: whereas in truth there is nothing
but emptiness, and dissatisfaction in any creature, especially when sin leads
or helps us to the enjoyment of it.

Thirdly, At least, sin promises and gives its word for it, that we shall be
free from trouble, and feel no evil; That we shall have peace, though we
walk in the imagination of our heart (Deuteronomy. 29.19.) That as they flattered
themselves in the Prophet, we shall not see Sword, nor Famine: These vanishing
dreams of plenty, of good things, and immunity from evil, carry thousands of
souls captive to the basest bondage of sin.

Further, This vanity, from trusting which the deceived soul is called off by
Eliphaz, is conceived to be worldly riches, and the fullest possession of the
creature; these are vanity: That they are, is a common theme, and yet though
it be much spoken of, it is very little believed; we are apt to over-rate the
things of the World, and under-rate the things of Heaven. The creature is
vanity, not only in regard of the nothingnesse of it, but vanity in regard of
that which we call the somthingnesse of it, or the best of it.

The Prophet Jonah makes the word which we here translate vanity, (...)
Vanitates mendacii sive mendaces.
the Epethite of that which is commonly translated vanity ( Jon. 3.8.) They
that observe lying vanities: Idols are vanity, and a lie, because though they
can do no good at all, yet they promise much: Riches are vanity, and a lie,
because they cannot do so much good as they promise. Solomon says in his
Ecclesiastes, That Money answers all things (Chap. 8.10.) And so it does as
the value of all earthly things is made by Money, and as Money is the price of
all earthly things. But though Money answers all things, by satisfying our
engagements, yet it answers nothing to the satisfying of its own
engagements. Money and riches have paid many a man's debts, and enough of them
will pay any man's debts; but they have never paid their own debts, no more
then Idols have, and therefore they justly bear the brand of this reproach,
Lying vanities: That they are so, appears clearly in two particulars.

First, In the report which they make of themselves.

Secondly, In the promises which they make to us.

First, In the report which they make of their own worth; if you look upon the
bil of the creature, it puts down, not only a hundred for fifty, but a million
for a mite: For, how much soever it is worth, yet it bears no proportion to
that which it would be esteemed worth: As some rich men are not half so rich
as they desire to be reckoned; so riches themselves are not so rich by
thousands of thousands as they would be reckoned.

There is indeed a created worth in the creature, for it is the work of God;
but since the sin of man has (as to us) both imbased, and imbittered the
creature, it is worth nothing comparatively to that at which it is rated, both
in its own, and our Books.

Secondly, The creature (in this notion) is a lying vanity, while it persuades
us; that in the enjoyment thereof we shall be happy; whereas our happiness
does not consist in any creature-enjoyment; unless God himself be our
portion, we are both poor and miserable in the fullest possession of the
creature. God is the living stream, the creature at the best was but a
Cisterne, and now it is but a broken Cisterne which leaks out all the waters
that pass into it, unless God stop the chinks, and mend the cracks of it, by
Jesus Christ.

Again, The creature promises to ease us of our cares, yet it does but
multiply them: The creature promises to satisfy our desires, yet it does only
increase and enrage them. Riches are not food, but fuel to our desires; they
do not allay our appetite, as bread does, when received into the stomach, but
inflame our appetite, as wood does, when it is cast into the fire.

Further, The creature promises to protect us; hence that of Solomon (Prove.
10.15.) The rich man's wealth is his strong City: That is, it promises to be
so, and tells him, it will do that for him, which a strong City does for its
Inhabitants, defend him against all Comers and Invaders; yet the same Solomon
assures us in the next Chapter ( Verse. 4.) That riches profit not in the day of
wrath. And Ezekiel threatens the Jews, That their Silver and their Gold shall
not deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord.

Lastly, The Creature promises to continue with us. Riches tell us, that
though Father and Mother forsake us, yet they will not, though Wife and
Children forsake us, yet they will not; they make us believe that they will
stick closer to us, then Christ himself, and yet they are upon the wing
presently, they fly away as the Eagle, and are gone out of sight, they do not
only perish in the using, but perish from our use.

Is not all this and a thousand times more, which might be said of their lying,
and vanity, enough, and more then enough to justify those titles which the
Spirit of God has bestowed upon them, that they are vanity and a lie, or as
Jonah calls them, Lying vanities.

And yet (to close the point) we must remember that creature-riches are not a
lie, nor deceitful in themselves. There Is no more deceit in the greatest
abundance of Gold and Silver, then there is in a wholesome savory piece of
bread. Riches are not vain and deceitful, as our hearts are said to be
deceitful ( Jer. 17.9.) nor as lust is said to be deceitful ( Ephesians. 4.22.) for
these things are deceitful only through the deceitfulness of our hearts, and
lusts: Or they are deceitful Objectively, not Actively; we are deceived about
them, not by them. They do not deceive us till we are deceived; nor do they
deceive us either as possessed or used, but as adored and trusted. Let not him
that is deceived trust in vanity.

Thirdly Observe,

Man must and will have somewhat to trust to, or lean upon. And therefore
rather then fail, he will trust that which cannot but fail, Vanity. Like one
that is ready to drown, he catches at any thing, a rotten stick, or a straw,
and would support his whole body, by that which is not able to bear the weight
of his little finger. Man is a weak creature, sense and nature are enough to
make him sensible of his natural weakness; and these also are enough to
prompt and provoke him to seek help without himself, though they are utterly
insufficient to direct him whither to go for the surest help; It is the
privilege of God alone to have nothing to trust to, or to be above trust: He
who is all strength needs not trust. As he does not put trust in his Saints
(Verse. 15.) because he knows they are frail and mutable: so he has no need to
trust them, because he knows himself not only strong, but immutable. God is
all that he is from himself, and therefore he ever continues to be what he is,
by himself. But man who is not a spring to himself of Being, cannot be a
support to himself for the continuance of his Being; much less for the
continuance of his well-being. And as man's necessity calls him to trust, so his
duty calls him to trust God: Man fell at first by his desire to stand alone, he
would be independent; and men fall every day, because they desire to stand by
that which cannot stand alone. It is a special part of that worship which we
owe to God, to trust him; and whatsoever we trust besides God, we make a God of
it. He that trusts not in the God that made him, makes many Gods (such as they
are) by trusting them. While Job puts that negative supposition (as to his own
case) Chap. 31.24.) If I have made Gold my hop^, or have said to the fine Gold,
thou art my confidence: He more then implies that many had. Man ought to trust
God, but few will; many will trust in Creatures, but none ought: Man will be
trusting in somewhat, and he is so forward to trust in vanity (which indeed is
nothing) that it is the hardest thing in the World to take him off. We cannot
press either our selves or others too much, to trust God, and we cannot
repress them enough from trusting vanity: Man is very ready to exercise and
put forth an act of trust, and he is as ready to mistake the object of trust.

Lastly Observe.

Man is apt to trust that which has deceived him; or man being once deceived,
trusts that which will deceive him again. Let not him that is deceived trust
in vanity: We say, Such a man has deceived me once, but he shall not deceive
me the second time: But carnal hearts being deceived once by sin and vanity,
are willing to be deceived a thousand times; being once deceived, they care not
how often they are deceived: That of the Prophet is an eminent Testimony to
this too much experimented truth ( Isa. 44.20.) He feeds on ashes; that is,
he is as much deluded as a man is, who eats ashes, thinking it to be bread or
other good cheer; or his Idol which promised him great matters and much joy,
has given nothing but ashes, sorrow, and misery; of which, ashes, and
especially feeding upon ashes, was an emblem: Now though it were thus with
him, yet (says the Prophet) A deceived heart has turned him aside that he
cannot deliver his soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand? that
is, Though he sees himself deceived, yet he has no power to withdraw from the
deceiver, nor to question the deceit; he is so bewitched with the sorcery of
sin, that he cannot deliver his soul from the snares of it; but being
deceived, he is willingly deceived, and looks upon his deceiver as his trusty
Friend.

God never deceived, no nor failed any man that trusted in him ( Ps. 9.10.) yet
the hearts of the most will not be persuaded to trust God; sin and the creature
deceive all that trust in them, yet we can hardly call or beat the heart off
from trusting them. Sin seldom looses its credit; sin has broken and undone
thousands, yea all who have trusted it; yet still it has credit among
thousands, and can be trusted with more then this World is worth, the precious
soul of man, for the asking. But let not him that is deceived, trust (any
longer) in vanity, if he do, he shall never be a gainer, no nor a saver by it.

For vanity shall be his recompense. Vanity fills both parts of the Verse, and
meets us at every turn, yet with a difference: In the former part by vanity
was signified either sin, or the creature; in this latter part, vanity notes
misery, Vanitatis nomen vary hic sumitur, quam ob rem sorsan and vary
scribitur priore loco sig. vanas res quibus fidebant, scopes: gloriam,
posteriori loco vanitatem in quam haec omnia redigenda sint dum ex his decidens
miser siet. Merc.
or the effect and fruit of sin.

Hence Observe.

The vanity of misery overtakes all those who are deceived by the vanity of
sin.

Vanity is their recompense. There are two sorts of recompense.

First, Of wrath. Secondly, Of favor.
Evil deeds have their recompense, as well as good. To me (says the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 32.35.) belongs vengeance and recompense; that is, the recompense of
vengeance; as the Apostle expounds it ( Heb. 10.30.) For we know him that said,
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense says the Lord: God will not
live long in any man's debt: As holy Gospell-confidence has a great recompense
of reward (Heb. 10.35.) So every disobedience of the Law received a just
recompense of reward (Heb. 2.2.) And God is so exact in giving the recompenses
of punishment, that he will not spare his own, when they are so foolish as to
trust in vanity ( Prove. 11.31.) Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in
the earth, much more the wicked and the sinner: that is, A righteous man shall
be corrected, though he sin of infirmity; how then shall the wicked be punished
who sin with presumption and delight. As a wicked man has all his recompenses
of good on the earth ( Matthew. 6.2.) They have their reward; so a righteous man
has all his recompenses of evil or affliction in the earth; he has none
beyond. But, we may strongly argue, that the wicked, who trust in vanity shall
be recompensed with sorrow for ever; seeing the righteous, if they do but a
little turn aside to vanity, shall be recompensed with sorrow here: That Is the
Apostle Peter's way of reasoning (1 Epist. 4.18.) If the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? Surely, as the Prophet
concludes ( Isa. 59.18.) According to their deeds accordingly he will repay
fury to his adversaries, recompense to his enemies, to the Islands he will
repay recompense.

Secondly, as vanity in the former clause is taken for the Creature. Observe.

The Creature is most vain to those who trust it.

The Creature is a vain thing in his hand, who believes and trusts in God, but
it is exceeding vain in his hand, who trusts on it; and the more it is
trusted, the more vain it is. If we make it our staff, it will be our
scourge: if we lean upon it as our rock, it will run into our hands like a
broken Reed: The best way to keep up our comforts in the Creature, is to keep
our distance from the Creature. And they shall find most content in the World,
who live furthest off it, and expect least from it. God is good, and the more
we trust him, the better he is to us, yea he is not good at all to us, unless
we trust him: But the best of creatures trusted to become evil, yea an Idol
to us. Trust not in vanity (such are all creatures in their best estate) for
vanity shall be your recompense.

Again, The word which we translate recompense, signifies a change, or the
exchange which is made of one thing for another: While Job exalts the value and
excellency of wisdom above all created excellencies, he says ( Chap. 28.17.)
The Gold and the Crystal cannot equal it, and the exchange of it shall not
be for jewels of fine Gold.

So some render it here, Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity, A radice
(...) mutavit (...) commutatio vanitas erit; commutatio ejus, i. e. in nihilum
redigetur.
for vanity shall be his change: Whenever he changes, he shall change into
vanity, or when he has driven a trade in sinful vanity, to the highest; the
best exchange which the Merchandise thereof yields him, is miserable vanity:
Vanity can produce nothing to us but vanity: The effect is not better then the
cause, nor the fruit then the Tree; and that which we receive in exchange,
though it may be of another kind, yet it is of no better value then that we
give in exchange.

Hence Observe.

That a wicked man's state never changes for better, but from good to bad, or
from bad to worse. Till the man himself be changed from bad to good, his state
can never change from bad to good: And suppose his outward state be good, then
the worst thing that can befall him, is this, that his state should not change.
His setlednesse in that which is civilly good, does but more settle him in that
which is morally evil. They have no changes, therefore they fear not God
(Psalm. 55.19.) What can be worse for man then this, not to fear God, who is
the chiefest good? Who would not fear to be without changes, when he hears
that being without them, keeps out this fear?

Suppose further. That the wicked man's outward estate be evil, then it is
worse to him, when he changes to outward good: if he change from sorrow to joy,
from povery to riches, from sickness to health, from a prison to liberty, in
all these, or in any other of like nature with these, he changes to his loss:
That man can never change for good, who continues evil. Such a man's outward
estate often changes from bad to worse; if it change from bad to good, that is
bad for him; and if being good, it change not at all, that is worst of all.

It is a part of the misery of man, that his state is changeable, but that is
incident to the best of men: We shall not be unchangeable in our state, till we
come into the presence of God, who is unchangeable in his nature. We may say
also (considering the many troubles which we are subject to in this life) that
it is a part of our happiness, that our state is changeable. Those changes
which are from evil to good, or from good to better, are to be numbered among
our blessings; such are the changes of the Saints, all their changes are for
the better: yea those changes of the Saints which are from joy to sorrow, from
riches to poverty, from health to sickness, from liberty to a prison, from
life to death, in a word, their changes from any kind of outward temporary
good, to outward temporary evil, are yet for their good. He cannot change but
for his good, who is good, and who abides always under this promise, that all
shall work together for his good.

An evil and a good man differ in nothing more then in their changes; nor
should any selfe-consideration provoke an evil man more to desire that he may
be changed to good, then this, that his changes may be for good. Who would
continue or trust in vanity, were he persuaded that vanity shall be his change?

Secondly, Observe.

That such as our way is, such will our end be: If we walk and trust in vanity,
we shall have vanity for our recompense, or our change. Every man's end is
virtually in his way: So the Apostle argues ellegantly ( Gal. 6.7.) Be not
deceived, God is not mocked; whatsoever a man sowes that shall he reap, he
that sowes to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; he that sowes to
the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting: If the Husbandman sow
tares he must look to reap tares: A seed time of tares, and a Harvest of Wheat,
were never heard of in the same ground: As the seed is, such is the crop ( Isa.
3.11.) Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hand
shall be given him. There is nothing worse for some, then to have their reward
brought in, and all that is owing to them paid: The very receiving of their
debts and rewards, is their undoing for ever.

All the misery of a wicked man is summed up in this, He shall have the reward
of his hands. Wrath, and death, and Hell, are his rewards, and all the wages
which the work both of his hands and heart can earne, and these he shall have
fully paid to him: Vain he has been, and vanity shall be his recompense.

Some read this Verse, not as a dehortation, Let not him that is deceived
trust, or believe in vanity; but as a negative proposition (for that particle
in the Hebrew, which sometimes carries a prohibition, (...) Malo simpliciter
negare quam prohibere Merc. Non credet qui vanitate errat quod vanitas erit
permutatio ejus. Merc. Non credet fore ut ejus faelicitas permutetur and ad
me^am vanitatem deveniet. Vat^bl.
notes also a bare negation; so here) He that is deceived with vanity will not
believe (the same word signifies both to believe and trust) that vanity shall
be his recompense: He will not believe a change, much less such a change; This
is a clear sense, and it hints us this Observation.

That a wicked man is full of infidelity or unbeleife, that his estate is
evil, or shall ever be worse then it is.

The unbeleife of man is as strong against the threatenings, as against the
promises: The Saints are hardly brought to believe, that glory shall be their
recompense, that the purchase which Christ has made of Heaven, and eternal
happiness belongs to them. A wicked man will not believe that tribulation and
anguish shall be upon him, or that the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against his unrighteousness, he will not believe that he shall go to Hell and
be damned, or that everlasting fire shall burn him, or the worm that dies
not, feed upon him; he that is deceived will not believe these things, and the
Devil has as great an advantage upon men, by making them strong in unbeleife:
As God has, by making his people strong in Faith.

The first assault that ever the Devil made against man, was to weaken Faith,
or strengthen unbeleife about the threatenings: While he labored to deceive the
Woman, he labored as much to persuade her, That vanity should not be her
recompense: God had said peremptorily, In the day that ye eat thereof, ye
shall surely dye: The Devil denied as peremptorily, Ye shall not surely dye
(Genesis 3.4.) The people were commanded to say Amen to every branch of the Curse
( Deuteronomy. 27.16, 17, etc.) Though it be the lowest way of obedience to obey,
because we believe the truth, and certainty of the Curse; yet it is a high act
of obedience to believe it: And Satan is as busy against our faith, in the
threatenings, as he is against our faith in promises. This unbeleife opens the
way to the committing of sin, and sweetens sin while we are committing it: Were
it not for this unbelief sin could not be bread, much less (as it is to many)
pleasant bread. Sin would be Gall and Wormwood in the acting of it, did we
believe, that it will be bitterness in the end. Who would do the work of
sin, did he believe that vanity should be his recompense? Because this threat
is not believed, therefore the Law which forbids sin, is not obeyed. As Faith
is a shield to the new Man, so unbeleife is a shield to the old Man; as Faith
quenches the fiery darts of the Devil, or his allurements to sin; so unbelief
quenches all the fiery darts of God, or his threatenings of punishment. Tush say
they, We shall never see Sword nor Famine, we need not fear (which is so much
talked of) death or Hell: Vanity shall not be our recompense.

There is a third reading of the Text: Rab. Kimchi exponit Sheve, pro aequali
seu aequalitate. q.d. Ne credat qui deceptus est aequalem semper and sui
similem fore sibi statum, vel eodem semper modo res sibi cessuras. Merc.
The former word which we render Vanity, is translated by some of the Rabbis,
Equality, or a thing that is equal, the latter, as we, a lie, or Vanity. This
varies the whole strain of the Verse, and yet the Exposition given upon it is
clear, both to the general scope, and to the sense given immediately before.
Let not him that is deceived, believe that he shall be always equal, or of
the same estate, for vanity shall be his recompense. He thinks to carry it
smoothly, and with an even thread, but he is deceived. Things will not always
stand at the same point and poyze with him, and therefore let him not feed
himself with groundless ayery hopes, that they will: His affairs will not
always have the same face, nor bear the same aspect toward him; now they
smile and look pleasantly, but annon they will frown and look sour.

Lastly, Keeping near the same sense still; Non credet verbo aequo qui errat
sed mendacium erit loco ejus. Pagn. q. d. qui errat non credet verbo recto; sed
ponet mendacium loco illius and hoc pacto credet.
the words are thus translated: He that is deceived, will not believe the right
word, or the word of truth, but he will believe a lie in stead of it: As if
Eliphaz had thus schooled and cautioned Job, I have told you this as from God;
but I know he that is (as you are) misled, and deceived, will not believe the
word of God, who cannot lie; he will believe a lie rather. As the carnal heart
changes the glory of God into a lie, so the truth of God into a lie, or
embraces a lie for truth; he that believed not the right word, will soon
believe that which is wrong. As they who receive not the love of the truth, are
(by the just judgment of God) given up to strong delusions, to believe a lie:
So also are they, who receive not the truth. As the not doing of good, is not
only it self an evil, but leads us also, or lays us open to the doing of
many evils, yea of any evil: So the not receiving of truth is not only an
error, but it leads us also, or lays us open to the receiving of many, yea of
any error.

Eliphaz having thus pressed his dehortation upon Job, not to trust in vanity,
lest he find vanity the reward and recompense of that unholy faith and trust;
proceeds yet further to press his dehortation by the same argument for the
matter, though varyed in the manner of expression, in the beginning of the next
Verse.

Verse. 32. It shall be accomplished before his time, etc.
These words are a strong enforcement of the motive laid down in the former
Verse, Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity: Why, what if he do?
Vanity shall be his recompense: That Is the first part of the motive. The second
is,

In non die suo complebitur. Mont.
Verse. 32. It shall be accomplished before his time: What shall be accomplished?
There is no express Antecedent in the Hebrew; we may understand, either first,
the life of the wicked man himself, of whom Eliphaz had before discoursed. Or
secondly, Compleri ante diem, etc. est potius perire quam ullum complementum
and perfectionem accipere. Pined. Antequam dies ejus impl^antur, peribit* ut
sit (...) a (...) succido. Morte immatura praev^nietur vel gladio, vel morbo,
vel aliqua alia violenta causa In die non suo implebitur sepulchrum ejus. Ta^g.
the estate of the wicked man. Or thirdly, the designs and plots of the wicked
man. Taking in all three, the meaning is, That himself, and all that he has
gotten, and all that he has projected, Shall be accomplished before his time;
and what is this but vanity for his recompense?

To be accomplished before the time, is not to be accomplished at all, it notes
rather perdition then perfection. The word which we translate to accomplish,
signifies also to cut off, as we put in the Margin of our Bibles, It shall be
accomplished, or cut off before his time: The Vulgar translation fills up the
sense thus, Before his days can be filled, he shall perish.

As the Relative looks to the wicked man himself, Observe.

An untimely death is the portion of a wicked man. He shall be accomplished in
a day that is not his, or before his proper day. In opposition to which,
Eliphaz had promised, Chap. 5. That a godly man shall come like ^sheafe of
Corn into the Barn, fully ripe: Now says he, This wicked man shall be like
untimely fruit, accomplished, cut off, and perishing before his time. We have
such an Expression ( Eccl. 7.17.) Be not righteous over much, neither make thy
self over-wise; why should thou destroy thy self? Be not over much wicked
(not that there is any mediocrity in wickedness, or that a man can be wicked
in due proportion, but says he, take heed of high actings in wickedness) why
should thou dye before thy time? Some wickednesses lie close, men live and
continue in them long unseen; others are so open and abominable, that their
actors are abnoxious to the hand of Justice: He that is wicked overmuch, that
is, extremely wicked, shall be cut off some way or other before his time.

Quarrellers dye by the Sword, Drunkards dye by surfeit, Adulterers decay into
filthy diseases, Sorcerers are killed by the Devil, Malefactors of all sorts
are cut off by the sentence of the Magistrate. Most desire to live long, and
yet they take a course to make their lives short; they forget that short way to
long life ( Psalm. 34.12.)

That promise ( Isa. 65.20.) stands opposite to this threatening, There shall be
no more there an infant of days, Implere dies ad longam faelicemque senectam
pertinet vel denotat illam aetatis maturitatem, quae non annorum numero; sed
pietatis perfectione definitur.
nor an old man that has not filled his days: A good man fills his days, a
wicked man shall be accomplished, or there shall be an end of him before his
day; both, before that day which he would live to, according to the course of
his desire, and before that day which he might live unto, according to the
course of nature.

Besides, a wicked man never fills his days, though he be full of days; he
that is not prepared for death (how old soever he is) dies before he is ripe:
he is ripe for destruction, but he is neither ripe nor fit for death: The
youngest Saint that dies, dies ripe, though he dye before he come to that
estate, Pii licet aetate juvenes, senes sunt moribus.
wherein nature uses to crop men off; yet, he (as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians.
4.13.) is come to the fullness of the stature of Christ.

Secondly, Referring these words unto the estate of a wicked man, it shall be
accomplished, or cut off before the time; that is, his pomp, and greatness,
all that he has gotten together (of which he spoke in the precedent part of
the Chapter) shall be scattered suddenly.

Hence Note.

Wicked men often outlive all their worldly enjoyments: Some live to be their
own Executors; they dispose, or rather dissipate all; they leave nothing when
they dye, for others. The pride of wicked men shall have a fall, their present
possessions and future hopes shall come to naught ( Prove. 3.16.) Solomon tells
us, that Wisdom has length of days in her right hand, and in her left hand
riches and honor: We may say of sin, Shortness of days is in its right hand,
and in its left hand, poverty and disgrace. The former point says, that a
wicked man's days are short, he shall be cut off before his time, death cuts
him off. The latter says, his pomp, his riches and honor, all these shall be
cut off before the time. We have seen some who have raised great estates by
sin, and they have seen an end of all in misery.

Thirdly, Taking the Antecedent to be the designs and contrivements of the
wicked man.

Hence Note.

The counsels, designs, and contrivements of wickedmen, do often prove
abortive: They are accomplished before their time. Their plots break out before
they are ripe, and then all is spoiled. So it was with the Powder Plot, it was
accomplished before the time; it was discovered before it could be acted; we
have often seen grand designs laid in the dust, crushed in the shell, and nipt
in the very bud. As the Prophet reproves some for staying too long, in the
place of breaking forth of Children ( Hos. 13.13.) That is, they have let their
purposes dye under tedious consultations, or irresolutions for acting: So we
may deride others for staying too little in the place of breaking forth of
Children. God in judgment hastens them to action before their designs are
fully matured by consultation, It is accomplished before his time.

And his branch shall not be green. In the close of this Verse, and in the
next, Eliphaz in several metaphors, prosecutes the declining condition of
wicked men, His branch shall not be green.

(...) Sig. and manum and ramum, rami sunt veluti brachia and manus arboris.
His branch. Or his hand shall not be green; so the word signifies properly:
And, that some understand in a figure, his hand shall not be green; that is,
himself shall be unapt, and unfit for work. When an arm is dried up, or a
hand palsied, it is unserviceable: The hand of a godly man is green, he is
laborious, and fit for labor; the hand of the wicked man, as it is always
sinfully dried up, in reference to the doing of any good, so it is often
judicially dried up lest it should do hurt: his hand shall not be green, that
is, he shall not have power to do that evil which he would: When Jeroboam put
forth his hand from the Altar, etc. his arm dried up, so that he could not
pull it in again to him (1 Kings 13.4.) His hand, his arm, was not green, he
could not use it to hurt the Prophet ( Zech. 11.17.) The wicked Idol Shepherd
is threatened, His arm shall clean be dried up, and his right eye shall be
utterly darkened: that is, He shall neither have counsel, nor strength, he
shall neither be able to advise, nor to act; his eye shall be darkened, so that
he shall not be able to see his way; his arm shall be dried up, he shall not
be able to attain his end ( Psalm. 75.5.) None of the men of might have found
their hands; as we say of a man that goes lamely or lazily, He cannot find his
feet; so of a man that acts lamely and lazily, or of a Soldier that fights
faintly and cowardly, He cannot find his hands; or in the language of the
Text, His arm or hand is not green.

We translate metaphorically, so the word signifies not a hand, but a branch;
because a branch or bough of a Tree puts forth from the body of it, as the hand
or arm is stretched from the body of a man; by this branch we may understand,
either of those two things noted before;

First, The estate of the wicked man; for that is as a branch shooting and
growing out from him;

Or secondly, The designs and counsels of the wicked man; they also are
branches sprouting from the corrupt stock of his heart: and so this clause is
of the same sense with the former, It shall be accomplished before his time,
his branch shall not be green: That is, he shall not prosper in any thing he
possesses, or undertaketh.

But thirdly, There is a distinct sense, Priusquam impius senescat, interibit;
and liberi ejus sub aetatis flore morientur. Paraephr.
and so the branch is the Posterity, the Children of this wicked man. As he,
and his plots, shall fail, so his Children likewise. Children are compared to
branches ( Psalm. 128.) His Children shall stand like Olive plants (or branches)
round about his Table.

His branch shall not be green. Greenness, notes flourishing ( Cant. 1.16.)
where the Spouse and Christ speak one to another of their several
excellencies, she says, Verse. 16. Behold thou art fair my beloved, yea
pleasant, also our bed is green. By bed some understand holy Ordinances,
wherein the Lord communicates himself to his people, Our bed is green; that
is, Ordinances are pure, flourishing, and fruit-bearing. In the same sense the
word is used ( Luke 23.31.) If they do these things in a green Tree, what
shall be done in the dry, that is, If they do these things in a vigorous,
strong, and flourishing tree, meaning Christ himself, who was like a tree full
of sap and life; what shall be done in those that are dry? The best of men
compared to Christ, are but dry trees, how fear and rotten then are the worst?
And if Christ suffered these things for sinners, himself being without sin,
what shall those sinners suffer, who are without Christ? They like dry Trees
will soon be consumed by the fire of Gods wrath. So that, when he says, They
shall not be green, it is as much as to say, They shall have no strength,
vigor, life, nor beauty.

Taking the branch in this last sense for Children: Observe.

A wicked Father brings a curse, and withering upon his whole Family: His
branch shall not be green. Though they walk not in the ways of their Fathers,
nor inherit their sins, yet they may receive temporal fadings, and outward
decays upon their Fathers account. It is a misery to be the branch of a wicked
stock (for though an evil stock may have good branhecs, they who are evil, not
only (as all are) descending from a common evil stock, but also from a
particular evil stock (as most are) even some of these are made good by
transplantation into Jesus Christ, yet (I say) it is a misery to be a branch of
an evil stock) many Children have fared the worse for the wickedness of their
Parents, even good Children may fare somewhat the worse for their Parents
wickedness. Though God will not lay eternal judgment upon them for the
wickedness of their immediate or remoter Parents, yet they may feel
declinings, and lose much of their greenness, and beauty. It is a disadvantage
to be in any relation to a wicked man, Servant, Wife, Children, his whole
Family, may groan and smart for his sake, His branch shall not be green.
That Is not all yet,

Verse. 33. And he shall shake off his unripe Grape as the Vine, and shall cast
off his flower as the Olive.
That is, His unripe Grapes and Flowers shall be shaken and cast off. By whom?
Some say by God. He (that is, God) will snap off his sour Grape as the Vines,
says Master Broughton; and indeed whatsoever is the wind that shakes them, it
is God who blows and sends the wind.

These words are a gradation to what went before, here are two similitudes to
set forth one thing, the certain and sudden destruction of all the hopes of a
wicked man, His branch shall not be green; his Children and Posterity,
especially they that follow his steps shall wither; and, which is yet a greater
judgment, He shall shake off his unripe Grapes as the Vine, etc. Though his
branch be green a while, though he has leaves and buds, yet before it is
perfect fruit, and gives a pleasant taste, it shall be destroyed: This he
shadows under these metaphors, of the Vine, and the Olive, shaking off his
unripe Grapes, and casting off his Flowers.

The Naturalist Observes, Eodem sere tempore vitis and oleoe florescunt, Plin.
l. 17. c. 25. Aliquando vites maritantur oleis. id. ib. c. 4. Pessimus est
inter omnia, quum deflorentem vitem and oleam imber percussit; quoniam simul
desluit f^uctus. Plin l. 17. c. 25.
that these Trees flourish near about the same time, and that the Vine and the
Olive join, and are (as it were) spoused together; and if storms, or blasts
of wind smite the Olive and the Vine, while they put forth their flowers, the
hope of the Husbandman is utterly disappointed, We may sum up the meaning of
these two similitudes into this breife conclusion.

That God will utterly destroy the very appearing hopes of wicked men. Their
boughs and branches may be green, some flowers, some unripe Grapes may appear;
here is hope; but, He shall shake off; that is, God shall shake off (by some
terrible storm which he will raise, by some sudden judgment which he will
send) their unripe Grapes, and their fairest Flowers.

Hence Observe.

Violent judgments storm wicked men out of all their comforts. Thus the
Egyptians are threatened ( Isa. 18.5, 6.) Before the Harvest, when the bud is
perfect, and the sour Grap^ is (...) in the Flower, he shall both cut off the
sprigs with pruning (...) o^s, and take away, and cut down the branches. They
shall b^ ^^f^ ^^^her, unto the Fowls of the Mountains, and to the Beasts of
the Earth, and the Fowls shall Summer upon them, etc. The Bud is perfect, while
the fruit is imperfect, while God takes away their Buds he destroys their
hopes. And as God has his winds at hand, to shake the fruit off from the
branches; so he has his Pruning Hooks to cut off the branches also.

De immatura morte filiorum duas similitudinesaffert.
Some interpret these unripe Grapes of the Vine, and Flowers of the Olive, as
the branch before, for Children, as if Eliphaz would here re-minde Job, how his
Posterity, the Grapes of his Vine were shaken off, before they were ripe, and
the Flowers of his Olive blasted in the Bud; Odiose Eliphaz ut acerbos filiorum
Jooi mores notaret, ipsos oniphaci contulit.
or as if he would upbraid him with the sour manners, and ill tasted
conversation of his Children, under this Allusion of unripe Grapes, which in
stead of pleasing the palate by a savory relish, do only by their sharpness,
set the teeth on edge.

Hence Note.

It is an affliction upon the best, and a judgment upon many, to have their
Children, their Grapes and Flowers, rent from them, and taken away unripe: And
then especially it is so, when God leaves no Grapes on the Vine, no Flowers on
the Olive. To lose a hopeful Child is an affliction, what is it then to lose
them all?

Eliphaz having dehorted the wicked man from trusting in vanity, upon these
considerations; gives in the strength of his whole discourse in the two last
Verses of the Chapter.

Verse, 34. The Congregation of Hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall
consume the Tabernacles of bribery.

35. They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly prepares
deceit.


Epilogus est totius loci. Merc. Apodosis superioris allegoriae Jobum
perstringens cui ista obvenerant. Jun.
As if he had said, Here is the sum of all, of all the sins, and of all the
punishments of a wicked man. Here are two sorts of wicked men described, and
these two (as was touched before) by a Senechdoche, include all.

The first are such as worship God falsely, or with false hearts: they draw
near to God with their lips, but their hearts are far from him, these are
Hypocrites, The congregation of Hypocrites shall be desolate.

As these are false with God in his worship, so others are false with men in
their commerce and dealings: These are comprised in the second branch, Fire
shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery: Bribery is put for all sins against
our Neighbors, and hypocrisy for all sins against God. So that here we have
sinners against the first Table, and sinners against the second; sinners
against God, and sinners against men; in the compass of this division all sins
and sinners are contained.

The Congregation of Hypocrites. That is, Hypocrites how many soever there be
of them, though they be a full Congregation: Hypocrites, how strongly soever
they are conjoined and cemented, yet they shall be desolate.

The Hebrew word signifies, not only to Congregate, (...) Significat non solum
congregari; sed in faedus and pactum aut amicitiam convenire.
and gather together several persons into one place, but to associate them
into a Covenant, League, or confederacy one with another: as if he had said,
Though hypocrites combine, and Covenant together, yet this covenanting
Congregation, or these unholy Leaguers, shall be made desolate.

A second interpretation gives it thus, Illa quae congregantur ab hypocrita,
Aquin.
The Congregation of hypocrites; that is, all that Hypocrites do congregate;
whatsoever they gather together, whether things or persons, their Riches, their
Honors, their Relations, all shall be desolate.

Shall be desolate: Or barren; the word signifies both; that which is desolate
brings forth no fruit, and that which brings forth no fruit will quickly be
desolate.

What an Hypocrite is, has been showed before, Chapter 8. therefore I will not
stay upon it, but refer you thither, where Bildad told Job, The hope of the
Hypocrite shall perish: Only note two things from the whole, The Congregation
of Hypocrites shall be desolate.

First, An Hypocrite is under a curse. Of all men in the World Hypocrites are
deepest under a curse: They are most cursed, who are most wicked, Hypocrites
are therefore more wicked then others, because they would seem not only
somewhat, but much more holy then others. It is bad enough to be bad; but it is
worse to appear good when we are bad. They who delight in the shows of moral
goodness, when they hate, or care not for the reality of it, shall surely meet
with, not shows, but realities of penal evil. Their painted feigned fire of
zeal shall be punished with the true fire of Divine wrath.

Secondly, Observe.

Hypocrites, how many soever they are, how strongly soever they are
confederate, how much soever they have gotten together, shall be made desolate.
It is not possible to make any power to withstand the power of God. Though like
those uncircumcised Nations, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck, the Philistims, and
those of Tire, they all consult, and lay their heads together, to make a
Congregation, yet God will break them all. How long soever their train be, how
many soever their attendants be, and how strong soever their correspondency be,
yet the Congregation of Hypocrites shall be desolate.

And fire shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery. Fire may be taken two ways.

Either literally, and strictly, for the element of fire, or for ordinary fire.

Or it may be taken figuratively, and metaphorically, and so it signifies:

Either first, The wrath of God.

Or secondly, Any effect of the wrath of God, any revenge, or judgment which
God powers forth on wicked men. And so, what judgment soever God sends, we may
call it a Fire, even that deluge of Water (as has been noted) which drowned
the old World, was (in this sense) a fire.

Divine judgments are represented by fire, upon these three grounds.

First, Because as fire, they break forth suddenly, and unexpectedly; they are
not like the fire that is for use, which we are long preparing and blowing,
before it will burn; but the judgments of God are like an accidental fire,
which breaks out, when no man looks for it, in a moment.

Os and lingua tribui solet igni nam dicitur lambere and depascere.
Secondly, They are fire, because of their destroying nature, so the Text
speaks, it eats up, or devoures. Fire is a great eater, fire has a strong
stomach; what will not fire digest? Fire will digest the whole sublunary World
at last; The Element shall melt with fervent heat: Fire will digest Stones,
Adamant, and iron. Such is the wrath of God, nothing can stand before it, it
will subdue the hardest materials, and toughest pieces. The hot stomach of the
Ostrich (as some affirm) concocts Iron; what will not the heat of Gods anger
concoct, and consume to ashes?

Thirdly, There is a mercilesnesse in the judgments of God, as in fire: We
say, Fire, and Water have no mercy; there is no entreating them, they are not
only hard, but impossible to be entreated. Such (in reference to wicked men)
is the wrath of God; as good speak to fire not to burn, or to water not to
drown, as to the wrath of God not to consume wicked men; it must and will do
it ( Jer. 15.1.) Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, etc. to entreat, yet
the sentence shall not be taken off, wrath must burn. Though prayer has in
many cases quenched wrath, yet sometimes the wrath of God cannot be quenched by
prayer, nor entreated down, there is no speaking to it; and sometimes that it
might burn quietly, the Lord has said, Pray not for this people.

Fire shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery. Tabernacles of bribery, may be
taken two ways: Either for the Tabernacles of those who have taken bribes: Or
the Tabernacles of those who have given bribes; for there goes (as we say) but
a pair of Shears between him that gives, and him that takes bribes; both are
of a piece, (...) Proprie munus quod datur ad corrumpendum judicem. Drus.
and both are alike mischeivous and wicked. Some take bribes to pervert
Justice, and others give bribes to pervert Justice: Fire is prepared for both
their Tabernacles; that is, for their whole estates, or for all that belongs
unto them. Yet Eliphaz may seem rather to aim at bribe-takers, or unjust
Judges (among whom he secretly numbers Job) who suffer themselves to be
corrupted with gifts, and to have their eyes put out by rewards: The Septuagint
is express in that sense, (...), munera accipientum. 70.
Fire shall consume (say they) the Tabernacles of bribe-takers. And indeed, if
there were no bribe-takers, there would be no bribe-givers: as we say, There
would be no Thieves, if there were no Receivers. The Receiver makes the Theife;
and corrupt Judges, who take bribes, make so many bribe-givers.

Further, The word which we translate Bribery, signifies properly a gift; and
the Text may be rendered thus, Fire shall consume the Tabernacles of gifts.
There are many gifts which are far from bribes. There are five sorts of gifts.

First, Gifts of charity to the poor.

Secondly, Gifts of freindship between equals.

Thirdly, Gifts of duty from inferiors to those above them, to testify either
thankfulness or obedience.

Fourthly, Gifts of bounty and grace, from Superiors to those who are below
them, to testify their favor to them, and that they are wel-pleased in them,
or in their services; There is no hurt either in giving or receiving these
gifts. These are only testimonies of respect from man to man, and tend only
to maintain humane society.

But there is a fifth sort of Gifts, which we may call gifts of injury, or in
the language of the Text, Gifts of Bribery: These are given, either to pervert,
or delay Justice, and to overthrow a man and his cause.

The Hebrew expresses a gift in general, and a bribe, by the same word, Quid
est (...)? qu^d facit, (...) unum, dantem scilicet and accipientem quam primum
accipit munus ab ipso, tunc accedit anima ejus ad ipsum, and fit si cut ille
ipse. Rab. Becei. etc. Buxtorf. Lex.
because, as all bribes are gifts; so very many gifts are bribes. Gifts of
charity, of freindship, of duty, of favor, are but few in comparison of
bribing gifts. And it is exceeding hard for any man that is interessed in
affairs of Judgment between man and man, to receive a gift from either of
them, and not be bribed by it, to transgress the rules of equity and
righteousness. A gift transformes the Judge into a party, or makes (as the
Hebrew critics tell us upon that word) the Judge and party to be but one
person.

Lastly, The tabernacles of bribery, may be taken, not only in general for
the estates of those who have given or taken Bribes; but particularly for the
very Houses which have been built by giving, or taking Bribes. Some have built
houses, with what they have gotten by giving Bribes, and many by taking Bribes,
have got enough to build houses: While such look on their houses, and
dwellings, they may say, if they will say the truth, Injustice has built us
these houses; these are the Tabernacles of bribery.

A Traveller coming to Rome, and viewing many famous structures, Haec sunt
peccara Germanorum.
and goodly houses there, asked who built them? It was answered, These are the
sins of Germany; the meaning was, that the Money brought for Pardons out of
Germany, built those Houses. So we may say of many fair places, and goodly
dwellings, These are Bribes and Oppressions, such a man built these by
iniquity. Bribes may build houses, but bribe-takers cannot protect them: The
Tabernacles of bribery shall be consumed.

Hence Observe.

First, Bribery is an odious sin: That sin which is put to express all sins
against our neighbors, must needs be a very odious, as well as a very
comprehensive sin. God loves judgment, bribery opposes what God loves. God
commands charity, as well as judgment; and delights to see men bountiful as
well as righteous: Yet charity without judgment, and bounty without
righteousness, are an abomination to God. God is a God of judgment, they that
are against judgment, act not only against the rule which God makes, but
against the example which God gives. It is as much the honor of God, that he
is a God of judgment, giving all their due; as, that he is a God of mercy,
giving to all his, what they have not at all deserved.

Secondly, Observe.

That which is sinfully gotten, shall be miserably lost. Fire shall consume the
tabernacles of bribery. There is nothing gained, though much be gotten by
injustice. Many give bribes to undo others, and all who receive bribes, undo
themselves. what is the advantage of any sinful gain, when the fire of Gods
wrath consumes the gainer? What shall a man give in exchange for his soul? And
as the loss is infinite, that comes by sin, in reference to the next life; so
at best, the gain is little, in reference to this present life: Either the
actor of injustice, or his Heir, shall find a fire in the foundation, a fire
in the Stones and Timber of his House, and down 'twill come; Bribery never
bought any lasting materials to build with. Woe be to him (says the Prophet,
Hab. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.) that coveteth an evil covetousness; or (according to
the Hebrew) that gains an evil gain to his house, that he may set his nest
on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil: Thou have consulted
shame to thy house, etc. For the Stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam
out of the Timber shall answer it. What shall the stones cry? Or what shall the
beam answer? The stones shall cry, that the mortar in which they were laid,
was tempered with the blood of innocents, and the beam shall answer, that it
was set up by pulling down the poor.

Those are crying sins indeed, which cause stones (that cannot speak) to cry:
And what answer can be given for those iniquities which provoke Timber beams
to answer? Such is the iniquity of oppression and injustice, which are the
fruits of bribery. See a parallel place ( Jer. 22.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.) the sum
of which may be drawn up into this conclusion, given by Eliphaz, Fire shall
consume the Tabernacles of Bribery.

Eliphaz having thus described the perishing estate of wicked men, as an
argument to deterr and stave them off from wickedness, concludes his whole
discourse with an Allegorical recapitulation both of their sin and misery, in
the last words of this Chapter.

Verse. 35. They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly
prepares deceit.


They conceive mischeife. The Scripture is frequent in this metaphor; we have
it ( Psalm. 7.14.) almost word for word, Behold he travelleth with iniquity, and
has conceived mischeife, and has brought forth falsehood. (Isa. 59.4.) They
conceive mischeife, and bring forth iniquity. The Apostle James (Chap. 1.15.)
speaks the same language, When lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and
sin when it is finished, brings forth death. All alluding to the natural
conception, formation, and production of Children. We have these three in the
Text before us, the order of the words being a little altered.

Here is first, Conception, They conceive mischeife.

Secondly, Formation, Their belly prepares deceit.

Thirdly, The birth, Bring forth vanity.

More strictly to the method of Eliphaz; we have first, The conception;
secondly, the birth of sin: And as if one birth were not enough, they return
to their work, providing for a new birth of the old man, Their belly prepares
deceit.

They conceive mischeife. The word which we translate Mischief, signifies
properly, labor, (...) Labor, molestia, perversitas.
hard labor, or labor accompanied with a great deal of pains and sorrow; it
signifies also wickedness, perverseness. We translate mischeife, They conceive
mischeife, or some mischeivous devise to the dishonor of God: and the wrong of
man.

They conceive. Conception is here the work of the mind, we ordinarily say,
We conceive such a thing; that is, We take it in, or apprehend it by an act of
the understanding.

Here Is the truest character of a wicked man, he is one that conceives
mischeife. The allusion teaches us:

First, That a wicked man sins with much freedom of spirit, or he sins freely.
He conceives mischeife. The conceptions of the mind cannot be forced, nor can
the conceptions of the body; and therefore the Law resolves it, That there is
no rape, where conception follows. These conceptions are the joint actings of
the will and understanding, both concur in them. an unregenerate person is free
to do evil, he needs not be forced to it, he cannot be forced from it; and
every evil is the more evil, by how much the more freely it is done. The more
voluntarily we sin, the more wickedly we sin.

Again, The conceptions of the mind, are deliberate, there is a collecting of
one thing from another, a debating in conceiving.

Hence Note.

Secondly, Wicked men sin with deliberation. They sit down and meditate, they
lay the frame of wickedness in their hearts, and then set it up, or act it
with their hands.

Note thirdly.

All the conceptions of wicked men are wickedness. They are very fruitful in
wickedness, and they bear no other fruit. Mischeife is not only that which
he conceives, but all that he conceives; he conceives nothing else. A wicked
man cannot think or conceive one good thought; he may think of that which is
materially good, but he conceives no good ( Genesis 6.5.) All the thoughts of the
imaginations of his heart are only evil, and that continually. All the
Creatures which he forms in his mind, all the children of his understanding
are deformed and monstrous; He conceives mischeife, which as it notes a
continued act, so an act continued about, or upon the same object.

Fourthly, Observe.

To be a contriver, a plotter, a conceiver of mischeife, is worse then then to
be an actor, or a doer of mischeife. It is ill to have a hand in any sinful
evil, it is worse to have a head in it, but worst of all to have a heart in
it. Conceivers of mischeife always have their hearts and heads in mischeife;
and if they are not stopped, will have their hands to it too: they who are
plotters, and designers, would be actors. Hence they are called, Workers of
iniquity. They have an inward Shop, and an outward Shop: first they work it in
their thoughts, and mould it there, and then it comes out. To conceive
mischeife is properly, the Devils trade, he rather devises then acts
wickedness. There are many wickednesses in the World which he cannot act; but
he is or would be the plotter, setter, and contriver of them all: This is the
wickedness of the Devil: and every conceiver and deviser of mischeife is of
the Devils trade. A good man may (possibly) do evil, but a wicked man
devises evil. As it notes the spiritualnesse of a man in holiness, when he
does not only act that which is good, but his heart is upon it, he conceives
and frames it in his mind. So it notes a man spiritually wicked, when his
mind frames wickedness. The Apostle concludes of himself ( Romans 7.25.) So
then with my mind I serve the Law of God, but with the flesh, the Law of sin.
Not that he willingly gave up his flesh to sin, but that he was carried through
the infirmity of the flesh to some sinful actings, while his mind, his
devisings and contrivings, were according to the Law of God, and he delighted
in the Law of God concerning the inward man. This is the spiritualnesse of
holiness, and without this, there is no outward act of any account with God.
It is what the mind moves to, not what the mouth speaks, or the hand does,
which commends us to God. What is it to God that we serve his Law with our
flesh, if with our minds, we either serve the Law of sin, or do not serve the
Law of God? Man is not what he acts, but what he conceives, unless he act what
he has conceived. They conceive mischeife.

And bring forth vanity. Now they come to the birth; they are in travel after
conception; they bring forth, and the Child's name is Vanity.

The Original word is rendered three ways.

First, We say Vanity. Secondly, Another says Lies. A third says Iniquity.
The word will bear any of, or all the three translations. (...) Vanitat
mendacium perversitas.
They bring forth vanity, a lie, iniquity. They who conceive mischeife, may
bring forth any thing but what is good. Those three words may serve the same
thing; every vanity is a lie, and any lie is vanity, and iniquity is both lie
and vanity. The persons of whom Eliphaz discourses are said to bring forth
vanity, on these three grounds.

First, Because they sometimes bring forth no fruit at all; they are conceiving
mischief, but they can make nothing of it, their conceptions end in abortions;
they devise and plot, but all is hatching of wind: The Church is so expressed,
though in a different case ( Isa. 26.17, 18.) Like as a Woman with Child near
the time of her delivery is in pain, and cries out in her pangs; so have we
been in thy sight O Lord; We have been with child, we have been in pain:
The Church had conceptions for good, she hoped that the Lord would have done
some great thing for her; yet after her conception, and travel, see what she
brings forth, We have been in pain, and brought forth wind; that is, nothing
at all, it proved a mere timpany; for so he explaines it, We have not wrought
any deliverance in the earth, neither have the Inhabitants of the World fallen;
that is, we have not obtained that deliverance that we hoped for in the earth,
neither have our Enemies (who are called by the Prophet, The Inhabitants of the
World) been subdued under our power; they have not fallen. Now as the Church
and people of God sometimes are disappointed in their expectations; they
conceive, yet bring forth wind, not that Man-child of mercy which was
expected: So, much more do wicked men, after all their pleasing conceptions,
and pangs of travel, they bring forth vanity; and their vessel is marred upon
the wheel.

Secondly, They are said to bring forth vanity, Parturium montes. etc.
or a vain thing; because what they bring forth, is not proportionable to
their expectation. Their Mountain proves a Molehill or (as it was said of
old) a Mouse.

Thirdly, Because the birth is not only always below, but often quite cross
to their expectation; they conceive mischeife against others, and bring forth
mischeife upon on themselves: this is vanity, yea and vexation of spirit, They
bring forth vanity.

Observe from this allusion.

Wicked men cannot but act evil: They who conceive, must do their utmost to
bring forth conceptions. As a Woman with Child, cannot but bring forth when
her time is come, and her pains are on her; if you would give her all the
World it is impossible to divert or delay the birth. So it is with a wicked
man, when he has mischeivous conceptions in his heart; He sleeps not unless
he do mischeife (Prove. 4.16.) What ever comes of it, fall back or fall edge,
he must do it. He cannot forbear an attempt to do it, though it cost him his
life; many have been at that cost, in attempting to do it but could not.

Observe secondly.

Wicked men are often put to much pain in fulfilling their lusts, or in acting
their conceived mischeifes. It is with such men as with the Woman in
childbearing, on whom the Lord has laid that heavy burden, In sorrow shall
thou bring forth Children (Genesis 3.16.) wicked men feel this to the full, In
sorrow they bring forth: The wicked man travelleth in pain all his days,
verse. 20. It is their delight to sin, but for the most part they smart in
sinning, and run through many sorrows to accomplish their sin. They are so mad
upon sinning, that the sweetness of doing mischeife pleases them more, then
all the troubles they go through in doing it discourageth them. Many evils
cannot be done with ease, it costs sinners dear to effect what they design;
they often have, as we say of Women, after long and sore travel in
childbearing, A very hard bargain of it, and pay very dear for that which is
worth, or worthy of nothing but repentance or greater pain.

Thirdly, Taking vanity for iniquity, which sense was given in opening the
terms.

Observe.

Such as our thoughts and conceptions are, such are our productions. They
conceive mischeife, and bring forth iniquity; such as we plow and sow in the
mind, such is the Harvest of our actions: The very form, the lineaments and
portraiture of a man's spirit is drawn upon the things he does; his works are
the image of his heart. As it is said of Adam in nature, He begat a Son in his
own likeness; so does every man in morals. Our actions are as our selves are,
they are begotten and brought forth in our own likeness, whether good or
evil, only with this difference, Good actions are borne in our supernatural
likeness, evil actions in our natural likeness.

Fourthly, As to bring forth vanity, imports, as was interpreted, either no
fruit, or that which is not suitable to the designs and desires of wicked men;

Observe.

Sinful conceptions often prove abortive, and miscarry; they bring forth
nothing, or nothing as they would have it, who have conceived them. The birth
is sometimes short in degree, and not seldom contrary in kind; they have not
what they expect, yea they have what they least expect ( Psalm. 2.1.) Why do
the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? Why a vain thing?
Because they cannot obtain their desire: it is vain to imagine the pulling
down of Christ's Kingdom, which must stand for ever. Pharaoh designed
mischeife, Let us work wisely; (here is the language of conceivers) but he
brought forth vanity, in all the notions spoken of: vanity, as it was a sinful
and wicked act, vanity, as he failed in the thing he did expect; he thought to
bring destruction upon Israel, but he could not; he thought to subdue the
people of Israel, and make them slaves for ever, but he could not: He brought
forth vanity also in the worst sense, the issue was contrary to his
expectation, himself and his Army were swallowed in the Red Sea, and Israel
was saved. Haman devised mischeife against the Jews, but he brought forth
vanity; he did not effect what he intended against them, this was vanity; nay
it wrought the contrary way, himself was hanged on the Gibet he had prepared
for Mordecay, this was vanity and vexation too; Perseverante allegoria venture
sumitur ex consueto loquendi modo sacri sermonis pro intelligendi facultate.
(...)
every wicked man brings forth vanity in some one if not in all these notions
of it, after all his conceptions of mischeife.

And their belly prepares deceit. The belly is taken here metaphorically, for
the understanding, or mind; because natural conception, is in the belly
wrought; therefore Eliphaz prosecutes the Allegory in suitable express^ons,
Their belly prepares deceit.

The word signifies, To prepare Accurately, Strongly.


Their belly prepares deceit: They express a kind of curiosity in working,
they are very exact in every point; they prepare with art, they will not have
their work like a Copweb, curious, yet weak; but they must have it strong too;
they prepare for establishment, and plot as if it were for everlasting. So the
word is used ( Psalm. 37.3. Psalm. 89.14.) Righteousness and judgment are the
habitation of Gods Throne. It is this word, The establishment or strength of
Gods Throne is righteousness and judgment: Righteousness and judgment, are
the bassis and establishment of all Thrones; That which has made Thrones to
totter in all Ages, has been the want of righteousness and judgment.

The wicked man in the Text prepares not only curiously, but strongly; as he
likes no bungling, so he is not pleased with toys and and bables; he would lay
his designs so cunningly and so firmly, that as they said of the Pouder-Plot,
All the Devils in Hell shall not disappoint it: He hopes to catch and hold,
not the weak Flies only, but the strongest Eagles, in his deceits and snares.

Their belly prepares deceit. That is, they prepare to deceive and ensnare:
The Prophet denounces judgment against the Priests, against the house of
Israel, and against the house of the King, because they had been a snare upon
Mizpeh, and a net spread upon Tabor (Hos. 5.1.) that is, because they had
prepared nets and snares to entangle and deceive the people. Their bellies
prepared deceit; and so did theirs, who said ( Jer. 18.18.) Come let us devise
devises; let us contrive somewhat to ensnare the Prophet ( Jer. 18.18.) Their
belly prepares deceit: He speaks in the present tense, as if they were always
doing it; they know neither vacation nor cessation from this wicked work. It
is a continued act, Their belly preparetb.

Hence Observe.

A wicked man is constant in conceiving and contriving wickedness. He does it
not by starts and fits, his belly is ever preparing; when one deceit is wrought
off, he goes to work upon a second, and then he projects for a third. Some
speak of a perpetual motion, we find it here; what a man does naturally, he
does constantly. Though there be much art in preparing deceit, yet it is the
work of sinful nature; the frame, the engine of a wicked man's heart moves
perpetually, He prepares deceit, he is always at it. As David professes (
Psalm. 45.1.) My heart is inditing a good matter, I will speak of the things
which I have made touching the King. David had some holy work ready made, but
he had more a making; he says not, I have endited, but my heart is enditing, I
am upon it, it is my continual study. So also the wicked man's heart is always
preparing and devising unholy work, or that which is evil.

Again, Their belly; that is, their mind prepares.

Hence Note.

The mind of man is the Shop wherein deceit is framed: Yea, the mind is not
only the Shop, but the Artificer; and it is not only the Shop and the
Artificer, but the very Tool that frames it: The understanding and wit of a
wicked man, hammer out and shape all his deceitful wares.

The hand and tongue begin where the mind ends; The tongue publishes, and the
hand executes what the mind prepares, and the heart suggests. That which one
of the old Poets said of the belly, under the notion of Appetite and Hunger,
the same we may say of the belly, in the notion of this preparing; This belly
is the Master of all sinful Arts, and that which gives out and furnishes man
with all the cunning deceits of wickedness. Out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, Artis magister ingeniique largitor venture. Pers.
murders, adulteries, fornications, theft, false witness, blasphemies (Matthew.
15.19.) these are the wares which are not only laid up in the heart, as in a
Storehouse, but made in the heart as in a Worke-house, and from thence they
proceed ready made. The belly prepares deceit.

Lastly, Mark how Eliphaz describes the wicked man in his actions, He
conceives mischeife, and brings forth vanity: And yet again, he is preparing
deceit.

Note from it.

An evil heart is never discouraged by any disappointments from going on in
evil.

One would have thought, after he had conceived mischeife, and brought forth
nothing but vanity, that we should have heard no more of him; that he would now
sit down and be quiet, but his belly prepares deceit presently, he will to it
again, he will try once more; if he fail in one plot, he hopes to thrive in
another; he will sow his seed of sin in the morning, and in the evening he will
not withhold his hand, and though he see neither of them prosper, yea though he
see both of them blasted, yet he will to his sowing again. As a gracious heart
receives many disappointments and discouragements, but says he, I will not
give over, My belly shall prepare still, holy, and just, and righteous things;
and the more he is disappointed the more holily he acts. So does a wicked man
more sinfully; for he acts as strongly and naturally in his state, as a godly
man does in his; and therefore he will not be put off by disappointments. He
says in the words of Solomon (Prove. 23.35.) They have stricken me and I was
not sick; they have beaten me and I felt it not, when I awake, I will seek it
yet again. Wicked men in general, as well as Drunkards in particular, of whom
Solomon there speaks, meet with many blows, and are often sick in following
their sin; yet (because they are never sick of sin) as soon as ever they
awake, and recover a little, they forget all their wounds and sicknesses, and
resolve to seek it yet again. They please themselves so much with what is to
come, that they slight all that has been done, and resolve with those ( Isa.
56.12.) To morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant: They are
preparing for sin, even while they are sinning: It is said ( Revel. 6.) that he
on the Red Horse, went forth conquering, and to conquer: he had not only a
present Conquest, but a project to conquer; he was actually a Conqueror, and
having conquered, he had fresh designs in his eye. As Christ goes out thus
conquering, and to conquer; so wicked men go out doing evil, and to do it;
deceiving, and to deceive. Their belly prepares deceit: Though they have
brought forth vanity once and again, yet they prepare, as assured of victory.

This arises three ways.

First, From the extreme love and good affection which a carnal heart bears
to sin: as the love which believers bear to Christ, is not only a motive
provoking them to do for Christ, but also to persevere in doing for Christ,
though they suffer much in doing for him; he that loves Christ will not only
sweat at his work, but bleed at his work, if his work cannot be carried on
without bleeding. Thus also the love of wickedmen to their lusts, is not only
a motive provoking them to fulfill their lusts, but to endure any thing for the
fulfilling of them; Love is the the spring of labor, actions are affections
put forth, and made visible: Love is also the spring of valor, as well in a
bad cause, as in a good cause: What is it that love dares not attempt, toward
the attainement of what we love? Many waters cannot quench love, neither can
the floods drown it: Love is such a vehement flame, that though you cast the
waters of sorrow, yea floods of trouble upon it, yet these cannot extinguish
it; much more then will it keep alive after many deferrs and disappointments.
It is the Observation of one of the Ancients, that Love built the two Cities;
Holy Love built the City of God, and unholy Love built, or is daily building
the City of Satan: And though it be much hindered and opposed in building this
City; yea though the materials with which it would raise and fortify this City
be often scattered and broken, yet these Builders will provide more materials,
Their belly prepares deceit.

Secondly, This their unwearyed projecting and acting after discouragements and
disappointments, arises from the extreme desire they have to attain their
end. It is a true Axiom, that, The appetite of the end is infinite. Whatsoever
a man proposes to himself as his end in any undertaking, will carry him on
without end till he do attain it: As rest is the natural end of motion, so
till man has reached his civil (though sinful) ends, he cannot rest. A
wicked man proposes an end to himself in evil actions, as well as an honest
man does in good: and therefore till that profit, or pleasure, or honor, or
revenge, which he proposes to himself be enjoyed, he is unsatisfied; let God
or Man put as many stops as they will in his way, let his first and second and
third conceptions of mischeife, conclude in the bringing forth of vanity, yet
he is not concluded by it, he will try a fourth and a fifth time too, His belly
again prepares deceit.

Thirdly, His hope to speed at last, put him forward to new experiments, when
former ones have failed; he persuades himself he shall obtain, if he
continue. As the Saints having prayed, and waited long without an answer from
God, yet go on praying, their belly prepares new prayers, because they have a
good ground to hope that God will hear at last: So ungodly men persevere in
plotting mischeife, because they have strong hopes (though but the shadow of a
ground to hope) that they shall one day accomplish their desires. As the heart
would break for sorrow; so both heart and hand would break off from labor,
were it not for hope. But where hope of attaineing lives, especially where it
is lively, there, such will labor as long as they live: Though they have
hitherto been deceived in their expectation, yet their belly prepares deceit.

Thus Eliphaz prosecutes his dehortation; and though he says not to Job, as
Nathan did to David, Thou art the man; yet Job was the man he meant, the man,
who (in his opinion) had conceived mischief, and brought forth vanity; yea the
man whose belly was even then preparing deceit. How much Eliphaz was deceived,
appears upon the whole matter; what Jobs belly, his mind, his inward man was
preparing, will appear by his own answer in the two Chapters following.

JOB, Chap. 16. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Then Job answered and said,

I have heard many such things: Miserable comforters are ye all.

Shall vain words have an end? Or what emboldeneth thee that thou answerest?

I also could speak as ye do: if your souls were in my souls stead, I could
heap up words against you, and shake mine head at you.

But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should
assuage your grief.


THIS Chapter, and that which follows, contain Jobs second answer to the
second charge of Eliphaz. He calls it an answer, but in strictness of speech
it is a rejoinder; and he rejoynes with some accrimonie, and sharpness of
speech. The longer contention is maintained, the hotter are the spirits of the
contenders; and the more we are put to answer, the more angry are our answers.

Verse. 1. Then Job answered, and said.
And what said he? His answer consists of three general parts.

In the first, he confutes what Eliphaz had asserted; which he does to the
eighteenth Verse of this sixteenth Chapter.

Secondly, He proceeds to corroborate and confirm his own Tenet, or Opinion;
which he does to the eleventh Verse of the seventeenth Chapter.

Thirdly, He renewes his former complaints, and desires; which he does from
that eleventh Verse to the end of the Chapter.

The first part of his answer, is confutation; and he begins his confutation
with an accusation; with an accusation of those who had disputed with him: and
that is the subject of these five Verses, in all which he taxes, or checks his
friends for their unfreindly and uncomly dealing with him; and he checks them
(as Eliphaz had done him at the beginning of the former Chapter) upon five
points of error and unfreindlinesse.

First, For speaking unprofitably, or for telling him no more then he knew
before, at the entrance of the second Verse, I have heard many such things.

Secondly, He charge them for speaking such things, as did rather increase,
and boil up, then mittigate, and allay his sorrow, Miserable comforters are
ye, in the close of the second Verse.

Thirdly, He accuses them for speaking so much, or for endless speaking;
their discourse was tedious, they would not give over, Thus he takes them up at
the third Verse, Shall vain words have an end? What, will you be endless?
Will you never have done?

Fourthly, He accuses them for their causeless speaking, in the same third
Verse, What emboldeneth thee? (or what provokes thee) that thou answerest? As
if he had said, Have I given thee any cause.

Fifthly, and lastly, He reproves his and their whole carriage toward him, by
a serious profession of his contrary carriage, or that he was purposed to deal
better with them, upon supposition that they were in his case; and this he does
two ways,

First, Telling them what he could do, if they were in his case; Verse. 4. I
also could speak as you do, if your soul were in my souls stead, I could
heap up words against you, etc.

Secondly, Telling them what he would do, But I would strengthen you with my
mouth, and the moving of my lips should assuage your grief, Verse. 5. That Is
the course which I would take; I could deal as harshly with you as you do
with me, but I would not; you should find me in another strain and temper.
Then Job answered and said.

Verse. 2. I have heard many such things: miserable comforters are ye all.
We find this point tossed both ways; Jobs Friends telling him, that he spoke
but ordinary matter, and he telling them that they spoke so too. Bildad
charge Job with it, Chap. 8.2. How long will thou speak these things? And
how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind: as if he had
said, Thou speak impertinently, or what thou speak does not much concern
the point in hand, it comes not up to the matter; yea it is quite besides the
mark. And so Zophar (Chap. 11.2.3.) Should not the multitude of words be
answered? And should a man full of talk be justified? Thou do but Verba
dare, thou speak to little purpose, or little to the purpose, though thou
speak much.

Eliphaz puts the same language upon him ( Chap. 15.2, 3.) Should a wise man
utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the East wind? Should he reason
with unprofitable talk? Or with speeches wherewith he can do no good? Thus
his Friends accused him of that for which he now accuses them; and he himself
had accused them once and again of this before: So ( Chap. 12.2, 3.) Who
knows not such things as these? They are but vulgar truths which you have
told me; and ( Chap. 13.1, 2.) Lo mine eye has seen all this, mine ear has
heard, and understood it, what ye know, the same do I know also; I am not
inferior to you. You produce nothing all this while, but what I am well
acquainted with; which is fully the sense of this Verse: I have heard many such
things: that is, Rhetorico modo principium, sumit ab extenuatione, vice quippe
defensoris agit. Pined. Defensor causam fuisse negabit si potest, aut eam
vehementur extenuabit. Cic. l. 2. ad Heren.
Every man can speak as much as this. Here Job plays the Orator, or
Rhetorician, whose business and design (as the great Orator tells us) is as
much as he can to extenuate, and lay low the arguments, or reasons, of him that
he opposes. Job stands as Defendant here, his Friends as Plaintifs; therefore
he endeavors to render their Charge weak, and what they said sinnewlesse, I
have heard many such things as these.

Job does not accuse his Friends, as giving out false and erroneous Doctrine;
for himself had heard and learned those things before; but he accuses them
for bringing proofs, which were not to the purpose, or which were in
sufficient to prove their purpose: As if he said, I expected when you would
produce some stronger arguments to maintain your opinion, or clearer answers
unto mine: I waited for some new matter, and to have heard somewhat that I had
not heard before, but you have deceived my expectation: For, I have heard many
such things as these.

Hence Note.

First, Some truths are of very common observation: Who knows not such things
as these? Every Child that has been Catechized, knows them. It Is no
disparagement to any truth, that it has been often heard, and is commonly
known. The more common a truth is, the more weighty it may be. Yet,

Which gives us a second Observation.

Ordinary truths will not serve in extraordinary cases, and that which every
man knows and hears, will not resolve us in those points which few men know or
hear: As Jobs Person was a Phaenix in the World, his age afforded not his
second, There is none like him in the earth, says God himself to Satan (
Chap. 1.8.) So Jobs condition was a Phaenix, it had no second; there was no man
tried like him in the whole earth; and therefore his case eould not be measured
by the common Standard, or rule of Providence. He had need hear that which was
never heard before, who bears and feels that which was never borne nor felt
before. There are some temptations on afflictions, as the Apostle speaks (1
Cor. 10.13.) Which are common to man: Common truths may comfort and satisfy
the consciences of such. But there are temptations (such were Jobs) which are
not common to man, we can hardly find their parallel, or a president of them
in the Records of any Age: Common truths will not comfort, nor satisfy the
consciences of such. Every dispensation has a doctrine suitable to it;
dispensations which are seldom seen call up doctrines which are seldom heard.

Secondly, Job complains that he hears only those things which he had often
heard.

Hence Observe.

It troubles a man in trouble, to be often pressed with the same thing: A man
at ease is pained with unnecessary repetitions; much more a man in pain: and
though they who like and love the things which they have heard, do both love
and like to hear them often; yet (in some cases) they may hear them too
often. Some indeed speak very profanely, what Job spoke justly, who when they
would not put off submission to, and attendance upon holy Doctrine, say, we
know before we go, what he will say: We know such things as the Preacher
usually speaks; what can he tell us, that we have not heard before? That Is the
language of the profane; We know as much as he can teach us.

Though it be granted, that a man knows as much as the Preacher can tell him,
yet he ought to hear it again. Though the matter be known before, yet to
hear it often may work a better knowledge, and leave a stronger impression
upon the heart then ever. It Is profitable to write the same things, therefore
it cannot be unprofitable to hear them ( Phil. 3.1.) Brethren, to write the
same things, to me, it is not grievous, and to you it is profitable: If to
write, then to speak the same things is profitable. In the Story of the Acts
of the Apostles, when Paul had preached in the Synagogue; the Jews being gone,
the Gentiles besought him, That those words might be preached the next Sabbath
( Acts 13.42.) The repeating and inculcating the same thing, is not always
blameable, and it is sometimes desirable: but when a man is under sore
afflictions and temptations, when he is burdened with many sorrows, it is very
grievous to have those things that have been often answered or assented to,
again objected, or asserted. A weak stomach must have variety and change, to
entice the appetite, and so must a troubled and distempered spirit: I have
heard many such things: And hereupon he infers: Miserable comforters are ye.

As if he had said, This is a miserable way of comforting, always to be beating
upon, and inculcating the same thing; Job calls his Friends, Physicians of no
value, (Chap. 13.4.) Here he expounds himself, while he calls them, Miserable
comforters: He is a Physician of no value, who in stead of curing, increases
the disease; and he is a miserable comforter, who in stead of abating our
sorrow adds to it, and heightens it, Miserable comforters are ye.

It seems the Friends of Job (at least to his sense) had forgotten the design
they proposed to themselves when they first undertook this visit, ( Chap.
2.11.) They made an appointment together, to come, and mourn with him, and to
comfort him. That was the intendment of Jobs Friends at their first addresses.
Yet after so long a conference, he makes this report, Miserable comforters are
ye; ye rather vex then heal any soar; you my Friends have troubled me more
then my wounds, you have wounded my spirit more then Satan did my flesh,
Consolatores malorum. i. e. malos potest^s consolari. August.
Miserable comforters are ye.

One of the Ancients renders the words thus, Ye are comforters of evil men;
or, possibly, you may comfort evil men; but you cannot comfort me. As that
which is one man's meat is another man's poison; so that which is one man's
comfort is another man's sorrow. All good men cannot take in their comforts the
same way; but the way of comforting good and evil men, differ as much as good
and evil. The words of flattery and falsehood will serve to comfort the one,
no words will comfort the other, but those of sincerity, and truth. I dare not
conceive Jobs Friends such as would sow Pillows under the elbowes of evil men,
yet surely they put hard Stones under the sore and aching arms of this good man.

Consolatores Onerosi. Vulg.
The Vulgar translation speaks thus, Ye are burden some comforters: A
comforter should take off burdens; sorrow is a burden: As the judgments that
God threatened upon the Jews, and other Nations, are represented in the
Prophets, under the name of burdens, The burden of Judah; the burden of
Israel; the burden of Moab; the burden of Babylon; the burden of Idumea: So
any affliction upon a person, is his burden; and the business of those who
come to comfort a soul in affliction, should be to take off his burden, at
least to lighten it. Jobs Friends did indeed bind the burden faster upon his
spirit, and therefore he might well call them Burdensome comforters. False
hearts count all truth a burden: The Land (says Amaziah) is not able to bear
his words (Amos 7.10.) yet his were words of truth, and tended to peace. Some
truths may be burdensome at some times to a good heart. Hard words are always
burdensome; Job had store of them.

(...) Consolatores laboris aut molestiae. Heb.
The letter of the Hebrew gives the sense thus, Ye are comforters of trouble;
that is, troublesome comforters: As if he had said, Ye do not comfort me in
my troubles, but ye trouble me with your comforts: Ye are comforters made up
of trouble; that is the predominant Element, which denominates your complexion
and constitution; ye are so troublesome, that you seem to be nothing but
trouble. Our rendering in the concrete is clear to Jobs scope, Miserable
comforters are ye all.

Hence Observe.

Some while they go about to act the part of comforters, do but add to their
sorrow, whom they pretend to comfort; and in stead of comforters prove
tormenters. But when does a man deserve this title, A miserable comforter? That
which caused Job to charge his Friends with this miscarriage of their pains
with him, will resolve the question, and tell us, when.

First, They gave him little hope of good, or they did not open to him a done
of hope wide enough: it is true, they made some overtures that way, which yet
(comparatively to what they ought) were scarce considerable. And Eliphaz who
had been somewhat large upon the point in his first congresse with Job, speaks
nothing of it in his last: For as if he thought his case desperate, and had
given him for a lost man, he shuts up in the dark, as we see, in the close of
the former Chapter; where he thunders out the judgments of God upon
Hypocrites, and Bribe-takers, without so much as one word of comfort to the
penitent: This is to be a Miserable comforter. The song of comforters should at
least be mixed, like that of David to the Lord, of mercy and of judgment (Psalm.
101.1) A song of judgment alone, or most of judgment to a heavy heart, may be
called (like that of Jeremie) A Lamentation, but it is not a Consolation.

Secondly, They (as was touched before) tired out his afflicted soul with
tedious discourses, and unpleasing repetitions; they always harped upon the
same string, and that makes no music to a disconsolate soul. As God
complains of those prayers as unpleasing, which are full of unnecessary
repetitions; so also those counsels are unpleasing to man, which are made up of
needless repetitions. To press the same point, though true, often, and often, is
a weariness to the spirit; and because it suggests this suspicion, that the
hearer does oppose, or resist that truth, it proves an upbraiding, rather then
a teaching, or a comforting: Comfort must be stolen in unawares, by a holy
sleight of hand, it must not be beaten in with beetles, as it were, by force of
hand.

Solomon tells us ( Prove. 25.12.) As an earering of Gold, Subrepere debet
consolatio and fucum facere affectibus. Sen.
and an ornament of fine Gold, so is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear.
What he speaks of a reprover is as true of a comforter; and he only is fit to
be a reprover, who is skilled, or knows how to be a comforter. He that will
open or lance a soar, had need be acquainted with the means of healing it.
The spirit of God, who is the Reprover (John 16.8.) is also the Comforter (John
14.26.) We may therefore take up Solomon's Proverb here, As an earering of
Gold, and an ornament of fine Gold, so is a wise comforter upon an obedient
ear. They who hang Jewels in their ears (as it was the custom of those
times, and is to this day) take that which is of great price and value, yet of
little weight: No man hangs a Talent, or a great lump of Gold in his ear: Gold
is precious, but much Gold is ponderous, and burdens rather then adornes the
ear; the bulk of it is more combersome then the beauty of it is conspicuous.
Esto correptio non levis pretii sed levis p^nde^is.
So comfort, which is the most pleasant Jewel of the ear, should be pure and
precious as the Gold of Ophir; but yet it must be like an earering, which
though it be not light, in regard of worth, yet it is light in regard of
weight. We must not load, but guide a man with counsel, nor must we burden him
with many, but ease him with pertinent words of comfort.

Thirdly, That which rendered them yet more miserable Comforters, was, their
unkind grating upon that string of his sinfulness and studied hypocrisy. Job
acknowledged himself a sinner, and that he could not be justified in the sight
of God by any righteousness of his own; yet still his friends were
unsatisfied about his sincerity; and still they presented him with suspicions
of secret wickedness, as the cause of all his sufferings; still they told him
of the sad fate of Tyrants, of Oppressors, of unjust Judges, of unsound, and
false-hearted Worshippers; and though they did not apply these Parables
personally to Job, yet the general discourse sounded, as if they had said,
Thou art the man.

Now as the Apostle speaks concerning death (1 Cor. 15.56.) so we may say
concerning any affliction, The sting of affliction is sin; the sting of
sickness, the sting of poverty, the sting of disgrace is sin: when the least
trouble is armed with sin, the strongest tremble at the sight of it. A godly
man can easier bear the weight of all afflictions, then the weight and burden
of one sin; so long as he sees all clear between God and his own soul; so
long as he can look up to God, as having his sin pardoned, and can approve his
heart to God, that he lives not in any known sin; in this case, though the
Lord lay the heaviest burden of affliction upon him, he can go lightly under
it; The spirit of a man will bear all these infirmities: but if his spirit be
wounded, either with the guilt of sin, or with the fear of the wrath of God,
how can he bear it? This afflicts more then all other afflictions. This was
it which caused Job to cry out, Miserable comforters: His Friends ever
upbraiding him with his sin, his sin, his sin, as the root, and therefore as
the sting of all his troubles. They applied nothing but these corrasives to his
wounded soul, which called alowd for the balm of Gilead. There are two sorts
of miserable comforters.

First, They who flatter the soul that lives in sin.

Secondly, They who embitter, and burden their souls, who being under burdens
of sorrow, are also in bitterness for their sin.

Some sow Pillowes under the elbowes of those who delight in sin, and dawbe
them up with untempered mortar; others thrust Swords, and shoot arrows into
the bowels of those, who mourn for sin, and in stead of bringing well-tempered
mortar to bind and cement their souls, lay hard stones under them, which vex
and gaul their souls. Both are Miserable comforters.

They who undertake the office of comforting others, should consider these
three things especially.

First, The nature of the affliction, whether internal, or external; that
which will comfort a man in bodily afflictions, will not do it in soul
afflictions.

Secondly, The degree, or measure of the affliction: If the Plaster be too
narrow for the Soar, how can it heal?

Thirdly, They should consider the temper of the Person afflicted, if he be
pressed in conscience for sin, they should not press his conscience with sin;
much less should they thunder out judgment and terror against him for sin;
if he be very weak they should use few words; if he be passionate, they should
use gentle words, lest, in stead of persuading, they provoke his spirit: Many a
soul is cast down, and swallowed up in despair by the ignorance or
unfaithfulness of those who would be called Comforters, and Supporters: (
Ezekiel. 13.19.) They slay the souls that should not dye, and save them alive,
that should not live. Unskilful Physicians of the body, kill more then bodily
diseases. And though the unskilfulnesse of soule-physitians does not indeed
kill souls that should dye (for it is their own sin that kills them) nor can
kill the souls that should not dye (for the medicine of Christ's most precious
blood, will heal and save such from their sins) yet unskilful
soule-physitians shall be judged and dealt with, as having done all this,
because they have done their utmost to do it; which is also the meaning of
that Text (1 Cor. 8.11.) And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother
perish, for whom Christ dyed: that is, an indiscreet use of that liberty which
thy knowledge teaches thee, does that which may be accounted a destroying of
thy weak Brother. As that knowledge, so the ignorance before spoken of, slayes
the souls that should not dye. As it requires the power, so the wisdom and
teachings of God to comfort and extricate poor s^ules, in and from the
Labyrinth of their sorrows.

The Lord has given me the tongue of the learned: What to do? That I should
know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary (Isa. 50.4.) It is a
great piece of learning to speak aright to a weary soul, to deal with them
so, as neither to flatter them in their sins, nor oppress them under their
sins; to deal with them so in th ir affliction, as that we neither cause them
to slight the hand of God, nor yet to sink under it. He that can guide and
steer the course of a soul that is afflicted and tossed with the tempest of
sin and sorrow, between this rock and gulf, the Scylla of presumption, and the
Charybdis of despair; he is a learned Pilot indeed.

This learning is the special gift of God; Christ himself acknowledges that
the Lord his Father had given him the tongue of the learned for this end. This
learning is not taught in the Schools of men: Philosophers and Orators never
taught such an art of consolation; nor can it be attained by the bare teaching
of the holiest Doctors and Preachers of Divine truths. We may have a rich
furniture of materials for this work, and yet make no work of it, nor be able
to put truths and consciences rightly together, unless the annoynting teach
us. As the Prophet brings in our great Master and Tutor in this heavenly
science, again confessing of himself ( Isa. 61.1.) The spirit of the Lord is
upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek,
he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the
Captives. Till we are anointed by God, we cannot speak effectually to man;
without the spirit who is the comforter, we prove but miserable comforters, we
bungle at the work, and rather undo souls, then do them any good: We may
Preach good tidings, good news, from Heaven (the Gospel is nothing else but
good news) yet no good comes of it, till the good spirit comes with it, both
instructing the hearts of those that hear, and the tongues of those that
speak, duly to apply the word.

Master Calvin upon this place, says, Some Comforters, have but one song to
sing, and they have no regard to whom they sing it: All persons, all estates,
and all conditions are alike to them. The wisdom of a comforter consists in
discerning and making these differences; As the Apostle Jude hints unto us (
Ver. 22, 23.) And of some have compassion, making a difference; and others save
with fear: As faith saves all, so (in a sense) fear saves some; that is, they
must be terrifyed and made afraid, that they may be saved. Jobs Friends would
needs save him with fear, whereas they should have had compassion of him, and
have spoken kindly to him: Because they could not make this difference,
therefore they took a wrong course with him, and were justly taxed without
distinction, Miserable comforters are ye all.

Verse. 3. Shall vain words have an end?
As if he had said, I have got no comfort, I would feign get some rest; your
words have not refreshed me, I desire you would not trouble me, you have done
me no good, will you have done?

Shall vain words have an end? The Hebrew is, Shall words of wind have an
end? That expression has been opened twice before. (...) Verba vervi, i, e.
ventosa, parum solidas rations habentia.
How long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong East wind, says
Bildad (Chap. 8.2.) Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly
with the East wind? says Eliphaz (Chap. 15.2.) Job retorts it upon them,
Shall words of wind have an end? You tell me that my words are windy, yours
are so indeed: I must hide my self from these blasts and storms of your
tongues, unless you grow calmer; Shall windy words have an end? Words are
windy:

First, When they have no solid reason, no substance in them: reason is the
substance of words, and so is truth; these two go always together, and where
these are not, nothing goes out of the mouth but wind; Projicit ampullas, etc.
we say of all words which are not followed with action, Words are but wind,
we may say so also of all words which are not accompanied with reason.

Verba plena spiritu superbiae.
Secondly, Words are windy when they have much pride, and swelling
conceitednesse in them; The Scripture calls such words, Swelling words of
vanity: That which swells our hearts, will quickly swell our lips; pride does
both. Pride is a wind within us, vain words are a wind without us: the proud
man knows not how to ease himself of this wind within, but by breaking it
out in words.

Thirdly, Words are windy when they have much passion in them, when they are
angry and furious; an angry man blusters rather then speaks, and makes a noise
rather then a discourse. While David (Psalm. 39.2, 3.) was dumb with silence,
while he held his peace from good, his sorrow was stirred, his heart was hot
within him, and while he was musing, the fire kindled: While some are even
hoarse with speaking, while they cannot hold their peace from evil, their
anger is stirred, their hearts are storming within them, and all their talk is
only a wind blowing without them.

We read of a strange distemper in two sorts of men, who ought of all others to
be most composed and temperate ( Hos. 9.7. Ish ruach.
) The Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is madd: Our Translators put in
the Margin, The man of the spirit: for Ruach in Hebrew, signifies both the
wind that blows in the air, and the spirit of God which moves in our
hearts: We take that sense, The spiritual man, or the man of the spirit; that
is, the man that pretends to have, or should have the spirit of God (his
business lying wholly in spirituals) this man is madd; he is so far from
acting to the height of those graces which the spirit gives, that he acts below
that reason which nature gives.

Yet the Original may be rendered thus (and so diverse learned Hebricians
render it) The man of wind, or the windy man, is madd: Anger is a short
madness, and he that speaks angerly, is in danger to speak madly.

Jobs Friends were not men of wind, nor were they madd, and the words which
they spoke had a general sense and savor of truth and soberness in them; yet
(as to Jobs particular case) they wanted some grains of truth and reason, they
were too high and swelling, considering how low and humble he was; they were
too full of passion, being spoken to a man so full of sufferings. And therefore
though that censure of his Friends words, as vain (who indeed were wise and
grave men) was too censorious and sharp, yet it must be granted, that their
words also were too sharp, even such as vexed his spirit, and wore out his
patience, upon which account he expects and begs an end of them. Shall vain
words have an end? That is, (...) Finis a (...) praecidit abscidit. Quia finis
est tam temporis quam rei praecisio and terminus.
Will you make an end of vain speaking? I pray do, I wish you would: Cut off
the thread of this discourse, you have spun it out and continued it, but too
long alr^ady.

The Hebrew word which we translate an end, springs from a root which signifies
to cut off, because every end, whether of time, or things, is the cutting off
of that time or thing, the end of which it is. While Job asks the Question,
Shall vain words have an end? He speaks the vehemence of his own desire and
expectation, to see an end of them. I shall not stay here to give any
observations upon these words, but referr the Reader to the Texts before
alleged, in the eighth and fifteenth Chapters, where this expression is more
fully opened: Only Note.

First, Vain words are very burdensome to a serious ear, much more to a sad
heart.

Secondly, It is good to end that quickly, we should not have begun.

Profitable words may be too long continued, but unprofitable words cannot be
too soon ended: It is best not to speak vainly, and it is next best to cease,
or give over such kind of speaking quickly. There is a time to be silent from
good words, as well as a time to speak them; but there is no time to speak
evil words; all times, in reference to them, are times of silence. An
Aposioposis, or sudden stop of speech, is the most suitable figure of Rhetoric
which they can use, who speak unsutably. As the end of what we say or do
well is best, so the ending of what we say or do amiss is best. Perseverance
in every good word and work is Angelical, and the highest perfection of duty,
but perseverance in an evil, whether word or work, is Diabolical, and the
utmost departure from duty. Let not thy mouth open to utter vanity; but if it
does, shut it quickly: be not heard speaking that twice, which should not be
spoken once.

Or what emboldeneth thee that thou answerest? If thou will not make an end,
then tell me why? Give me a reason; what is it that stirrs thee to reply upon
me, What emboldeneth thee to answer? The Hebrew word signifies, first, to
strengthen, to fortify, or confirm; he that is strengthened, is emboldened.
(...) Est roborare fortificare acris esse.
It signifies also to be sharp or bitter (1 Kings 2.8.) David on his
deathbed, tells Solomon his Son, and Successor in the Kingdom, that Shimei had
cursed him with a grievous curse; that is, with a strong, bitter, and provoking
curse, of which we read the Story (2 Samuel 16.5.)

This Quaere is rendered three ways.

First, as we, What emboldeneth thee that thou answerest? As if he had said, I
thought I should have silenced thee before this time, or that thou would
have put silence upon thy self; I wonder who, or what it is, that sets thee on
to speak still; do thou think by thy renewed on sets to weary me, and make
me yield at last? Have thou a hope to prevail upon me by thy importunity, when
thou can not by thy reason? Or have thou further strength of reason, fresh
arguments to produce in confirmation of thine opinion? Are these but
Forerunners, or thy Vauntguard? Is the maine battle yet behind? Have thou
some Reserves of greater power then thou have yet led up against me? Let me see
them if thou have? If not, give over, and hold thy peace; for what shall either
I or thou get by a further progress? What emboldeneth thee to answer.

Job speaks wonderingly, his reason was at a loss about the cause of his
Friends boldness, and therefore he admires it: There are two things which may
embolden a man to answer.

First, The goodness and justice of that cause which he undertakes.

Secondly, The strength and assistance of God to carry him through it.

Upon these grounds, the youngest David may be bold to enter the Lists, and
dare the Combat with the strongest Goliath. But there are two other things
which usually embolden men to answer.

First, Selfe-confidence.

Secondly, Unwillingnesse to yield.

They who are thus emboldened, will not give over answering, though they have
no further light of truth, or reason to hold out in their answers: Job surely
had such apprehensions of his Friend Eliphaz, which moved him to ask, What
emboldeneth thee that thou answerest?

Hence Note.

Such is the stiffness and vanity of some, that they will hold on a contention,
though they have no further grounds of truth or reason to continue it upon.

They will speak on though it be the same thing, only in a new dress of
words. They have store of words, though scarsity of matter; we may justly say
to such, What emboldeneth you to answer? It is more then boldness, a kind of
impudence in such to answer: pertinacy of spirit disdaines to lay down the
Bucklers. They who contend for victory, rather then for truth, will not be
answered, how much soever they are answered: And they who are more loath be
foiled, then willing to be rectified, will hardly submit to the plainest and
clearest evidence.

The second reading is, What does provoke thee to answer, Quid exacer bu ^e ut
respondeas. Jun.
or What imbitters thy spirit that thou answerest? As if Job had said, Surely
Eliphaz my fair discourse with thee, should have stopped the course of this
severe proceeding with me before this time; thou have loaded me with hard
words, and uncharitable jealousies; but have I spoken provokingly, or bitterly
to thee? My conscience tells me that I have not, and thou know I have not.

He that impartially reads over Jobs answers to Eliphaz, may find here and
there a sour passage; but as we say Proverbially, You must give loosers leave
to speak. The wise Physician hears his Patient giving him uncomely language,
yet will not hear it, much less retort or answer so again: They who are in
pain must be borne with; though they provoke, it must not be called a
provocation; and though they give offense, yet it must not be taken. When the
Child cries, the Nurse sings: God himself bears with the manners of his
people (so the word intimates, Acts 13.18.) as a Mother does with a froward
Child; and so should we with the frowardness of our weak and afflicted
Brethren. So that in this sense, the provocations which Job gave his Friends,
were not to be reckoned as provocations; and he might well say to Eliphaz, What
provokes thee to answer? If I (in the case I am in) have spoken passionately,
Will thou be provoked by it? Thou should not. Thou ought to pass it by
and cover it with the garment of charity.

Yet further, we may take the words as a total denial of any provocation
given on his part.

Whence Note.

Some will speak harshly to, and of those who never provoked, or gave them
cause.

Water runs clear till it is troubled and stirred by some outward violence: But
the spirits of some men run muddy, though nothing from without stirrs them. The
Prophet compares all wicked men to the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose
waters cast up mire and dirt (Isa. 57.20.) The Sea is not always troubled,
when the Winds are quiet, that is quiet; we often see a smooth Sea, as smooth
as Glass: A wicked man is like the Sea when it is enraged, he is such a Sea as
knows no calm; he is like the Sea, not only when it is troubled, but when it
cannot rest. Though no breath of Wind from abroad offend him, yet he storms:
He has lusts in his own bowels, which provoke him when nothing else does; yea
those lusts within provoke him, when all without labor to pacify him.

So David complains ( Psalm. 120.5, 7.) Woe is me that I sojourne in Mesech,
that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar; that is, With the Sons or descendants of
Ishmael, who have learned of their Father to mock and persecute; I dwell in the
Tents of Kedar: But what caused them to mock and persecute? Was it any
provocation that David had given them? No, for he says in the next words, I am
for peace (I would live quietly with all my heart) but when I speak, they are
for War. A motion for Peace, becomes a provocation to War? It is sinful to
speak rashly, or harshly, though we are provoked; what is it then to speak so
when we are not provoked? They angered Moses at the waters of strife, they
provoked his spirit; yet it went ill with Moses for their sakes, when he spoke
unadvisedly with his lips (Psalm. 106.32, 33.) But what was this unadvised
speech. Moses reports his own infirmity ( Numb. 20.10, 11.) And Moses and
Aaron gathered the Congregation together before the rock; and he said unto
them, Hear now ye Rebels, must we fetch you water out of this Rock? And Moses
lift up his hand, and with his Rod he smote the Rock twice, etc. The error of
Moses in this business was twofold.

First, That he did not only smite the Rock, but smite it twice with the Rod
in his hand, whereas he had order only, to take the Rod in his hand, and
speak to the Rock before their eyes, and it should give out water (Verse. 8.)

His second error was, that he did not only speak to the people (for which
in that transaction he had no order from God) but spoke bitterly and harshly to
them, calling them Rebels, and slighting them Must we fetch water for you, etc?
What, for you, who are a murmuring and gainsaying people? God knew the
stubbornenesse of that people, and their rebellions against him, yet he did not
call them Rebels, but said in the close of the eighth Verse, So shall thou give
the Congregation, and their Beasts drink. God had more reason and power to
call them Rebels then Moses had, yet he did not. And because Moses did, that
unadvised speech of his, and the actions which attended it, were called
Rebellion, at the twenty fourth Verse of the same Chapter. Ye (says the Lord
of Moses and Aaron) rebelled against my word at the waters of Meribah.

Now, if Moses was thus reproved and censured by God himself, for speaking
passionately, to a people who had provoked both God their Deliverer, and him
their Leader; what reproof do they deserve, who, either upon none, or very
little provocation, call their Brethren, Hypocrites, Heretics, Scismaticks,
Rebels, perjured persons, men of prostituted consciences, or at least, of
unsettled and uncertain Principles; will not the Lord take notice of this
bitterness, even in those who are his precious Servants, toward their
fellow servants, when he laid so heavy a penalty (as non-admission into the
promised Land) upon a pair of the most eminent and faithful Servants that
ever he called forth to his work, since he laid the foundations, of the World?

This false heavy upon the present age: Whence is that bitterness, that Gall
and Wormwood which falls from many, both tongues and Pens every day? What has
provoked them thus to speak and write? I confess there have been provocations,
and some do but give Gall for Gall, and Wormwood for Wormwood; yet it cannot
be denied, but that many speak and write bitterly, when they have had no
provocation; yea most who speak bitterly, have been treated gently, and few
who answer angerly will be able to give a good account what has provoked them
thus to answer; and how much soever any man has been provoked, the Lord may
justly make him smart for such smartnesse in answering. It will not bear us
out in acting or speaking besides the rule, because others do so. Paul shows
us our duty in his own practice (1 Cor. 4.12, 13.) Being reviled we bless,
b^ing defamed we entreat: We must not defame them that defame us, we must not
revile our revilers. Then, woe to those who revile such as bless them; and
defame such as entreat them: O what provokes such to such ways of answering?

There is yet a third reading of this clause, which I will but touch, Quid tibi
molestum est si loquaris. Vulg.
When shall vain words have an end? But what trouble is it to thee if thou
speak? Or, Is it any trouble to thee if thou speak? As if he had said, I
cannot much wonder though thou do not end these vain ruffling discourses,
for I am persuaded they are no great trouble to thee, how much soever they are
to others; such words cost thee little study; thou need not beat thy
brains, or byte thy nails for such matter as this. That which comes next, and
lies uppermost, is all that some men have to say, when they have said all. They
that speak most to the pain of others, take least pains themselves. We say,
Good words are cheap, it costs little to speak fair; but ill words are
cheaper, Foul language costs little in the preparation, though it may prove
costly enough in the event. There is a profitable sense in this translation,
though I will not give it for the meaning of the Text.

It is our duty to consider before we speak, as well as before we act; and to
put our selves to some trouble in preparing what we have to say, before we give
others the trouble of hearing it. When God calls us to speak, either in our
own defense, or for the edification of others, on a sudden, we may expect
(according to the promise, Matthew. 10.19.) That it shall be given us in that
hour what we shall speak. If the providence of God straiten us, the spirit of
God will enlarge us; that promise will help us, when we have no time to
prepare our selves, but it will not, if we neglect the time in which we
should prepare our selves: For when Christ says in that place, Take no thought
how or what ye shall speak; we must expound it like that ( Matthew. 6.25.) Take
no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; Which
is not a prohibition of all thought about those things, but only of those
thoughts which are distracting and distrustful.

Job having reproved his Friends these three ways, for the manner of their
dealing with him; Now reproves them by a serious profession of his better
dealing with them; in case (as we commonly say) The Tables were turned, they
coming in his place, and he in theirs: This he does in the two Verses
following.

Verse. 4. I also could speak as ye do, if your soul were in my souls
stead: I could heap up words against you, and shake mine head at you.

5. But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should
assuage your grief.


Job in this context tells his Friends two things.

First, What he could do. And secondly, What he would do.
The former of these is laid down expressly in the fourth Verse.

Verse. 4. I also could speak as you do, if your soul were in my souls stead,
etc. The Soul is here put (as often elsewhere in Scripture) for the whole
man; then, his meaning is (and so Master Broughton translates) If you were in
my place, or in my condition. If God should transcribe my vvounds and sorrows
upon your backs, and consciences, or if my grief dwelt in your bowels, I could
speak as you do, etc.

The sufferings of the soul hold out the sufferings of the whole man, upon a
twofold consideration.

First, Because the soul is the principal part of man. When that which is
chief suffers, all may be said to suffer.

Secondly, Because afflictions which lie upon the soul, are most afflictive:
The sensitive power of the body, is called the soul, and we are most sensible
of those afflictions which fall immediately upon the rational soul. That man
forgets the sorrows of his body, whose soul is sorrowful. The more inward
any suffering is, the more grievous it is.

I also could speak as you do, if your soul were in my souls stead, etc.
Some read the words Interrogatively, Could I speak as you do? If your soul
were in my souls stead, could I heap up words against you, and shake my head
at you? Master Broughton gives that sense fully, Would I speak as you, if you
were in my place, would I compose bare words against you, and nod upon you with
my head? The meaning is Negative, If you were in my souls stead, I could do
none of these things. Could I do them? No (as we say) I could as soon eat my
own flesh as do them: If I were at ease, and you in pain, could I deal thus
with you? I would dye rather then deal so with you. This reading is good, and
has a greater emphasis in it then our bare affirmative reading, though the
sense and scope of both be the same.

If your soul were in my souls stead. Some read this Optatively, or as a
wish, O that your soul were in my souls stead; and then the latter words are
taken as a promise or profession of offices of love: First, I would heap up
words for you.

(...) concinnare apt disponere.
The Hebrew word which we translate to heap, signifies properly to prepare and
fit a thing, to fashion and put it into a good frame; it is not a rude,
inartificiall heaping of things together, without form or fashion, as the
first Chaos was; but a beautiful elegant digestion or composure of them, in
the exactest form and fashion, like that of the several pieces of the World,
conjoined in that work of the six days creation: As if he had said, O that
your soul were a while in my souls stead, see how I would use you, how I
would deal with you; truly, all the hurt I would do to you, should be this,
I would prepare the softest and the sweetest words I could with all my skill
and rhetoric, to ease your sorrows; I would speak music to your ears, and
joy to your hearts; I would study and compose a speech on purpose, to revive
and raise your drooping, desponding spirits.

So also the second branch may be interpreted, And shake mine head at you, or
over you: For to shake the head, notes pity and compassion; (...). Et movissem
super vos caput condolenter. Chrysostom.
to shake the head is the posture of those who mourn with, or for their
Friends. Hence the word is translated to bemoane ( Nah. 3.7.) Who will bemoane
him (Chap. 42.11.) Jobs Friends came to bemoane him; it is this word, They came
to shake their heads over him, because of all the evil which the Lord had
brought upon him. One of the Ancients makes this exposition, the Text, I would
have shaken my head over you bemoaningly, or with compassion: The same word
may well signify to shake the head, and to pity, seeing they who pity others,
use to shake their heads over them, and say, Ah my Friend, or Ah my Brother.

So then, if we read the words as a wish, O that your souls were in my
souls stead; yet Job did not wish it for their hurt, but that he might have an
opportunity to show how much he would labor to be their Servant in Love, to
do them good.

Hence Note.

A good man does not wish ill to those who have rewarded him with evil upon
any other terms, then a discovery of his own goodness. It Is sin to wish that
they who are in a comfortable condition, might fall into our misery, though
they have been miserable comforters to us in our misery. We may not (in this
case) wish pain or sorrow to any sort of men, except upon one of these two
considerations.

First, That we may give them an experiment of our tenderness toward them,
in doing them all the good we can in their affliction.

Or secondly, That God may give an experiment of his graciousnesse toward
them, in doing them good by their afflictions.

The Prophet Isaiah (Chap. 14.10.) foreshewes how they who had been weakened
by the power of Babylon, should insult over weakened Babylon, All they shall
speak and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou become
like unto us? The people of God shall at last rejoice (in reference to the
glory of God, and public good) to see their destroyers destroyed, and those
weak who have weakened them. But the people of God (in reference to any
private, or personal interest) cannot rejoice at the destruction, or in the
weakness of any man, much less can they wish them weak that they might have
an opportunity to rejoice over them. Paul was a Prisoner, and in bonds, yet he
did not wish the worst of his Enemies in Prison, or in Bonds with him; he only
wished that they might enjoy the same liberty by Jesus Christ, which himself
enjoyed. For when he had almost persuaded King Agrippa to become a Christian,
he said, I would to God, that not thou only, but also all that hear me this
day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds (Acts
26.28, 29.) I would keep my chains, and troubles to my self, I would have
none of you know my sorrows; but I would that all your souls were in as good a
state as mine, and knew my comforts. A holy heart wishes all well, as well as
it self; and if at any time he wishes that to the worst of his enemies, which
is penally evil, he does it with an eye both to their spiritual and eternal
good.

Thus of the words as they are read in the form of a wish.

We read them as a Supposition, If your souls were in my souls stead: And
then the two latter branches must be interpreted as acts of unfreindlinesse,
showing what Job could, but would not do, as was touched before.

I could heap up words against you. That is, I could make long speeches, and
enlarge my self in discourse, I could speak terror, and thunder out whole
volleys of threats against you; I could deaf your ears with loud voices, and
sad your hearts with heavy censures. There is a figure in Rhetoric called
Congeries, or The Heap. Many words to the same sense, especially when there is
little in them but words, are called justly, a heap of words: Now, says Job,
Quassare caput, apud authors Latinos gestus est hominis irati aut minantis aut
lamentantis. Drus.. Ridentes caput motitant. Drus.
I could be as nimble at this figure as you; and with my speech I could mix
your action.

Shake my head at you. Shaking the head, notes scorn and threatening ( Psalm.
22.7.) All they that seem, laugh me to scorn; they shoot out the lip, and
shake the head, saying, He trusted on the Lord, etc. So the afflicted Church
complains ( Psalm. 44.14.) Thou make us a byword among the Heathen, a
shaking of the head among the people. We have this action joined with two more,
which signify the greatest contempt, by lamenting Jeremiah (Lam. 2.15,) All
that pass by clap their hands at thee, they hiss, and wag their head, at the
Daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the City that men call the perfection of
beauty, the joy of the whole Earth?

Our blessed Savior (upon whom contempt and scorn was to vent it self all
manner of ways he being to bear all that scorn, as well as all that pain
which was due to our sins, our blessed Savior, I say) was scorned this way (
Matthew 27.39.) And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads. So then
to shake, or wagg the head at a man in affliction, speaks, as sometimes our
pity, so most times, our contempt; and as it is usually accompanied with
audible mockings, so it self is a visible mock: Which being interpreted,
speaks thus to the person afflicted, Thou evill-doer, or thou hypocrite, thou
do even well become thy sufferings, all these miseries are well bestowed on
thee, etc.

In this sense Job seems to speak here, I could shake my head at you: I have
indeed been as one mocked of his Friend ( Chap. 12.4.) and I could mock my
Friends, I could laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes; but
my conscience bears witness with me, that if it should come, I would not.

Hence Note.

First, A godly man has a power to do that evil which he has no will to do.

A carnal man has a will to many evils, for which he has no power or
opportunity: A godly man would not do any evil, how much power and
opportunity soever he has. And indeed though he has a natural, or civil,
yet he has not a moral power to do any evil. In which sense the Apostle
speaks of a regenerate person, (1 John 3.9.) He that is borne of God cannot
sin: He has a natural power to sin any sin, to lie, to be drunk, to be
unclean, etc. He may have a civil power to oppress, to deceive, to wrong his
Brother; yet he cannot turn either his hand or his heart to such works as
these are: he has learned better, and is better. He is borne of God, his blood
and pedigree is so high, that he cannot meddle, nor trade in such low things.
Wisdom is too high for a fool (says Solomon, Prove. 24.7.) and folly is too
low for a wisdom. When Joseph was solicited by his Mistress to commit folly
with her, he answers, How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God
(Genesis 39.9.) Joseph wanted neither power, nor opportunity to do that
wickedness; yet he says, How can I do it?

Paul and his fellow-Apostles had wit and parts sufficient to oppose the truth,
yet he says (2 Cor. 13.8.) We can do nothing against the truth, but for the
truth. Paul was a great doer, and he says ( Phil. 4.13.) I can do all things
through Christ strengthening of me; but Paul could do nothing to the dishonor
of Christ. Doubtless Paul could have maintained an argument, and drive on an
objection as far as another man, against the truth, if he would have set
himself to it, and have made that his business; but he had not a mind to
do it: The bent of his spirit did not lie that way, he was all for Christ,
and the Gospel; he was a Giant for the truth, but an Infant, a weakling, as
weak as water against it; he had neither an understanding to conceive, nor a
tongue to speak to the disservice of Jesus Christ.

It is a good observation of one of the Ancients, upon this place, Narrat
justus quid facere potuit, sed ne justitiam deserat, quod facere potuit
declinat. Greg.
A just man declares what he can do, but that he may not desert Justice, he
forbeares to do what he can. The providence of God sets bounds to the power of
a carnal man, but the spirit of God sets bounds to the power of a holy man; if
a carnal man keep within compass at any time, it is because he is restrained;
but a godly man keeps within compass, because he is renewed. Laban tells Jacob
(Genesis 31.29.) It is in the power of my hand to do thee hurt: And why did not
Laban hurt Jacob? Was it from any principle of love or righteousness in Labans
breast? The Text is silent in that, and Laban himself seems to tell us, whence
it was, in the same Verse, The God of your Fathers spoke unto me yesternight,
saying, Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob, etc. And this his
speaking to Laban, Jacob calls, Gods rebuking of Laban (Verse. 42.) implying,
that if God had not stopped him, he would have done him hurt.

It was more then once in the power of David's hand, to hurt, yea to slay Saul,
and he was strongly moved by some of his great Officers to do it, yet he
strongly refused to do it, or to suffer it to be done, because it would have
been sin in him to do it, himself being a private person, and the way in
which he had any opportunity to do it, being only a private way, when Saul
was in the Cave, covering his feet (1 Samuel 24.3.) or in a Trench fast asleep
(1 Samuel 26.7.) and therefore (though he had strengthened himself against Saul
with an Army, and was ready (upon his provocation) to stretch forth his hand
against him in Battle, yet) he says, Who can stretch forth his hand against
the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? David was not stopped from hurting Saul,
by a rebuke from God, but by the rule and dictate of his own conscience. The
thing might have been easily done, but because it could not be innocently done,
therefore David could not do it.

Secondly, Observe more specially to the matter of this Text.

A godly man (when himself) cannot be harsh and grievous to others, though he
have never so much advantage to be so.

His cannings are not for such uses. What the Apostle says of his Ministerial
power, a gracious heart says of all his power, It is for edification, not for
destruction (2 Cor. 13.10.) He designs his power for the help and comfort of
all, not for the hurt or grief of any. A good man is merciful to his Beast;
how then can he be unmercifull to his Brethren? He pitieth a Beast fallen under
a burden, how then can he be cruel to his Brother when he is under burdens?
Nature, or common humanity abhorrs such actings; much more does Grace. Paul
gives this charge to Believers, Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill
the Law of Christ (Gal. 6.2.) This Law of Christ is written in the heart of
every man, who is Christ's, and therefore he is far from adding to another man's
burden: He that has a fellow-feeling of his Brethrens sorrows, will not
increase their sorrows; no man will purposely increase, or add to that burden
which himself must bear. Could I speak as you do?

Thus for the Negative, what Job would not have done, if their soul had been
in his souls stead.

But, What would he have done? He tells us in the next Verse, this is the course
that I would take.

Verse. 5. I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips
should assuage your grief.
This is my design, and all the hurt I intend you. These words in the
substance of them have been opened ( Chap. 4.4.) where Eliphaz tells Job, that
he had done, what here he promised he would do, Thy words have upholden him
that was falling, and thou have strengthened the feeble knees: Thou have
instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak hands. Eliphaz had given
testimony for Job that he had done, what Job now professes he was resolved to
do, and would do, in case he were put into their condition, and they into
his, I would strengthen you with my mouth: that is, With the words of my
mouth; and (which is the same) the moving of my lips should assuage your
grief.

Here are the two parts of consolation, and the two great duties of a comforter.

The first, is to strengthen sorrowful man.

The second, is to abate the strength of his sorrows.

Job was resolved upon both: Were they weak in faith, and hope, he would
strengthen them; were their fears and doubtings strong, he would endeavor to
weaken them, I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips
should assuage your grief.

The word Grief is not expressed in the Hebrew: there it is only thus, Motio
labiorum meorum prohiberet. Heb. sc. dolorem vestrum.
The moving of my lips should assuage; be it what it will that greives you, I
would labor to assuage it: I would assuage your fears, your sorrows, your
impatience, your unbeleife; whatever spiritual evil were upon you, the
moving of my lips should be for the removing of it. Or (as others render) For
the turning of it away. For the word signifies.

First, To abate in degree.

Secondly, To turn away, or to stop altogether.

My design should be upon both, I would study to the utmost of my power and
parts, not only to mitigate, but quite to remove whatsoever I should find an
affliction to you.

It has been showed ( Chap. 4.4.) what power words have, both to strengthen
vveake faith, and to assuage the strongest grief, thither I referr the Reader;
only take two breife notes from it.

First, A good man does not only abstain from the hurt that he might do
another, but he labors to help him, and to do him good. Not to heap words in
anger upon them that are in misery, not to shake the head at them in contempt,
is only a Negative piece of charity and kindness: It Is our duty to use our
utmost endeavor to refresh and comfort them. Negative acts of kindness are
not the fulfilling of the law of love, it is not charity to the poor, to say I
will not make them poorer, I will take nothing from them; it is our duty to
give them of what we have. When a man is sorrowful, it is not enough to say, I
will not increase his grief; it is our duty to lessen it, yea to turn it into
joy.

And this is more considerable, in reference to the persons with whom Job had
to do; they had given him very hard measure, yet he would not requite them
with hard measure; he would measure that to them which was good, and he would
give them good measure. It is the common rule of humanity, to do good to those
who do us good; it is more then beastly, even devilish cruelty, to hurt those
that do us good; it is the height of Christianity, to do good to those who
have been a hinderance to us, and to comfort those who have caused our sorrow.
The Apostolical rule is, Recompense to no man evil for evil (Romans 12.17.)
And again ( v. 19.) Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give
place unto wrath: The Apostle does not mean, that we should give place to our
own wrath, if we do so, we give place to the Devil, as the same Apostle
intimates ( Ephesians. 4.26, 27.) Our own wrath must be stopped and resisted,
quenched and put out. Then, what, or whose wrath is it, that we are commanded
to give place unto? This wrath may be taken two ways.

First, For the wrath of that man, who is our enemy; we must give place to his
wrath, not by approving him or his wrath, but by not answering him with wrath.
If when another storms we are calm, if when he rages, we show all gentleness,
and meekness both of speech and spirit, then we give place to his wrath; that
is, We make it room to pass away and evaporate: Solomon's Proverb is the sum
of this Exposition ( Pro. 15.1.) A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous
words stir up anger.

Secondly, When Paul advises us not to avenge our selves, but rather to give
place to wrath; we may understand it of the wrath of God; and the very next
words, which the Apostle alleges from ( Deuteronomy. 32.35.) carry the sense
clearly this way, For it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay, faith
the Lord: As if the Apostle had said, if you take upon you to avenge your
selves, you take Gods work out of his hand; it belongs to God as much to take
revenge, as it does to give reward. And therefore as a man who having done
good, is over careful and anxious how to get his reward, takes rewarding work
out of Gods hand, and shall have no more reward then he can get himself; as
Christ tells the Pharisees in that case ( Matthew. 6.2.) Verily I say unto you,
ye have your reward: And all that a man can get himself, is not worth the
having.

So the man, who having suffered wrong, goes about to revenge himself, takes
revenging work out of Gods hand, and shall be righted no further then he can
right himself, which is but little, if any thing at all; whereas if he would
give place to the wrath of God; that is, Let God alone, by such ways as his
Justice shall raise up, to right him, against his adversary, he would right him
fully. So that our Interest does not lie in returning evil for evil, but in
returning good for evil to our enemies; as Saint Paul concludes ( Romans 13.20.)
Therefore if thine Enemy hunger, feed him, of he thirst, give him drink; for
in so doing, thou shall heap cooles of fire on his head. That is, thou shall
either melt and mollify his spirit toward thee, as hardest metals are by
coals of fire (some such melting we may see in Saul toward David, when he
forbore to take vengeance on him (1 Samuel 24.16. Chap. 26.21.) or thou shall
heap coals of divine vengeance upon him, by making his malice and hatred
against thee more inexcusable: Which latter though it may be looked upon as a
consequent of our doing good to our Enemies, yet we must take heed of making it
the end why we do so, for that were to seek revenge while we forbear it, and
to do good for that end, were to be overcome of evil; which the Apostle
forbids in the close of that Chapter.

Job in this Text was far from professing a^ readiness to assuage the grief
of his unkind, or enemy-like Friends, upon hope that God would increase their
sorrow.

Secondly, Observe.

Words duly spoken and applied, are of great power.

How forcible are right words? Is Jobs question ( Chap. 6.25.) He does not
there answer his question, nor tell us how forcible they are, but here he does.
They are of such force, that they strengthen weak souls, and assuage the most
swelling floods of sorrow.

God at first gave being and motion to all creatures, with the moving of his
lips: He by the moving of his lips has ever since ordered all their motions:
The word of man produces great effects, the tongue sets all hands on work;
and what almost cannot the tongue of man do? The tongue is a little member
(says the Apostle James, Chap. 3.5.) ^ond boasts great things: Now as the
tongues of vain men boast great things which they cannot do; so the tongues
of wise men can really do great things. Vain men (as we say) will take
thirteen to the duzzen, but cannot perform one. Wise men though they speak
not much, yet they can perform much with a word speaking. And though as the
same Apostle declaimes most holily against the tongue of a wicked man ( Verse.
8.) that his tongue is such an unruly evil, that no man can tame it; yet there
have scarce ever been found any men so unruly, but the tongues of wise and
godly men have tamed them: yea the tongue of a wise man is to an unruly man,
and often to a multitude of unruly men, as a bit in a Horses mouth, or as a
Rudder to a Ship, turning him or them about which way soever he lists; as
this Apostle teaches us by these similitudes ( Verse. 3.4.) the tongue of every
man is to, and does to himself, whether it be good or evil. And as the tongue
is thus powerful in civillizing the ^ude, and in appeasing the humors of
those who are most 'outragious; so it is very powerful in supporting those
that are ready to sink, and in asswaging the grief of those who are most
disconsolate and sorrowful.

Lastly, Whereas Job speaks peremptorily, as if he saw the effect, or were
assured of it aforehand, I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving
of my lips should assuage your grief: Job knew that the success of all his
counsels depended upon the concurrence and blessing of God; yet thus he
speaks.

Hence Note.

A man may say he has done that, for the doing of which he has used suitable
and faithful endeavors, whether the thing be done or no: The Lord says to
Jerusalem by the Prophet Ezekiel (Chap. 24.13.) Because I have purged thee, and
thou wast not purged. Now as God takes it upon him, that he had purged them,
though they were not purged, because he gave them so many means and helps
for their purging; so any man in his proportion, may take it upon him, that he
has strengthened their faith, abated their grief, yea and saved their souls,
among, and toward whom he has diligently used those means appointed by God
for the attaining of those great and noble ends, though possibly those ends be
not attained. God himself reckons thus of all the labors of his faithful
servants, they shall be rewarded as having done that which they have been
doing with their hearts, hands, and tongues, though they see little fruit of
either. Then I said, I have labored in vain (Isa. 49.4.) but though it was
in vain to those for whom he labored, that is, they got no good by it, yet it
was not in vain to him who labored, he got much good by it; as it follows in
the same Verse, Surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work (or my
reward, one word signifies both reward and work, to show that these can
never be separated, my work, says he) is with my God; and Verse. 5. Though
Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my
God shall be my strength.

As we are not to judge of the goodness of any cause by the success, but by
the justice of it; so neither does God adjudge the reward of any work by the
success, but by the goodness of it, together with the sweat and sincerity of
him that does it. As the will of a godly man is accepted for the deed, so his
deed is accepted for the success.

JOB, CHAP. 16. Verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Though I speak, my grief is not
assuaged: and though I forbear, what am I eased?

But now he has made me weary: thou have made desolate all my company.

And thou have filled me with wrinkles, which is a witness against me: and my
leanenesse rising up in me, bears witness to my face.

He teareth me in his wrath, who hates me: he gnasheth upon me with his teeth,
mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me.

They have gaped upon me with their mouth, they have smitten me upon the cheek
reproachfully, they have gathered them selves together against me.

God has delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over to the hands of the
wicked.


IN the five former Verses of this Chapter, Job reproved the personal faylings
of his Friends toward him; he now enters upon the confutation of their
opinion. This is the constant method, both of Job and his Friends; they never
come to the matter till they have fallen upon the man; nor touch the opinion,
till they have dealt with the person. And this is the tenor of most men's
spirits, to this day, in disputes and controversies, and some do not only
deal with the man before the matter, but lose the matter in dealing with the
man, entangling, and engaging themselves so much in personal quarrels, that
they forget, or desert the doctrinall quarrel. Job and his Friends, though
they were too mindful of the former, yet they did not forget the latter, and
here Job addresses himself unto it. Yet before he enters upon the state of the
question, he sets forth his own state, and shows how it was with him; granting
(which Eliphaz had made the ground of his accusation) that he was in an
extremely afflicted condition, yet denying what he from thence inferred, that
he was therefore wicked, or continued knowingly in any sinful course. He
describes his afflictions with much variety of Argument and Elocution, to the
seventeenth Verse.

First, Aggravating them by their unmoveablenesse, or remedilesnesse: His
sorrows were stubborn, and such as would not yield to any kind of remedy.

Verse. 6. Though I speak my grief is not assuaged, and though I forbear,
what am I eased?
In the former Verse Job speaks in a high strain of assurance, that if his
Friends were afflicted, The moving of his lips should assuage their grief: But
it seems, his own experience had taught him, that the moving of his lips
could not assuage his own grief; Though I speak (says he here) my grief is
not assuaged.

Hence Observe.

A man may do that for others which he cannot do for himself. He may comfort
others in their sorrows, when he cannot comfort himself, he may resolve
others in their doubts, when he cannot resolve himself, he may answer to
cases which their consciences put him, when he cannot answer his own; yea it is
possible for a man to speak such words to another, as may turn him from his
sin, and save his soul, and yet himself continue in sin, and lose his own
soul for ever. Naturalists have a rule concerning the senses, That, when a
sensible object is brought too near, or laid upon the sense, it not only
hinders, but takes away the present sensation. This holds a proportion in
rational actings: the nearer any one is to us in relation, the harder it is to
fix counsel upon him; and because we are nearest to our selves, therefore it
is hardest of all to counsel our selves.

Our Savior Christ prevents what he foresaw some ready to object against him (
Luke 4.23.) Ye will surely say unto me this Proverb, Physician heal thy
self. The Proverb in its Original is (I conceive) to be understood
personally; but as Christ suggests it there, it is to be understood Nationally,
or Provincially, Heal thy self, is, heal thy own Country; exercise thy
power of working miracles there, as well as thou have done it in other places;
that this is the meaning of it, appears plainly by the next words, Whatsoever
we have heard done in Canaan, do also in thine own Country: For Christ as
yet had wrought no mighty works of healing there ( Mark 6.5.) But why was
Christ so slow in manifesting himself to his own Countrymen? He gives the
reason ( Verse. 24.) And he said, Verily I say unto you, no Prophet is accepted
in his own Country: The Gospel of Mark (Chap. 6.4.) adds two closer
relations, His own Kin, and his own House: They in a man's house are nearer to
him then his kindred abroad, and his kindred are nearer to him then his
Contrymen; now among these, a Prophet has no honor: They know him so much,
that they do not respect him, or his sayings. The Jews said, Is not this the
Carpenter, the Son of Mary, the Brother of James, etc. Christ being thus near
to them, had little honor among them. Now for as much, as a man is nearer to
himself, not only then his Contrymen, but then any of his Kin; therefore
his own counsels and comforts have ordinarily so little effect upon himself;
he is not accepted in his own breast. There are some indeed so gracious, or
great in their own eyes, that they will ask counsel of none but themselves,
nor follow any advise but their own; but usually man seeks out, as being
neither able to satisfy his own doubts, nor abate his own sorrows, though
possibly, more able for both, then he to whom he seeks. Though I speak, my
grief is not assuaged; and though I forbear, what am I eased?

Some conceive Job speaking here like an Orator, who seems to stand in doubt
what to do, Eloquar an sileam? Quid agam? si locutus fuero, etc. Vulg.
and therefore trembles out his Preface in such words as these, Shall I
speak, or shall I be silent? Shall I open my lips, or shall I forbear? Jobs
pain received no check which way soever of these he took, and therefore it
seemed vain to attempt either.

Though I speak. That is, If I stand up in my just defense to answer, and take
away your objections, yet my grief is not answered; Nunc eo res redierunt, ut
quo me vertam nesciam aut quid agam, nam nec loquendo nec tacendo quicquam
proficio. Merc.
that is as busy with me, and as talkative as ever it was; yea, then you
object my impatience under sufferings, as an argument of my sin.

And though I forbear. That is, If I byte in my pain, and speak not, if I
stand mute, as attentive to hear you speak, yet my sorrow moves not; yea,
then you judge my silence an argument of my secret guilt, and that all is true
which you have said against me, because I say nothing for my self. Thus,

What am I eased says the Text in our translation? The Hebrew says, What
goes from me? That is, What of my pain, what of my sorrow goes away from me,
when I cease, or forbear to speak? So that,

The general sense of this Verse is to show that his troubles were past hope
of redress; they found no cure; none by speech, none by silence: Grief is
sometimes eased by speaking, sometimes by silence, either our own or others.

To say nothing is a medicine for some men's sorrow: the sorrow of others cannot
be medicin'd, but by saying much: A plaster of words has cured many a wound,
and the more words have been used, the more some wounds have festered, and the
anguish of them has increased.

Hence Observe.

There is no means of remedy left for that evil which is not remedyed by the
use and trial of contrary means.

If neither speech nor silence ease a man's mind, what can? We find such a
kind of arguing (though in a different case) used by Christ ( Matthew. 11.16,
17.) Where when he would show how impossible, or at least how extremely
difficult it was to please the Jews (they were a humourous people, and let a
man put himself in what posture he would, they would find some fault, or have
somewhat to object against him) Whereunto (says Christ) shall I liken this
generation? (they were so untoward, that Christ speaks as if he were
straightened, how to find out a fit comparison for them, or could scarce tell to
what they were like; yet he tells us) They are like unto Children sitting in
the Markets, and calling to their fellows, saying, We have piped and ye have
not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not lamented. When a man will
neither mourn with us, nor rejoice with us, what shall we do with him?
How shall we please him? For what company is he fit? That such was the
tendency of this similitude, appears plainly in the application which Christ
makes ( Verse. 18.) For John came neither eating, nor drinking, and they say he
has a Devil: They did not like the mournful, austere course of John: The
Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they said, Behold a man gluttonous,
and a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners: They did not like the
free converse of Christ. When a people are of this spirit, or at this lock,
that neither a man who is affable and courteous, ready both to receive, and
give civilities, is welcome to them, nor yet he who is austere, and reserved,
close, and strict in his way, can give them any content, who, or what can
content them? When neither piping nor mouring, when neither dancing nor
sorrowing takes with us, what can? When we would describe a person whose
troublesomenesse of spirit seems unanswerable, we say of him, He is quiet
neither full nor fasting: that is, he is never quiet, or nothing can make him
quiet. Abraham says to his Nephew Lot (Genesis 13.8, 9.) Let there be no strife I
pray thee, between me and thee, and between thy Herd-men and my Herd-men, for
we are brethren, etc. If thou will take the left hand, then I will go to the
right, or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left. Now as
it is an argument of the sweetest spirit, and fairest disposition when a man is
ready to take either hand, rather then break the peace, so it argues the
sowrest spirit, and most untractable disposition, when a man will neither go
to the right hand nor to the left, when he will neither move forward nor
backward; when he will neither give nor take, neither buy nor sell, there is no
dealing with such a man, for he wav^s all the ways of dealing.

Thus also we conclude a people incorrigible, who continue in their sins,
whether God smite or heal, whether he deliver them from, or deliver them up
into the hand of judgments, because these are the utmost bounds, or the
extremes of all those providentiall dispensations which God uses at any time
to turn a people from their sin.

Again, We say they are unperswadeable wh^m neither fair means, nor foul,
can reduce; speak them fair, they are naught; speak them foul, they are
naught still; promise them good, they remain evil, threaten them with evil,
they will not be good. You may carry it out in all experiments, wheresoever you
find an evil frame of mind or body, or of affairs, which mends not, or does
not alter for the better, by the application of the other contrary, when the
former has been applied without success, you may write under it (as to humane
helps) This is a desperate case, a distemper incurable,

Yet further, Job in these words reflects upon his Friends; as if he had said,
Some men, by complaining and opening their soars to those who visit them in
their affliction, find their Friends releeving them presently with sound
counsel, and pouring the oil of consolation into their wounded spirits; but
alas, it is not so with me, for whether I speak or hold my peace, it is all
one; ye are all against me, and are neither persuaded by my speech nor by my
silence, to apply proper remedies for the asswaging of my grief, or the easing
of my pains.

Hence Note.

It is the duty, and should be the care of those who visit Friends in
affliction, to pick somewhat out of what they say, or at least to take occasion
from their silence, to administer consolation to their grieved minds.

When the Servants of Benhadad came to Ahab to sue for their Masters life; the
Text says (1 Kings 20.33.) The men did diligently observe whether any thing
would come from him (that is, whether any word of hope would come from Ahab)
and they did hastily catch it: And Ahab had no sooner said, He is my Brother;
but they caught at this as a word of comfort, they had what they looked for, and
said, Thy Brother Benhadad. If thou ownest him as a Brother, surely thou will
not use him as an Enemy: There is (to the point in hand) a holy cunning in
catching up words, which drop from the lips of men in affliction; and it is our
wisdom to make improvement of them.

As for instance, There was an ancient Professor (as I have been informed) in
much distress of conscience, even to despair; he complaining bitterly of his
miserable condition to a Friend, let this word fall, That which troubles me
most, is, that God will be dishonored by my fall: This word was hastily caught
at, and turned upon him to the asswaging of his grief, Art thou careful of
the honor of God, and do thou think God has no care of thee, and of thy
salvation? A soul for saken of God regards not what becomes of the honor of
God: Therefore be of good cheer; if Gods heart were not toward thee, thine
could not be toward God, or toward the remembrance of his name. Thus words
should be watched, yea and silence should be watched for advantages to ease a
distressed soul.

Lastly, These words may referr to God; as if Job had said, Whether I speak,
or whether I forbear, God does not come in to my help, I find no comfort
from him; he puts no stop to my pain, nor does he assuage the floods of grief
which are ready to swallow me up. He gives me no ease at my complaining cries,
nor does he give me any, at my patient silence. The next Verse seems most
suitable to this exposition, where Job applies himself to God, showing what he
did to him, both while he spoke, and while he held his peace; he wearyed him
still, and left him in a wearyed condition.

Verse. 7. But now he has made me weary, thou have made desolate all my
company.
We may see (in this context) that the spirit of Job was much troubled, by the
troublednesse of his speech. At this seventh Verse he speaks in the third
Person, He has made me weary: and before he gets to the end of it, he speaks
in the second Person, Thou have made desolate: In the eighth Verse, Thou have
filled me with wrinkles: In the ninth Verse, He teareth me in his wrath: The
tenth Verse is Plural, They have gaped upon me: Strange kind of Grammar,
sometimes in the third Person, sometimes in the second, sometimes in the
Singular, sometimes in the Plural number; His mind was uneven, or unsettled,
and so was his discourse. We must not play the Critics with the words of men
in pain, nor submit their sentences to a Deske of Grammarians: Broken
language, and incongruities of speech, do well enough become broken hearts,
and wounded spirits: God will not call his Scholars in the School of
affliction to the Ferula for such faults or false Latin falling from their
mouths, either in prayer or conferences, while their hearts are true, and the
language of their spirits pure.

But now he has made me weary. [But Now] Now, is not here a Particle of time
only, (...)
or a specification of the season, noting that then God either began, or still
continued to make him weary; but it carries also a strong asseveration, or the
certainety of the thing; as in that promissory exhortation ( Hag. 2.4.) Yet now
be strong O Zerubbabell, says the Lord, and be strong, O Joshua. Though you
see things yet below expectation, though this be a day of small things, yet
take heart and encourage your selves to carry on this reforming work. Yet now
be strong, even now, when so many things might weaken both your hearts and
hands, and be ye assured that I will not reject your confidence, but will
cause you to prosper in it. Nunc in principio dictionis quandam cordis
dulcedinem connotare solet. Bold.
And in promises, besides the certainety of the thing promised, and the speedy
fulfilling of them, it intimates much sweetness of affection in him that makes
the promise. On the contrary, in threatenings, and comminations, besides the
certainety and speed of them, it notes the sharpness and severity of his
spirit, who gives those threats. So ( Isa. 5.5.) And now go to, I will tell
you what I will do to my Vineyard. Now, go too, is chiding cheer. As if the
Lord had thus rated them; What? Have you served me thus, as sure as I formerly
planted and hedged this Vineyard, so surely will I now pull down the hedge,
and root it up. In this fullness of sense take it here, But now he has made me
weary; certainly or of a truth he has; I was once sweetly and strongly hedged
about with mercy, But now he has made me weary and desolate.

He has made me weary. He, is not expressed in the Hebrew, and therefore there
is a doubt who is meant by this He.

Nunc autem oppressit me dolor meus. Vulg.
Some understand it of his grief and sorrow, and read it thus, But now it has
made me weary; my pain has tired me.

Secondly, Others understand it of what had been spoken by his Friends; your
tedious discourses, and severer censures have quite spent my spirits, and made
me weary.

Our translation leads us to a person, and our Interpretation leads us to God;
He, that is, God, has made me weary. Job every where acknowledges that God
was the Author, and Orderer of all his sorrows; Now he.

(...) Non solum fatigationem denotat. sed and fastidium molestissimum, tum
animi tum corporis.
Has made me [weary] Or, He has wearyed me; it is but one word, and it
signifies not an ordinary weariness, not such a weariness as comes upon us
after a turn or two in the Feilds: A man who walks into the air, to refresh
himself, may come home weary; but it notes such weariness as we feel after
long and tedious travel, or after a hard journey; yea it notes not only
weariness of body, but the weariness of the mind. It is possible for a man
to weary his body, and yet his mind remain unmoved; bare outward action
stirs not the mind. To ride, to run, to digg, or thresh, weary the body, not
the mind; but those works which with action have contention in them, as to
argue, and dispute, do at once exercise and weary both mind and body. The
weariness of the mind is the most painful weariness, Jobs weariness
takes in both; thou have vvearied my body, and vvearied my mind too, I am full
of soars without, and of sorrow within. And such was that weariness spoken
of by the Prophet ( Isa. 47.13.) Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy
counsels: that is, In going long journeys, to ask counsel of thy adored wise
men, or Wizzards rather, of Southsayers, and Diviners; In this pursuit thou
have labored thy body, and vexed thy soul, but profited neither. After all
thy travels what have thou brought home but weariness? Tired flesh, and a
tired spirit is all the fruit of our addresses for comfort to any but God, or
in the way of God.

The Septuagint translate yet higher, Sept. Exponunt de defectu rationis. q. d.
vix prae dolor sum mei compos.
Thou have made me mad or besides my self: The Hebrew word signifies to
distract, or to put one out of his wits: As if Job had said, I am scarce my
own man, being over-burdened with those sorrows God has laid upon me.

Hence Observe.

First, A state of affliction is a wearisome estate. A man may be vvearyed who
never stirrs foot from the place where he stands or sits. O the weariness of
a sick bed! Suffering, vvearies more then doing; and none are so weary as they
who are vvearied with doing nothing.

Observe Secondly.

Some afflictions are a weariness both to soul and body.

There are afflictions which strike quite through; and there are afflictions
which are only skin-deep: As there is a filthiness of the flesh, and a
filthiness of the spirit properly so called (for though every sin of the
flesh, or outward man defile the spirit, yet there are many filthinesses of the
spirit, which are never acted by the flesh, or outward man.) Thus the Apostle
distinguishes (2 Cor. 7.1.) There are also some filthinesses which strike
quite through flesh and spirit, body and soul. Thus there are some afflictions
which are merely upon the flesh; there are other afflictions which are purely
upon the spirit; the skin is whole, the body is in health, but the soul is
vvounded, an Arrow sticks within: And there are a sort of afflictions which
strike quite through body and soul; as old Simeon tells the Virgin Mary, a
Sword shall pierce through thy soul (Luke 2.35.) or as the Psalmist speaks of
Joseph (Psalm. 105.18.) according to the letter of the Hebrew, Whose feet they
hurt with fetters, his soul came into Iron, or the iron entered into his soul:
Such afflictions are like the Roll spoken of by the Prophet Ezekiel (Chap. 2.)
Written with lamentations, mourning, and woe, within and without; Some woes are
written only without, some vvoes are written only within, others are
written without and within. Their Characters are legible upon the flesh; and
their effects descend and sink into the spirit. Jobs afflictions were of this
extension, he was smitten all over, and written quite through with woes and
lamentations.

Thirdly, As the word reaches the distemper of the brain. Observe.

Some afflictions do not only afflict, but unsettle the mind.

They unsettle not only the comforts, but the powers and faculties of it: a
man under some afflictions can scarce speak sense while he acts faith, or do
rationally while he lives graciously.

A soul that has grace, yea much grace, may appear much scanted in the use
of reason: As oppression (from men) makes a wise man madd (Eccles. 7.7.) And
the more wise a man is, the more madd it makes him: Fools can bear
oppression, and not be troubled much, because they do not understand what
justice and right means; and that is the reason why in those parts of the World
where Tyrants reign, they love to keep the people ignorant, poor, and low,
for such are not much sensible of their oppressions; but oppression is very
grievous to an ingenious, wise, and understanding man, and therefore it is said
to make him madd: The purest intellectualls have the quickest sense of
injuries. Thus also some afflictions from the hand of God may (in a degree)
make a godly wise man madd, and put him for a present plunge beyond the command
of his understanding. It is the confession of holy David (Psalm. 73.22.) I was
even as a beast before thee, so foolish was I and ignorant: If David a godly
man acted below reason, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked; how much more
may a godly man act below reason, under the feelings of his own adversity.
Heman is express in this ( Psalm. 88.15.) While I suffer thy terrors I am
distracted: Yet the word in the Psalm does not signify properly the
distraction of a man that is madd, but the distraction of a man that is in
doubt; or the distraction of a man who knows not what to do, not of a man who
knows not what he does, and yet that distraction does often lead to a degree of
this; for a man who is much troubled to know what to do, and cannot know it,
grows at last to do he knows not what. We may also take in that about
distraction arising from affliction, which was touched about distraction caused
by oppression: Those Christians, who are highest in spirituals, and have the
quickest sense of Gods dispensations toward them, do soonest fall into it;
whereas a soul upright in the maine, yet being of weak and low parts, and of
small experience in the things of God, will go, yea groan under a heavy
burden of affliction all his days, and not be much moved with it.

Fourthly, Observe.

A godly man may grow extreme weary of his afflictions.

Affliction is the burden which God lays upon us, and it is our duty, not
only to bear it, but to bear it with contentedness; yea we should labor to
bear it with joyfulnesse. My brethren (says the Apostle James, Chap. 1.)
Account it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations; that is, Into
diverse afflictions. But yet the best cannot always rejoice in temptations,
nor triumph under a cross; when affliction according to that description of
the word ( Heb 4.12.) comes quick and powerful, as a two edged Sword, and
peirceth to divide between the soul and the spirit, the joints and the
marrow, when affliction (I say) cuts to the quick, a Believer is put hard to
it; he may be so far (for a time) from tryumphing and rejoicing, that he can
scarsely find himself contented or patient; his burden may cause him to cry
out, O, the weariness!

Carnal men cry out at every burden of duty in the service of God, O what a
weariness is it! They are tired with an hours attendance in holy things; O
the burden! Much more do they cry out under the lighter burdens of
affliction. How tedious is a day, or an hour of affliction; two or three fits
of an ague, an aching tooth, a soar finger, O what a weariness is this! They
sink presently. True Believers, as they have more patience in doing, so in
suffering; yet even their patience does not always hold out; they, as Job,
speak sometimes mournfully, and complainingly: But now, he has made us weary.

Thou have made desolate all my company. Quod loquitur nunc in secunda nunc in
tertia persona nihil in sententia m^tat id quod admodum frequens est in
Scriptura Pined.

(...) Vastari seu desolari, ita ut videntes obstupescant and horreant.


It was He in the first clause, Thou in the second; he and thou are the same
person in Jobs Grammar, as was touched before.

Thou have made [desolate.] The word Shamam, signifies to waste, and destroy,
and that not by an ordinary destruction, but so to destroy, as works the
beholders into amazement and wonder: This word signifes both to wonder, and to
destroy; because great destructions cause wonder.

Thou have made desolate all my company: Thou have made such a desolation among
them, that all who are about me lift up their hands (as we say) and bless
themselves, admiring to see this day. God brought such a desolation upon
Jerusalem, as set the World a wondering ( Lam. 4.12.) The Kings of the Earth,
and all the Inhabitants of the World would not have believed, that the
Adversary and the Enemy should not have entered into the Gates of Jerusalem:
Christ will come (at last with such mercies) to be glorified in his Saints, as
will cause him to be admired in all them that believe (2 These. 1.10.) He now
comes sometimes with such afflictions to his Saints, as easily cause them who
believe much more those who believe not to admire. Thou have wonderfully
desolated, or wasted, All my company.

Et in nihilum redacti sunt omnes auctus mei. Vulg.
All my [company] The word which we translate Company, is rendered, The joints
or members of the body by the Vulgar Latin, Thou have reduced all my members
to nothing: As if he had said, Thou have loosened the whole compages, or
structure of my bones and body, thou have untyed, or cut asunder all the
ligaments that held me together. This translation is but an allusion; because
the members of the natural body are like a company of men joined together in a
civil or spiritual body, which is therefore commonly called a Corporation.
Some contend much for this sense, Thou have made desolate all the members of my
body: Especially, because the scattering of his Family does not so well agree,
or comply (say they) with the weariness before complained of, nor with the
leanenesse, and wrinkles, which are spoken of afterward; both which belong
properly to the body.

Yet I pass that, and take the word as we read it, to express a distinct
affliction, thou have wearyed me in my person, and have made desolate all my
company; What company?

First, q. d. desolasti omnem Synagogam meam. Bold.
Some understand it of the company which used to flock to his Synagogue, in
holy duties, and excercises: As if he had answered the words of Eliphaz (Chap.
15.34.) The Congregation (or Company) of Hypocrites shall be desolate: Here,
says Job, I grant it, God has made desolate all my company. The Synagogues,
and places of public meeting were wont to be filled, but now that resort is
stayed, they are all scattered, or diverted, and those public places are
filled with howlings and lamentations. Thus he grants Eliphaz what he had
objected, and yet denies what he thnnce inferred, that he was an Hypocrite.

Secondly, Rather interpret it of the company he had in his own House, or for
his particular Family. So it is a renewed complaint of the loss of his
Children and Servants, of his Friends and Familiars, who used to resort to him,
and stay about him.

Thou have made desolate all my company: Some of Jobs company were made
desolate; that is, they were destroyed; most of his Servants were slain by the
Chaldeans, and Sabeans, and all his Children were slain by the fall of a House
( Chap. 1.) This company was made desolate indeed: Yet when he says, Thou have
made desolate all my company, his meaning is, as Master Broughton translates,
Thou have made me desolate of all my company; that is, I am left alone.

Hence Observe.

The company of Children, and Friends, is a very great mercy.

Heman complains much when he wanted this mercy, Lover and Friend have thou
put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness. Job makes, as a more
particular, so a more patheticall enumeration of this loss ( Chap. 19.13, 14.)
To be desolate in so great an affliction, that it is often put for all
afflictions; and to be desolate of company, is the worst desolatenesse. When
David had said, I am desolate and afflicted, he presently adds, The sorrows of
my heart are enlarged (Psalm. 25.16, 17.) A man may be much afflicted, and yet
not desolate, but a man cannot beat all desolate, but he must be extremely
afflicted. When the Prophet would put all the miseries of the Jews into one
word, he puts it into this ( Isa. 1.7.) Your Country is desolate, your Land
strangers shall devour it in your presence: And when a Land is devoured of
strangers, either it is made desolate of its own company, or its own company
is made desolate. Babylon boasts ( Revel. 18.7.) I sit a Queen, and am no
widow; that is, as I have power, so I have resort and company enough, I am not
desolate: The Apostle puts these two together, Widdow-hood, and Desolatenesse
(1 Timothy 5.5.) Now, she that is a widow and desolate, etc. So that when
Babylon says, I am no widow, her meaning is, I am not desolate; and hence the
punishment of Babylon is threatened in this language ( Revel. 17.16.) The ten
horns which thou saw upon the Beast, these shall hate the Whore, and make
her desolate, etc.

Those ten horns are ten Kings, who sometime doted upon the painted beauty of
that Whore, and then made frequent addresses to her, and did throng about her
from all parts of the World; but when once their eyes shall be opened, their
hearts will soon be alienated; They shall hate the Whore. And then as they
withdraw affection, so visits and messages; Babylons Courts shall be crowded
with Suitors no longer: Thus they shall make her desolate of the company of her
old friends, before they make her desolate by bringing in new enemies, who
shall strip her, not only of her company, but of her clothes, yea of her
skin; they shall make her naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire
(Revel. 17.16.) Thus, as the misery which came upon Jerusalem, so the misery
which shall come upon Babylon meet in this, The making of their company
desolate: yet in this they differ, the desolations of Jerusalem shall be (at
least mystically) repaired, but the desolations of mystical Babylon (when they
are fully come upon her) shall be irreparable.

Man is naturally (as the Philosopher calls him) a sociable creature, he loves
company; they who are for a solitary life, Monks and Anchorets, seem to have
put off the nature of man. There is an elective alonenesse, or retyrednesse, at
some times very useful for contemplation and prayer: And we are never less
alone, then when we are so alone; for then God is more specially with us, and
we with him. It is said of Jacob (Genesis 32.24.) Then Jacob was left alone, not
that Jacobs company had left and forsaken him, but that Jacob for a time had
left his company: So, some render the Text actively, He stayed, or remained
alone. Jacob stayed alone pueposely, that he might have freer communion with
God in that recesse and retirement from the creature: It is good for man to be
alone from the company of man, that he may enjoy (more fully) the presence of
God.

Yet God himself said at the first when man was created, It is not good for
man to be alone: There was no moral evil in that alonenesse (for when God
spoke this word, there was no such evil in the visible World) but God called
it evil, because it was so inconvenient for the civil well-being and
inconsistent with the natural propagation of man. And therefore as in
reference to both these evils, God said with his own mouth, It is not good for
man to be alone; so in reference to the former of the two, God said by Solomon,
Two is better then one, and woe to him that is alone (Eccles. 4.9, 10.) Job
puts his alonenesse among his woes, Thou have made desolate all my company.

But it may be said, Had Job no company? Were not his Friends about him? Did
not these three come to mourn with him, and to comfort him? And had they not
been in discourse with him all this while?

Yes, he had company, but it was not suitable company; he had evil ones about
him, as he complains ( Chap. 19. and Chap. 30.) and though his three Friends
were good men, yet to him they were no good company, because so unpleasant in
their converse with him.

Hence Note.

Some company is a burden.

We say of many men, We had rather have their room then their company. Man
loves company, but it is the company of those he loves. The comfort of our lives
depends much upon society, but more upon the suitableness of society: It is
better to dwell in the corner of a house top, then with a brawling Woman in a
wide house (Prove. 21.9.) And it is better to be in a Desert among wild Beasts,
then in a populous City among beastly men. This made the Prophet desire a
lodging in the Wilderness ( Jer. 9.2.) The Country about Sodom was pleasant,
like the Garden of God, yet how was the righteous soul of Lot vexed with the
filthy and unrighteous conversation of the Sodomites? How uneasy are our lives
made to us by dwelling among either false Friends or open Enemies?

In the Creation, when God said, It is not good for man to be alone; he
subjoynes, Let us make him a help meet for him. Adam had all the beasts of the
earth about him, but they were no company for him, man knows not how to
converse with beasts, or employ his reason with those that have none. As, it is
not good for man to be alone, so to be in company that is not meet for him is
as bad, or worse then to be alone. Therefore says God, Let us make him a help
meet for him; the making of a Woman brought in meet company for mankind; yet
some men are as unmeet company for men as beasts are, and are therefore in
Scripture called Beasts. Paul fought with such beasts at Ephesus; there are few
places free of them, and many places are full of them. David cries out, Woe is
me that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, etc.

There was company enough, but it was woeful company. The Primitive Saints
associated themselves, they continued in fellowship one with another, as well
as in the Apostles Doctrine, or in breaking of bread and prayer (Acts 2.42.)
They were all of one mind, and were therefore f^t to make one body. The
communion and fellowship of the Saints, is the lower heaven of Saints. And the
making of such a company desolate, is the saddest desolation that can be made
on earth: Communion of Saints in Heaven, is one great accession to the joy of
Heaven. And it is a great comfort to the Saints in the midst of all the ill
neighborhood which they meet with here, to remember that they shall meet with
no ill neighbors there; none but Friends there, none but loving Friends.
There shall not be a cross thought, much less a cross word or action among
those many millions of glorified Saints for ever, nor shall there be any among
them there but Saints: no tares in that field, nor chafe in that floor, no
Goats in that Fold, no nor any Wolves in Sheepskins, no profane ones there,
no nor any Hypocrites there. Uunsutable company would render our lives
miserable in Heaven it self. If God should say to the godly and the wicked (as
David once did to Mephibosheth and Ziba, Thou and Ziba divide the Land) divide
Heaven among you; might they not answer (with reverence) as Mephibosheth did to
David, Nay let them take it all to themselves, O our souls come not into their
secret, and unto their assembly let not our honor be joined: if Swearers,
Adulterers, Liars, should be our company in Heaven, Heaven it self, were
unheaven'd, and everlasting life would be an everlasting death. And that which
further argues the burdensomness of unsuitable company, is, that even wicked men
themselves cannot but confess that they are burdned with the company of those
who are good; if such come in presence where they associate in any sinful
converse, how weary are they of their company? How do they even sweat at the
sight of them? And how glad are they when such turn their backs, and are gone:
the only reason why they like them not, is because they are not like them, and
they are not good company, because they are good. All company is made desolate
to us, which is not made suitable to us. Job had many about him, yet he
complains, Thou have made desolate all my company.

Job goes on yet to describe his troubles; he wanted desirable company about
him, but he had store of witnesses against him; he was emptyed of his comforts,
but filled with sorrows, as might be seen in the symptoms and effects of
sorrow.

Verse. 8. Thou have filled me with wrinckles, which is a witness against me:
and my leanness rising up in me, bears witness to my face.
As if he had said, Though I hold my peace, and say nothing, Si vellem caelare
aut verbis extenuare dolorem meum rugae meae testimonium daub etc.
though I do not aggravate my grief, yea though I should extenuate and hide
it, yet there are witnesses enough of it; my wrinkles speak my grief, and my
leanness shows that I am feasted with the sour herbs of sorrow: That Is the
general sense of this Verse.

Thou have filled me with wrinkles. It is but one word in the Hebrew, we might
render it, Thou have wrinkled me; or as Master Broughton, Thou have made me all
wrinkled. The word is not found in this sense any where else in Scripture;
(...) Rugas contraxit active corrugavit. (...) and corrugastime Non alibi quam
in hoc libro in scriptura reperitur. Quod succidisti me, testimonio est. Merc.
but very frequently among the Rabbis. There are also two other significations
of it which Interpreters have taken in here.

First, It signifies, To cut off, or to cut down (Chap. 22.15, 16.) Have thou
marked the old way which wicked men have trodden? Which were cut down out of
time: That old way was the way of sin (the way of holiness is the oldest way,
but the way of sin is a very old way.) They who have trod the way of sin, were
cut down by judgment, and they were cut down out of time; that is, the
course of divine Justice prevented the course of nature, and struck them to
death before death uses to strike. So some render it here, and then the sense
rises thus, Thou have cut me down by the stroke of these afflictions, and
this is a witness against me.

In significatione Chaldaica exponitur pro ligare and constringere.
Secondly, The word according to the Chaldee, signifies to bind, and fasten one
with Cords, or with fetters of Iron, as Malefactors are bound in Prison ( Prove.
5.22.) His own iniquity shall take the wicked, and he shall be holden with the
Coards of his sin. The Hebrew word which we render to hold, or fasten, is
expressed by this of Job in the Chaldee Paraphrase. Taking this sense of the
word, the interpretation given of the whole is, Thou have bound, or straitened
me with the cords of my affliction, Quod his dolorum vinculis constrictum me
tenes, ne qua elabi queam, testimonium fecit in me. Merc.
lest I should get out, or make an escape, and this is a witness against me:
There is a truth in both these readings, as to this place; but because wrinkles
are more proper to the leanness which follows, therefore I shall not stay
upon them, but keep to our own reading.

Thou have filled me with wrinkles. Wrinckles are caused two ways.

First, Through old age; for then the moisture of the body being consumed, and
so the skin contracted, wrinckles appear: These natural wrinckles cannot be
avoided, if nature hold out to old age.

Secondly, There are accidental wrinckles, such as are caused by strong
diseases, which sucking up, or drawing out the moisture of the body, fade the
beauty of it. Great sicknesses hasten on gray hayres, and make a young man
look old. Job was not filled with the wrinckles of old age (he was in the
strength of nature at that time) but he was filled with the wrinckles of
sickness and sorrow; grief had made furrows in his face, and his tears had
often filled them: we commonly say, Sorrow is dry; it is so, because it is a
dryer. Solomon tells us, that A merry heart does good like a medicine, but a
broken spirit (which is the effect of much sorrow) dries up the bones (Prove.
17.22.) The Church cries out in the Book of Lamentations, My flesh and my skin
he has made old (Lam. 3.4.) How did God make them old? He made them old not by
giving them many years, but by giving them many troubles. Many troubles in one
year, will make a man older then many years.

We have heard of some, whose hearts being filled with vexing cares have filled
their heads with gray hayres in a very short time. As some have an Art to ripen
Fruits, before nature ripens them; so the Lord has a power to hasten old age,
before nature makes us old. Thou have made my skin old; that is, full of
wrinckles and leanness; these are the liveries which old age gives. The
Apostle assures us, that Christ shall one day present the Church to himself,
in the perfection of spiritual beauty and glory; that beauty and glory is
described by the removal of that from her spiritual estate, which Job
complains of in his temporal estate: Job was full of spots and wrinkles, but
she shall appear, Not having spot or wrinckle (Ephesians. 5.27.) that is, Without
any note or mark of old age upon her. A spot defaceth the beauty of a Garment,
and wrinckles spoil the beauty of the face. An old Garment is full of spots,
and an old face is full of wrinkles. Old things pass away when we are made new
creatures by grace; yet in that state (because we are not perfectly freed from
the old man) our garments have some spots, and our faces some wrinkles upon
them: But in the state of glory, when all old things, even all the image of the
old Adam shall be totally abolished, we shall not have so much as one spot or
one wrinkle. Believers have now a righteousness in Christ without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing; they shall then have a holiness in themselves,
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing* that is, They shall not only not
have any spot or wrinkle upon them, but they shall have nothing like it,
nothing which has any relation to it, nothing which either themselves or
others shall mistake for it, they shall neither suspect nor be suspected to
have a spot or a wrinkle about them. A perfect soule-state, and a perfect state
of body, has no wrinkle in it. Job to show the decays and blemishes of his
body, says he was full of wrinkles.

Again, These wrinkles by an elegant metaphor may referr to his whole outward
condition: For as a man's face is wrinkled when he grows old, so are his riches
when he grows poor, and so is his honor when he grows out of repute.
Poverty is the wrinkle of riches, and disgrace is the wrinkle of honor; we may
take in all three here, for not only was Jobs body, but his wealth and honor
were extremely wrinkled, and therefore he had great cause to cry out according
to all the the interpretations, Thou have filled me with wrinkles.

Which witness against me. I shall give the meaning of that, when I have
opened the latter clause, where it is repeated, My leanness rising up in me,
bears witness to my face: both parts of the Verse have the same meaning.

My leanness rising up in me. Some think, that Job answers what Eliphaz had
given, as part of the description of a wicked man, in the fullness of his
prosperity ( Chap. 15.27.) where he tells us, that, He covers his face with
fatness, and makes collops of fat on his flanks; as if he had said, Friend
Eliphaz, thou have told me, that wicked men are fat and full, if so, what are
they who are lean and meagre? can thou according to thy own rule, read
wickedness in my physiognomie? My leanness rises up in me, can thou raise
an argument from that against me?

My leanness. Jobs body was lean, his Purse and Name were lean, his
leanness and his wrinkles were of the same extent, both reaching all his
worldly concernments. The Lord threatens Idolaters ( Zeph. 2.11.) that he will
famish, or make lean (so we put in the Margin) all their Gods. Jehovah, the
true God, who says to man ( Psalm. 50.12.) If I were hungry, I would not tell
thee, tells these false Gods, that he will make them hungry: But what was the
meat of these Gods? It was the honor and credit, the worship and service which
they had among men. Indeed they who deny the true God, his due honor and
worship, do what they can to famish, or make him lean; and when the true God
(as he has done by the Preaching of the Gospel) turns men from Idols to
serve, and worship him the living God, then he famisheth those Gods: When Idols
lose their esteem, their leanness rises up, and they go down. Thus also it
is with man, his leanness may be said to rise when his credit falls.

Further, There is a twofold leanness.

First, Of the soul, or inward man. Secondly, Of the body, or outward man.
When the Jews lusted in the Wilderness, and called for flesh to satisfy the
flesh: God (says the Text, Psalm. 106.15.) gave them their request, but sent
leanness into their soul. The soul in a proper sense, is neither fat nor
lean, and therefore the soul in this place of the Psalm, must be taken
improperly, or else the leanness of it must. The soul is put improperly for
the body, or for the whole man, and so, he sent leanness into their souls,
is, the curse of God caused them to pine secretly, or he slew the fattest of
them (openly) and smote down the chosen men in Israel: So this leanness is
expounded ( Psalm. 78.31.) as if he had said, God made them a thin and a lean
company before he had done with them. Yet besides this (I conceive) the Text
does intend some spiritual judgment; and then the soul is taken in a proper
sense, but leanness in an improper sense: and so, he sent leanness into their
souls, is, while they inordinately desired meat for their bodies, God withheld
the ordinary food of their souls: He did not administer his grace and holy
spirit (which are the fatners of the soul) while they were thus hungry after
dainties for the flesh.

Jobs Friends thought him a lean soul, but he here confesses the leanness of
his body; and in that his continual sorrow the cause of it. So the Prophet
cries out, My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me (Isa. 24.16.)

My leanness [rising up.] Fatness rises up, and not leanness, when a man
grows lean, his flesh falls, and abates; skin and bone stick together, Why
then does he say, My leanness rises up?

Though, when a man is lean, his flesh falls, yet his bones rise: A fat man's
bones are (as it were) buried in flesh, you can scase feel his ribs, but when
he grows lean, his bones stick out, and rise up: That is the meaning here, my
leanness rising up.

Maciei videtur dare personam ut paulo ante rugis.
Job ascribes a rational act, both to his wrinkles and to his leanness, as if
both did speak, and which is more, give evidence concerning him; he brings them
forth as witnesses at the bar, this speaks, and that speaks, he doubles it,
My wrinkles witness against me, and my leanness rising up witnesses to my
face: When a witness is to give in his evidence in any cause before a Judge,
he rises up, or stands forth, that all may see him; Job presents his
leanness in the proper posture of a witness rising up.

The Original varies somewhat in the latter clause from the former; we render
both by witnessing, but we may read it thus, Thou have filled me with
wrinkles, that has been, or is a witness, or (as Master Broughton reads) a
proof, my leanness rising up (or which rises up against me) answers (or
speaks) to my face. The meaning is, These outward evils are evidence enough
to my Friends, that God is angry with me, and that I am wicked against God.

Job grants that those wrinkles, and this leanness were witnesses of his
afflictions, he never questioned their testimony, as to that point, neither
indeed could he. Jonadab said to Amnon, Why art thou being the Kings Son,
lean, or thin, from day to day, will thou not tell me? (2 Samuel 13.4.) His
leanness told his Friend plain enough, that all was not well; he read that
in his face, only he could not read the particular illness there. Magnum
certe peccatum, quod tantum in florente illa aetate deformitatem and senilem
speciem induxit. Putant tantas afflictiones testes esse magnae culpae and irae
Dei. Coc.
If we see a young man, especially the Son of a Great man, or of a King (who
is waited upon with all worldly delights) vvrinkled, and lean, is it not a
witness that he has been sick, or is overwhelmed with sorrow? these testify
to his face, he cannot conceal it.

But Jobs Friends said, these were vvitnesses of his sin: they produced the
wrinkles of his body as a witness of his vvrinkled soul; and the leanness
of his outward man, as an argument of his inward leanness; they said, these
testified plainly, that he was not only a great sinner, but an Hypocrite: And
thus they argued all along, this was their constant plea; Job must needs be
(according to this opinion) a man of an evil life, because his life was filled
with evils: Thou have filled me with wrinkles, which is a witness against
me, etc.

Hence Observe.

First, Great afflictions leave their marks behind them.

Little afflictions leave no wrinkles, no leanness behind them, we recover
out of them, and nothing appears of them; as it is in sinning, some sins leave
no mark, such are our daily infirmities, and common failings; but there are
other sins, which leave a mark behind them, you cannot get them off suddenly,
it may be you cannot claw off the marks of some sins as long as you live:
though the sin be fully pardoned, yet the mark, the vvrinkle, the leanness of
it may remain to your dying day. David being defiled with adultery and murder,
prays, Cause the bones which thou have broken to rejoice: Those two were such
sins as broke his very bones; they were to his soul, as the breaking of a
bone is to the body: If a man break a bone, though it be well Set, yet it
leaves a mark. David carried the skarr of those sins to his Grave: Though God
had forgiven those sins, and did not remember them, to impute them to David,
yet when God had occasion to speak of David to his highest commendation, he
could not forbear the mention of those sins (1 Kings 15.5.) David did that
which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing
that he commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of
Vriah. The vvrinkle or stain of that sin stuck upon David's reputation, when
the guilt of it was quite removed, and vvashed off from his person. It Is so
with afflictions, some afflictions leave no mark, others go deep: Though all
afflictions are light comparatively to the weight of glory, as the Apostle
speaks (2 Cor. 4.17.) For our light affliction which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory: Yet
afflictions being compared among themselves, some are light, and some are
heavy: As a Cart that is heavy laden, cuts deep into the earth, and tells you
where it has gone; so does the wheel of a heavy affliction drawn over body,
soul, or state.

Secondly, Observe (which is the natural theology of the Text.)

Wrinkles, and leanness in youth, or strength of age are an argument of
extraordinary sorrow.

Thirdly, Take the words according to the sense of Jobs friends, which Job also
hints as meeting with their objection, They witness against me: that is, You
use them, you bring them as witnesses against me:

Then Note.

Great afflictions are looked on as proofs, or witnesses of great sins.

We no sooner hear of, or see a man under great afflictions, but our first
thought is surely he has committed some great sin. This is almost every man's
suspicion; but it is an ill grounded suspicion. This point was spoken to (
Chap. 10.17.) where Job tells the Lord, Thou have renewed thy witnesses against
me, etc. There 'twas showed how afflictions are brought in by God and man as a
witness; and this was the greatest evidence, and (upon the matter) all the
evidence which the Friends of Job brought against him, his wrinkles, and his
leanness: I shall here only add this caution.

Take heed of passing judgment upon the evidence of such vvitnesses as these,
wrinkles, and leanness; for though every vvrinkle witness that a man is a
sinner (were it not for sin we should have remained ever in our body and
outward condition, as Believers shall be restored by Christ, without a wrinkle)
yet they are not vvitnesses that a man is wicked: I may say two things of these
vvitnesses.

First, They are always doubtful witnesses. Secondly, For the most part they
are false witnesses.
It is a very questionable and uncertain evidence which afflictions give
against us: For no man knows love, or hatred, by all that is before him: We
can but guess at the best, by what they say. Rugae meae testimonium dicunt
contra me, and suscitatur falsiloquus adversus faciem meam contradicens mihi.
Vulg.
But usually they bear false witness against the innocent; so they did
against Job; they witnessed that of him to his Friends which was not right.
Therefore the Vulgar translates the latter branch (though not well to the
letter of the Original, yet well as to the sense) A fal^e witness is risen up
against my face, contradicting me; that is, Opposing or weakening all that I
have said concerning my own innocence. Yea if we make affliction a witness,
we may rather make it a witness of sincerity, and of grace, a mark of
adoption and sonship, a mark of divine Favor and Fatherly love, then of man's
wickedness, or of Gods rejection and disfavour. The word is clear and
express for this ( Heb. 12.6, 7, 8.) For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth,
and scourges every Son whom he receives, etc. But if ye be without
chastisement whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards and not Sons. So
then, our wrinkles and our leanness may upon Scripture warrant, be brought as
witnesses for us, but we have no warrant to conclude upon their witness,
either against our selves, or others.

But it seems Job had a higher witness against him (if such witnesses might
be allowed) then a wrinkled skin, or a lean face: Behold now his torn flesh,
and his limbs rent in sunder, as if (not only like Daniel) he had been cast
into a Lions Den, but as if (which Daniel did not) he had felt the worst of the
Lions teeth and paws.

Verse. 9. He teareth me in his wrath, who hates me; he gnasheth upon me with
his teeth, mine enemy sharpeneth his eye upon me.
Strange language! He teareth me in his wrath who hates me. Job gives us a
description of the Lords dealing with him, in allusion to the fury of wild
Beasts, Lions, Tigers, and Bears, who gnash their teeth, and sparkle with their
eyes, when they either fight one with another, or fall upon their prey.

He teareth me in his wrath who hates me. It Is doubted whom Job means by
this Tearer: Some judge this Title applicable only to the Devil, and
interpret Job speaking of him; the Devil hates me, He teareth me in his
wrath: Job was delivered into the hand of the Devil ( Chap. 2.) And this is
the courtship of Hell, He teareth.

Secondly, Others understand it of his extreme pain and torturing disease,
that tore him like a savage Beast.

A third expounds it of his Friends, as if he compared them to wild Beasts,
who in stead of comforting his spirit, did (upon the matter) tear his flesh
between their teeth.

Fourthly, It Is conceived, he means those vain ones of whom he speaks (
Chap. 19.) that came about him, and troubled him.

But fifthly, and most generally, this Text is interpreted of God himself, He
teareth me in his wrath who hates me. For though Job speaks here distractedly,
discovering rather his grief then his enemy; or as a man wounded and smitten
in the dark, Ejusmodi querimoniae in neminem certo jactatae afflicti hominis
propriae sunt.
he perceives he has an enemy, he feels the smart, and bears the blows, but
he is not able to see who hurts him, yet in this confusion of language, his
heart was still upon God who ordered, and disposed all those armies of sorrow,
which assaulted him on every side.

He [teareth] me in his wrath. The Hebrew word Taraph is near in sound to our
English Tear, (...) Ferarum praedam rapientium and lacerantium proprium est.
and it signifies to tear as a Lion his prey ( Genesis 49.9.) Judah is a Lions
whelpe, from the prey my Son thou art gone up. The same word in the Verb,
notes Tearing, and in the Nowne a prey, because the prey is torn by the teeth,
or claws of the Lion.

(...) Est totis viribus adversari, idem cum Satan, unde and Satanas dictus.
Ira sua rapit quasi odio intestino prosequatur me. Jun.
He teareth me in his [wrath.] Wild Beasts tear not so much from wrath, as
for hunger; they tear out of a desire to fill themselves, rather then out of
malice to destroy others. But Job says, He teareth me in his wrath who
[hateth] me.

The word signifies not an ordinary, but an inward hatred, and with the change
of a letter it is the same by which the Devil is expressed, Satan, an
adversary, or the adversary; so called because of his extreme hatred against
mankind, yea against Christ himself. Job speaks of God as if he bare such a
hatred against him as Satan does, (...) Frenduit dentibus; est invidentium,
irascentium, irridentium habitus. Loquitur ad similitudinem bestiae quae homini
comminando dentes contra ipsum parat. Aquin.
an inward perfect hatred.

Thus some translate, He prosecutes me with inward hatred: A hard expression of
God; Does he tear a harmless soul, and tear him in wrath? Yet this is not
all; to make up the measure of this excessive language, take two aggravations
more.

He gnasheth upon me with his teeth. Job pursues the allusion still: Beasts (as
it were) whet their teeth that they may devour their prey: This action of
gnashing the teeth is ascribed to men, and it notes four things.

First, Extreme envy ( Psalm, 12.10.) The wicked shall see it and be grieved,
he shall gnash with his teeth and melt away; the desire of the wicked shall
perish: But at what was this wicked man greived, till he gnashed his teeth? Was
it a grief of compassion at the misery of others? No, it was a grief of envy
at the prosperity of others, as is clear from the words immediately foregoing.
The horn of the righteous shall be exalted with honor: Envy is the vexation
and depreson of our own spirits, at the exaltation of another man in riches or
in honor. It is not a sickness caught from another man's disease, but a
sickness caught from another man's health.

Secondly, Gnashing of the teeth, notes extreme derision, or highest contempt
and insultation over a man in misery ( Psalm. 35.15, 16.) But in mine adversity
they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together (that is, then gathered
themselves together for joy, or to rejoice) yea the very abjects gathered
themselves together (such as all honest, or civil men had cast out of their
company and society, associated and knotted themselves into companies) against
me, they did tear me (that is, my good name) and ceased not; with
hypocritical mockers at feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth: Where
it is also observable, that we have the former act complained of by Job, joined
with this, Tearing, with gnashing of the teeth.

Thirdly, Gnashing of the teeth is the effect of extreme pain; thus the
damned in Hell shall gnash their teeth for ever ( Matthew. 8.12. Matthew. 13.42.)
That gnashing of teeth arises from a mixed passion, partly from envy, and
partly from sorrow; envy at the good which the Saints enjoy, and sorrow at the
evil which themselves feel; hence comes gnashing of teeth in Hell.

Fourthly, Gnashing of teeth is an argument of extreme wrath and anger ( Acts
7.54.) where it is said of Steevens at once Auditors and Enemies, When they
heard those things, they were cut to the heart (Peter's Auditors, Acts 2. were
pricked at the heart with godly sorrow, Stevens Auditors were cut to the heart
with ungodly anger) and they gnashed upon him with their teeth. The gnashing of
teeth here spoken of is the concommitant of supposed wrath, He teareth me in
his wrath, and gnasheth upon me with his teeth.

Yet further: Mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me.

This notes the fierceness of an enemy: Wild Beasts when they fight, whet
their eyes as well as their teeth; and a man that is extremely enraged, looks
upon his opposite as if he would look through him: Thus Job represents the
Lord in all the postures of an enemy, He sharpeneth his eyes against me.

(...) Acuit, detersit gladium ut splendeat, ad terrorem polivit instrumenta
ferrea autanea. Placidis oculis aliquem intuemur quando facta ejus been
interpretamur. Aquin.
The word signifies to sharpen as a Sword, or a Spear, or any instrument of
Iron is sharpened (1 Samuel 13.20.) There was no Smith in Israel; but all the
Israelites went down to the Philistims to sharpen every man his share, etc.
That word is used here, Mine enemy sharpeneth his eye like a Sword, as if he
would strike me through with his eye; we say a man has a peircing eye, when he
looks very angerly.

When we are well pleased, kindness is seen in our eyes; we give our Friends a
pleasant and gentle look; Christ tells the Spouse ( Cant. 4.9.) Thou have
ravished mine heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my heart with one
of thine eyes. The Hebrew is, Thou have taken away my heart with one of thine
eyes. Per metaphoram ad scintillationem oculorum transfertur, ubi oculi ad
modum aeris candentis, vel lampadis ardentis vel aurorae radios vibrare
dicuntur. Bold. Ingenii vim in eo fulgor oculorum ostendebat, quorum a^iem
instar siderum vibrantem intentius eum intuentes far non poterant. Pezel.
Mellis. Hist. par. 2da. Knolles Turk. Hist.
A holy love-looke stole away Christ's heart; he could not but love the Church
when (through the comeliness which he had put upon her) she looked so lovely
on him. As thus a look of love from the Churches eye stole away Christ's heart,
so a look of mercy from Christ's eye broke Peter's heart, yea and opened the
Floodgates of his eyes too ( Luke 22.61, 62.) And the Lord turned, and looked
upon Peter, and Peter went out and wept bitterly.

There are soft looks as well as soft words, and there are hard looks as well
as hard words: The eye is a Spear and an Arrow, yea a sharp Sword as well as
the tongue; He sharpneth his eyes upon me, as if he would stab me to the heart
with a glanse of his eye. The eye has its scintillations, its sparklings, even
as bright burnisht Brass, or as a burning Lamp, or as the morning Sun sends
forth his rays and beams; such scintillations does the eye of some men send
forth naturally. The Roman Historians report of Augustus Caesar, and our
Turkish Historian reports of Tamerlane, that such a majestic luster sparkled
from their eyes, as dazzled the eyes of their beholders, which (says my Author)
caused the latter in a comely modesty to abstain from looking earnestly upon
such as spoke with him. What the eyes of these great Princes did naturally, the
eyes of many do when they look passionately. Christ has a sharp eye, so
sharp, that his eyes (as represented to John in a Vision) were like a flame of
fire (Revel. 1.14.) The eyes of God are so sharp naturally, or according to
the excellency of his nature, that no eye can behold his face; and himself
beholds not only every face, but peirceth into every heart; yet besides this
natural sharpness of his eye toward all, he angerly sharpens his eye against
his Enemies; God was indeed Jobs Friend, and Job was Gods Favorite, yet here he
speaks of God (as he had also done before) as of his Enemy; and as of an
Enemy, declaring himself at his eye, Mine enemy sharpeneth his eye upon me.

Job attributes this to God, in the extremity of his pain; Adversarium suum
vocat Job non amicos solum sed omnem creaturam, quae resistit Domino
resistente, accusat Domino accusante, damnat Domino damnante, aut ipsum Deum
adversarium intelligas. Brent.
this was the voice of his flesh, it was not the voice of Job himself: this
was the voice of his sense, not the voice of his Faith, Would you know what was
the voice of Job himself, or of Jobs Faith? Hear that ( Chap. 13.15, 16, 18.)
Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him He also shall be my salvation, and I
know that I shall be justified. Hear again his Faith speaking ( Chap. 19.25.)
I know that my Redemeer lives, and I shall see him again with these eyes:
Though sense saw God as an Enemy sharpening his eyes upon him, yet Faith saw
God his Redeemer, in this assurance, that he also should behold him with an eye
of sense, I shall see him with these eyes.

Hence Observe.

First, That God deals with those whom he loves dearly, as if he hated them.

Secondly, They whom God does love, may be under a present apprehension that
God hates them.

I only name these points as arising from this place; they have been handled (
Chapter 13.24. Chapter 14.13.) upon those words, Until thy wrath be past; and
therefore I stay not upon them here.

Thirdly, Note.

God (to sense) does seem to exercise a kind of cruelty (even the cruelty of
wild Beasts) toward those whom he dearly loves.

What are tearing and gnashing of teeth? What is the sharpening of the eye? Is
not any one of these, much more all these in one, the discovery of cruelty. Job
says all this: and does not Hezekiah say as much ( Isa. 38.13.) I reckoned
till morning, that as a Lion, so will he break all my bones, from day even to
night will thou make an end of me. We find God taking upon himself those
similitudes, not only in reference to his Enemies, but also to his own
people; for as he deals with the wicked when they provoke him, so in
proportion with his own. Outward dispensations make no difference; I will take
vengeance, I will not meet thee as a man (Isa. 43.3.) that is, I will not show
so much as any humane pity or compassion, much less Divine, but I will meet
thee as a Beast. Thus God threatened to deal with Babylon; and thus he appears
to deal with Sion, with the choicest Sons and Daughters of Sion.

And thus he professed ( Hos. 5.14.) For I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and
as a young Lion to the House of Judah; I, even I, will tear and go away; I
will take away and none shall reseue him.

Job having showed what hard usage he had from God himself, who appeared as an
enemy, proceeds now to show what hard and course usage he had from men, who
were indeed his enemies, into whose hands God had delivered him.

Verse. 10. They have gaped upon me with their mouth, they have smitten me upon
the cheek reproachfully, they have gathered themselves together against me.
The person is now changed, as also the number; before it was He, now They: And
who were they? We have no Names to give them; only in general. These were the
instruments which God let loose upon him; his Friends, say some; his Enemies
say others. Whosoever they were, doubtless they were either down right
Enemies, or Enemy like Friends; their own behavior speaks them so, They have
gaped upon me, etc.

He varies, or heightens their enemy-like behavior by three expressions.

First, They have gaped upon me with their mouth. Secondly, They have smitten
me upon the cheek reproachfully. Thirdly, They have gathered themselves against
me.
I shall open them distinctly.

First, They have gaped upon me with their mouth.

Gaping with, or opening the mouth, implies two things.

First, Scorn and derision ( Lam. 2.16.) All thine enemies have opened the
mouth against thee, they hiss and gnash the teeth; they say we have swallowed
her up: certainly this is the day we looked for. The Church in affliction was
afflicted with scornful gestures.

Secondly, As gaping with the mouth notes scorn, so also cruelty; he that
gapes at another, tells him (though he say nothing) that he could devour him,
and eat him up (as we say) Without Salt, Such a one shows that he needs no
Sauce ( Psalm. 22.13.) They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and
roaring Lion: A Lion gapes at his prey to devour it; Job often complains both
of the contempt and cruelty of many against him; and their gaping upon him
includes both; which are also again intimated in the next clause.

They have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully. Some render it, Reproaching
me, they have smitten me on the cheek: Smiting on the cheek is taken two ways.

Literally. Metaphorically.
What literal smiting is, all know, and most have felt, but had Job any about
him who used him thus rudely? I conceive, not; and therefore we may understand
him metaphorically. So, smiting on the cheek, is to reproach: And these words,
They have smitten me on the cheek reproachfully, are no more nor less, then,
They have reproached me. To smite on the cheek, is a thing so reproachful,
that, by an Hebraisme, Percutere maxillam Hebraica locutio est, quae significat
gravissima contumelia aliquem afficere.
it signifies to reproach ( Lam. 3.30.) He gives his cheek to him that
smites him, which is expounded in the latter clause by this, he is filled full
with reproach. The sufferings of Christ, which were full of reproach, are thus
Prophesied, I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked
off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting (Isa. 50.6.) Christ
was smitten on the face literally ( Matthew. 26.67.) Then did they spit in his
face and buffeted him, and others smote him with the palms of their hands. He
was smitten also tropically, being put to open shame, and disgracefully dealt
with. That of the Apostle cleares this sense (2 Cor. 11.20.) Ye suffer a man
to bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man
exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face, that is, If he disgrace you: So
the Apostle expounds it ( Verse. 21.) I speak concerning reproach. Paul (Chap.
12.) had a messenger of Satan sent to buffet him, to cuffe, or smite him with
the fist, so the word signifies; what that was, at least in part, he explaines
( Verse. 10.) I will therefore take pleasure in reproaches. Thus the Prophet
describes the dishonor which should be put upon the Judge ( Micah. 5.1.) Now
gather thy self in Troops, O daughter of Troops, he has laid seige against
us; they shall smite the Judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek, that is,
The Enemy shall power contempt upon thy Kings and Princes; Cum aliquis propter
gravem aliquam ignominiam pudefit, licet vis omnis absit, and plaga verberari
dicitur in maxilla. Sanct. in Mic. c. 5. v. 1.
in which sense they may be said to be smitten upon the cheek, though no rod
nor hand touch them. And some interpret that ( Mat. 5.39.) If any man smite
thee on the right cheek, turn to him the left also, not of hand, but tongue
smiting, or of suffering reproach. As if Christ had said, If any one disgrace
thee a little, bear it, yea though he should disgrace thee a great deal more,
yet bear it: Smiting upon the right cheek, notes a lesser injury received.
When a man smites another on the right cheek, he smites with his left hand; the
left hand strikes the right cheek, and the left hand is the weaker in most, and
gives a weaker blow. If thou receive a blow on thy right cheek with the left
hand, turn the other, and let him smite thee with the right hand, let him give
thee a smarter, a hander blow: that is, If a man disgrace thee a little, reward
him not with disgrace, but prepare to bear a greater, turn the left cheek.
And the reason of this was, because slaves and condemned persons were thus
smitten, as also such as were supposed to speak irreverently to the Magistrate.

Hence it was that when Paul had spoken freely to the Council, saying, Men and
brethren, I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day:
presently Ananias the high Priest, commanded those that stood by him to smite
him on the mouth ( Acts 23.1, 2.) In which case Christ himself was smitten by
an Officer that stood by ( John 18.22.) From all which Scripture testimonies it
is more then manifest, that to smite a man on the cheek, is to disgrace,
because they who fell under disgrace, were usually smitten on the cheek: and
this I take to be the most suitable interpretation of Jobs complaint in this
place, They smite me on the cheek reproachfully.

Hence Observe.

First, The best Saints on earth have been smitten and deeply wounded with
reproach.

God himself gave an honorable testimony of Job, there was none like him, he
had no peer on earth, for holiness and uprightness; yet men gave testimony
against him, as if he had been the scumm of the World, for unholinesse and
hypocrisy. David, a man after Gods own heart, was (not only reproached, but)
a reproach among all his Enemies, but especially among his neighbors (or
nearest Friends both in habitation and relation) and he heard the slander of
many (Psalm. 31.11, 13.) The word of God was made a reproach to the Prophet
Jeremy (Chap. 20.8.) And the spirit was made a reproach to the Apostles ( Acts
2.13.) Others mocked, saying, These men are full of new Wine: When indeed they
were filled with the holy Ghost (Verse. 4.) Drunkards made Songs upon David, but
the Apostles were sung about for Drunkards.

We are fools, says Paul (that is, We are so called and accounted) for Christ,
and being defamed (or as the word bears, blasphemed, to speak against any
thing of God in Man, is blasphemy, as well as speaking directly against God) we
entreat. And to show, that this was no prick with a Pin, or small scratch upon
their credit, which made him complain; he tells us what this fame did amount
unto, We are made as the filth of the World, and as the offscouring of all
things unto this day (1 Cor. 4 13.)

The whole World lies in wickedness (which is a moral filthiness) so that
to be the filth of the World is to be the filth of filthiness; the filth of a
clean thing is bad enough, what then is the filth of a filthy thing? The
offscouring of any thing is base, then what is the offscouring of all things,
which must needs include the basest things? These Apostles who were the
ornament and glory, the purest and most refined pieces of the whole inferior
World, were yet made (not that these reproaches did at all change them from
what they were in themselves, but they made them to be in the opinion of
others, what they least of all were) the rubbish, and the refuse, the
sweepings, and the dross of the whole World. The Apologies of Tertullian and
others, do abundantly testify what reproaches the Primitive Christians
suffered, both in reference to their practice and worship. Athanasius was
called Sathanasius (as if he had been a Devil incarnate) by the Abbettors of
the Arrian Heresy, which he stiffely opposed: (...) est stercoreus, hinc
Coprion scarabeus, a luto scilicet. Bech de Orig. Ling. Lat.
And some who were displeased with the Opinions and Writings of Cyprianus,
called him in contempt, Coprianus, or one that gathers dung, as if his Books
were nothing but dung heaps.

How Luther, Calvin, and other Reformers of the former age, were smitten
reproachfully, both by the tongues and Pens of the Popish Party, is known of
all these parts of the World: And how much this trade (which is indeed the
Devils trade) of slandering the footsteps of Gods anointed ones, is continued
unto this day, we have but too much evidence. A man can scarce appear, indeed,
for God, but he is thus smitten on the cheek by men. Religion and the power of
godliness have ever been an occasion of contention, and for the most part, to
smite with reproach, has been the manner of contending.

There are not many enemies of good men, who have a Sword to draw against them,
but all the Enemies of good men have ill words enough at command to throw
against them, and of them they are seldom sparing: And, though (which is bad
enough, yet no better can be expected of them) this trade of reproaching be
driven most by evil men against those who are good, yet (which is far worse)
we may learn from this instance between Job and his Friends (for even they
did not spare to reproach him) that (which shall be,

A second Observation.)

A good man may so far forget himself, as to speak reproachfully against his
Brother: Yea, the reproaches of Professors one against another, have been (as
they are the saddest, so) the sharpest and bitterest reproaches. They who agree
in most things, take it most unkindely when they differ in any thing; and are
more ready to revile one another about the points wherein they differ, then to
bless God for those wherein they are agreed. The Papists did not more reproach
Luther and Calvin, whose judgments concurred in opposing them, then Lutherans
and Calvinists have reproached each other, where they are opposite in
judgment: The corrupt remains even in good men, tell them that whosoever
differs from them stands in their light and obscures their excellency, and
therefore that themselves may shine the brighter in what they hold, they little
care (when mastered by self and passion) how obscure, yea foul they render
them, who hold the contrary.

While Infidels reproached Christians, it was the glory of Christianity, and
while the wicked reproach the godly, it is the glory of godliness; but while
one Christian reproaches another, the glory is departed from godliness. Is it
not enough that the Servants of God are thus smitten by the world, must they
needs smits their Fellow Servants, and revile those who are (upon the maine) in
the same way of God wherein they are, only because they are not fully in their
way? Yea, when possibly, they may be in a higher and more perfect way then
they? Is it not enough that the Briars and Thorns, which are among the
Lillyes, tear and scratch them? Shall the Lillyes degenerate into Briars and
Thorns one toward another? Or if at any time a Lilly of the one side tear,
and be harsh, should not the Lilly on the other side be kind and gentle? If
Israel transgress, let not Judah offend too* Luther was often at Sharps with
Calvin, but Calvin professed (and that was a Noble profession) Though Luther
call me Devil, yet I will honor Luther as a Servant of God.

Holy Job cannot be excused for his faylings in this, who as he complains
here, that he was reproached by his Enemies, yea and by his Friends too, yet he
gave his Friends some advantage to complain also of harsh words, if not of
reproaches cast upon them.

Thirdly, Observe.

Reproach is a very heavy burden.

Remember (Lord) the reproach of thy Servant, how I do bear in my bosom the
reproach of all the mighty people, wherew^th thine Enemies have reproached
thee, O Lord, wherewith they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed
(Psalm. 89.50, 51.) And again ( Psalm. 69.9.) The reproaches of them that
reproached thee, are fallen on me. Yet more ( Psalm. 42.10.) As with a Sword in
my bowels (or in my bones) they reproach me, while they say, etc. Reproach is
not only a burden upon the back, but a Sword in the bowels. A reviling,
reproaching tongue is compared in Scripture to three things.

First, To a Raisor. Secondly, To a Sword. Thirdly, To an Arrow.
A Raisor is so keen, that it takes off every little hair, reproach cuts a
hair, it will have to do even with undiscernable evils. A Sword wounds at
hand, and smites those that are near; an Arrow wounds afarr off: So that
whether a man be far off, or near, whether his error be small or great, or but
imaginary; it is all one to a reproachful spirit, his tongue serves him for
all turns: David was tried by all manner of reproaches; but those which
pinched and pressed him most, were his reproaches about spiritual things. Any
reproach is bad enough, but a reproach in Religion, is worst; to be reproached
with our prayers, and with our God, Where is your God? Such reproaches, how
deep do they go? They strike to the very heart. Credit is a precious
commodity; a man is more tender of it, then of his flesh; now all reproach
falls upon our credit, and the more excellent that piece of our credit is, upon
which the reproach falls, the more grievous is that reproach to us. Credit in
spiritual things is the most excellent credit: Thus David was reproached, and
so was Job, Is this thy fear, and thy confidence? Is this the thing thou have
so long boasted of? Christ was to bear the greatest burden of affliction, and
therefore he did not only bear the Cross, but reproach with it; he suffered
death, and reproach with death; he suffered the shameful death of the Cross,
in which there was more then a reproach, a curse, Cursed is every one that
hangs on a Tree: Christ must dye an ignominious death, as well as a
painful, and the ignominy was a heavier burden then the pain. We are
exhorted ( Heb. 13.13.) To go out bearing his reproach; as intimating that to
bear the reproach of Christ, would be harder to us, and a stronger temptation,
then to bear the cross of Christ. As the greatest part of Christ's sufferings
for us, was to bear our reproach, so the greatest part of our sufferings for
Christ is to bear Christ's reproach: Let us go forth unto him without the
Camp, bearing his reproach. And indeed reproach is so great a burden, that were
not this consideration in it; that is, Christ's, no man would bear it; and they
will yield to do any thing rather then suffer reproach, who are not able to
say that their reproach is the reproach of Christ. Moses looked upon his
reproach, as the reproach of Christ, he did not esteem his own reproach, but
the reproach of Christ greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt ( Heb.
11.26.) Our reproach is nothing but dung or dross which has weight in it to
press us, but no worth in it to enrich us; but the reproach of Christ is
treasure, which though it have weight in it to press us, yet it has abundance
of worth in it to enrich and crown us. The Apostle calls it, The reproach of
Christ, both because Christ did bear such reproach himself, and because
Christ owned Moses in bearing that reproach; yea he owned that reproach which
Moses bare, as if he had borne it himself; while we are reproached for Christ's
sake, Christ is reproached; and though it should grieve us that Christ is
reproached in us, yet it may comfort us, that Christ takes our reproach as his.
They have smitten me on the cheek reproachfully, and yet they have not done
with me.

They have gathered them selves together against me. It seems they contemned
and reproached him singly, or every man apart; but they joined altogether in
consulting and plotting against him.

The word that we translate to gather together, has a second signification,
namely, to fill, either as a room is filled with Goods, or Persons, or as the
stomach is filled with meat, (...) 1. Implere complere. 2. Colligere,
congregare quod rebus collectis impleantur loca.
or food, or as an Army with Men. Hence Master Broughton translates, They come
by full Troops upon me: And another, They will be filled with me, or upon me.
The Vulgar explaines it thus, They are filled or satiated with my punishment:
or as a third, They have taken their fill of pleasure at my miseries. The
reason of this sense arises from the former; because, where many things or
persons are gathered together, they fill up that place.

First, It signifies to gather together, as men are gathered in a civil
Society, and combination: Job supposed his Friends conspired his hurt, and that
they gathered themselves together against him, who pretended to gather
themselves together for him; or we may apply this to his professed Enemies,
who were very unanimous to vex and trouble him.

Hence Note.

Super me implebuntur. Mont.
Men are apt to agree in doing hurt.

Union is not always a sign of a good cause: It Is but seldom we can agree to
do a common duty. Good men want the cement of love in a good cause; evil men
seldom want it in a bad. Behold (says God, Genesis 11.5, 6.) This people are
one, and they all speak one language: their language was one, and so were
their hearts, to build a Tower, whose top might reach to Heaven: The builders
of Babel are more united, then the builders of Sion. The Psalmist complains of
the Enemies oneness ( Psalm. 83.5, 6, 7. They have consulted together with one
consent (or heart) they are confederate against thee. Gebal, and Amon, and
Amalek, the Philistims, and them that dwell at Tire: Ashur is also joined with
them, etc. All Nations, even Hetrogeniall Nations, can join in mischief; men
of several Kingdoms, and spirits, Pilate and Herod join to crucify Christ;
but as it is most beautiful and pleasant ( Psalm. 133.) So, O how hard a thing
is it for Brethren to dwell in unity. They who have one God, one Lord, one
Faith, one Spirit, one Baptism, one Hope; yea they who (in one sense) are one
Body, and one Spirit ( Ephesians. 4.4, 5.) are seldom one.

Satiati sunt paenis meis. Vulg. In malis meis voluptatem suam exploverunt
Tygur.
From that second sense of the word, They have filled, or satiated themselves
with me.

Note.

It is a kind of pleasure to some to see others in pain.

We should be pained with the pain of others; fellow-feeling is a duty; how
far are they departed from this duty, who are so far from feeling the
sufferings of others, that they take pleasure in their sufferings?

There are two sorts of pleasure, which every good man should abhor.

First, Pleasure in sin, our own, or others: The worst that was said of the
wicked Gentiles was this, They not only do such things, but take pleasure in
them that do them (Romans 1.32.)

Secondly, Pleasure in the sufferings and sorrows of others; some do not only
put others to the suffering of sorrow, but take pleasure in the sorrow which
they suffer; they make their tears as Wine, their ashes as Bread; and until
they see them weeping and feeding on ashes, their own Wine is as tears, and
their Bread as ashes to them. Haman came full from the Queens Banquet, and he
was invited by her to a second Banquet the next day, yet still he was hungry,
and said ( Hest. 5.13.) All this avayleth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai
the Jew sitting at the Kings gate: It Is like, Haman had eaten and drunk
freely, yet the Banquet had not filled his belly: All this avails me nothing.
More then forty of the Jews bound themselves under a curse, that they would
neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul (Acts 23.12, 13.) It would
have been better to Haman then meat and drink to have killed Mordecai, and
all the Jews.

Some have been heard to say, O how sweet is revenge! What a pleasant draught
is a draught of blood! Spightfull spirits hunger and thirst for the downfall
and misery of those who stand in their way; nor will any thing satisfy hatred,
but the ruin of those who are hated; and when once they see them ruined, they
are satisfied; as envy is troubled at the good which another enjoyes more then
at all the evils which it self feels; so malice is more satisfied with the
evils which befall others, then with all the good which it self enjoyes ( Ex.
15.9.) The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil,
my lust shall be satisfied upon them. Pharaoh and his Courtiers, yea all the
Egyptians hungered and thirsted for the flesh and blood of Israel: They had a
lust, or a longing rather (as women with Child have sometimes inordinate
appetites after strange meats) to eat man's flesh, and drink the blood of the
slain: Revenge is as craving a lust as covetousness, but it is a lust more
easily satisfied then covetousness. This increases by receiving what it
desires, but that (if it may have it) is satisfied: That which covetousness
receives, is only as fuel to a fire, but that which revenge receives,
Appetitus finis est infinitus.
is as food to the stomach; the desire of the end is infinite, but the end
being once attained, desire is at an end: Ye are filled with me.

Job having thus described the instruments and manner of his affliction, turns
his thoughts from them to the supreme efficient, and orderer of his
afflictions.

Verse. 11. God has delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into the
hands of the wicked.
The words seems to b^are an allusion to the proceeding of an earthly Judge,
who having tried a Malefactor, and found him guilty, pronounces sentence of
death upon him, and then delivers, or turns him over to those who^e office it
is to see execution done accordingly.

The word which we render to deliver, signifies also to shut up, which suites
well with the former notion; for a condemned Person is more closely shut up,
and more narrowly watched, then before: But who were the ungodly to whom he was
delivered, and the wicked into whose hands, or power he was turned? These were
not only the Chaldeans, and Sabeans, but also all such as showed any malice
against him, or willingly afflicted him in his afflictions.

The words carry in them a correction of his former complaint, as if he had
said, Why do I trouble my self with men, why do I complain of their
unkindnesse or cruelty against me? (...) A via divertit, deflexit, declinavit.
God has done it; he has delivered, and turned me over (as a Magistrate does
a Malefactor whom he has condemned) into the hands of these tormenters, he
has sealed a writ for my execution. Thus Job ascribes all to God, he
sometimes wrangles with men, but as often before, so now again, he looks
beyond them, at once seeing and adoring the hand of God, putting him, and his
estate into the hands of men.

Hence Note.

First, Wicked men are ordered by Providence.

They cannot take till God puts into their hands: a Sparrow falls not to the
ground without God, much less does a godly man fall into the hands of the
wicked without God. They do but execute what God decrees, though they do it
without any respect to his decrees, and quite cross to his commands. Many will
be found at once executing the decrees and disobeying the commands of God.

Secondly, God delivers his dearest Children into the hands of wicked men, for
trial and correction.

Their graces and goodness appear most, when they are under the handling of
evil and graceless men. Many of their corruptions are purged out, while they
are in their power who are not at all purged from their corruption. Foul hands
may serve to wash that clean which is foul, and they who are but dross, may
fetch off the rust which cleaves to the purest metal.

Thirdly, Note.

It is an aggravation of affliction to be given up to wicked men.

It is an affliction to be in their company, what is it then to be under their
power? Woe is me, says David, Est hoc in judicio Domini gravissimum quod
adversariis videatur Favere, and a part eorum stare, consilia conatusque
ipsorum contra nos prosperando. Brent.
that I dwell in Meshec, how woeful then is it to be a Prisoner in Meshec?
While God keeps the Rod in his own hands, the smart is not so grievous: We
learn this in David's choice (2 Samuel 24.14.) when three evils were offered him,
he resolves, Let me fall now into the hand of the Lord (for his mercies are
great) and let me not fall into the hand of man. A good man can easier dye by
the hand of God, then receive a slight wound by the hand of an Enemy: As those
comforts are sweeter, so those sufferings are not so bitter which Believers
receive immediately from God.

It is hard to suffer from equals, much more from inferiors, but most of all
when we suffer the fatherly displeasure of God, from those who are the objects
of his displeasure as a Judge. Let the righteous smite me (says David, Psalm.
141.) a reproof from them is oil, but a reproof from the wicked is Gall and
Viniger to a godly heart: The reason why a godly man chooses rather to be
smitten by the righteous, then the wicked, is, because they have somewhat,
possibly, much of God in them; therefore much more does he say, Let the
righteous God smite me. It is a mercy, if we must needs be chastised, when God
will chastise us himself, and not give us into the hands of men whose mercies
are cruel.

There are two things which make it so grievous to the people of God, when they
are delivered up into the hands of the ungodly.

First, Their cruelty: Their mercies are cruel, how unmercifull then are they
in their cruelties? As they know no measure in sinning against God, so they
keep none in vexing man. The Lord promises ( Psalm. 126.3.) The Rod of the
wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; implying, that by the good
will of evil men it should rest there; they would never take it off, if God
did not.

Secondly (which troubles more then the former) Their blasph^my. And that first
against God himself, as if he either could not deliver out of their hands (2 Chronicles. 32, 14.) What is your God that he should be able to deliver you out of
my hand ( Psalm. 42.) Where is now their God? Thus the wicked Jews into whose
hand God delivered his Son, did even dare God to come to his rescue ( Mat.
27.43.) or, as if he took their part, and favored the cause which they have in
hand. Secondly, They blaspheame, or speak evil both of the ways and people of
God. What Is become of your prayers now? Where Is your fasting now? Of which you
boasted, that it would do such wonders. It is a soar affliction to be under
the rule of wicked men, much more to be under their rage: that prophetic curse
which David denounces against his Enemy, is thus expressed ( Psalm. 109.6.) Set
thou a wicked man over him: A wicked man were better be under the power of good
men, then of the wicked (for a good man cannot be so severe to a wicked man, as
one wicked man is to another) but if a wicked man be so cruel to wicked men
who are so like him, how cruel must he needs be to godly men who are
altogether unlike him?

Fourthly, Note.

Godly men look through all second causes to the first.

As they rest not in the creature for the good which they receive, so they stay
not in the creature when they receive evil; they see a hand of God in and over
all.

Note Fifthly.

We glorify God as much in acknowledging afflictions, as in acknowledging
mercies and blessings to come from him.

He is the Author of both; he takes it as much upon him, that he creates
darkness, as that he forms light; that is, As the next words expound it, That
he creates evil as well as makes peace (Isa. 45.7.) Now if the Lord
challenges this as a part of that glory which he will not give to Idols, then,
we give him the glory of the only true God, while we acknowledge this.

Sixthly, Note.

There is no way to settle or quiet the heart till it look up to God as the
disposer of our troubles.

This was Jobs last resort: And this was David's when Shimei cursed him, God
has bid Shimei curse: This kept down those angry motions, which must else
have boiled up as high in his spirit, as they did in Abishaes, himself being
more deeply concerned in it then Abishai was. Job having discovered this frame
of spirit more then once before, I here only touch upon it.

Lastly, Take this comfortable Corolary from the whole.

Though God does often deliver his choycest Servants into the power of wicked
men, yet he never delivers them up to the will of wicked men: They cannot do
with his people what they please, they shall only do what God himself
pleases, though they displease God highly in doing it. God never turns the
least of those who believe in his Name, out of his own hand, though he turn
them over into the hand of the ungodly: as God keeps his title to them still,
so he still keeps the possession of them. Saints in the hand of the vilest
men, are in the hand, or possession of God two ways.

First, They are in the hand of his power, he can fetch them out of the hands
of men when he will.

Secondly, They are under the hand of his care; and this five ways.

First, To provide, that though they endure much hardship in their hands, yet
they shall receive no hurt; God does not turn his into the hands of evil men
for evil, but for good.

Secondly, He has them in the hand of his care to furnish them with strength
to suffer.

Thirdly, To teach them how to profit by sufferings.

Fourthly, To moderate the hands of the wicked toward them, their hands shall
not be heavier then he has appointed, they shall not give you a stroke more
then he has numbered out.

Lastly, As to order how much, so likewise how long they shall suffer: Our
times are in Gods hand, when we are in the hand of men. As they cannot add a
drop to our cup, so not a Sand to our Glass, beyond what the Lord has
appointed out.

JOB, Chap. 16. Verse. 12, 13, 14. I was at ease but he has broken me asunder:
he has also taken me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for
his mark.

His Archers compass me round about, he cleaves my reins asunder, and does
not spare; he powers out my Gall upon the ground.

He breaks me with breach upon breach, he runs upon me like a Giant.


JOB still prosecutes the same argument, setting out his afflictions in their
darkest colors to the seventeenth Verse of this Chapter, and then with highest
confidence attesting, yea calling Heaven and Earth to attest both the
righteousness of his ways toward men, and the rightnesse of his worship
tendered unto God.

These three, with the two Verses following, contain two general points.

First, He tells us how, and in what manner he was handled by God in those days
of his affliction, Verse. 12, 13, 14.

Secondly, He tells us how he behaved himself under the hand of God, or how he
was affected with these afflictions, Verse. 15, 16. I have sowed sackcloath upon
my skin, and defiled my horn in the dust, etc. As Gods hand was heavy upon
him, so he held out all the demonstrations and emblemes of a heavy heart: I
sowed sackcloth upon my skin.

He begins with, or rather prosecutes the description (for he had spoken much
of it before) of his sad afflictions. And because contraries illustrate, and
set forth one another, therefore, he first shows what condition he had been
in: secondly, what he then was in. Our present wants and evils are aggravated
by our former comforts and enjoyments.

This course and method Job takes to aggravate his; First, Telling us that he
was once whole and at ease. Secondly, What he at that time was, pained and
broken to pieces.


I was at ease.
But how does this agree with what Job affirmed ( Chap. 3. 26.) I was not in
safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet, yet trouble came. It seems
Job was never at ease, and yet he says here, I was at ease: He that is not in
safety, and has neither rest nor quiet, surely, He is in little ease.

There is no contradiction between these two, we may easily reconcile them, and
make up the seeming difference, thus. When Job says ( Chap. 3.) I was not in
safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet; his meaning is, that his
spirit did not trust upon his outward prosperity: He had abundance in the
World, but he had no carnal confidence in worldly things. Job never said to
his soul (when his Barnes were full, and his substance multiplied) Soul take
thy ease, eat and be merry, thou have enough laid up for many years. Job had
much of the creature in his hand, but he kept it all out of his heart, and when
he was furthest from misery, he was far enough from security; he did not
think his life safe, because he had sufficient to live upon, nor was he at
rest, because he was rich. A Believers rest is not in any outward comfort which
he receives from God, but in God, from whom he receives all his comforts. So
then, Job speaks there of the spiritual frame of his heart, but here he
speaks of the temporal frame of his worldly estate, in which he had ease, and
the affluence of all good things, no man molesting him: As if he had said, Time
was when I was not at all pinched with poverty in my estate, nor blasted with
reproach in my credit, nor tortured with pains in my body; I can remember the
time when I was at full ease in all these: That Is his sense in this Text, and
between these two there is no opposition: A man may be at ease in the World,
and yet not make the World his ease, nor rest upon the World.

I was at ease. Such was my former flourishing condition. (...) Pacificus,
tranquillus, quietus eram. Fui opulentus. Vulg.
The word signifies to be peaceable, quiet, or well settled, the Vulgar
translates, I was a rich man; the same word in the Hebrew signifies a rich man,
and a man at ease, for two reasons.

First, Because riches and ease usually go together; and unless a man live at
ease, that is, in outward peace, it is hard to gather riches. Times of War
and trouble are scattering and impoverishing times: The rolling Stone gets no
Moss. As men have the best opportunity, so they are most active to gather
wealth when all is still and quiet: There are but few who know how to fish in
troubled waters, though some make their best trade there.

Secondly, The same word signifies, both to be rich, and to be at ease, from
the effect; because, men that are rich, usually take their ease; as ease and
peace give them opportunity to gather riches, so riches cause them to take
their ease, both outward civil ease, and often times inward sinful ease; that
is, to sit down, and make their riches, and outward accommodations, the very
basis of their quiet and contentment. So the rich are expressed ( Ezekiel. 23.42.)
Thou satest upon a stately Bed, and a Table prepared before it, etc. And a
voice of a multitude being at ease was with her, and with the men of the common
sort were brought, Sabeans from the Wilderness, which put bracelets upon their
hands, and beautiful Crowns upon their heads: Here Is the description of a
rich people; and what were they? A multitude being at ease, having gotten
goodly furniture for their houses, full tables for their bellyes, precious
ornaments for their hands and heads; that is, having abundance of all things,
they gave themselves up to security, and took their fill in the creature: And
by how much the greater a carnal man's worldly felicity is, by so much does it
the more triumph over all jealousies and suspicious of evil ( Revel. 18.7.)
Babylon says, I sit a Queen and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.
Babylon is at ease, she feels no evil, and she fears none. Jerusalem was
once in such a condition through the favor of God, and so she shall be in due
time again ( Zech. 7.7.) Should ye not hear the words which the Lord has
cried by the former Prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited, and in prosperity
(or at ease) and the Cities thereof round about her, when men inhabited the
South of the plain? The South of the plain, was a Region or Country,
extremely infested with Enemies, where no man durst dwell or make his
habitation, for fear of hostile incursions: yet Jerusalem was in such
prosperity, or at such ease, that the South of the plain, the open Countries
and unwalled Villages were as safe to the Inhabitants as walled and fortified
Cities: At such ease, and in such safety shall Jerusalem be again, when the
Lord shall appoint salvation unto her, in stead of Walls and Bulwarks.

I was at ease. Job makes this report of his former prosperity, Miserationem
movet a priore statu. Merc. Primus locus miserecordiae est per quem quibus in
bonis fuerit, and nunc quibus in malis sit ostenditur. Cic. de Invent. lib. 1.
that he might move his Friends to pity him in his present misery. It is a
rhetorical argument: The Orator gives this rule, when we would stir up
compassion toward a man in misery, we must first describe in what heights he
has stood, and then show how low he is fallen; we are not so much affected
with any man's being in a low estate, as with his falling from a low estate.
When Lucifer the Son of the morning, falls from Heaven, and falls into Hell, to
the sides of the Pit; this sets all men a wondering ( Isa. 14.11, 12, 15.)

Hence Observe.

To have been in prosperity, adds to the burden and bitterness of present
adversity.

It is an affliction, never to have been in prosperity; but it is a greater
affliction to be cast down from a state of prosperity: for him that has been
great, and rich, and powerful in the World, to become mean, and poor, and
powerless, Cor dolet, quam scio nunc, ut sum atque ut fut. Plaut. in Mostel.
Cernite sim qualis, qui modo talis eram. Ovid. Fuimus Troes et.
this pinches soar, and goes to the quick. Job aggravates his sorrows at large
upon this account ( Chap. 29. Chap. 30.) The Candle of God shined upon my head,
I washed my steps in butter, my glory was fresh in me, etc. But now they that
are younger then I have me in derision, etc. So ( Lam. 4.2.) The precious Sons
of Sion, comparable to fine Gold, how are they esteemed as earthen Pitchers,
And ( Verse. 5.) They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets, they
that were brought in up Scarlet embrace dunghils. From delicate feeding to
desolation, from Scarlet to a dunghill is a great change: the dunghill would
not be so loathsome, were it not for the Scarlet, nor desolation so grievous
were it not for the remaining taste of the late delicate feeding. Every
remembrance of the Wormwood and the Gall of their present affliction in
Babylon, was made more bitter by the remembrance of the Milk and Honney which
flowed in the Land of Canaan. They who have always been in a low condition
scarce feel or know the want of great things, because they never knew the
meaning of their enjoyment.

The Greek Poet tells us of Hecuba, not daring for shame, Euripides.
so much as to lift up her eyes, or look Polymnestor in the face, because she
had been a Queen, but was then a poor Captive. Common Captives can easily
lift up their eyes and cries to those that are in prosperity, for releife and
help whereas others who have lived at ease, can with more ease starve then beg.

As a downfall from a seeming height in spirituals into the mire of sin, has
more wickedness in it then a bare continuance in sin; so a downfall from a
real hight in temporals into the mire of misery, has more trouble in it, then
a bare continuance in misery. They who have made a fair show, or an outward
flourish in the Faith, and afterward fall back, are worse then those who never
made any show at all. It is sad for any one to live openly in sin; but for such
as have made an open profession of godliness, to apostatize, and fall back to
sin, this is matter of saddest lamentation: For as the Apostle Peter speaks,
It had been better for them that they had not known the way of God, then after
they have known it to turn from the holy Commandment: It is better (in
spiritual respects) never to have been a Professor, then to be an Apostate.
Thus also it is better (in civil respects) never to have been high, or great
in the World, then after all this to suffer a miserable downfall, and to be
numbered among the lowest of the People.

And in this we may see the wonderful love of Jesus Christ to poor sinners,
who suffered so great a change for our sakes; he might well say, I was at ease,
but he has broken me asunder. Christ was broken all to pieces for us, he was
broken and bruised for us, but he had been at ease: How great was his love who
willingly suffered, not only for sinners, but as a sinner, having reigned in
righteousness from all eternity? The Apostle uses this argument, more then
once, to advance the kindness of Christ to sinful man (2 Cor. 8 9.) Beloved,
You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who though he were rich, yet he
became poor for our sakes; that we through his poverty might be made rich: For
Christ who was rich to become poor, argues the riches of his love; this
shows the great affection he bare to us, because it shows that he bare such
great affliction for us.

Again ( Phil. 2.6, 7.) Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery
to be equal wioh God; but made himself of no reputation. and took upon him
the form of a Servant: He emptyed himself, to fill us, and to raise our
reputation with his Father, laid down his own.

Now seeing Jesus Christ suffered such a vvondrous change, from the form of
God to the form of a Servant, from the fullness of God, to the emptiness of
the meanest man; this is the highest testimony of his love. The course which
Christ did run to save us, declares that there went as much of his love, as of
his worthiness to save us: For as no creature had worth enough to save us any
way, so no creature had love enough to save us in such a way. If one had come
out of poverty and misery to dye for us, it had showed vvonderfull love, but to
leave riches and become poor, to leave glory and become base, to leave
fullness and become empty, to leave (in regard of visible manifestations) his
Godhead, and become Man: How unchangeable was his heart to us, who yielded
himself up to such changes for us? He being at ease was broken asunder that we
might not be broken, or rath r that we might be made whole for ever.

Secondly, I was at ease: What follows? He has broken me asunder.

Hence Observe.

All worldly prosperity may quickly be dashed and lost.

Do not think any new thing happens under the Sun, when you see men that were
at ease, broken, men that were full, empty, men that were rich, impoverished,
men that were in health, sick. The holy Apostle (1 Cor. 7.30.) at once
counsels and commands us, Use the World, as not abusing it, that is, use it
well: There is much evil in the World, yet we may, yea we must make a good
use of the World: Why? Because the fashion of this World passes away. As
fashions in the World alter and change every day, so does the fashion of this
World; there is a World to come, the fashion whereof shall never go or pass
away; but the fashion (or scheme) of this World passes continually. The word
which we translate fashion, signifi^s a Geometrical figure, or artificial
form, habit, vesture, as also any rhetorical finenesse or bravery of words:
Now all the beauty of this World is but like some of these schemes, which have
more show then substance in them; and the whole World below put together, is
but like a Pageant, or Mask, on the scene whereof many persons are represented
to act their parts, but they soon disappeare, and the stage or scene it self
is pulled down.

As thus the whole World passes awy, so does the state of each man in the
World. And as there is in the World an affected varying of fashions, or a
voluntary passing from one vain fashion to another, from one proud fashion to
another; so there is an inflicted variety of fashion in the World; God makes
man pass from one fashion to another, whether he will or no, or much against
his will; when his fashion was fullness, he makes it emptiness, when his
fashion was riches, he makes it poverty; when his fashion was Peace and
quietness, he makes it War and confusion; these are the changes which God
makes among the fashions of the World. The pride of man changes from one vain
fashion to another; the providence of God changes man from his most
delightful, to a mournful fashion: And when the Garments of outward
prosperity seem to us so strong, that they will never wear out, how much or
how long so ever we wear them, he tears and breaks both them and us, as Job
complains with his next breath.

He has broken me asunder. (...) A (...) (...) contrivit, irritum fecit. Verba
grandia selegit ad ^^agg^randam mali sui vim. Merc. In conjugatione quadrata
auxesin habet. Merc q. d. Frequentatis ictibus in minutissimas parts contri
vit me. Bold.
This sentence is but one word in the Hebrew, yet more then a single word; it is
elegantly doubled in construction to imply double affliction. Grammarians tell
us, that two words put together, or the same word twice put increase the sense.
Ordinary words will not serve to express an extraordinary condition; he
speaks great and compounded words, because his sorrows were great and
compounded sorrows. Jobs was not a single, but a double breaking; yea, his was
a manifold breaking: He was often broken, and utterly broken; the repeated
strokes which fell upon him (by divine dispensation) from all hands, had beaten
him to dust and atoms: He has broken me in sunder.

Further, The root of the word signifies, to make void, to dissipate, to
scatter, to bring to naught, or to make nothing of ( Psalm. 33.10.) The Lord
brings to naught the counsel of the heathen. So again ( Isa. 8.10.) It is
used often for breaking the Law, by frequent and vvilfull sinning against it.
Proud sinners would break the Law in sunder, or pull it all in pieces: They
have made void thy Law (Psa. 119) As if they would not only sin against the
Law, but sin away the Law, not only withdraw themselves from the obedience of
it, but drive it out of the World; they would make void and repeal the holy
acts of God, that their own wicked acts might not be questioned; and lest the
Law should have a power to punish them, they will deny it a power to rule
them; that is the force of the simple word here used, as applied to highest
transgressing against the Law of God.

Now as wicked men by sinning, would batter the Law to pieces, so God by
afflicting does sometimes break good men to pieces. Consider what course usage
the holy Law of God has in the hearts and lives of wicked men; O how they
tear it and vex it, and batter it every day: Thus does the Lord deal with many
of his holy servants who (had they their vvish) would not make the least
breach in the Law, and whose hearts are often broken with godly sorrow,
because they cannot but break it, yet to these he does not only give a bruise
or a blow but breaks them asunder.

There is yet another elegancy in the signification of the word: For as
Hebreicians observe, it notes a bruising, like that of Grapes, or Olives,
which are trodden in a press, to make Wine or Oil; Confractus sum velut uvae
aut olivae in torculari.
hence also a Noune from this Verb signifies the Wine Press ( Isa. 63.3.) Now
Grapes and Olives being trodden, are broken and bruised in pieces; not only is
their form and beauty totally spoiled, but all their sweetness, juice, and
liquor, is wrought out of them, and they are left as a dry lump.

Now look what Grapes and Olives are, when taken out of the Press; even such
a lump was Job; he was broken asunder in the Wine Press, though not of Gods
wrath, as his Friends mis-judged, yet in the Wine Press of his chastisements
and severest trials; all his vvorldly moisture was squeezed out, and his
earthly glory was quite defaced, he had nothing left of that, but (as it were)
a dry husk; yet his spiritual estate was still juicy, and his soul by these
pressings, treadings, and breakings, had distilled much sweet Oil and Wine,
and much more was still remaining in him. From these heightened significations
of the word laid together;

Observe in general.

God does not only afflict those whom he loves, but afflict them soarely and
severely.

He afflicts some, not only to the empayring and abating, but to the undoing
and ruining of their outward comforts, and worldly enjoyments: Nothing can be
said to descipher an afflicted state beyond what this word will bear. And that
God does afflict his chosen ones to the utmost rack of this phrase, will
appear also from all that follows to the end of the fourteenth Verse; the
opening of which will be a continual proof and illustration of this great and
often experimented truth, upon, and among the precious Sons of Sion: This I
shall hint all along, besides those observations which arise out of them: He
has broken me asunder, and what follows, in the same Verse; He has also taken
me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces.

Is not this to deal severely? A loving Father takes his Son about the neck
and kisses him; what a rough salute did the Lord give this Son of his, when he
took him by the neck, and shook him to pieces? Such a carriage seems not to
be after the manner of men, much less after the manner of Fathers; yet this
was the manner of God to Job, who was also his Friend and Father.

He has taken me by my neck. The neck is as the tower and strength of the
body, and when a man is taken by the neck, he is assaulted in his chiefest
strength, and taken at the greatest advantage.

There is a threefold metaphor, or allusion in these words, which being
considered distinctly, will let out their meaning yet more fully.

First, They bear an allusion to Wrestlers, who take one another by the neck,
or collar; he that is the strongest, not only takes his Antagonist by the
neck, but shakes him, as if he would shake him to pieces. God wrestled with the
Patriarch Jacob literally and corporally (though the greatest labor and
stresse of Jacobs wrestling was spiritual and internal) And when he saw that
he prevailed not (Jacob prevailed with God for so much strength, that now God
could not (according to that dispensation) prevail against Jacob, yet) he
touched the hollow of Jacobs thigh, and made him halt. God wrestled with Job,
not corporally, yet in corporal things, the stresse also of his wrestling was
spiritual, and he prevailed with God, and over Satan; yet God was pleased not
only, for the present, to touch a joint, and make him halt, but even to shake
every joint and limb to pieces.

Secondly, It is an allusion to Sergeants or Bailiffs, that are sent to arest
men for debt, or for their evil deeds: This sort of men are boisterous enough,
they having power will not forbear to lay hold on Persons obnoxious, and take
them by the neck, when they attach them. We have that usage expressed ( Matthew.
18.28.) The evil Servant, to whom the Lord had forgiven ten thousand Talents
(a vast debt) found one of his fellow Servants, who owed him an hundred pence
(an inconsiderable sum) and would needs exact the utmost from him: the Text
says, The same Servant went out, and found one of his fellow servants, which
ought him an hundred pence, and he laid hands upon him, and took him by the
throat, saying, Pay me that thou owe: He took him by the throat, the word
signifies properly to choke, (...) Premebat sauces illius debitoris tanquam
suffocaturus: obtorto collo premebat. Eras.
or to take another so rudely by the throat, as to choke, or (as we say)
throttle him. It is translated to choke with water ( Mark 5.13.) and is
applyable to any violent act by which the breath is stopped, especially to taking
by the neck, or throat.

Thirdly, It is an allusion, as some conceive, to Conquerers in War, who when
they have worsted an Adversary, take him by the neck, and make him their
prisoner: As it is the last act of triumph and insultation over an Enemy, to
tread upon his neck ( Josh. 10.24.) Joshua called all the men of Israel, and
said unto the Captains of the men of War, which went with them, Come near
and put your feet upon the necks of these Kings: and they came near and put
their feet upon the necks of them; Now as it is (I say) the last act of triumph
to tread upon the neck: so it is the first act of triumph to take by the neck.
Job thought himself used thus, He has taken me by the neck, as a Wrastler,
as a Sergeant, or as a Victor in War.

And has shaken me to pieces. I will not let it pass unobserved, that the
word which we translate to shake to pieces, is but one in the Hebrew, but as
that which we render to break asunder, so this is doubled to highten the sense,
and intimate no ordinary, but a terrible shaking; such a shaking as is followed
with scattering, or a shaking, (...) A radice (...) contrivit cum dispersione,
sicut testa: vel in minutissima fragmenta comminuit. Drus.
like the breaking of a potters Vessel with an Iron Rod. The word is used to
signify the irresistible efficacy of the Word of God, whether to convert, or
to confound, to break the stony heart into contrition for sin, or to batter the
obstinate heart, which continues in sin. Is not my word a fire? (says God)
The word of God is a fire, to consume the dross and corruption that is in the
hearts and lives of men. And is not my word a Hammer? What kind of Hammer? A
Hammer that breaks the rock in pieces? Yes, the word of God is all this, it is
a fire, and it is a Hammer, it burns, it batters all that stands before it. Now
as the Word of God is to the hearts of men, so the Rod of God is to the estates
of men; it shakes, shatters, and breaks them to pieces: To shake, or break a
man to pieces, is in common speech applyable to the estates of men, as well as
to their persons, for of such a man we say, He is broken.

The Septuagint reads this clause with an expository addition, (...). Sept.
He has taken me by the hair of the head, and shaken me. They who follow that
reading, interpret it, by a metaphor, He has taken me by the hair; that is,
by my outward estate, by my riches, honor, and greatness (these are to men,
as the hair is to the head, ornaments, yet excrements) he has taken me by
these hairs, even all my outward splendour, and glory, and shaken them in
pieces.

All this diversity, whether of reading, or expounding the Text meets in the
maine point, That God deals severely with many whom he loves dearly.

He has shaken me in pieces, and yet he has not done with me; as the Lord
broke and shook me asunder when I was whole, so he wounds me, now I am broken:
If he can but find enough of me left together to make a mark of, I shall be
sure to feel his Arrows.

And set me up for his mark. Job was cast down by affliction, and yet he was
set up to receive more affliction: It Is a Proverbiall speech, Proverbialis
locutio quo significamus aliquem esse omnibus telis and injuriis propositum.
signifying that a man is made the common receipt, or subject of misery. A Mark
is purposely set up to receive Arrows, Darts, or Bullets shot at it; so that
for a man to be set up as a mark, is to stand as a common object, upon which
all calamities center themselves; what Job here complains of, he had
expostulated with God about ( Chap. 7.20.) Wherefore have thou set me up as a
mark, so that I am a burden to my self? I shall speak the less to it here,
having spoken to it there already.

The same Original word is not used in both places, though the sense be the
same: There Job speaks in a Paraphrase, Thou have set me opposite, or over
against thee: A (...) servo, quod eum diligenter observent jaculatores ne
oberrent. (...), proprie sig. signum praefixum sagittantibus, unde quod animo
destinamus aut praesigimus scopus est. Eras.
Here he uses a single term, which notes a mark, strictly taken; for it comes
from a root which signifies to observe; because the mark, or white, is
diligently observed by him that shoots; the Archer keeps his eye upon the mark,
that he may send his Arrow to the mark. A mark is that to the eye in shooting,
which the end is to the mind of man in all his ways of acting; and therefore
our English word Scope from the Greek ((...)) which properly signifies an
Archers mark, is used figuratively to signify the end which we design to our
selves in every undertaking. And hence the eye with which we take aim, is put
for the end ( Matthew. 6.22.) If thine eye be single, the whole body is light;
that is, if the end, or the thing that thou aymest at be just and right, all
thy actions will be right too: Every man is regulated by his end, all he does,
looks that way; therefore if thy end and aim be honest and sincere, all thy
ways and works will be such. So then, as the end is the mark of the mind, so
a mark is the end of the eye; it directs all unto it. And while Job says, He
has set me up as a mark, his meaning is, I am the Butt or White, at which the
Lord aims all his Arrows, he empties his Quiver at my breast. Ego ipse
positus fui in scopum ut mill jacula, mill sagittas exciperem.
So the Church cries out ( Lam. 3.12, 13.) He has bent his bow, he has set me
as a mark for the Arrow; he has caused the Arrows of his Quiver to enter into
my reins: The Hebrew is, He has caused the Sons of his Quiver to enter into
my reins. Arrows are the Sons of the Quiver: Sons are called Arrows ( Psalm.
127.4, 5.) As Arrows in the hand of the mighty, so are the Children of the
youth, blessed is the man that has his Quiver full of them. Now as Sons are
compared to Arrows in a Quiver, so Arrows are compared to Sons, because as
Sons are together in their Fathers house, so are Arrows in the Quiver. Christ
is described by old Simeon, as a mark set up to shoot at ( Luke 2.34, 35.) This
Child is set for the falling and rising of many in Israel; Significat Christum
veluti scopum fore, quem omnes certatim figere contendant. Bez.
and for a sign to be spoken against: What sign? A Butt sign, or a Butt
mark. A sign to be spoken against; that is, All shall direct the Arrows of
their words against him. Bitter words are compared to Arrows; many showers of
these were shot against Jesus Christ: He was aimed at on every side, by
envious spirits and malevolent tongues: He might say as Job, Thou have set me
up as a mark.

Observe from this Allusion.

First, The Servants of God must expect many afflictions from the hand of God.

A mark is not set up (or it is very rarely set up) for one shot: As God has
more mercies then one in store for his people, so he has more Arrows then one
for them in his Quiver. When thou have received one shot, prepare for a second,
and a third.

Observe.

Secondly, God seems to take pleasure in afflicting his people.

This also contributes to the proof of the general Observation before given:
For the more pleasure any one takes in afflicting, the more severity he shows
in afflicting. A Father chastises his Child with tears in his eyes; every
stroke which a wise Father gives his Child, is as a wound to himself, and
this abates the smart of the blow; but for Fathers to do it as the Apostle
speaks ( Heb. 12.) For their pleasure, or when it pleases a Father (in that
sense) to do it, this increases the smart. The sufferer feels most pain
when it is a pleasure to another to make him suffer. Now, what is shooting at
a mark? No man shoots at a mark for toil, to make a labor, and a business
of it, but men shoot at a mark for their recreation, and pleasure.

God delights not properly in the sorrows and sufferings of his people; he is
not like those cruel Tyrants, who fasten their Captives to a Post, and then
shoot them dead for sport: God does not willingly, much less sportingly,
afflict the Children of Men ( Lam. 3.33.) yet it pleases him to afflict them;
yea, as Job speaks ( Chap. 9.) He laughs at the trial of the innocent; that
is, He carries himself (as to their sense) as if he did not regard what they
suffered, though indeed he be infinitely tender of them in all their
sufferings; yet because they do not always understand the language of this
laughter, it makes them cry out as if God had forsaken them, and were either
really turned an Enemy against them, or at least, did not use them as his
Friends; from which near relation, nothing appears more remote, then to be set
up and shot at as a mark.

Observe.

Thirdly, Affliction does not hit the Saints by chance, but by direction.

There is a great difference between shooting at random, and shooting at a
mark. God does now draw his Bow at a venture (as he who slew Ahab did, 1 Kings
22.34.) or shoot at the whole host of mankind, let the Arrow light where and
on whom it will, but he singles out the particular person, whom he intends to
hit. Every one of his Arrows goes upon a special errand, and touches no breast
but that against whom it was sent: And as this speaks the honor of God, who
determines as much, upon whom, as what to do, and chooses out those at whom
he means to shoot, as well as the means by which he shoots at them; so it
should establish our hearts to receive his shot, and in this sense to be like a
senseless mark which stirrs not from the Arrow, nor vvithdrawes from the
deadly Bullet. It is not only the grace, but the glory of a Believer, when he
can stand as a But-mark, and take affliction quietly. The Apostle speaks near
this language, and fully this truth (1 These. 1.3.) I would that no man should
be moved for these afflictions; for you your selves know that we are appointed
thereunto; As if he had said, I would have you stand as Posts, notwithstanding
all these afflictions: Not that he would have them careless, or secure; but
courageous, and full of holy undauntednesse: I would have no man flinch, or
stir a foot, no more then a mark that is shot at, Why? Knowing that we are
appointed thereto: As a mark is appointed to be shot at, and set up on purpose
that the Arrow may be directed against it; so the Lord sets up his Saints and
Servants on purpose, that he may shoot the Arrows of affliction at them;
therefore let us keep our ground and not be moved. We honor God, yea it is our
honor also, when we are unmovable in active obedience as the Apostle exhorts
(2 Cor. 15.58.) Wherefore my Brethren be steadfast and unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord. But as it is our honor, and Gods honor too, when we
are unmovable in doing the will of God; so it is a greater honor, both to him
and us, when we are so in suffering his will, or in passive obedience; when we
stand to it, and move no more in way of cowardice and impatience then a Post
when it is shot at. This is the glory of a Christian, and it is his duty; this
is the glory of God, and it is his due; though it be put here as an aggravation
of the greatness of Jobs affliction, that he was set as a standing mark, yet
it is a hightning of our praise, contentedly to be so.

God will make wicked men his standing mark to all eternity, against whom he
will shoot the Arrows, the poisoned Arrows of his indignation, which shall
drink up their spirits, and yet their spirits shall not be consumed. God makes
his precious Servants and faithful people, his standing mark for a time, they
feel the Arrows of affliction, and are deeply wounded; as Job further
prosecutes his sad condition, continuing the Allegory in the next Verse.

Verse. 13. His Archers compass me round about, he cleaves my reins in
sunder.
(...) Magni ejus. sed hic quadrare non potest. Licet enim (...) Sig.
magnitudinem sive in quantitate continua sive in discreta, hic tamen in
discreta est accipienda, a multitudine enim sagittarii dicuntur Rabim.
God has a Bow, he has his Arrows, and his Archers, all ready at a call. The
decree of God is his Quiver, his Arrows are his purposes, and the Instruments
which execute them are his Archers; whether rational or irrational, whether
men, or things, any thing which God uses to afflict man by, is his Archer: His
Archers have compassed me about: The word is (Rabbi) His Archers, from Rab,
great; so some read it, His great Ones have compassed me about. The word Rab,
does not only signify greatness in bulk, or continued quantity, but in
number or discreet quantity. Hence Archers are called, Rabbi, great ones, not
from their magnitude, but from their multitude, because Archers go in company;
two at the least, and usually many are a set; or they are called many, because
every one has many Arrows, Men carry but one Sword, and one Spear, but they
carry many Arrows, therefore the word signifies many. His Archers, or many,
compass me round about. Hence note in prosecution of the same point,

That, God has variety of means to afflict.

He can make any creature his Archer; and he has many Quivers full of Arrows.
Old Jacob said of Joseph (Genesis 49.23.) The Archers shot sore at him, and
grieved him. Joseph was a mark of envy, because God had put so many marks of
honor upon him: His own Brethren were the Archers. Job had many Archers
shooting at him: I can name you seven eminent Archers that shot at Job.

First, Heaven was an Archer, the heavens shot fire, which burnt up his flocks
of sheep.

Secondly, The Air was an Archer, that shot wind, and down fell the House
upon his Children.

Thirdly, The Chaldeans and Sabeans were Archers, and they shot spoiling and
plundering, they took away all his Cattle, and slew his Servants with the
edge of the Sword.

Fourthly, The Devil was an Archer, he shot diseases, and wounded his body all
over with soars.

Fifthly, The earth was an Archer, and that shot Worms, he was clothed with
Worms, and clods of Earth.

Sixthly, His Wife was an Archer, or an Archeresse, she shot terrible Arrows,
evil and bitter words.

Seventhly, His Friends were Archers, they shot reproves, and uncomfortable
comforts; they peirced him with their salyes, and the very means that they
used to heal him, grieved him more.

All these shot at him, he must needs have many hurts, who was compassed about
with so many Archers; David felt the anguish of these Arrows ( Psalm. 38, 1.) O
Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure:
For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore: David was
full of Arrows, what those Arrows were, is not determined in the Text. One of
the Ancients says, They were the threatenings of God, with which his conscience
was wounded for sin, as for his body and outward estate, they were in a whole
skin; it is true, judgments or wrath threatened, wound the spirit deeper then
judgments or wrath executed wound the outward man; and as the whole word of
God, so that part of it especially which consists of threatenings, is as the
Apostle speaks ( Heb. 4.12.) Quick and powerful, and sharper then any
two-edged Sword, peircing, even to the dividing asunder of the soul and
spirit, etc. Yet I rather conceive, that David's Arrows were bodily troubles or
diseases, already inflicted, the immediate cause of which was the anger of God,
and the cause of that was his own sin, both which are expressed at the
third Verse, There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger,
neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin: When sin stirrs up
the anger of God, the anger of God can quickly send his Arrows abroad; nor is
there any thing in this World so near unto us, but he can make an Arrow, or
an Archer of it; His Archers compass me round.

And see what kind of Archers his were, they were no bunglers, they were good
marks men; like the left handed Benjamites (Judge. 20.16.) They could shoot at a
hairs breadth and not miss: For it follows: He cleaves my reins asunder.

They are expert Archers who can cleave the reins: The reins are in the
middle of the back, he that shoots at a Butt, and hits the middle of it shoots
exactly; the whole Butt is not the mark, but the White which is set (according
to a Geometrical proportion) in the middle of it. He that hits the mark, hits
the middle of the Butt; but he that cleaves the Pin (that is the Archers
Dialect) which fastens the mark to the Butt, That Is the Archer, or That Is He
(as they also use to speak at their sport) he wins the prize: Renes seeds sunt
affectus and libidinis vehementissimi. Renum nomen in Hebraeo a desiderando
dicitur. (...) Vulnerare renes est tenuiores affectus configere.
An Archer may hit the man, and not his reins, but to hit his reins is
skillful archery: Jobs Archers were thus cunning in their art, They compass
me about, and cleave my reins asunder: That Is the first.

Further, We may understand it by a metaphor, and so two ways.

First, The reins being the seat of desire, as Naturalists speak; some
interpret he cleaves my reins asunder, thus, He smites me in that which is to
me most pleasant and desirable: and then, the seat of affection is put for the
thing which we affect. This holds out a profitable truth.

God can wound us in that upon which we most entirely set our affections. He
knows how to cleave our very reins asunder, and he often does it; that which
we inordinately love, is usually the mark at which he aims his Arrow: The
readyest way to lose any comfort, is to over-love it (I add that by way of
caution, not of direction.) And indeed, though it be a great deal of smart to
us, yet it may prove a great deal of ease to us, to be vvounded in that which
we over-love. God in much mercy to those he loves, takes that from them which
they love too much, that so they may love him the more, to whom all their love,
and more if they had it, is but due: He cleaves their reins, that their reins
may cleave to him.

Secondly, The reins in a metaphor, Renes occultissima denotant cor intelligit
renes consulunt.
signify that which is most secret, and hidden ( Psalm. 16.7.) My reins also
instruct me in the night season; that is, my most inward thoughts instruct me,
I have secret communion with my self, and my heart reads me a curtain Lecture
every night; My reins instruct me in the night season. This metaphorical
interpretation, gives us this plain Note.

God peirceth into our most retired thoughts, and can punish our most secret
sins.

Those sins which lie as much out of sight, as the reins do, he sees, and he
sees them as plainly as an Archer does the White, or mark, which stands open
to the eye; for all things are naked and manifest (anatomized, or cut open to
the reins of the back, so much the word bears, and so manifest are we) before
his eyes with whom we have to do.

Take it literally, and then to cleave the reins is an expression of putting a
man to the greatest sorrow, or pain, imaginable; if the back were chyned (as
we speak) and cut quite down, through the reins, this would be an exquisite
torment; the reins are a very tender part: A deep vvound in some other parts
of the body, is but a scratch, and such wounding were a kind of embracing, in
comparison of that.

Secondly, To cleave the reins, is to weaken, because the reins, or the
loins, are the strength of a man, or of any creature; Lo his strength is in
his loins, says God of Behemoth, Elumbem reddere.
which is as some think the Elephant ( Job. 40.16.) And a man of no loins, is
a man of no strength, in common language.

Thirdly, To cleave the reins, is to give a mortal wound. Chyrurgions and
Physicians observe, That if the reins be struck through, Mala immedicabilia
indicat.
there is no help for it; cleaving the reins is much like peircing the heart;
this is present death, and that leaves no hope of life, the wound of it is
incurable.

There is a fourth interpretation, He cleaves my reins, may note the torture
of any acute disease, especially that of the Stone in the reins, or kidneys;
which is as it were the cutting of the back asunder; poor Patients under it
are often heard so complaining: O it is like a sharp Knife; the Stone is not
only a grinding, but a cutting pain.

I shall only lay in the consideration of these four glosses from the
literal sense of the word, to a further making out of the first general
Observation, That God often deals very severely in outward, or present
dispensations, with many of his dearest Servants: He does that which they may
call cleaving of the reins, and that, in the easiest of the four senses, is a
very severe dispensation; much more (which we may suppose) when the pain of
all four meets in one man; as doubtless they did in Job; He cleaves my
reins asunder.

And does not spare. (...) Pepercit, ignonovit, propitius fuit. Nullam Domini
in me miserecordiam, sed omnigenam saevitiam experi^r. Merc.
He that does not spare, uses the utmost extremity, and shows no pity or
Indulgence: to spare, is both an act, and one of the kinds of mercy: Sparing is
opposed to severity, it is a doing less against another then we may, and that
two ways.

First, When we do less then we can. We having power, though no right to
do more then we do, no nor to do so much as we do: Thus a Thief may be
said to spare a man, when he does not take all from him, life and all.

Secondly, When we do less against another then we may, both according to
the right of our cause, and the power in our hands: Thus a Magistrate spares a
Thief; or a Creditor his Debtor; when the one exacts not the whole
punishment, nor the other the whole Sum due. And in this sense God spares the
Sons of men; he has both power and right to punish sinful man to the utmost,
but he spares him: To hold the hand, though but a little, is sparing merccy;
but Job found not this mercy, He does not spare; as if he had said, The Lord
lays on, lays on, and does not forbear.

Hence Observe.

There is mercy in sparing.

There is a fivefold mercy of God:

First, Rewarding mercy, toward those who have done well.

Secondly, Pardoning mercy, which is exercised toward those who have done ill,
or toward past sin.

Thirdly, Preventing mercy, when he keeps us from evil, whether it be the
evil of sin, or of punishment.

Fourthly, Delivering mercy, when though he let us fall into the evil of sin
or punishment, yet he is pleased to help us up, and takes us out again.

Fifthly, There is Sparing mercy; if while we are in affliction God deals
gently with us, this is sparing mercy: As God was not pleased to prevent Jobs
sorrows, nor to deliver him from them, so he did not spare him in them, his
hand continued heavy upon him, he had no ease.

There is a fourefould degree of this sparing mercy of God.

First, Not to punish at all: thus God sometimes spares his own people, as a
Father spares his Son that serves him (Mal. 3.17.) Though they fail, yet he
passes it by, and does not reckon with them for it. The Lord represented
himself to Amos, forming Grasse-hoppers, which either in kind, or in a figure
(shaddowing the Assyrians) threatened to devour the Land; this Vision put the
Prophet upon that earnest prayer, O Lord God forgive, by whom shall Jacob arise
for he is small? The Lord repented for this, it shall not be says the Lord
(Amos 7.1, 2, 3.) Here was sparing mercy, and this is repeated a second time (
Verse. 6.) yet in the third Vision of a Plumbe line (by which God was noted,
taking exact notice of all the unevenness and crookedness of that people in
that Vision, I say) as the Prophet suspended prayer, so the Lord being
resolved, no longer to suspend their punishment, says, I will not pass by
them again any more: that is, I will spare them no more which is again
repeated ( Chap. 8.2.) where by a Basket of Summer fruit, the Lord showed their
ripeness in sin, and his readiness to punish, and not to spare.

Secondly, It is sparing mercy, when punishment is deferred, or adjourned to a
further day; thus the Lord spared the old World, a hundred and twenty years,
My spirit shall not always strive: It did a long time, he spared them many
years to draw them to repentance, and to leave them inexcusable, because they
repented not.

Thirdly, It is sparing mercy, when judgment is moderated: When though God
punish, yet he does not punish to the full; when though the cloud break, yet he
lets but a few drops fall on us, and does not power out showers, or make an
inundation to overwhelme us; when though he strike, yet he gives but few
strokes; yea, if he abate but one stroke, it is sparing mercy. The Jews (2
Cor. 11.24.) gave Paul, forty stripes, save one; and in this they would be
thought to be merciful, because they might have given him forty by the Law (
Deuteronomy. 25.3.) therefore to abate one, was sparing mercy. As to punish beyond the
Law, though it be but a little beyond, is cruelty; so to punish less, though
it be but a little less, is mercy: And this is brought in as an argument of
great mercy ( Psalm. 78.38.) But he being full of compassion, forgave their
iniquity, and destroyed them not: yea many a time turned he his anger away, and
did not stir up all his wrath: They felt his wrath, but God did not stir up
all his wrath; they were smitten, but not destroyed, Justice did not make an
utter end of them, there was mercy in that. The like read ( Jer. 30.11. Jer.
46.28.) I will not let thee go altogether unpunished (yet I will spare thee,
though I punish thee) I will correct thee in measure, I will not make a full
end of thee. But are not all the corrections of God, yea and his judgments too
done in measure? All the judgments of God are done in measure, as measure
notes a rule of equity, but not as measure notes a rule of equality. Again, to
do a thing by measure does not always note the rule by which it is done, but
the degree in which it is done. And so to do a thing in measure is to do it
moderately; as when it is said ( John 3.24.) That God gives not the spirit by
measure to Christ: the meaning is only this, he gives him the spirit
abundantly, infinitely, without stint or limit: So when it is said, that he
corrects man in measure, the meaning is only this, that he corrects him
moderately, mercifully, with many stints and limits. It is of the Lords mercy,
(says Jeremie Lam. 3.22.) What? That we are delivered? That we are crowned
with comforts? These are of the Lords mercy indeed, but he speaks not of
these, the mercy he speaks of is, That we are not utterly consumed. What
kind of mercy is this? Sparing mercy. Suppose God take away many Children, yet
if he leave but one, here is sparing mercy to the Parents: Suppose he take
many hundreds, and thousands of a man's estate, yet if he leave him a little to
buy Bread, and to stand between him and Beggary, this is sparing mercy:
Suppose we are much consumed, yet if we are not utterly consumed, this also is
sparing mercy. In the Prophecy of Daniel, we read of a goodly tree, And behold
a watcher and an holy one came down from Heaven, and cried aloud Hew down the
Tree and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves and scatter his fruit, etc.
Nevertheless leave the stumpe of his root in the earth, etc. Though it was
judgment to shake off the leaves and fruit, to hew down the boughs and
stock, yet it was sparing mercy to leave the root, that gave hopes it might
grow again, and not be utterly consumed; it is sparing mercy when any thing is
reserved: But God did not spare Job, he took all; he did not leave him (as we
say) A Shirt to his back, nor a sound patch in his skin: Satan's power had no
limit put to it, but as to life only ( Chap. 2.6.) Behold he is in thine hand,
but (or only) save his life: There was indeed somewhat of sparing mercy in
that, and that was more then Satan would have spared, yet it was but so much as
without which he could not have groaned out this complaint, as to the loss of
all other comforts, He does not spare.

Fourthly, There is a sparing mercy of God in the very act of afflicting, when
he shows that he is unwilling to afflict, or discovers tenderness to them
that are afflicted ( Lam. 3.12.) He does not willingly afflict nor greive the
children of men. As there are many who will serve God in an outward form of
worship, whom yet they neither serve nor worship with their will: So God will
afflict some, whom he does not afflict with his will; he does not give out his
spirit, or take delight in smiting, while he smites them. Thus the Lord
expressed himself toward his ancient people the Jews; he threatens Israel,
That the Assyrian shall be his King; that is, the Assyrian shall carry them
Captives to Babylon and exercise a tyrannical power over them ( Hos. 11.5.)
Yea, the Sword shall abide on his Cities, and shall consume his branches (Verse.
6.) Now though God were resolved to do this, and did also bring it to pass;
yet he says ( Verse. 8.) How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver
thee, Israel? (sc: into the Enemies hand) How shall I make thee as Admah? How
shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are
kindled together: I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not
return to destroy Ephraim: that is, I will not destroy him wholly, by
redoubling evil upon him: I will destroy once, but I will not return to
destroy, a remnant shall be saved. The Lord gave up Ephraim, but he did not
make Ephraim as Admah, and Zeboim, he did not utterly ruin him; and what he
did against Ephraim, he did it with a secret contest in his own spirit, How
shall I do this? I do it not with my heart, and whole mind, my heart is
turned within me, while my hand is turned against thee; it grieveth me while
thou art grieved, while I kindle this fire of affliction in thy borders, the
fire of compassion kindles in my own bowels; My repentings are kindled
together, while I punish thee for thine impenitency, and my heart is turned
within me, while I must correct thee, for refusing to return (Verse. 5.)

Nero being desired to sign a Writ for the execution of an Offender, was so
pitiful at his first entrance upon the Empire (though he proved a Monster for
cruelty after) that he could hardly be persuaded, or wrought to subscribe it,
and when he did it, Quam vellem nescire literas.
in doing it he said, How glad should I be if I could not write my name; which
wish occasioned Seneca his Tutor, to write a Book of Clemency, in which he
extols Nero, as the pattern and mirror of clemency: When either God or man
do acts of severest Justice, with meltings of spirit, and tenderness of
affection toward those who fall under their hand, those acts of Justice have a
great temperament of sparing mercy in them.

For as it is in sinning, when a Believer falls into a great sin, yet because
his heart cannot go fully with it, he cannot delight or take pleasure in it,
therefore his may be called Sparing sinfulness: whereas a carnal heart
committing only a little sin, for the matter yet, because he delights in it,
and is pleased with sin, he does not spare to sin. Now (I say) as it is in
sinning, so in punishing; he does not spare to punish, who does it with his
whole heart, and takes delight in it, though the actual punishment be but
little, whereas he whose heart retreats while his hand is stretched out in
greater punishments, may be said to spare in punishing.

Hence, to show that God exacted the utmost of his Justice upon his Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, when he stood in our place; the Apostle says ( Romans 8.32.)
He spared not his Son. How did he not spare him? He did not spare him any of
these four ways. He did not spare him, so, as not to punish him at all; for
the Cup could not pass from him. He did not spare him by deferring the time,
but when the hour was come that he must suffer, he suffered in that moment.
Nor did he spare him in the degree, he suffered to the utmost for our sins, God
did not abate one drop out of his Cup, not one dram of the weight of his
sorrows: Yea fourthly, God did not spare him, in regard of the affection with
which he punished him: The Lord may be said willingly to afflict him for the
sins of the Children of men, though he does not willingly afflict the Children
of men; He was pleased to bruise him (Isa. 53.) and that signifies not only
(Voluntatem Dei) that it was the purpose and resolution of God, that his Son
should be bruised for our sins; but it signifies also (Voluptatem Dei) the
delight, and contentment that the Lord had in bruising his Son. He did not
spare, but gave him up with his heart, to those punishments which were due to
sinners. God showed no more relenting toward his Son, when he stood suffering
in the place of sinners, then he does to those sinners who stand in their own
place to suffer without his Son: Yea, God the Father did not only not relent,
or show any yearning of bowels toward his Son in that suffering condition, but
(as to sense and present apprehension) he hardened his heart toward him, which
caused that grievous outcry of Christ upon the Cross, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me?

Not that God did really withdraw his love in the least, from his Son, but he
did infinitely delight to see his Justice satisfied; and his Son as a
Conqueror, bearing up under the weight of it. Thus the Lord took pleasure in
afflicting his Son, or (as Job speaks, Chap. 9.) He laughed at the trial of
that innocent and Holy one: And indeed, without this, the work of our
redemption had not been accomplished by a full satisfaction to divine Justice,
for it would have had somewhat of mercy in it toward the Redeemer, as well as
it is all mercy toward the redeemed: But as it is all of mercy to us, so it
was to be nothing at all of mercy to Jesus Christ, that sinners are redeemed:
he was to have no more of his Father then he paid for, and his Father did not
spare him, but made him pay the utmost Farthing, that upon the casting up of
the account between himself and sinful man appeared a due debt unto his
Justice. Job complains, that he was not spared, yet the truth is, that, every
man how much soever he suffers on this side Hell, has somewhat of sparing
mercy in his sufferings.

Secondly, Forasmuch as Job being about to show the extremity of his
affliction, tells us, That God did not spare.

Observe.

Sparing mercy is the lowest degree of mercy: If God deny sparing mercy, he
denies all mercy.

It is argument enough that God showed Christ no mercy, when the Apostle says,
He did not spare him. That we sinners might have all mercy, he that saved us
from our sins had none. The Angels who sinned found no mercy, no sacrifice was
provided for them, God cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into chains
of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment: All which punishments are affirmed
by the Apostle Peter, as the result of this Negative, God spared not the Angels
(2 Pet. 2.4.) The same Apostle tells us also in the next Verse, that, God spared
not the old World, but saved Noah, the eight person, a Preacher of
righteousness, bringing in the Flood upon the world of the ungodly. Neither
the Angels who apostatized from God, nor the old ungodly World had any share in
sparing mercy. Job looked upon himself (in reference to present peace) as one
in their case, He does not spare, which appears further in the next clause.

He powers out my Gall upon the ground. (...) Fell ab amaritudine. Viscera.
Vulg.
The Original word which we render Gall, signifies properly, bitterness,
because the Gall is so. Peter speaking to Simon Magus (Acts 8.23.) puts these
two together, I perceive that thou art in the Gall of bitterness: He that
continues in sin, lives in the Gall of spiritual bitterness, and he whose
Gall is powered out, is in, or ready to go into the gall or corporal death.
For as cleaving of the reins, employed the receiving of a deadly wound; so
pouring out the Gall upon the ground, is a proverbiall, speaking present death.
When the gall is out, the bowels are out; the gall is affixed to the Liver: So
that, it is as much as to say, He kills me dead, or I am now upon the borders of
death it self: When the gall is indeed powered out, we cannot live; and he who
is afflicted to such a height, that he cries, my gall is powered out, may well
he numbered among the dead. The reason or original of this speech was this (as
I conceive) because when a wild Beast, or any other (which are fit for man's
eating) are taken and slain, it is usual when the bowels are pulled out, to
cut off, and throw away, or power out the Gall upon the ground, lest the
overflowing of it should disrelish the neighboring parts: So that Job in this
does only prosecute the former theme of his greevious sufferings, or that he
was (as Paul speaks of himself (2 Cor. 1.18.) pressed out of measure, above
strength, insomuch that he despaired even of life; which he gives us yet more
fully in the next Verse.

Verse. 14. He breaks me with breach upon breach, and runs on me like a
Giant.
Job varies into all manner of inventions and allusions, (...) Vi disrupit,
erupit. Poetice variat orationis modos lugubres.
to set forth both the constancy and extremity of his afflictions. As before he
compared himself to a mark, against which Arrows are shot; so now to a Stone
wall, or fortified Tower, against which, battering Rams of old, and Cannons in
latter ages, are usually planted to make a breach, that the Soldiery may come
up to the assault.

He breaks me with breach upon breach. Some men are like fortified Cities,
which cannot be easily entered, yet when the Lord of Hosts draws up his Armies
and beseigeth them, he has Artillery and Ammunition enough to thunder down
their highest Towers, and to make breach upon breach in their thickest walls.
Satan complains ( Chapter 1.) Thou have made a hedge about him: Jobs hedge was the
protection of God; that hedge was so strong that Satan could not pull up a
stake of it, nor make a gap in it, till God gave him leave. But though Job (as
this similitude implies) were like a wall or fortified tower, yet God had made
breaches in him; God can soon break our estates, our strength, our health,
our comforts, our peace, our all. And when Job says, he breaks me with breach
upon breach; he means a multitude of breaches made together, or continual
breaches, made one after another: Jeremy laments ( Chap. 4.16.) My bowels, my
bowels, I am pained at the very heart, my heart makes a noise in me: Why does
he thus double upon these words, My bowels, my bowels, my heart, my heart? The
twentieth Verse gives us an account of that, Destruction upon destruction is
cried, for the whole Land is spoiled: Destruction upon destruction is total
destruction. Thus Sampson repeats his Victory over the Philistines ( Judge.
15.16.) With the Jaw Bone of an Ass heaps upon heaps; or (as the letter of the
Hebrew) an heap, two heaps; that is, I have made a great slaughter; or as
himself explaines it in the close of the Verse, I have slain a thousand men.
We have the Prophet Ezekiels threat in the same language ( Chap. 7.26.)
Mischeife shall come upon mischeife, and rumor shall be upon rumor: When the
Prophet Isaiah would convince the Jews of their unteachablenesse, that whereas
(as the Apostles speaks, Heb. 5.12.) They ought to be teachers; yet they had
need to be taught the first principles of the Oracles of God, like little
Children, who must have the same precepts and lines often and often inculcated
upon them, he gives it us in the form of this Text ( Isa. 28.10.) For precept
must be upon precept, line upon line; that is, they must be continually
followed with precepts, they must have many, and yet they scarce learn one; or
(as others expound that place) the Prophet describes the scornefulnesse of that
people who jeered the Messengers of God for their frequency in Preaching, with
a riming scoff, Precept upon precept, line upon line, here a little, and there
a little; which single terms the Prophets had often used in their Sermons. Now
which way soever we take the proper sense of that place; yet the common sense
of the words reaches this in Job: for precept upon precept, speaks there a
multitude of precepts, even as here, breach upon breach speaks a multitude of
breaches, or breaches all over. And the Apostle Paul expresses himself in
this strain, while he gives the reason of the recovery of Epaphroditus from a
dangerous sickness ( Phil. 2.27.) He was sick (says Paul) nigh unto death,
but God had mercy on him; and not only on him, but on me also, least I should
have sorrow upon sorrow; that is, many sorrows heaped up together: So then,
when Job complains of his breaking with breach upon breach; the plain meaning
is, that he had many, very many breaches: His very wounds were wounded, there
was nothing in him, Vulnera ipsa vulnerat. Non habet in nobis jam nova plag^
locum.
or about him to be smitten, but what had been smitten already. As if he had
said, I am so full of breaches and afflictions, that there is no whole space or
room left for a new breach, for another affliction: As he that lies upon the
ground can fall no lower, so he that is all broken cannot be broken any more.

Job had breach upon breach in his estate, his Cattle, and goods were taken
away: Job had breach upon breach in his Family, most of his Servants, and all
his Children were destroyed: Job had breach upon breach in his body, that was
sick and soar: Job had breach upon breach in his credit, he was called
Hypocrite again and again: Job had breach upon breach in his soul, that was
filled with fear and terror from the Lord.

Hence Note.

The best Saints on earth are subject, not only to great, but various
troubles, to breach upon breach.

God is pleased to smite them sundry times, and he smites them sundry ways:
It Is no argument that a man shall be no more afflicted, because he is
afflicted, or that God will not smite again, because he has smitten already.
God does not stay his hand by looking upon the number, but upon the effect and
fruit of our afflictions: Every Child of his, whom he corrects, must look
for more corrections, till repentance has had its perfect work, and every
Champion of his whom he tryes, must look for more trials, till faith and
patience have had their perfect work. God would not give his Children so much
as one blow, or one breach, not so much as a little finger of theirs should
ache, were it not for one of these ends, and until these ends be attained, they
shall have many blows and breaches, even till the whole head be sick, and the
whole heart faint, till from the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is
no soundness in them, but wounds and bruises and putrefying soars. As the
Vine-dresser cuts, and cuts, Vt in vineis labor labori, cura curae, semper
additur, etc. Sanct.
prunes, and prunes the Vine, this day and the next day, because once cutting
or pruning will not serve to make it fruitful: So the Lord prunes, and cuts,
and pares, and breaks, and breaks, not to destroy his people, but to make them
(as pleasant Vines) bring forth abundantly, either the fruits of godly sorrow
for their sins committed against him, or the proofs and experiments of the
graces which they have received from him. This latter was Jobs case, and the
chief cause why he was broken with breach upon breach. And no sooner had the
Lord by his roaring Cannon, made breaches in him, fair, and assaultable, but
he presently takes his advantage, as Job shows elegantly (pursuing the
Allegory) in the last clause.

He runs upon me as a Giant. (...) Sicut fortis potens idem valet Gigas and
(...).
When a breach is made in the wall, the beseigers run up to assault and storm
the place. Job keeps to the Soldiers language, the Lord has made breach upon
breach, and now He runs upon me as a Giant. There are three things in this
expression.

First, The speed which God made to assault him, He runs.

Secondly, The strength that God puts forth in assaulting him, he runs, not as
a Child, not as a weak man, no nor as the ordinary sort of strong men; but as
a Giant, or mighty man, who exceeds other men as Goliath did David, both in
strength and stature.

Quando aliquis dicitur aut currere, aut aliquid agere, sicut Gigas, nihil
aliud denotat, quam magno animo and strenue rem aliquam aggredi. Bold.
Thirdly, Running as a Giant, notes courage as well as strength. A Giant runs
fiercely and fearelesly.

David compares the Sun at his rising, to a Bridegroom coming out of his
Chamber, and to a Giant, or strong man (it is the word of this Text) who
rejoices to run a race (Psalm. 19.5.) Giants are swift, and Giants are strong;
Some men are strong but not swift of foot, but no man can be swift of foot
unless he be competently strong, Giants are both in excess: And therefore Job
puts both together, He runs upon me as a Giant. And yet (I conceive) this
running does rather imply the fierceness of the Giant, then his swiftness.
Giants are dreadful and terrible to behold; they are called Nephilim in the
Hebrew, of diverse Texts, which coming from the root, Naphal, to fall,
signifies fallers, and that in a twofold sense.

First, Because they Apostatized or fell from God, his truth and worship, which
Moses seems to intimate, while he describes the first great personal
defection of the World ( Genesis 6.4.) There were Giants in the earth in those
days: these he opposes to the Sons of God, in the same Verse, who had also
greatly corrupted themselves, so that ( Verse. 5.) God saw the wickedness of
man was great upon the earth: For the Sons of God, they who owned a profession
of Religion (being the Posterity of Seth, they) mingled themselves with the
wicked of the World; as for the Giants, they disowned God, and were totally
departed, or fallen from his obedience, and were therefore as some apprehend,
called Nephilim, or Fallers.

Secondly, They were so called, because either through the vastness of their
strength and stature, or through the fierceness of their minds and spirits,
they were men of violence, great oppressors, causing others to fall before
them: In so much that the very name of a Giant was dreadful. And when those
unbeleeving Scarchers of Canaan brought up an evil report of that Land, the
worst which they could say of it to the discouragement of their Brethren, was
this ( Numb. 13.33.) And there we saw the Giants, the Sons of Anak, which came
of the Giants: and we were in our own sight as Grasse-hoppers, and so we were
in theirs. Men of strength and courage were as much afraid at this story of
Giants, as Children are of Bugbeares and Fayries.

So then, when Job said, That God did run upon him as a Giant, his intent was
only to show, with how much terror God was pleased to cloth himself, and
how much strength he put forth, while he thus contended with him. The truth is,
God needs not lay out his strength to afflict man, he can crush the strongest
of men as a moth, with the touch of his finger. The weakness of God is
stronger then man; yet God in afflicting his people, will sometimes personate a
mighty man, exercising his power to the utmost, and arming himself from head
to foot, while he combats with an enemy: which still confirms the general
Observation, That God does not only afflict such as he loves, but he afflicts
them sorely. Does he not so, when he shaks them in pieces? Does he not so, when
he sets them as his mark? When a multitude of skillful Archers compass them
about; when he cleaves their reins asunder; when he powers out their Gall upon
the ground? Does he not so, when he sets Engines of battery to make breach upon
breach, and then runs up as a Giant to the assault? Thus God has dealt with
many precious souls, and thus he dealt (beyond his dealings with many) with
his precious Servant Job.

And as no man, either in his estate or health, either in his credit or
comforts, is so strong a wall, but God by his Artillery can quickly make a
breach upon him; so who is able to stand in the breach, or make it good, when
God comes up to the assault? Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be
strong in the days that I shall deal with thee? says the Lord ( Ezekiel.
22.14.) When the Lord as a Giant runs upon man, the strongest Giant among the
sons of men, is but as a Pigmie, yea but as a Pismire, he is but as the Chafe
before the wind, or as the potters Vessel before the Iron Rod. But though
flesh and blood cannot stand in the breach when God assaults; yet Faith and
patience can. Moses by Faith stood in the breach, and turned away the wrath of
God, when he came to destroy Israel (Psalm. 106.23.) Job by patience stood in
the breaches which God made upon him, when he seemed utterly to destroy him.

For what did Job to God, when God did all this to him? Did he oppose? Did he
strive with his Maker? The two next Verses show, that prayers and tears were
all the Weapons he used in this holy War with God.

JOB, CHAP. 16. Verse. 15.16, 17. I have sowed sackcloth upon my skin, and
defiled my horn in the dust.

My face is foul with weeping, and on my eyelids is the shadow of death.

Not for any injustice in my hands also my prayer is pure.


THE former words showed in what manner Job was afflicted; and because the
manner of his afflictions did almost exceed words, therefore he strained
himself to the highest pitch of holy rhetoric, to make his unkind Friends
sensible of it. And as there he told us what God had done to him, so here he
tells what he did, or how he behaved himself under the hand of God; he tells
us how he took those tearings, and those wounds; how he received those showers
of Arrows from the Almighties Bow. Eliphaz taxed Job in the fifteenth Chapter,
with height and haughtiness of spirit in his low estate ( Verse. 12.13.) Why
does thine heart carry thee away? And what does thine eyes wink at, that thou
turnest thy spirit against God, and let such words go out of thy mouth?
And ( Verse. 25.) he more then intimates that Job stretched out his hand against
God, and strengthened himself against the Almighty. In both passages he is
severely charged, not only with impatience under the hand of God (which is bad
enough) but with opposition against the hand of God, which is far worse.

Job refutes these unfreindly censures, and professes another kind both of
spirit and practice in this Text. As if he had said, I am not so madd as thou
take me to be, to runn upon God, or to stretch out my hand against him while
he smites me, I have learned better, then to shoot the arrows of blasphemy
against God, whilst he shoots the arrows of calamity against me; and if you
desire to know what I have been doing, seeing I deny that I have been doing
what you suggest: This is the account which I give of my self, and of my
behavior.

Verse. 15. I have sowed sackcloth upon my skin, and defiled my horn in the
dust.
That is, I have humbly submitted my self to receive, and entertain those
saddest dispensations.

Hence Observe.

That the surest way to confute the censures, and wipe off the aspersions which
are cast upon us, is to show our selves doing contrary to what others are
speaking of us.

A practical answer is the strongest answer; we may speak more for our selves
by our hands, then we can do by our tongues in many cases. The Papists mouths
are stopped (who call us Solifidians) when they see Protestants forward in, and
zealous for good works: He that is accused of uncharitableness, may best free
himself from that charge, by giving freely to the poor; and he that is
accused of injustice, may soonest do himself right, by showing that he has
done right to every man. Bare denyals that we have done evil, are nothing; but
when our doing of good appears, who can deny it? The old Philosopher answered
him that denied motion, by rising up and walking, not by arguing: Job answered
Eliphaz, who affirmed that he turned his spirit, and stretched out his hand
against God, by falling down and submitting to it. I have sowed sackcloth
upon my skin, etc.

And this Job offers, as to remove, and take away that objection of
mis-behaviour toward God; Hoc assert ut ad miserecordiam socios moveat,
paenitentiam, sc: suam and humilitatem, quod sese in his afflictionibus non
extulerit. Merc.
so to move his Friends to better behavior, even to compassion, and pity
toward him. He was in a sorrowful case, and he had acted the part of a
sorrowful man; God had laid him low, and he laid himself low; this might
have taught them moderation; why should they speak so harshly against him, who
had dealt but coursely with himself? Sowing sackcloth upon his skin; and
seeing he abased himself, even to the defiling of his horn in the dust, why
should they abase him too? It stirrs up pity toward a professed adversary to
see him in misery, especially, when he submits unto it, and suffers with
patience: Much more should the misery of a professed Friend, he also quietly
submitting to it, stir up the bowels of pity. So then, the scope of this
report which Job makes of himself, was not only to answer what Eliphaz had
charged him with, but also that he might obtain from his Friends, a milder
answer.

I have sowed sackcloth upon my skin. The word which we render Sackcloth,
(...) Saccus, v^x quae hic habetur Sak habet eundem sonum in omni sere lingua,
quod unum arguit linguam Hebraeam omnium esse matrem.
is of the same sound in the Hebrew, and almost in all other languages; which
is observed as an argument of its antiquity, and that it is the mother of all
languages. But how did Job sow sackcloth upon his Skin? This is a hard piece
of Sempstery.

The Roman Historian reports of cruel Nero, that when he fled out of the City,
(fearing the sentence of the displeased Senate which quickly pursued him) and
had got into a grove or thicket like a wild Beast, he commanded those about
him to make a trench in the earth, fitted to the dimensions of his body, which
he ordered them to line with such pieces of Marble, as were to be had upon the
place; thus as it were, preparing his own Tomb, he wept and often cried out,
See what a workman is here now ready to perish* What that wretch said of
himself, I may say of this holy man in the Text, whom I find thus busied at
his Needle, as if he were preparing his own Grave-clothes, or winding sheet,
What a workman have we here ready to perish? Job looked upon himself as a
dying man, Qualis artifex pereo.
and behold he is sowing sackcloth upon his skin. When men of worth dye, they
are wrapped in fine linen, so Joseph of Arimathea wrapped the body of Jesus (Mark
15.46.) And a living man full of soars needs the finest and softest linen to
wrap him in: Sackcloth is a course stubborn cloth, greevous to a sound body,
painful to those who have never a breach upon their flesh; but for a man (as
Job describes himself) full of breaches, having breach upon breach, his body
being broken all over, as if it were but one continued breach, to lap up such a
one in sackcloth, is an extreme addition to his pains and sorrows. How is it
then, that Job was thus severe to his own soars? To clear this, Sackcloth
may be taken two ways.

First, Properly. Secondly, Improperly.
Properly, so, sackcloth is that hairy, rough Garment which was very usual
among mourners, whether in times of sorrow for sin or judgment. Sackcloth was
the Livery of both these sorrows. The King of Israel was a close-mourner in
sackcloth (2 Kings 6.30.) The King rent his clothes as he passed by upon the
wall, and the people looked, and behold he had sackcloth within upon his
flesh. There being a terrible Famine in Samaria, that Kings wore Sackcloth as
an emblem of his sorrow, yet he wore it somewhat concealedly, it was within
upon his flesh. And so (2 Kings 20.31.) when the Servants of Benhadad came to
Achab, they put sackcloth upon them. And (2 Kings 21.27.) Achab himself when
he heard that sore judgment denounced against him, humbled himself, and put
on sackcloth, and went softly. In a time of common calamity, the Prophet tells
us, Every head shall be bald, and every beard clipped: upon all the hands shall
be cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth (Jer. 48.37.) And that it was the
usual wear in time of repentance, is taught us in the Prophecy of Jonah
(3.8.) where Proclamation was made, by the King of Niniveh, That all should
fast and put on sackcloth. Christ himself describing what Sodom and Gomorah
would have done if the Gospel had been Preached, or the mighty works done in
them which were done in Bethsaida and Corazin, says, They would have repented
long ago in sackcloth and ashes: that is, they would have put on sackcloth,
and sat in ashes, in token of deepest humiliation for sin. Thus sackcloth
properly taken was often used in times of great affliction, whether personal,
or public; as also in times of deepest and most professed repentance.

Secondly, We may take sackcloth improperly, and so two ways.

(...) Cutis vox Arabica non alibi in Scriptura reperitur. Et Gelad proprie
significare cutim and crustavi quae plagae siccae superinducitur. Rab. Levi,
First, As to Jobs then present condition, he was full of sores, and those
sores were to him as a course covering of sackcloth: for he was sore all over:
In some extraordinary diseases, a scab puts forth all over the body, like the
bark of a tree. Jobs scabs and sores were like the bark of a tree, or a
garment of sackcloth; he speaks near this language ( Chap. 30.18.) By the
great force of my disease is my Garment changed: As if he had said, I have
another kind of Garment then I was wont to wear; I was wont to wear the
best, and the costlyest Garments; but now, By the force of my disease is my
Garment changed, it binds me about as the color of my coat: that is, My
sores bind me about as the color of my Coat. Thus the Greek Expositors render
this Text, affirming, Nigrorem nacta est cutis mea propter cruciatuum
acerbitatem quasi saccus quidam ex vellis contextis effectus. Sanct.
that his Skin was discouloured and black, and began to look like sackcloth,
through the heat and distemper of his inward parts: As health and soundness of
constitution put out a fresh and lively tincture, so sickness and diseases
deface and darken the beauty of the body.

Secondly, Take it again improperly, as to Jobs then present action; and then,
I sowed sackcloth upon my skin, is, as if he had spoken plainly, I have
greatly abased, or humbled my self, I have been as one who puts on
sackcloth. Such was his posture ( Chap. 2.8.) He took a pot-sheard, and
scraped his sores, and sat down among the ashes. As he who wore sackcloth
did humble himself greatly, or at least would be accounted to have done so; so
he that is really humbled, and that greatly, may be said to have put on
sackcloth. The sign is often put for the thing signified, in reference both
to joy and sorrow. White garments and unctions were signs of joy; and
therefore when Solomon exhorts to joyfulnesse, he says, Let thy garments be
always white, and let thine head lack no ointment (Eccles. 9.8.) which we may
expound either by that which goes before, Eat thy bread with joy, and drink
thy Wine with a merry heart (Verse. 7.) or by that which follows ( Verse. 9.)
Live joyfully with the wife of thy youth: As to bid a man put on white garments
is to bid him rejoice, so to bid a man put on blacks, or sackcloth, is to bid
him mourn; and he who says as Job here, that he has done it, says, That he
has mourned, though he has not done it. Job did not sow sackcloth upon his
skin when he spoke thus, but his sorrows did truly speak sackcloth: Such also
is his sense of the next clause; where he professes, And I defiled my horn in
the dust.

Horns are proper to a beast, but they are often by a figure or improperly
ascribed to man. The horn imports two things in figure.

First, Strength, and power. Secondly, Dignity, and ornament.
It is often put for strength and power; for the strength and power of good men
(1 Samuel 2.10.) Hannah sings, Thou shall exalt the horn (that is, the strength
and power) of thine anointed. ( Psalm. 132.17.) There shall he make the horn
of David to flourish. David was a type of Christ, and of him this Psalm is
expounded ( Luke 1.69.) God has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the
house of his servant David: A horn of salvation, is, strong salvation, or
strength of salvation: God laid help for us upon one that is mighty, when he
laid help for us upon his Son.

The horn^, notes also the strength and power of wicked men ( Psalm. 75.5.) Lift
not your horns on high, speak not with a stiff neck: At the tenth Verse of
that Psalm, we have both; All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off,
but the horns of the righteous shall be exalted. Those ten Kings, who gave
their power and strength to the Antichristian Beast, Metaphora ab animalibus
ducta, quorum vires fere in cornibus existant.
are shadowed under the title of Ten horns (Revel. 17.12.) Strength and power
are expressed by a horn, in allusion to Beasts, whose strength to defend
themselves, and to hurt others, is in their horns; and hence it is that the
word by which the Greeks express harmless, signifies properly hornelesse
(Phil. 2.15.) That ye may be blameless and harmless, (...), Est careus
cornu.
the Sons of God without rebuke, etc.

Secondly, As the horn is put for strength, so for splendor, and dignity: The
Texts before alleged may be so expounded. And again ( Hab. 3.4.) His
brightness was as the light, and he had horns coming out of his h^^d, and
there was the hiding of his power: We in the Margin put, Bright beams out of
his side: For the Hebrew word which signifies a horn, (...) Radiavit splenduit.
signifies to radiate, and shine forth ( Exodus 34.29, 30.) When Moses came
down from the Mount; the Text says, He wist not that his face did shine. And
when Aaron, and all the people of Israel saw Moses, hehold his face shone: The
Vulgar translates, The face of Moses was horned, Quod cornuta esset facies
ejus. Vulg. Inde Moses cornutus pingitur.
or had horns upon it: that is, Beams and rays of light like horns
appeared, or darted from his countenance, so that the eyes of the beholders
were dazzled: And the reason why Moses is commonly pictured with horns, is,
because this word signifies, both beams, and horns. So here, I have defiled
my horn in the dust: that is, My dignity, and excellency; thus the Chaldee
expresses it: as if he had said, I have taken off, Splendorem meum. Chald.
or laid by all ornaments to put my self into the posture of an humble
suppliant; I have defiled my horn in the dust.

[Dust] also is taken properly, or improperly; properly, dust is light, small,
crumbled earth. Christ charge his Disciples ( Matthew. 10.14.) Whosoever shall
not receive you, nor hear your word, when ye depart out of that City, shake
off the dust of your feet: That action was emblematicall, and noted one of, or
all these three things.

First, That the earth was polluted, where such refusers of the precious
Gospel did inhabit, and was therefore to be shaken off as a filthy thing.

Secondly, That they were base and vile as dust, such as God would shake off.

Thirdly, That the dust of the Apostles feet there left, might be as a witness
(so the other Gospels express it) against them, that the Gospel had been
Preached there.

Dust also in a proper sense, was used in times of humiliation and sorrow among
the Jews; for then, they either sprinkled dust on their heads, or lay down in
the dust: Joshua and the Elders of Israel put dust on their heads ( Josh. 7.6.)
and Job professes ( Chap. 42.6.) Therefore I abhor my self, and repent in
dust and ashes: Which we may understand either strictly, that he sat down in
the dust, testifying his repentance, or largely, that his was a great and a
deep repentance, even like theirs, who are humbled in dust and ashes. That
carnal worldly sorrow of the Merchants and Friends of Babylon is thus
expressed ( Revel. 18.18, 19.) And they cast dust on their heads, and cried,
weeping and wayling, saying, Alas, alas, that great City.

Improperly, dust signifies any very low condition ( Psalm. 113.7. 1 Samuel 2.8.)
He raises the poor out of the dust. And again (1 Kings 16.2.) For as much as
I exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee a Prince over my people Israel,
etc. To be exalted from the dust, is to be exalted from among the common people
to a princely state, as that parallel place tells us (1 Kings 14.7.) All men
are but level with the dust in their natural constitution, but all
Magistrates are above the dust (that is, the common people) by their civil
constitution. When Job says, I have defiled my horn in the dust; it may be
understood either properly, that he did sit down in dust and ashes as he
speaks ( Chap. 2.) or improperly, that as God had brought him into a low
condition, so he was willing to submit himself to a low condition, and to be,
not only as man who is dust in his nature, and must return to dust, but as
becomes that man whose power and honor, whose excellency and greatness is
laid in the dust: David imprecates ( Psalm. 7.5.) If I have done this, if (as
some charge and suspect me) there be iniquity in my hands, etc. Let the enemy
persecute my soul, and take it; yea, let him tread my life down to the earth,
and lay mine honor in the dust: that is, Let him totally ruin me, or lay me
as low, as low can be. The Church is thus excited to rise from her Captivity (
Isa. 52.1, 3.) Awake, and shake thy self from the dust, arise, and sit down,
O Jerusalem: loose thy self from the bands of thy neck, O Captive daughter of
Zion. To lie in Captivity, is to lie in the dust; and as to shake off the dust
is to return from Captivity, so to defile the horn in the dust is to lay
aside our dignity.

Job gives yet a further description of his selfe-humiliation.

Verse. 16. My face is foul with weeping, and on my eye lids is the shadow of
death.
As Job put on his mourning Garments, so he was indeed a mourner, he wept, and
he wept plentifully: much eye-water does not cleanse, but foul the face, My
face is foul with weeping; Facies mea inturnuit a fletu. Vulg.
or my face is swollen, and my cheeks blubbered with weeping, says the Latin
Translator.

Note here three sorts of tears spoken of in Scripture.

First, There are tears of worldly sorrow. Secondly, Tears of godly sorrow.
Thirdly, Tears of Hypocrisy.
The last sort is applyable to both the former; it respects sometimes worldly
sorrow, and sometimes godly sorrow; for both may be feyned: Such were those
tears ( Jer. 41.) when Ishmael had killed Gedaliah, the Text says, Ishmael
went to Mizpeh, and met the men, weeping all along as he went; as if he had
been greatly troubled for the afflictions of the Land; but they were Crokadiles
tears. Ishmael wept only till he had gotten those men (as a prey) in his
power, and then he destroyed them. Ishmael was a State-hypocrite, and seemed
full of compassion, that he might get an opportunity to vent his malice.

There are many Church-hypocrites, who can foul and disfigure their faces with
weeping, as Christ reproves the Pharisees ( Matthew. 6.16.) while they have no
thought of washing or reforming either their hearts or lives. Jobs face was
foul with weeping, but his heart and life were clean; he needed not strain
for tears, or weep by art; how could he restrain tears, whose troubles were
enlarged? The word which we render foul, is doubled in the Original, (...)
Facies mea faedata est a (...) lutum, hic duplicatur ut ante ad augendam
fignisicationem.
which speaks thus much, that his face double-dirtyed, or double-dyed in his
own tears: Neither yet was this all the argument of his real sorrows; for
he had not only quite wept away his beauty, but he had almost wept away his
life too, and was even dead with grief, as it follows in the next words.

And on my eye lids is the shadow of death. That is, Mine eyes are darkened, and
I look like one that is ready to give up the Ghost: As if he had said, My
sorrow may be seen upon my eyes and eye lids, which with extremity of grief,
and multitude of tears are even wasted away and sunk in my head, as when a
man is dead, or dying: Much weeping weakens the eyesight, yea some are said to
weep out their eyes. David gives us that effect of weeping ( Psalm. 6.7.) I
water my couch with tears: that is, I weep abundantly, then it follows, Mine
eyes are consumed because of my grief: And ( Psalm. 38.10.) My heart pants,
my strength fails, as for the light of mine eyes, it is also gone from me: I
am even grown blind with sorrow, or (as the Church bemoanes her sad estate,
Lament. 2.11.) Mine eyes do fail with tears. Abundance of tears bring
failing of eyes: and he that uses his eyes to much weeping, shall have little
use of them for seeing: Hos gestus in humiliationibus Orientales etiam Graecos
usurpasse testatur and videt Plutarchus in libello de superstitione. Densissima
caligo est oculis meis offusa. Merc.
we may assign the reason of it from nature, because continual pouring forth
of tears spends the spirits, and so weakneth the vi^ive power. Now as death is
a total privation of sight, so they whose sight is much impaired, look
somewhat like the dead: Hence Jobs complaint, On my eyelids is the shadow of
death.

Shadow of death, notes the cleerest appearance, the strongest signs of
death: Or this shadow of death upon his eyelids, together with the fouling of
his face, in the former clause may be an allusion to some fashions or customs
of mourners in those times or places. This phrase (which also often occurrs in
other Scriptures) was opened ( Chap. 3.5.) thither I referr the Reader.

Thus we have Jobs behavior in his affliction by a twofold act, and a twofold
effect of it.

The first act was, Sowing sackcloth on his flesh.

The second was, Defiling his horn in the dust.

The first effect was, Foulness upon his face.

The second was, Death upon his eyes.

Hence Observe.

First, They are most sensible of the hand of God, who are most submissive to
it.

As Jobs afflictions were great, so was his sorrow, and so was his submission:
Sorrow is not contrary to patience; Job was the most pati^nt, and the most
sorrowful man in the World. There is an immoderate sorrow inconsistent with
patience, but great sorrow is not only consistent with patience, but an
argument of it; and unless we have some sorrow, we are not patient at all: how
can he be called patient, who either feels not, or slights his affliction. It
is as ill a symptom of a diseased soul to be unsensible of judgments, as to
be unsensible of mercies. Unless we feel the rod, we cannot hear the voice
of the rod, nor receive instruction by it. To be as a Trunk, or a Stone, under
correction, is not to be patient under it, but to despise it: Humble your
selves under the mighty hand of God, is the advice of the spirit, by the
Apostle (1 Pet. 5.6.) As God humbles us for sin, or for the trial of grace, so
they who have grace receive power to humble themselves; and to humble our
selves, is not only an act, but an high act of grace; both the grace of God
toward us, and the graces of God in us are exalted when we are low in our own
eyes.

Secondly, From the manner of this sorrowful humiliation, He sowed sackcloth
upon his skin, and defiled his horn in the dust.

Observe.

That as God lets out visible tokens of his afflicting hand upon us, so we
should let out visible tokens of our humiliation under his hand.

As we are visibly afflicted, so we should be visibly affected. We may make our
humblings seen, though we must not do it to be seen. As the light of our
active obedience, should so shine before men, that they may see our good
works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven (Matthew. 5.16.) So also
should the light of our passive obedience shine before men, that they may see
our holy sufferings, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. It is as great
a sin to boast of our poverty, as it is to boast of our riches, and as great a
vanity to be proud of a cross, as to be proud of a Crown; yet it is an honor
to God, when men see that we are not ashamed either of poverty or of a cross.
The cross should be carried upon our shoulders, not put up in our pockets: God
loves to see us own our troubles as well as our comforts; and as he will
condemn those who wrap the Talent of their gifts and abilities in a Napkin,
and hide it from the use of others; so he does not approve those who wrap up
their crosses and afflictions in a Napkin, and hide them from the sight of
others: especially considering, that even these also are Talents for which we
stand accountable, how we have used them, both for our own good, and the good
of others. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus (says the Lord)
Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised (Jer. 31.18.) Ephraims outward
moanes were as music in the ears of God; Ephraim did not murmr against God,
but he bemoaned himself; Ephraim was not angry at his chastisement, but
Ephraim mourned being chastised; God heard this fully, in hearing he heard it,
or, it pleased him to hear it. It is our duty to testify our sorrow by the
saddest notes of a troubled spirit, and it is a delight to God when we do so;
not that he delights in our sorrows; but he delights in the witness which
we bear to his wisdom, righteousness, and faithfulness, in sending those
sorrows. I heard Ephraim bemoane himself. Will an offender that looks for
mercy come before the Judge in rich apparel, or in some affected dress?
Comes he not rather in his Prison clothes, puts he not on the garments of
heaviness? The Messengers of Benhadad, put dust on their heads, and ropes
about their necks, and sackcloth on their loins, when they came to mediate
for the life of their Master. And thus the Lord speaks to the Israelites (
Exodus 33.5.) when they had sinned, and he was wroth, Put off your Ornaments
that I may know what to do with you: Ornaments are uncomly when God is
threatening judgments: It is time for us to lay by our bravery, when God is
about to make us naked. Sackcloth sowed upon the skin, and our horn in the
dust, are the best ensigns of an afflicted state. The Prophets counsel indeed
is ( Joel 2.13.) Rend your hearts and not your garments. (Rending the garments
may be taken, not only strictly for that act, but largely for all outward
actings of sorrow) Yet when he says, Rent not, this is not a prohibition of,
but a caution about the outward acting of their sorrow. Not, in Scripture, is
not always totally negative, it is often directive and comparative: So in this
place, Rend your hearts and not your garments, is, your hearts, rather then
your garments; or be sure to rend your hearts, as well as your garments: The
one must be done, the other ought not to be left undone. See more of this (
Chap. 1. Verse. 20.) upon those word, Then Job rent his Mantle.

Thirdly, Observe.

Great sorrow produces great effects, and leaves such impressions as testify
where it is.

The Apostle says of the sorrow of the World, That it works death (2 Cor.
7.10.) The sorrow of the World may be taken two ways.

First, For the sorrow of carnal worldly men, whose sorrow for sin is only a
vexing of their hearts, not a breaking or humbling of their hearts; which being
separate both from true faith for the pardon of sin, and from any real purpose
of leaving their sin, works death, both temporal death, often wearing out
their natural life lingringly, and sometime destroying their natural life
violently, as in Judas, as also hastening them on to eternal death, of which it
self is a foretast, or beginning.

Secondly, This sorrow of the World, is a sorrow for the loss of, or
disappoyntments about worldly things. This also works both those deaths in
mere worldly men; and when it is excessive (as under a temptation it may be)
in a godly man, it may be said to work the death of the body in him; yea great
and continued sorrow, though it be not excessive, works toward this death in
a godly man, drying his bones, and drawing out his spirits, as is clear in
Job, on whose eyelids the very shadow of death sat, while he wept and
sorrowed. It Is hard to dissemble a little grief, but a great deal cannot be
hid: As godly sorrow manifests it self in excellent effects upon the soul, of
which the Apostle numbers up seven at the eleventh Verse of that Chapter, For
this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carfulness
it wrought in you; yea what clearing of your selves, etc. Now I say, as godly
sorrow manifests it self in manifold effects upon the soul, so does the
sorrow of the World set its marks upon the body: As a good man's heart is made
clean by weeping the tears of godly sorrow, so every man's face is made foul
by weeping the tears of worldly sorrow; and as godly sorrow works repentance
unto salvation and life eternal, so the sorrow of the World works an
entrance to temporal death; yea, we may say that godly sorrow does sometimes
work temporal death; Paul was afraid lest the incestuous person while he was
repenting, might be Swallowed up with over much sorrow (2 Cor. 2.7.) which as
we are to understand cheifely of a swallowing up in the gulf of despair, so
we may take in that also as a consequent of the other, a swallowing of him up
in the Grave of death; as if he had said, The poor man may both despair and
dye under this burden, if you let it lie too long upon him. As soon as Heman
had said (in his desertion) My soul is full of troubles, he presently adds,
And my life draws nigh unto the Grave, I am counted with them that go down
to the pit, free among the dead (Psalm. 88.3, 4, 5.) To which he subjoyns ( Ver.
9.) Mine eye mourns by reason of affliction, and then expostulates ( Verse.
10.) Will thou show wonders to the dead? Shall the dead arise and praise thee?
As if he had said, These sorrows will bring me to my grave, or in the language
of Job, On my eyelids is the shadow of death.

Till we enjoy a life beyond the reach of all sorrows, we shall not be beyond
the reach of death. Hence that promise ( Revel. 21.4.) God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain: And as that life which has no
death in it, shall have no sorrow in it, so that life which is a continual
death (the life of the damned) is nothing else but sorrow. There shall be
weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth, for evermore (Mat. 13.42.) Their
eyes shall ever weep, their faces shall ever be foul with weeping, and on
their eyelids the shadow of death shall dwell for ever.

Fourthly, The hand of God being heavy upon Job, he defiled his horn in the
dust, and fouled his face with weeping; he regarded neither the beauty of his
face, nor the dignity of his condition, all was nothing to him.

Learn from it.

Great afflictions take off our respect to the World, and all worldly things.

What is honor? What is Gold or Silver? What is a goodly House? What is a
beautiful Wife, and pleasant Children? What are fine clothes, or a fair face
in a day of sorrow, or in the approaches of death? Spirituals are highest
prized when we are lowest: Grace shines clearest in worldly darkness; but the
light of worldly enjoyments is darkness to us, and that which some esteem as
a Sun, is but a Cloud to us in the day of distress: That is best which is good
to us in our worst estate. The favor of God, the pardon of sin, the fruits of
the spirit, are always pleasant to the Saints, but then most when the years,
or times are upon them, of which they not only say with the Preacher ( Eccles.
12.1.) We have no pleasure in them, but, we have much pain and trouble in
them. The face of the new creature is never foul with weeping, nor is the
horn of our salvation defiled when we lie in the dust, or on the dunghill.

Job having (according to his manner) accurately described his calamities, and
showed with what deep sense, and selfabasement he had entertained them; he
passes to a refutation of that inference which his Friends drew, and had
often pressed upon him from those premises of his affliction. Eliphaz suggested
him impious and unjust, because he was thus smitten. Job plainly denies it (
Verse. 17.) I have not received these wounds in my body and estate, for any
injustice in my hands, no, nor for any impiety in my heart, also my prayer is
pure. This Verse takes off both parts of that general assertion, as to Jobs
personal condition ( Chap. 15. Verse. 34.) The Congregation of Hypocrites shall
be desolate, fire shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery. There Eliphaz
closely hinted that Job was an Unjust man, and an Hypocrite: Job answers, no,
my Tabernacle is not the Tabernacle of bribery, there is no injustice in my
hands; my Congregation, or those with whom I joined in worship were not a
Congregation of Hypocrites, my prayer is pure: As if he had said, Though it be
a truth, that the Congregation of Hypocrites shall be desolate, yet it does not
follow, that every man is an Hypocrite, whose Congregation is made desolate,
for mine is desolate, and yet I know my prayer is pure: And though fire shall
consume the Tabernacles of bribery, yet every man is not guilty of bribery,
whose Tabernacle is consumed with fire, for so is mine, and yet I avouch it,
there is no injustice in my hands.

Verse. 17. Not for any [injustice] in my hands.
The word that we translate injustice, signifies rapine, (...) Proprie rapina
violentia injuria.
violence, or wrong done by violence, any open tyrannical oppression. The
Harpie being a ravenous Foul, has his name from this root in Hebrew (as also
in the Greek from one of the same importance) because he does not subtlely
surprise his prey, but openly assault it. It signifies also violence mingled
with scorn and contempt; as is observed upon that of the Prophet ( Ezekiel.
22.26.) Her Priests have violated my Laws: The Priests did not go behind the
door, they made an open breach upon the Law of God; they did not sin secretly,
as if they had been afraid to be seen, but avowedly and before the Sun. Hence
some have rendered that Text, Her Priests have contemned my Laws; noting either
that it was a violation with contempt; or that Laws which are once contemned
cannot be long unviolated. Thus Job professes, there is no such injustice in
my hand; Job did not disclaim all faylings in doing justice, but all
intendments of doing injustice, he did not peremptorily deny that there was no
injustice in his hand arising from mistakes of the Law, but none from contempt
of the Law, Not for any injustice, In my [hand.]

Injustice is ascribed to the hand, not because injustice is always, though
usually it be done with the hand; with the hand men take away, and with that
men detain the right of others. David speaks thus (2 Chro. 12.17.) Seenig
there is no wrong in mine hand; that is, I have done no wrong. The hand is the
great instrument of action, most injustice is done by the hand, though much be
done by the tongue; and a Judge who gives an unjust sentence with his tongue,
may be said to have injustice in his hands. Besides, he may be said to have
injustice in his hands, who keeps any thing in his hands which was gotten by
injustice; he also may be said to eat injustice, who feeds upon what he got
unjustly ( Prove. 4.17.) They eat the Bread of wickedness, and drink the Wine
of violence: that is, they eat Bread, and drink Wine, gotten by wickedness
and violence. Job disclaimes injustice in all these notions, There is no
injustice in my hands; as if he had said, I have not gotten wealth by
injustice, nor enricht my self by making others poor, I have not been as an
Harpie, to scratch and tear from others to feed my self: He gives a full
account of this ( Chap. 29. and Chap. 30.) wiping off those aspersions of
injustice, by a large narrative of his proceedings in that public capacity, as
a Magistrate; the breviate of which is summed up in this negative, There is no
injustice in my hand.

Further, Injustice may be taken two ways.

Either strictly, for the act of a Magistrate perverting the Law and going
besides the rules of righteousness.

Or largely, for any wrong that one neighbor in a private capacity, does
another.

To do justice is every ones duty as well as the Magistrates: we use to say,
Every man is either a Fool or a Physician; we may say, Every one is either a
doer of justice, or a dishonest man: For though to do justice is chiefly the
Magistrates work, yet no man (who has any thing to do in the World) can live
as he ought, without doing justice: In this large sense also we may expound
Jobs disclaimer of injustice; as if he had said, I have not willingly failed in
any of those duties which the Law of love toward my neighbor calls for, and
obliges me unto: There is no injustice in my hands.

Also my prayer is pure. Prayer is taken two vvayes, as injustice is.

Either largely, for the whole worship of God, My house shall be called the
house of prayer (Matthew. 21.13.) that is, All kind of public worship shall be
performed, and tendered to me there: Prayer being so principal a part of
worship, may well comprehend all the parts of worship; that which is chief
in any kind, often denominates all the rest. So Love is put for all the duties
of the Law, and Faith for all the duties, yea, and for all the Doctrines of the
Gospel, though in both, many other duties and Doctrines are contained.

Strictly, Prayer is that part or worship which consists in calling upon God:
Prayer is the making known of our desires, or the opening of our hearts to
God. It is the ascent of our souls to God. David being about to pray, says,
Unto thee O Lord do I lift up my soul. In this place we may take prayer in
both the notions of it, My prayer, Is pure.

The word signifies shining, bright, glorious; a gracious prayer shines so
bright that there is a glory in it; My prayer is pure. Zophar charged Job for
saying, My doctrine is pure (Chap. 12.4.) Now Job himself says, My prayer is
pure. The truth of Doctrine is the purity of it, and the sincerity of prayer is
the purity of it: Job did not boast his prayer pure without infirmity, but he
did profess it pure without hypocrisy. Yet besides this casting out of
hypocrisy, there are diverse ingredients to be taken in toward the
composition of a pure prayer, of which I shall touch more distinctly by and by.
We read in the Institutes of the Ceremonial Law of pure Myrrh, of pure
Frankincense, of pure Oil, of pure Incense, all which concurred to pure
worship among the Jews, and typed out all pure worship, both among Jews and
Gentiles; of the latter the Lord says ( Mal. 1.11.) From the rising of the Sun
unto the going down of the same, my name shall be called upon among the
Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
offering. This pure offering Job intends when he says, My prayer is pure.

Under these two, There is no injustice in my hand, and my prayer is pure: Job
conteines the whole duty of man, both to God and to man: Here is Justice
comprehending the duties of the second Table, His duobus membris utramque
tabulam complectitur. Merc.
and Prayer comprehending the duties of the first Table: Thus Job was complete
in all the will of God, and had respect to all his Commandments. And thus he
verified Gods testimony of him ( Chap. 1.1.) and approved himself to be A man
perfect and upright, fearing God, and eschewing evil, which is the whole duty
of man.

From the words in general, Observe.

First, Man has great support in bearing afflictions, from the witness which
his heart gives of his own integrity.

It Is matter of wonder that ever Job should bear so many burdens, and endure
breach upon breach, till we remember that though he had many breaches upon his
body and estate; yet he had none upon his conscience: Indeed his spirit had
breaches by way of trial and temptation from God; but it had none by way of
disobedience against God. The spirit of a man, says Solomon, will sustain his
infirmities (Prove. 18.14.) There are two sorts of infirmities.

First, Sinful infirmities, such are impatience, doubtings, deadness of
heart, and vanity of thoughts.

Secondly, Penal, or painful infirmities, such as are poverty, sickness,
diseases, or any outward cross whatsoever.

These latter are the infirmities which Solomon means; and these the spirit of
a man will sustain, even while his flesh or body sinks under them: Yet here
spirit is not taken merely in opposition to bodily, or material flesh (though
the spirit under that Physical notion is able to bear much more then the body
can) but as spirit is opposed to spiritual and sinful flesh; that is, to a
carnal corrupt mind: The spirit of a man furnished with grace, supported with
the favor of God, and the testimony of a good conscience, will sustain all
his infirmities; that is, cause him to bear with much, not only patience, but
courage and cheerfulness the heaviest burdens of affliction, which either the
wisdom of God does, or the malice of man can lay upon him. Holiness makes
the weak strong, and the strong like Giants, to endure all shocks of trouble
and hardship. A whole skin feels no smart, though you bath it with brine; and
if a man have a sound conscience, if his spirit be not galled and raw, he is
able to stand at any time, and sometimes to rejoice in the saltest waters of
worldly sorrow. For though he be not (as was showed before) senseless of, or
without outward smart; yet having no inward smart (which is the worst smart)
he is above it: The pains and wants of the body are almost lost, and
swallowed up in the comforts and enjoyments of the mind. A wounded spirit who
can bear? A spirit unwounded what can it not bear? He that has no injustice
in his hands has much peace in his heart, and while our prayer is pure, our
spirits will not be much troubled in any of our troubles.

Secondly, Observe.

It is possible to live without any known sin.

Job knew of no injustice in his hand, nor was he conscious of any impurity in
his prayer. The Apostle John writes to Saints of all Ages and Statures, under
the title of His little Children, not to sin (1 John 2.1.) And in that he does
not only admonish them of what they ought not to do, but of what they might
attain not to do: For though, he that says he has no sin, deceives himself,
and sins in saying so (1 John 1.9.) yet it may be said of some without sin, and
they (in Jobs case) may say it of themselves without sin, that they sin not.
The best Saints have, and know they have sin in their natures and sin in their
lives, yea, and sometimes they fall into great sins; yet such a degree of
holiness is attaineable in this life that a man may be said, not to sin: For
then (in a Gospel sense) we are said not to sin, when we cast off and are free
from all gross and scandalous sins, and do both carefully avoid and make
conscience of the least and the most secret sin. Zachary and Elizabeth (Luke
1.16.) were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord blameless; that is, They did not live in any open or
known sin; they lived so, that no man could blame them, or bring any just
complaint against them, either in matters of morality, which seem to be meant
in the word Commandment, or in matters of worship, which seem to be meant by
the word Ordinance. And when I speak of not living in any known sin, I mean
not only, that Saints may rise so high as not to live in any sin which the
World takes notice of; but they may, yea and often do arrive at that hight of
holiness, not to live in any sin known to themselves; if once a true Believer
discovers sin, he cannot own it, much less live in it, be it injustice or
wrong toward men, be it any failing in the worship and service of God, he will
not suffer it to lodge with him. He that has grace in his heart, cannot live
with injustice in his hand; there is an inconsistence between these two, a life
of grace, and to live in sin. Sin may be much alive in him that has grace, but
he cannot live in sin; he may be often tempted to the act of it, and sometimes
possibly overtaken with it, yet he cannot live in it: He cannot keep injustice
in his hand, nor frame an impure prayer in his heart. A good man may do an act
of injustice, but he continues not unjust; he restores what he has taken
unjustly from men, and repents before the Lord; but usually he is not conscious
to himself of doing unjustly toward men. If a Laban (one with whom he has
had converse and dealing twenty years together) should come and search his
house, he is able to say to him as honest Jacob did to his Uncle Laban (Genesis
31.37.) Whereas thou have searched all my stuff, what have thou sound of all
thy household-stuffe, set it here before my brethren and thy brethren, that
they may judge betwixt us both: As if he had said, Is there any injustice in my
hand? Let it come to trial. Or as upright Samuel to all Israel (1 Samuel 12.3.)
Behold, here I am, witness against me before the Lord, and before his
anointed, whose Ox have I taken? Or whose Ass have I taken? Or whom have I
defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? Samuel had been long a Judge, yet he knew of
no injustice in his hand, neither did any man know of any, and therefore all
acquit him from the least blemish of unfaithfulness in his Office ( Verse. 4.)
Thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither have thou taken ought (as
a bribe) of any man's hand. And he said unto them (Verse. 5.) The Lord is
witness against you, and his anointed is witness this day, that ye have not
found ought (that is, ought gotten unjustly) in my hand: That man has reached
the perfection of justice, who neither takes out of the hand of others
violently, nor of the hand of others covetously to byas his spirit when he
sits in judgment. Such a perfect Justicer was Samuel, all Israel could not
find ought (so come by) in his hand: He might say (and he did say as much in
effect) with Job, Not for any injustice in my hand.

And as a Believer may arrive at such a blameless walking toward men, that
they cannot say, He has sinned; so at such a holy walking before God, that God
himself will not say, He has sinned. And this God will not say, when he
sees a soul laboring (as Paul was once praying that the Colossians might) to
walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good
work (Col. 1.10.) And when he sees, that his prayer is pure, and his worship
tendered with a perfect or sincere heart.

When a soul does not wilfully neglect any duty toward God, God will say he
has performed all duty; and though there may be many failings in prayer, yet
God will say, that man's prayer is pure. So then, we grant that no man lives and
sins not, yet we affirm, that no godly man lives in sin; and that some godly
men are so far from living in any sin, that others cannot tax them, nor can
they tax themselves of acting any gross sins; yea, though the best of Saints
here know they sin, and know their sins, yet they may be said not to commit
known sins; that is, not to sin knowingly: He is not properly said to sin
knowingly, who knows he sins, but he who sins against his knowledge.

Thirdly, Observe.

Holiness consists in a complete uniformity, or in conformity to the whole
will of God.

Job draws the picture of a holy man, in all his limbs and lineaments; equity
and purity contain all: Some are First Table Christians, others are Second
Table Christians. Some are zealous for prayer, who are extreme cold in doing
Justice; some are extreme honest and just to men, righteous in all their
dealings, but they care not for prayer, nor have they any delight in communion
with God: The Law of God is one entire thing, and so must man's obedience be, He
that offends in one point is guilty of all (Jam. 2.10.) For though, he that
commits adultery, cannot properly be said to break that Law, Thou shall do no
murder; yet whosoever commits adultery, may properly be said to break the whole
Law: the reason is given by that Apostle, in the next Verse; For he that said,
Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill; now if thou commit no
adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressour of the Law. He that
breaks any one link of a chain, breaks the chain, though he break not a
second link: it is so here, the whole Law is Copulative: and as in this sense,
the Law is one, so the Lawmakers is altogether one: This the Apostle James
hints, as the reason of it, For he that said, do not commit adultery, said
also, do not kill: As if he had said, There is one and the same Legis-lative
power commanding all, and therefore, if ye transgress one, ye transgress
all. And how can there be a state of holiness, without an equal respect to
both Tables of the Law, seeing the breach of any one Law of either Table, is,
though not formally, yet reductively a breach of every Law in both Tables. And
therefore it is the aim of a Believer to fulfill both Tables of the Law, though
he fail in every Law of both: he gives up his will wholly to God, yea, he may
be said to lose his will in the will of God, and this is his doing the whole
will of God. And indeed we do nothing, unless we be found doing all.

Observe.

Fourthly, We may without hypocrisy make report of our own integrity.

Job does it here, and had done it before, and we find holy men doing it often
in Scripture; Non ad jactantiam sed ad divinae veritatis assertionem commemorat.
I (says Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7.) have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the Faith: This he speaks of himself, but not for
himself; not out of vainglory, or a desire of esteem with men, as the
Pharisees, but that others might be encouraged by his example, and that God
might have the glory of his free and powerful grace, enabling him to give and
hold out such an example. Other passages in this Book have led me to this note
before, and therefore I only mention it here.

More particularly, Observe.

Injustice toward men, and impurities in the worship of God, are great and
provoking sins.

Job disclaimes these by name: it is as if Job had said, Were there injustice
in my hands, or were I false in the worship of God, it were no wonder though
all these judgments should seize upon me; yea, though my burden were heavier,
I had no reason to complain; I must thank my self: Injustice and false
worship, will certainly bring breach upon breach; they break not only single
persons, but Kingdoms and Nations. Oppression and Superstition are
Kingdome-shaking sins; much more will they shake the walls and foundations of a
private House, or Family.

Again Observe.

If God afflict where there is no injustice, how justly does he destroy those
who are unjust?

Shall they complain who are beaten for their faults, when some are beaten who
have no fault? The Apostle Peter argues (1 Pet. 4.18.) If the righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinners appear? I may also
argue, if the righteous be not saved (from outward afflictions) if the godly
are smitten, how shall the ungodly and sinners escape unsmitten? Many are
smitten, not for any injustice in their hand (there is some other end, and that
a just one, why they are smitten) nor is God unjust in smiting them. Now, if
just ones are (without any injustice) thus smitten; how just is it with God to
smite those who are unjust? The repenting Thief rebuked him that blasphemed,
and spoke evil of Christ, upon this consideration, Do thou not fear God,
seeing thou art in the same condemnation? and we justly; for we receive the due
reward of our deeds: This man and we are in the same condemnation, but not in
the same fault; we are all condemned to dye, but we justly, and he unjustly,
This man has done nothing amiss, but we have done much amiss ( Luke 22.40,
41.) Now as this Thief was patient under his own just sufferings, seeing
another suffer who was just: So when we hear that the Lord afflicts those who
have done no evil, how ought such to lay their hands upon their mouths, who
are afflicted for the evil which they have done. We know (says the Apostle,
Romans 3.19.) that whatsoever the Law says (in a way of threatening) it says to
them who are under the Law (that is, who are not only under it, as having
heard the precept of the Law, but are under it also, as having by sin deserved
the penalty of it) that every mouth may be stopped, and all the World become
guilty before God; or, subject to the judgment of God, not having a word to
object why sentence should not be executed, because they have transgressed.

My prayer is pure. Taking prayer either for the worship of God in general, or
for that special duty of calling upon the name of God: Note from it,

That,

Only pure prayer is acceptable prayer.

Cain brought an offering to God, as well as Abel; But unto Cain and his
offering God had not respect (Genesis 4.5.) It is not what we do, but how we do
it, which is acceptable to God.

Pure prayer is pleasing to the pure God, and no other can please him. Heathens
have told us, that their Gods require pure worshippers, and pure worship: The
impure spirit imitates God, he will be worshipped, and he will have (according
to man's opinion) a pure worship; Omnis proefatio sacrorum, eos, quibus non sunt
purae manus sacris arcet, Live. lib. 41. Praecipuum est non admittere in animum
mala consilia, ^uras ad caelum manus tollere. Sen. lib. 3. Not. Qu.
how much more does the holy God require pure worship?

But what is it which denominates prayer pure, or when is prayer pure?

Prayer is pure:

First, When it is directed to a right object, when we pray to God, and to God
only: It is the sole privilege of God to receive prayer; O thou that hear
prayer, to thee shall all flesh come: There is but one hearer of prayer, and
that is God. Daniel withstood the Decree of the King, when he forbad him to
make his prayers to God; he would rather be cast to the Lions, then not to
pray, or pray to any besides God: therefore he opened his window (to let them
see his resolution) and prayed to God thrice a day openly. We may petition
living men, but we must pray only to the living God. All men (except such as
have sinned unto death) are to be prayed for, but no man must be prayed unto:
Neither Saint, nor Angel, nor any Creature, are the object of prayer, but God
alone.

Secondly, Pure prayer must be right in the matter of it, as well as the
object; if we pray for that which is unlawful, our prayer must needs be
unlawful; as it is a sin to do any thing which God commands not, so it is a
sin to ask any thing which God allows not. God has set special bounds to
three things.

First, To our Faith, he teaches us what to believe. Secondly, To our actions,
he teaches us what to do. Thirdly, To our prayers, he teaches us what to
desire.
We may make enlarged prayers, but we are not left at large in prayer. The
square or rule of prayer, is the will of God (1 John 5.14.) And this is the
confidence that we have in him, if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us. The will of God is the rule, not only of things to be done by us,
but of things which we are to ask God, to do for us: As man naturally would
rather do, so he would rather have his own will, then the will of God. Man
would feign be his own carver, but God will not let him: It pleases man better
to go two mile upon his own errand, then one upon Gods errand; and it pleases
man better to have any one thing of his own choosing, then two of Gods choosing;
but it should not. The will of God under a threefold revelation is the rule and
matter of prayer.

First, The will of God in commandments; whatsoever God has charged upon us
to do, we may pray for power and strength to do it, or that it may be done.

Secondly, The will of God in Promises; what God has said he will give, we may
pray to receive.

Thirdly, The will of God in Prophesies; what God has foreshewed shall come to
pass, we must pray that it may come to pass. The prayer of man gives birth to
the Prophesies of God. Thus says the Lord, I will yet for this be enquired of
by the House of Israel, to do it for them (Ezekiel. 36.37.) God is a sure
play master, yet he expects we should sue him, before he pays. Daniel found by
Books, that the time drew nigh, for the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon;
and then (says he) I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and
supplications, with fasting, sackcloth, and ashes (Dan. 9.1, 2.) The
manifestation of the will of God in a Prophecy, is a strong ground of prayer:
Thus the matter of prayer, is the will of God under one of those three
manifestations, a Command, a Promise, or a Prophecy.

A third thing in pure prayer, is the form of it. There is a twofold form of
prayer.

First, The internal, or essential form.

Secondly, The external, or accidental form of prayer.

The external form, is that habit of words and expressions with which we
cloth our desires, when we present them unto God: This form varies, not only
according to the several occasions and emergencies of this life, which call us
to the duty of prayer, but also according to the several gifts and abilities
of those who pray. We are free as to this form, from all ties and
prescriptions, except this, that we utter our minds to God soberly, gravely,
spiritually, with an eye to those forms and patterns of wholesome words
delivered to us in the word of God; and especially to that part of the word
which Christ gave both as a compendium, and a copy of holy prayer.

But as for the essential and internal form of prayer, that is unchangeable,
and must ever be one and the same: Namely, That we pray in the name of Christ.
One of the Ancients was much delighted in reading Tullies Hortensius, yet this
at last abated the edge of his delight in it, That he did not find the name of
Christ in it. As the Name of Christ is the greatest ornament of all Books where
it is; August. lib. 3. Confess. cap. 4.
so the name of Christ is the essence of all prayers; and that is no prayer,
where his Name is not. (John 14.13.) Whatsoever ye ask in my Name, I will do
it, that the Father may be glorified in the Son: whatsoever ye do, do all in
the Nome of Christ, giving thanks to God, through him (Col. 3.17.) To pray in
the Name of Christ, is more then to name Christ in prayer: It is easy to name
Christ in prayer, but it is a hard thing to pray in the Name of Christ. To pray
in the Name of Christ, is,

First, To look up to Christ, as having purchased us this privilege, that we
may pray; for it is by the blood of Christ that we draw near to God, and that
a Throne of grace is open for us.

Secondly, To pray in the Name of Christ, is to pray in the strength of Christ.

Thirdly, To pray in the Name of Christ, is to pray in the virtue of the
present mediation of Christ, which carries this acknowledgement in it, That
what we ask on earth, Christ obtaines in Heaven.

To pray thus is no easy matter, and unless we pray thus, we do not pray
at all. ( John 16.23, 24.) In that day ye shall ask me nothing: Verily I say
unto you, what soever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it
you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name, ask and ye shall receive,
that your joy may be full. But how do these parts of the Text consist? Why
does Christ tell them, that they shall ask nothing in that day, and yet
promise, that what they ask he will give? There is a twofold asking.

First, By way of Question. Secondly, By way of Petition.
The former, is asking, that we may know, or be informed in what we doubt;
the latter, is asking, that we may receive and be supplied with what we
want. Now, when Christ says, In that day ye shall ask me nothing: he had a
little before promised such a manifestation of the mind of God to them, by the
spirit, that they should not need to come and ask him; as if he had said, Now
ye put questions (as we read they did) about many things, ye understand
little of the mystery of the Gospel; but in that day ye shall have so clear a
revelation about the things of Heaven, that ye shall not need to propose your
doubts, and desire resolution, for you shall be able to resolve your selves by
the light within you. This the Apostle John (1 Epist. 2.20.) tells the Saints,
But ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things: And again
( Verse. 27.) But the annoynting which ye have received of him, abides in you:
and ye need not that any man should teach you: but as the same annoynting
teaches you all things, and is truth, and is no lie; and even as it has
taught, ye shall abide in him. These Scriptures are both a clear exposition,
and an illustrious verification of that promise of Christ, In that day ye
shall ask me nothing: that is, After my resurrection.

But when he says, Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, he will give it:
the meaning is, Your prayers shall be heard, while you keep close to this
essential form, Asking in my Name. Besides this essential form of prayer,
there is also another form, which we may call in a quallified sense,
essential: As when the matter we pray about is spiritual, and absolutely
necessary to salvation, then to pray in an absolute form. If it be temporal,
and outward, or if it be of a spiritual nature, yet such as is only necessary
to the vvel-being of a Believer, as spiritual gifts, yea, and the degrees of
grace are, then to pray in a conditional form, as submitting it to the will
of God, not only for the time, and manner, and means, and measure wherein,
or by which we shall receive those things, but also submitting the very
things themselves to his good pleasure, whether we shall receive them at all,
or no. Nor does conditional prayer hinder Faith, but looks to the rule. We may
pray without doubting, though we pray with a condition; and when we are
fullest of submission, we may be fullest of confidence; yea, without
submission in those cases, there can be no true confidence.

Fourthly, Prayer is pure, when the end which we aim at is pure: The end
denominates every action, as to the quality or goodness of it. The great end
of prayer, as of all other actions, and without which, neither those, nor
this, can be called pure, is, the glory of God. Hallowed be thy name, is the
first prayer, and that has influence into all our prayers: we must pray for
all, that God may be glorified, and pray for nothing that our lusts may be
satisfied. Though we may pray that our wants may be supplied (that may be an
end) yet never that our lusts may be satisfied ( James 4.3.) Ye ask and
receive not, because ye ask amiss: Where was the fault which the Apostle
found, and specified in those prayers? Not in the object, they prayed to God;
not in the matter, they prayed for things lawful; not in the form, they
prayed in the Name of Christ; but the fault was in the end, ye ask amiss,
that ye may bestow it on your lusts. It is possible for a man to pray, not
only for evil things, but for good things, and not only for outward good
things, but for spiritual good things, to bestow upon his lusts; some pray for
spiritual gifts, to bestow them on their lusts, pride, vaineglory, and
covetousness; yea, it is possible for a man to pray for grace, to bestow it on
his lust (so Hypocrites do) though it be impossible for any man, who indeed
receives grace, to bestow it upon his lust: Let your end be pure, that your
prayers may be pure also.

Fifthly, Prayer is pure when it is mingled with, and put up in Faith. By Faith
Abel offered a more excellent sacrifice then Cain (Heb. 11.4.) and without
Faith it is impossible to please God (Verse. 6.) Prayer is our coming to God,
He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. Faith takes hold of Christ, by whom only our
prayers are purified; and therefore there can be no pure prayer without Faith.
As God purifies our hearts by faith, so our prayers are purified by Faith.
Faith does not only take hold of God for the granting of our prayer, in which
sense it is said ( Jam. 1.6.) If any one ask, let him ask in Faith; that is,
That he shall receive: but Faith takes hold of Christ for the purifying of our
prayer, that so it may come up with acceptance before God. He is of purer eyes
then to behold evil, he cannot look on iniquity (to approve of it, or to like
it, Hab. 1.13.) Seeing then there is much iniquity in our holy things, we must
do all by our High Priest, who (as the typical High Priest, did for the
Children of Israel ( Exodus 28.38.) bears the iniquity of our holy things, that
we (as they) may be accepted before the Lord.

Sixthly, That, and only that, is pure prayer, which is breathed in, and
breathed out, by the spirit of God. Edify your selves in your ^ost holy Faith,
pray in the holy Ghost (Jude. Verse. 20.) Or, praying by the holy Ghost (as some
translate) that is, by the strength and help of the holy Ghost. We cannot make
pure prayer with our own breath, parts, and gifts; the holy spirit breathes
holy prayer into, and draws it out of our hearts: As we know not what to
believe or do aright, till the spirit teaches us; so we know not what we
should pray for as we ought* but the spirit it self makes intercession for us
(Romans 8.26.) The spirit makes intercession, not as Christ does; the spirit
does not mediate between God and us; but as it is the office of Christ to
intercede for us with God, so it is the office of the holy Ghost to make those
intercessions in us, which we put up to God: So that the spirit is said to make
intercession for us, because the intercessions and prayers which we make, are
made by the spirit; the spirit forms them in us. As some duller Scholars in a
School, who cannot make their Exercises, get their exercises made for them by
those that are more pregnant; so the spirit makes intercession for us. We are
dull, and low, (...), particula (...), ad nos laborantes refertur, quorum tamen
vis omnis ab eo spiritu proficiscitur, qui sicut nos penitus collapsos erexit
ita etiam erectos regit; ideoque dicitur ipse vicissim onus attollere ne sub eo
fatiscamus. Bez. in Epist. ad Romans
and straightened, we cannot make a prayer, the spirit makes them for us in our
hearts: Hence it is said in the beginning of the Verse, The spirit also helps
our infirmities: The Greek word signifies to help, as a Nurse helps a
little Child to go, or as a weak decrepid old man is upholden by a staff,
or rather (as the composition of the word implies) The spirit helps together:
And then it is a Metaphor taken from those who lift a weight, or a piece of
Timber (too heavy for one) together: The spirit lends us his hand in this duty,
and they who have received grace, act also with the spirit: Thus, the spirit
helps together: The Spirit and a Believer are both at it, to carry on this
praying work; yet all that strength which we put to the work flows from the
spirit; who as he raises us when we are quite fallen, so he assists us when
we are raised, and then we make good work, pure work of it in prayer.

Lastly, That is a pure prayer which comes from a pure person: And there is a
double purity of the person necessary to a pure prayer.

First, There is the purity of his state; he must be a converted, and
regenerated person, otherwise his prayer is abominable, though he should be
right in as many of the forementioned requisites, as it is possible for an
unregenerate man to be; as suppose he not only prays to God, and for such
things as are agreeable to the will of God, but also (as he thinks) for the
glory of God; yet the man's prayer is impure, because himself is impure: God
has respect to the person, before he has respect to his supplication. ( Prove.
15.8.) The prayer of the wicked is an abomination to God; but the prayer of the
upright is his delight: And again, He that turns away his ear from hearing
the Law, even his prayer shall be abomination (Prove. 28.9.)

Secondly, As there must be purity of state, before there can be a pure prayer,
so also purity of life, that is, he must be renewed in purity, not lying or
continuing in any sin (1 Timothy 2.8.) I will that men pray every where, lifting
up holy hands without wrath and doubtings. Holy hands, note the purity of our
actions, as a holy heart notes the purity of our state: To lift up the hands is
to pray, the sign being put for the thing signified: The meaning is, let your
prayers be holy. First, without wrath to men; come not to seek the favor of
God, with anger and revenge in thy heart against man: Secondly, pray without
doubting; that respects God, and is opposed to Faith: As if the Apostle had
said, Pray both in actual Faith and Love. Yet the Greek word ((...)) there
used, is rendered by some, Disceptation, or wrangling; as if the Apostle had in
that specified one effect of wrath. It Is expounded also by others, for any
internal distraction, or distemper of the mind; for the mind of man is often
carried away from God in prayer, and maintains secret Dialogismes, discourses,
and conferences, in, and with it self, when it should be wholly taken up with
God.

The covetous man's heart talks of Gold, and the voluptuous man's heart talks
of pleasures, when he seems to pray: yea, these Fowls will often come down
upon the Sacrifice of an Abraham, only as soon as he espies them, he drives
them away; yet by these interruptions in prayer, as well as by any sinful
action unrepented of, before, prayer, the holiness of prayer, or the lifting
up of holy hands in prayer, is hindered and defaced, even in those, whose
persons are holy. David was a man that was pure in state, he was a converted
person; yet he says ( Ps. 66.18.) If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord
will not hear my prayers. Though I am pure in state, yet if I am impure in
life, the ear of God will shut against my suites ( Isa. 1.14, 15.) God rejects
the prayers of his own people, because their hands were full of blood, and
hence his counsel, Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes, etc. Come now let us reason together; says the
Lord (Verse. 18.) As if he had said, while I see your sins, I cannot hear your
prayers; while your iniquities are before mine eyes, your supplications cannot
enter into mine ear, nor will I answer them. How can any soul expect with
Faith, that God should do what he requests, when he will not do what God
commands? Or that God should fulfill our desires, while we in any thing
neglect his rules?

As the prayer of an unholy person is turned into sin, so the sin of a holy
person may cause the Lord to turn away his prayer: Then take that counsel of
the Apostle, writing to, and of Saints ( Heb. 10.22.) Let us draw nigh to God
with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water: There is a twofold
evil conscience.

First, That which lives in any known sin unrepented of.

Secondly, That which is unquiet and unsettled about the pardon of those sins
which we have repented of.

We should get both these evil consciences, but especially the first, cured and
removed by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, before we draw nigh to God in
prayer: as also our bodies washed in pure water, which is either an allusion to
the old Ceremonies among the Jews, who before they came to worship at the
Tabernacle, purged themselves with diverse outward washings, leading them to
the consideration of that moral purity, both of heart and life, in which God
is to be worshipped; or it is an allusion to Baptism in special; in which
there is an external washing of the body, signifying the washing of the soul
by the blood of Christ, and by the effectual working of the spirit; The sum of
all is, unless the person be pure, his prayer is not pure. These are the
ingredients which constitute pure prayer; all these met in Job, and therefore
he concluded, not only confidently, but truly, My prayer is pure.

And as these are the ingredients of prayer, so they are all necessary
ingredients; so necessary that if any one of them be wanting, the whole prayer
is impure: They are necessary by a double necessity.

First, As commanded by God in prayer.

Secondly, As means without which man cannot attain his end in prayer.

The general end of prayer, is, that prayer may be heard, accepted, and
answered; God hears, accepts, answers, no one prayer, without some concurrence
of all these. The Incense of the Ceremonial Law was a shadow of prayer, which
is so great a duty of the moral Law: But if this Incense had not been made
exactly according to the will of God, both for the matter and the manner of the
composition, prescribed ( Exodus 30.34, 35, 36.) If after it had been thus made,
it had not also been offered according to those rules given ( Levit. 16.12,
13.) it had been an abomination to the Lord; or as the Prophet Isaiah speaks (
Chap. 66.3.) Such a burning of Incense had been but as the blessing of an Idol.
We may conclude also, That, if prayer be either composed, or presented in any
other way then God himself has directed, it is not only turned away, but
turned into sin. That man has spoken a great word, who can say (in Jobs sense)
My prayer is pure.

Thus Job justifies the prayer he made to God, and mainetaines his justice
toward men. There is no injustice in my hands, also my prayer is pure: A high
profession, yet in the next words he goes higher, and makes both an imprecation
against himself if it were not thus with him, and an appeal to God for his
testimony, that it was thus with him.

JOB, CHAP. 16. Verse. 18, 19. O Earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry
have no place.

Also now, behold my witness is in Heaven, and my record is on high.


JOB having (with much confidence) asserted the integrity of his heart, and the
righteousness of his way, both toward God and Man, confirms what he had thus
confidently asserted, by a double Argument.

First, By a vehement imprecation ( Verse. 18.) O earth, cover not thou my
blood, and let my cry have no place.

Secondly, By a free appeal, an appeal to God himself ( Verse. 19.) Also now
behold my witness is in Heaven, and my record is on high: He shows the
necessity of this appeal ( Verse. 20.) My Friends scorn me: therefore I am
constrained to go to God. When men have done us wrong, and will not do us
right, it is both time and duty to appeal to God. Upon this ground Job
appeals, Est juramenti deprecatorii forma, quo asseverat nullius sibi
iniquitatis cons^ium esse. Aben. Ezra.
and he concludes (according to our translation) his appeal, with a
passionate, yet holy wish ( Verse. 21.) O that one might plead for a man with
God, as a man pleads for his Neighbor. The reason both of his appeal and
wish, is given us further ( Verse. 22.) he looked on himself, as a man standing
upon the very confines of death, the Grave was ready for him; therefore he
beggs, that this business might be dispatched, and his integrity cleared
before he dyed. He was loath to go out of the World, like a Candle, burnt
down to the Socket, with an ill savor. He that has lived unstained in his
reputation, cannot well bear it, to dye with a blot; and therefore he will be
diligent by all due means to maintain the credit which he has got, and to
recover what he has lost: This was the reason of Jobs importunity discovered
in these two Verses, now further to be opened.

Verse. 18. O earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place.
There are two branches of this imprecation, or rather these make two distinct
imprecations.

The first in these words, O earth, cover not thou my blood.

The second in these, Let my cry have no place.

Job engages all upon the truth of what he had said, being willing that his
worst might be seen, and his best not heard, if he had not spoken truth.

O earth, cover not thou my blood. Poeticum sane and patheticum in dolor aut
re alia gravissima, res mutas mortuasve, omni sensu audituque carentes testes
and auditores compellare.
Job speaks pathetically, or, as some render him, Poetically, while he
bespeaks the earth, and makes the inanimate creature his hearer. The sacred
Penmen do often turn their speech to the Heavens, and to the Earth: Thus
Moses (Deuteronomy. 32.2.) in the Preface of his Sermon, his last Sermon to that
people, Give ear O ye Heavens, and I will speak, and hear O earth the words
of my mouth. So the Prophet Isaiah (Chap. 1.2.) Hear O Heavens, and give ear
O Earth, I have nourished, and brought up Children, and they have rebelled
against me: God speaks to that which has no ears, to hear, either to reprove
those who have ears, but hear not; or to raise up and provoke their attention
in hearing. Thus Job, O earth, etc. as if the earth were able to take his
complaint, and return an answer; as if the earth were able to make
inquisition, and bring in a verdict about his blood.

O earth [cover] not thou my blood. (...) texit, operuit, abscondit.
The word signifies not only common, but a twofold metaphorical covering.

First, Covering by way of dissimulation; to dissemble a matter, is to cover a
matter: In that sense Solomon speaks ( Prove. 12.16.) A fools wra^h is
presently known, but a prudent man covers shame: that is, He dissembleth his
wrath, or his anger, he will not let it always break forth, for that would be a
shame to him.

Secondly, The word signifies to cover by forgetfulness: That which is not
remembered, is hid or covered. ( Eccles. 6.4.) He comes in with vanity
(speaking of man) and departs in darkness, and his name shall be covered
with darkness: that is, He shall be forgotten, he shall be as if he had not
been. And thus it is applied to the pardon of sin ( Psalm. 32.1.) Sin is veiled
with the worthiness and obedience of Christ, as with a Garment, and is to God
as a thing forgotten, or out of mind, when once it is forgiven: In both these
senses Job seems to bespeak the earth, O earth, cover not my blood: Sanguis
terra tegitur quando facinus dissimulatur, nec vindictam exposcit.
that is, If thou have any of my blood, do not dissemble it, bring it forth,
be not as if thou knew of no such matter. As simulation makes that to be,
which is not, so dissimulation makes that not to be, which is.

Again, Cover not my blood; that is, Forget it not, if thou have such a record
upon thy Fyle, let it be continued and remembered, that the Generations to come
may judge how I have been dealt with by this present age, or how I have dealt
in it.

O earth, cover not my [blood.] But what is his [blood] which he would not have
covered? His blood may be taken two ways.

First, Passively, for his sufferings and grievous afflictions, which were even
to blood: The Apostle tells the Hebrews, Ye have not resisted to blood, striving
against sin (Heb. 12.4.) There is a threefold strife against sin.

First, Against sin already acting and moving in our selves.

Secondly, There is a striving against that sin which others move us to act,
whether by promises, or by threatenings.

Thirdly, There is a striving against that sin which others act.

The Apostle (as I conceive) intends one of, or both the latter sorts of
striving against sin, which is indeed a striving against sinners; and in this
strife he says, Ye have not resisted unto blood; ye have (I grant) resisted,
to the loss of your goods, yea, and to the loss of your credit and reputation
in the World ( Chap. 10.33, 34.) but know, ye are not come to the heat of the
Battle, till your bodies bleed: Ne tegas sanguinem meum. i. e. injuriam mihi
latam qua innocens pereo. Merc.
ye have lost no blood yet, striving against sin. Job resisted, or rather
submitted to blood; he had lost blood, in the great fight of affliction which
he endured; he was wounded all over. Now, say some, he cries, O earth, cover
not my blood; that is, These my bloody sufferings; what I have endured, let it
be remembered. But we cannot well accommodate this interpretation to the Text:
For, first, there may be as much vanity in desiring the evils we have
suffered, as the good we have done should be known: we must let God alone to
erect the monument of our sufferings; that must be none of our care.

Secondly, We cannot so much as suspect that Job would maintain the memory of
his sufferings against God; yet it was he who smote Job, though by the hand of
Satan, and wicked men: This Job had acknowledged more then once, with much
humble submission, and therefore he does not desire that his blood might be
forth-comming in a way of contestation with him. Further, If we look only to
those instruments of his affliction, who had indeed done him wrong: Surely the
spirit of this good man, as it was far from meditating revenge, so his scope
and business here, was rather to bring himself to a trial then them, rather
to have his own innocence cleared, then their guilt proved: And therefore we
have called these words, an imprecation upon himself, in case he were guilty,
not an accusation of their guiltiness. In pursuance of which general sense,
we must expound blood under another notion. And therefore,

Secondly, Blood may be taken actively, and so it falls under a threefold
consideration.

First, Blood is put for the general sinfulness or corruption of man's nature,
as also for any particular sin, as it is wrapped up in man's natural corruption.
Augustine.
One of the Ancients interprets David's prayer ( Psalm. 51.14.) Deliver me from
blood, or bloods, or (as we render) from blood-guiltinesse, O God; not of that
special sin, or not of that only, the death of Vriah, but of all sin, which
(says he) therefore bears that title, because it flows from the polluted
nature of man, which the Scripture calls flesh and blood. That of the Prophet
is more proper to this point ( Ezekiel. 16.6.) When thou wast in thy blood, I said
unto thee live: that is, When thou was wrapped in, and defiled with thy sin and
misery, then I had pity on thee, and spoke life into thee. Every soul tumbles
in blood till it is sprinkled with blood; our blood is our filthiness, and the
blood of Christ is our holiness, freeing us at once from the guilt, and from
the stain of sin. This corruption of nature, together with that issue of it,
the transgressions of life may be called blood, for two reasons.

First, Because it deserves death, and is a state of death, we are dead in
sin, and the wages of sin is death; and as any kind of death may be expressed
by blood, so a violent death is the pouring out of blood.

Secondly, It may be called blood, because sin is expiated by blood, and
without shedding of blood there is no remission; no not of the least sin.

Secondly, Blood signifies some notorious sin or sins. Great sins are not only
bloody sins, Sanguinis nomine intelligitur peccatum gravissimum, ac detestandum
facinus.
but (in Scripture language) blood. ( Isa. 1.15.) When ye make many prayers, I
will not hear: Why? For your hands are full of blood; that is, Of great and
foul crimes: For should we take blood there, for any sin, according to the
former interpretation, then whose prayer shall be heard? Who is it that sins
not, yea, who is not full of sin? So that by hands full of blood, he means
hands stained with great sins; or with sins, if small in themselves, yet,
(which greatens the least sin) loved and unrepented of ( Ezekiel. 9.9.) Thus says
the Lord, The iniquity of the House of Israel, and Judah, is exceeding great,
and the Land is full of blood; that is, Of all kind of wickedness ( Ezekiel.
24.7.) For her blood is in the midst of her, she set it upon the top of a
rock, she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust: Which words
describe, as the sin of Jerusalem, so her impudence in sinning. Her blood was
in the midst of her, it was not cast behind the door, or put into a corner,
She set it upon a rock, and not only so, but upon the top of a rock; as if
she not only cared not who saw it, but had taken care that all might see it,
She poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust: In which words the
Prophet alludes to that Law ( Levit. 17.13.) commanding that the blood of a
Beast should be poured out, and covered with dust. And again ( Hos. 4.2.) By
swearing, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery; they break out,
and blood touches blood; that is, One wickedness is heaped upon another.
There is an aggregation, Aggr^gant peccata, peccatis. Chald.
or a combination of many sins together, their sins are so thick set, that
there is not the least space, either of time or place between them; they sin
continually, and they sin contiguously, sin touches sin.

Thirdly, By blood in this active sense, we may understand those special sins
which draw blood; the sin of oppression, and the sin of murder. The Scriptures
last cited, include these principally, though not these alone, or not these
exclusively to other sins. Sins of cruelty are often called blood by name, and
such are named bloody men, who commit such sins ( Psalm. 55.24.) Blood-thirsty
and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; that is, Murderers,
and Oppressors shall not. When Shimei cursed David, he said, Go thou bloody
man, thou Son of Belial (2 Samuel 16.7, 8.) He calls him bloody man, in reference
to that particular act, with which David had stained his hands, the murder of
Vriah. (Hab. 2.12.) Woe to him that builds a Town with blood, that
stablisheth a City with iniquity; that is, By the iniquity of oppression: He
builds with blood, who to set his own nest on high, throws down the right,
or takes away the lives of others. Under this third, as also the second notion
of blood, we may best interpret Jobs imprecation, O earth, cover not thou my
blood: that is, The oppressions and cruelties which I have committed, if I have
committed any. Some conceive that Job referrs to the story of Cain and Abel
(Genesis 4.10.) The earth would not cover Cains blood; that is, the blood of Abel
which Cain had spilt. Eliphaz told Job before in a third person, that his
Tabernacle was a Tabernacle of bribery; as much as to say, That he had done
wrong in his place, Si quam caedem maleficiumve quod objicitis patravi, illud
revelet and testificetur terra. Jun. O Tellus ne celes scelera mea capitalia.
Tygur.
and had been a grinder of the faces of the poor. Now says Job, O earth,
cover not my blood, if I have been an oppressor, if I have drank the blood of
the poor, or am guilty of such like abominations, I desire that the earth
would not cover, or dissemble it, but let it be published to my shame, and
brought forth to my judgment. Master Broughtons note is full to this sense, If
there be any injury in my hands, let the earth reveal it. And the Tygurine, O
earth do not conceal my capital crimes.

The second branch of the imprecation falls cross to this; for in this Job
prays, that his evil deeds might be discovered, in that he prays that his
very prayers (which were his best deeds) might not be accepted, if he had
either been, or done as was suspected.

And let my cry have no place. The word signifies a loud cry, a greevous cry,
the cry of a man extremely pressed; yea, even utterly oppressed: This cry is
expounded three ways.

First, For the very cry of grief, or for a cry caused merely by grief. Let
my cry have no place; that is, Let not my pains and sorrows, my groans and
sighs, in midst of all these evils be regarded, either by God or Men, if I
have done such evils as I am accused of. It Is a great affliction which puts a
man to his cry, whether to God or Man; but it is a greater affliction to cry
and not to be heard, neither by God nor man: The cry of a poor man is then
said to have no place with a Judge, when he will not hear it, or take notice
of it.

Secondly, Others expound this for the cry of sin. Great sins are called a cry,
not only because they make others cry, but because themselves are very
clamarous and crying. Clamat quia innocens effusus est, and dicitur inter
pellare dominum, non prosecutione Eloquii sed indignitate commissi. Ambros.
Sin has a tongue to speak, and it has teeth to bite: every sin speaks, but
some sins have a loud voice, they cry, The blood of thy Brother which thou have
spilt, cries unto me (says God to Cain, Genesis 4.10.) The sin of Sodom cried up
to Heaven ( Genesis 18.20.) Oppression causes a cry; so here, Let my cry, that
is, my crying sins, or the cry of my sins, have no place; that is, none to
hide, or shelter themselves in: And then this clause of the imprecation is of
the same sense with the former, O earth, cover not thou my blood.

Thirdly, By this cry we may understand Jobs prayer, and that of two sorts:
First, Prayers, Petitions, or complaints to men; let not any Friend regard my
cry. Secondly, Prayers to God; for as there are crying sins, so there are
crying prayers, The Lord said to Moses, Wherefore cryest thou unto me (Exodus
14.15.) Asa cried unto the Lord (2 Chronicles. 14.) The Ninevites were commanded to
cry mightily to God ( John 3.8.) and Christ himself prayed with strong cries (
Heb. 5.7.) As there are two things especially which make sins crying sins,
First, When they are earnestly committed. Secondly, When they are constantly
committed.


So two things make prayers crying prayers, First, When we pray with
earnestness. Secondly, When we pray with continuance, or perseverance.


Ne in Caelum efferatur suscipiaturce clamor meus si sim e^^smodi. Jun.
We find David often crying to God in prayer; so that, when Job says, Let my
cry have no place, his meaning is, Let not God hear my most earnest prayer: A
dreadful imprecation! When we who have no help on earth, shall wish that we
may have none in Heaven neither; what can we wish worse to our selves then
this?

From the words in general, Observe.

It is lawful to use imprecations.

Job did not sin in this; There are imprecations of two sorts.

First, Upon others, when we wish them evil, or curse them; this in some rare
cases may be done, David uses imprecations against the incorrigible enemies of
the Church, and so may we; but in reference to personal injuries, the
Gospel-rule is, Bless them that curse you, pray for them that despitefully use
you (Matthew. 5.44.)

Secondly, Upon our selves; such are the imprecations intended in this point.
Job calls down mischeife upon his own head, in both parts of the Verse, Let
all my sins be discovered, let all my prayers be refused, if ever I have done
this thing. Imprecations, or wishes of evil upon our selves may proceed upon a
double ground.

First, For the assuring of what we promise, or engage our selves to do: As to
say, I will do such a thing, or I promise to do it; if I do it not, I wish
evil may befall me: This is to put our selves under a curse, which we do at
least implicitly in taking any promissory Oath. There are two sorts of Oaths.

First, Assertory Oaths, when we affirm such a thing to be true.

Secondly, Promissory Oaths, when we promise to do such a thing, calling God
to witness, and laying our selves under a penalty, if we do it not. This is
expressed in some, and employed in all solemn Oaths and Covenants. The present
point extends not to this sort of imprecations.

Secondly, Imprecations of penal evils may be used for the stronger denial,
or disavowing of any sinful evil, of which we are suspected, or with which we
are directly charged. To this sort of imprecations the present point is
confined: This was Jobs case, he was deeply charged to have done wickedly, and
he as deeply denied that he had done so. Thus David imprecates evil upon
himself ( Psalm. 7.3, 4, 5.) The title of the Psalm shows the occasion of it.
Shiggaion of David (that is, David's variable, or delightful song, or David's
solace) concerning the words of Cush the Benjamite: that is, either of Saul
himself, whose ill disposition toward him, he closely taxes under the word
Cush, which signifies a Blackmoore, or Ethiopian; or it may design some of
Saul's Courtiers, who had done ill offices to David, and accused him of a
conspiracy, to take away Saul's life, as appears (1 Samuel 24.9.) And David said
to Saul, Wherefore hear thou men's words, saying, Behold David seeks thy
hurt. Now David composed this Psalm in his own vindication, and fears not to
call down vengeance upon his own head, if he were guilty. O Lord my God, if I
have done this, if there be iniquity in my hands (that is, this iniquity, if I
have done this) If I have rewarded evil to him that was at peace with me (what
then? He imprecates) Let mine enemy persecute my soul and take it, yea let
him tread my life down to the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust. David
lays all at stake, soul, and life, and honor, in the highest actings of
holiness toward God, and integrity toward man. He that is in David's case,
and has David's conscience, may do the like and fear no hurt. The Woman
suspected of Adultery was by the Law ( Number. 5.) to imprecate, and wish evil on
her self, if she did not speak true in denying it: For the Priest was
commanded to bring the Woman, and to put the offering on her head, and then to
give her the water of jealousy to drink, saying, This water which causes the
curse, shall go into thy bowels, to make thy belly to swell, and thy thigh to
rot; and the Woman was to answer, Amen, Amen: As if she had said, I pray God
this misery may come upon me, in case I have been false, or unfaithful to my
Husband. Thus the Woman confirmed the curse, and took it upon her self, if
she were defiled: or testified her Faith in God, that he would clear her
innocence, she being not defiled; and therefore the word Amen was doubled.

And here it will not be impertinent to remember how the superstitious heart of
man has in times of former ignorance and darkness invented and adventured
upon ways of trial in doubtful cases, with some resemblance to (possibly in
imitation of) this appointment of God among the Jews.

Versteg: Restitut. of decayed Intal. in Antiq. Chap. 3d.
The old Saxons had their Ordeal, which word signifies, Due part, or Dome and
Judgment: There were four sorts of Ordeal, by which when manifest proofs
were wanting, they attempted (or indeed tempted God) to find out whether the
party accused were guilty, or guiltless.

The first was by Combat, in which the person accusing offered with the peril
of his life at any weapon, to prove his accusation: and if the person accused
did refuse the challenge, or did either yield, or was slain in the fight, he
was without further evidence adjudged culpable.

The second was by Fire, in which the person accused were to take red hot Iron
in their bare hands, or to go barefoot and blindfold where red hot Irons were
laid, and if they did either step between them, or stepping upon them, felt no
harm; this was a declaration of innocence.

The third trial was made by Hot boiling water, into which if the person
suspected thrusting his naked Arm, sound no evil effects, he was pronounced
guiltless.

The fourth was by cold water, into which persons accused, having a coard tied
about them, were cast, and if they sunk to the bottom, and continued a little
there, till they were drawn up, they were held faultlesse; all these trials
were made with prayer and invocation upon the name of God, that the truth might
be made known.

These customs drew their first breath from Paganism, and were continued by
some who professed Christianity, till clearer light convinced them of their
vanity, and unwarrantable boldness with the Name of God.

Now, as all imprecations used with these or the like Ceremonies and
circumstances invented by man are wicked and unlawful; so those which are in
themselves lawful, are used by most, unlawfully. And therefore I shall give
some rules, and bounds beyond which we may not pass, without sinful
presumption.

First, An imprecation must be used only in very great, serious, and weighty
matters: Woe to those who wish evil on, or curse themselves about trifles;
some have been heard to wish themselves Hanged, yea Damned, upon small
occasions.

Secondly, It is not enough that the matter be great, and ^erious, unless it
be done with serious deliberation, and self^xamination, as also with highest
reverence of God, who ^nowes our hearts, and will judge both our ways and
^ords.

Thirdly, It must be done with a desire to honor God, as ^uch as to exonerate
our selves; David knew Gods Name ^as blasphemed by those who misjudged him,
Here Is a man that would be thought so holy, and religious before God; see how
perfidious and disloyal he is to his King. When David saw the honor of God
concerned in him; He was bold to say, Lord if I have done this thing, let him
persecute my life and take it, he has persecuted my life, but he could not
take it hitherto; but let him take it, if this be so.

Fourthly, Be sure that you are clear in the matter, and that you imprecate in
truth; God is an avenger of falsehood, much more of studied falsehood. It is hard
to deprecate his wrath, when we have spoken falsely, surely then he will pour
out his wrath upon their heads, who imprecate it, to cover their falsehood. The
Jews accused Christ falsely, and as earnestly prayed judgment against him,
crying out to the Judge, Let him be crucified; But when they saw they could not
prevail with importunity, and that Pilate (who was doubtful of the justice of
their clamor) took water, and washed his hands, and said, Behold I am free
from the blood of this man; then in a rage they imprecate, Let his blood be
upon us and upon our Children (Matthew. 27.25.) As if they had said, Be not thou
so scrupulous to condemn him, if thou think him innocent, let the vengeance
of his innocent blood, fall upon us and our posterity. When a man is accused
rightly, and the Judge rests unsatisfied, the accuser may say to satisfy the
Judge, Let his blood be upon my head; I have spoke my conscience, and the
truth. The Jews accused Christ falsely, yet called for his blood upon their
heads; therefore God gave them their wicked wish, and they lie under the weight
of this imprecation to this very day: they prayed that the blood of Christ
might be upon them, and it is upon them. As God poures the blood of Christ upon
some in mercy, so upon others in wrath. The blood of Christ is upon Believers,
to wash and cleanse them from their sins, but the blood of Christ has been
upon the Jews to condemn and scatter them, as a vile people, all the World
over for their sin: The Lord has been most exact in answering this cry, even
in the very place where they made it. The History of the Jews reports that
about thirty eight years after this dreadful curse upon themselves, Herod
called the Jews together, and demanded a sum of Money of them for making a
watercourse, which they refusing to give, he sent for Soldiers to come
secretly armed, who slew great multitudes of them in that place, where they
cried, Let his blood be upon us, etc. At another time Florus, who was General
of the Common Soldiers, made a second, and that a more bloody massacre of them
there. And when Jerusalem was taken by Vespasian, the blood of Christ was
powered upon the heads of many hundred thousands, who were slain by Fire and
Sword, Famine and Pestilence; besides more then seven thousand of them, who
were led Captive: And the Story informs us further, that Caesar sold the
younger and common sort of those Captives at that contemptible rate of thirty a
penny; as they or their Fathers sold Christ for thirty pence, so by the just
judgment of God thirty of them were sold for a penny. There was never any
people in the World, who tasted more justly, or more deeply of that cup of
self-cursing then the Jews have done; yet many persons have tasted deeply of it
too besides the Jews. This sin has so much, not only of wickedness, but
boldness in it, that God never lets it go altogether unpunished, though
(being repented of) it may be pardoned. Master Perkins, in his Book of the
right government of the tongue, touching upon this point, tells us of certain
English Soldiers in the time of King Edward the sixth, who were cast upon the
French shore by a storm; in which stresse they went to prayer, that they might
be delivered; but one Soldier in stead of praying, cried out, Gallows take
thy right, or claim thy due; and when he came home he was hanged indeed.
Master Fox, in his Book of Acts and Monuments, has a notable example to this
purpose, of one John Peter's, Keeper of Newgate, who was wont at every ordinary
thing he spoke (whether it were true or false, it made (with him) no great
matter) to averr it with this imprecation, if it be not so, I pray God I may
rot before I dye; and so it came to pass. I might give many such instances of
rash imprecations which God has followed with severest vengeance: I shall add
one more which is fresh in the memory of many yet living, of a Gentleman of
quality, a Knight, Sir Gervaise Ellowayes.
that suffered at the Tower Hill, about the death of Sir Thomas Overburie, who
confessed it was just with God that he should undergo that ignominious death;
for often in Gaming (said he) I have used this wish, I pray God I be hanged if it
be not so. I will conclude this point with a nearer instance, A Woman who
accidentally came into the Congregation while this word was Preached, did
afterward by writing certify me, that she being convinced in conscience of
her sin in wishing evil upon her self, thereby to cover a sin, which she had
committed, but denied, did feel the sad effects of it according to her wish,
begging earnest prayers that it might be forgive^ her, and that God would be
entreated to take off his hand.

Let those wretches hear and fear, and do no more so presumptuously, who
fear not to wish, The Devil take them, and God damn them, lest indeed God
let the Devil loose upon them, and take them at their word. And here it may be
observed, that such as are most guilty, are most apt to imprecate vengeance
upon themselves, that they may appear guiltless. They have no way left to
persuade others, that they are good, or have not done evil, but by wishing
evil to themselves. Such is the stupidity of a misled conscience, that when it
is deepest in sin, it dares defy Gods justice to gain an opinion among men,
of its own innocence.

O earth, cover not thou my bloood. More particularly Observe.

Great sins, bloody sins, especially this sin of shedding innocent blood, shall
not pass undiscovered.

God will give a tongue to the earth, he will make speechless creatures speak,
rather then blood shall be concealed. Blood may be concealed a long time, but
blood shall not always be concealed ( Genesis 4.7.) What have thou done? The
voice of thy Brethers blood cries to me from the ground: The blood had no
voice, and the ground was silent; blood has no more voice of its own, then
water has, or then a Fish that lives in the water has; these did not speak
formally: but the Lord speaks thus to show that he will certainly bring
bloody sins, chiefly the sin of blood, to light. The justice of God in all
Ages has sent out his Writ of inquiry after bloody men, and for the blood of
the innocent ( Psalm. 9.12.) When he makes inquisition for blood, he remembers
them, he forgets not the cry of the poor.

But does not the Lord make inquisition for all sin? Or is there any sin that
God does not enquire after?

Surely no, there was never any sin committed in the World, but the Lord
inquired has after it, sin shall not be lost, God will find it out, and keep it
upon record: But when it is said, God makes inquisition for blood, it argues
the greatness of that sin: For while that act of God which extends to every
sin, is appropriated to some one particular sin; it is an argument that God
takes special no^ice of it, or that it is a very provoking sin: Though God
makes inquisition for all sin, yet as if he would let all other sins pass
unsought, and un enquired after, it is said only of this sin, that he makes
inquisition for it* we find not the like expression about any other particular
sin in all the Book of God; though it be a truth, that he enquires for all sin.

Thirdly, Observe.

O earth, cover not thou my blood. Innocence fears no discovery.

Come who will, Angels from Heaven, Devils from Hell, Men on Earth, let all
creatures be summoned into one Jury of grand Inquest, an innocent person will
neither run nor hide his head for it: He whose heart bears witness with him,
fears no witness that can be brought against him. While conscience acquits,
the matter is not much who accuses, or condemns: He that is righteous knows
that all his sins are covered by the freegrace of God in the righteousness of
Jesus Christ; and he knows that he has not covered his sin as Adam by
excuses, nor sewed the Fig Leaves of carnal reasonings together, to hide his
nakedness; he knows also that he lives not in any known sin, nor has
wickedly departed from the Lord. Now because in all these respects he knows
nothing by himself, therefore he cares not who knows him; he calls not for
Masks, or Visors, for Curtains, or coverings, to obscure or disguise himself,
or his actions under, either from the sight of God or man, but is willing to
stand forth in the open light. For though the best of men may have done some
act, which is not fit for the open light, yet considering the whole frame of
their hearts and lives toward God, together with what has past between God
and their souls about that act; they are not afraid that the worst act which
ever they have done should stand forth in the open light; and as for those
crimes which men uncharitably charge upon them, every honest heart speaks
boldly the sense of this first part of Jobs imprecation, O earth, cover not
thou my blood.

From the second branch of Jobs imprecation, Let my cry have no place.

Observe.

Not to have prayer heard and accepted by God, is the greatest misery that can
befall man.

God is the last refuge of a distressed soul, and the means by which we make
God our refuge, or fly to him for refuge, is believing, and servent prayer:
Prayer is a duty, and yet it is a privilege, it is a privilege, not only to
receive an answer of prayer, but to put up our requests in prayer; he therefore
that asks a stop upon his own prayers, has at once asked a stop upon all his
mercies; he cannot look to be releeved, who tells God he does not look to be
heard; and when prayer has no place of acceptance in Heaven, we can have no
place of contentment on the Earth: Upon this account we may conclude:

That,

Man cannot bespeake any thing worse for himself, then not to be heard when he
speaks to God. As it is one of the highest honors done to God that men make
prayers to him, so it is one of the deepest afflictions of man, for God not to
hear his prayers: Such was Saul's condition (2 Samuel 28.) God does not answer
me, neither by dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by Prophets: He could get no answer
from God, his cry had no place: This troubled him more then the invasion of the
Philistims. I am sore distressed (says he) the Philistims make War upon me,
and God is departed from me. When trouble comes, and God goes away, man is in a
woeful estate. We have no promise to receive unless we ask, and though we do
ask, we cannot receive, unless our prayer be received: God receives the
prayer of man, before man receives any thing from God in prayer. All our
treasure lies in Heaven, our comfort is in Heaven, our protection is in Heaven;
and prayer is the messenger which we send to Heaven in the name of Christ for
all things, or, for whatsoever else we need on earth. Now if prayer cannot get
in, if God will not hear prayer, if he send back our messenger without
audience, what can we receive?

The sinfulness of man appears in nothing, more then in this, That he calls
not upon God ( Psalm. 14.4.) Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? Who
eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord: Now as the
sin of man appears exceedingly in not calling upon God, so the wrath of God
appears exceedingly in not hearing man when he calls ( Prove. 1.20.) Then shall
they call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they
shall not find me. God will power out wrath upon the Families that call not
upon his name (Jer. 10.25.) but he powers out most wrath upon those Families
whom he hears not, when they call upon his name. All our mercies are shut out
at once, when prayer is shut out: nor shall that person have any place or room
in Gods heart, whose cry has no place in his ear.

Holy Job was sensible enough of this, nor durst he have imprecated, that his
cry should have no place, but that (being conscious of no evil) he was
assured that his cry had place; and therefore as in the sincerity of his soul
he made that imprecation, so in the confidence of his soul, he proceeds to
make his Appeal to God in the next words.

Verse. 19. Also now, behold my witness is in Heaven, and my record is on high.
As if he had said, I fear no evidence that can be brought against me on
earth, and I rejoice in the witness I have in Heaven: though I have none to
testify for me here, yet I have one that will testify for me above: My
witness is in Heaven, and my record is on high. Vtitur testificatione caeli
postquam terrae testimonium produxit. Eugub.


Some conceive, that as Job had spoken to the earth before, so now he speaks
to Heaven, O earth, cover not my blood: O Heaven witness for me. But he says
not my witness is Heaven, but my witness is in Heaven; nor does he call the
Heavens to witness for him, but he calls him who is in Heaven to witness, and
that is God.

There are two branches of this appeal, Idem bis dicit conscientiae suae
integrae declarandae causa. Lavat.

(...) Synonymum est (...) Hieron in Trad.


and they both intend the same thing, My witness is in Heaven, and my record
is on high. The words witness and record, are of the same signification,
though they differ in the letter: The one is properly an Hebrew word, and the
other Syriack: When Jacob and Laban were in that contest ( Genesis 31.47.) Jacob
took a Stone, and set up a Pillar for a witness, And Jacob said to his
Brethren, Gather stones, and they made an heap, and they did eat there upon
the heap, and Laban called it Jegar-sahadatha, that is, a heap of witnesses (as
it is in the Margin) but Jacob called it Galeed, or Gilead: Jacob speaking the
pure Hebrew, and Laban the Syriack language, they take in both the words of
Jobs appeal, My witness is in Heaven, my record is on high. Est forma
juramenti, quo deum invocat innocentiae suae testem atque conscientiae
spectatorem. Cajet.


Job speaks the same thing twice, to show how strongly he believed that the
Lord would be witness for him, My witness is in Heaven, my record is on high.

Heaven and high are the same, as witness and record are. And when he says,
on high, or in the high place; he uses not the word Bamoth by which those high
places are expressed, (...) In excelsis, malimin altissimis, quia excelsa
vocantur quae Ebraeis (...) in quibus sacrificabant idolis. Caeterum (...)
proprie de Deo usurpatur and de caelo, de Deo in singulari numero, de caelo in
utroque Drus. Dicitur Deus testis in excelsis propter locum aptissimum ad
contemplandum tanquam in sublimi specula quicquid agitur. Pined.
wherein the false gods were worshipped, or the true God falsely: Job puts that
word into his appeal, which belongs properly to God, and signifies in
Scripture, the place of his glorious residence. Jobs record was not only on
high, but ( Bemerumim, the Hebrew is Plural) in the heights; Some translate it
in the Superlative, not (in excelsis) on high, but (in altissimis) in the
highests: As if he had said, My witness is above all witnesses, and therefore
he is a witness above all exception. And Job did well, for his purpose, to say
his record was on high; not only because of the dignity of that which is high,
but for the advantage which he has, who is on high, or in the highest to be a
witness. God is said to be a witness in Heaven, or on high, to show how
easily he can observe and take notice of those things which are below: God has
eyes infinitely pure and piercing, he beholds all things, and he beholds them
from on high as from a watchtower, which renders the object more obvious to
the eye: The sight is soon intercepted upon a level: but, The Lord (says
David, Psalm. 14.2.) looked down from Heaven upon the children of men, to see
if there were any that did understand and seek God: If but one had sought God,
God had found him out; but the report which he makes upon that surveigh, tells
us, They are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there is none
that does good, no not one (Verse. 3.)

Further he says, My witness is in Heaven, or on high, implying, that he was
such a witness as was able to protect him; a witness who is above all fear,
and who needs no favor. Some witnesses are not only men of no state, but of
no conscience, Such underlings will be hirelings upon Oath against the truth,
and are ready to testify any thing for hope of gain, or for fear of a frown,
My witness (says Job) is in Heaven, my record is on high; such a witness he
is as cannot be corrupted by gifts, such as has no need of any man's gifts,
seeing he gives to all men life and breath, and all things.

Hence Observe.

First, That as God is the Judge of all men, so he is their witness.

God is the Judge of all the earth, and God is the witness of all the earth
too ( Jer. 29.23.) Because they have committed villainy in Israel, and have
committed adultery with their neighbors Wives, and have spoken lying words in
my name, that I have not commanded them; even I know, and am a witness says
the Lord: He says not, I know, and am Judge; but I know, and am witness.

Let no man hope to escape the judgment of God, because there is none to
witness against him: for if God has not the witness of man, if our sin be a
secret to all the World, yet God has always two witnesses.

First, Our own conscience. Secondly, Himself.
An earthly Judge must not be a witness; his duty is to give sentence, not to
give evidence; he must determine according to what is alleged, and proved
upon testimony given; but he cannot give testimony; he cannot be Judge and
Party too: But God is so transcendently Sovereign, that he is both Judge and
Party, he pronounces sentence, and gives in evidence; Christ is called, The
faithful, and the true witness (Revel. 3.14.) And yet, All judgment is given
into his hand (John. 5.22, 27.) God judges upon his own knowledge, not upon
the knowledge of others, and therefore as there can be no failing in, so no
avoiding of, his judgment.

Secondly, Observe.

It is lawful to appeal to God, or to take God to witness.

An Oath is the calling of God to witness, and whenever we appeal to God,
or call him to witness, it is an Oath. The Apostle Paul took an Oath, when he
said ( Romans 1.9.) God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel
of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you in my prayers. Thus in
highest holiness he swear that he prayed for the Romans spiritual good, while
he was absent from them, and had never so much as seen them; and that he
passionately desired to be present with them, and see them, that he might
impart unto them some spiritual gift: Because being a mere stranger, he had
not yet made his actions a witness of his love to them, and because no man can
be an unerring witness of another man's heart, or of the moving of his
affections, therefore he calls God to witness, who alone knows the heart, and
can tell how much we love either himself, or one another.

He speaks as much (though in another case) to the Corinthians (2 Cor. 1.23.)
Moreover I call God for a record upon my soul, that to spare you, I came not
as yet unto Corinth. As if he had said, By this my earnest adjuration, I assure
you, that the reason why I have deferred my coming to you, was not from any
levity of mind, or change of purpose in me, but only because I was unwilling
to use such severity as the distempers among you call for, and would have
pressed me unto being present. We find him in the same tenor of speech
toward the Philippians (Chap. 1.8.) For God is my record, how greatly I long
after you all in the bowels of Christ; that is, I call God to witness, I love
you: And again (1 These. 2.5.) Neither at any time used we flattering words,
as you know, nor a cloak of covetousness, God is witness: As if he had said,
Had I used flattering words, you might witness it; and that I have not used a
cloak of covetousness, God is witness. I might have worn a cloak of
covetousness so closely, that you could not have seen it, but God could; he
can judge through the darkest clouds, and see through the thickest cloaks and
coverings but I appeal to him whether I have put on such a cloak, or no. As
Paul by Oath purged himself from covetousness of spirit; so Abraham protested
by Oath against all covetous practices ( Genesis 14.22.) I have lifted up mine
hand to the most high God, the possessour of Heaven and Earth, that I will not
take any thing that is thine. This gesture of lifting up the hand when an Oath
is taken, is there put for an Oath it self; by which Abraham appealed to God
as a witness of his sincere intentions in taking up those Arms for the rescue
of his Nephew Lot, and that as he had overcome his Enemies, so he had overcome
covetousness, which was, of the two, the far more noble victory.

This calling of God to witness, is of two sorts.

First, When we are called by others, who have lawful power, to testify the
truth; such is swearing before a Magistrate.

Secondly, When we offer it our selves, for the removal of such jealousies as
are cast upon us, and we have no other way left, to free, or vindicate our
selves from.

This latter was the occasion of Jobs Oath, as also of those alleged
concerning Paul and Abraham: but whether it be an Oath of the one sort, or of
the other, both meet in this, that God is appealed to, and called to witness
by such as use them: and seeing he is a jealous God, who will not hold them
guiltless that take his name in vain: I shall add some cautions for the
bounding and directing of our practice.

First, We may call God to witness in weighty matters, and unless the matter
be weighty, either in it self, or in the consequents of it, we may not; God
is my witness, and God is my Judge, are not for common, much less for vain
things. There are two things in every Oath or appeal to God which show this.

First, An Oath is for confirmation ( Heb. 6.16.) vain things are not worthy
the mentioning, much less are they worthy the confirming: we ought not to
strive at all about them, much less ought we to swear about them, which is an
end of all strife.

Secondly, In every Oath or appeal to God, there is an invocation of the Name
of God; but the name of God must not be taken in vain, which it cannot but be,
when it is taken into our mouths about a vain thing.

Secondly, We may call God to witness when men give a wrong witness of us, or
will not give a right witness for us; but if we can have testimony upon earth,
we must not go to Heaven for it; God must be our last resort. Job found none
on earth to witness for him, and his afflictions were looked upon as
sufficient witnesses against him, and therefore he was necessitated to make his
address to God.

Thirdly, When the matter is not only such as others will not testify, when
they might, but such as no man can testify (none being privy to it, but only
God and our own souls) then we have a just ground of appeal to God; who
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the heart: Jobs sincerity was suspected; and that is such a secret
as man has no access unto, and therefore can give no witness to it: Who is
sincere, and who is an hypocrite, is resolved only by the testimony of God,
and of our own souls.

Fourthly, We must be sure to call God to witness in truth, Thou shall swear
the Lord lives in truth, in righteousness, and in judgment (Jer. 4.2.)
Unless we have a witness within us, we must not call God to witness who is
above us. God is ready to witness with our consciences; but woe to those who
call God to witness against their consciences. Holy Paul called God to record
upon his soul (2 Cor. 1.23.) that is, He did as it were (which is also done in
every Oath) engage, or pawn his soul and salvation upon it, that he spoke the
truth: When our souls bear record with us, we may venture to call God to
record upon our souls. But some, when they have no witness from their souls,
yea when their souls witness against them, will yet venture to call God to
record upon their souls. They will needs be tried by God, who dare not abide
the just trial of men; such would make God (who cannot lie) witness to a lie:
They use the glorious God as some do, a sort of miscreants, called Knights of
the Post, who for a Fee, will not only say, but swear what you will. This is
highest profanation of the name of God: For as he that believes not the truth
of God makes him a liar; so also does he that appeals to God for the witness
of an untruth.

More partiularly, My witness is in Heaven, my record is on high. Job speaks
this, not only because he wanted the witness of men, but because of the high
esteem he had of the witness of God.

Hence Observe.

The witness of God is the most desir^^ble witness.

The witness we have on (...) is nothing worth, unless we have a witness in
Heaven: I^ we have not the inward witness of our own conscience it is little
advantage though we have a thousand outward witnesses: conscience is more then
a thousand witnesses, but God is more then ten thousand consciences: Therefore
never rest in any witness, till you have the witness of God. We labor (says
the Apostle, (2 Cor. 5.9.) and that word signifies not only an earnest, or an
industrious, but an ambitious labor) that whether present or absent, we may be
accepted of him: As if he had said, Possibly we might gain acceptance and
applause among men, would we but study to please and apply our selves to them;
but the favor of men will not serve our turn, nor can we sit down and rest
our selves under their shadow. Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of
my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, was David's prayer ( Psalm. 19.14.)
David could not bear it, that a word, or a thought of his should miss
acceptance with God: It did not satisfy him that his actions were well
witnessed unto by men on earth, unless his very thoughts were witnessed to by
the Lord in Heaven.

Some, as it is said of those Rulers ( John 12.42.) Love the praise of men more
then the praise of God: So long as they have a record here below, they little
regard his record who is on high. There is no greater argument of a carnal
mind, then this. He that loves the praise, or testimony of men as much as he
loves the praise or testimony of God, does indeed love it more: Seeing there is
nothing more unequal then an equal partition of our esteem between God and
Man. Where our obligation unto two is unequal, we can never be discharged by
paying each of them an equal sum. We have cause to bless God when we have
witness among men, but the witness of men should be of no price with us in
comparison of the witness of God: Not only may we have recourse to the
witness of God, when we cannot obtain the witness of men; but we must
prefer the single witness of God before a throng of humane witnesses; and
when we have enough on earth, yet say with Job, My witness is in Heaven. The
witness of the men of this world, or of evil men (while we keep a good
conscience) is a mercy. But as the witness of good men is more desirable,
than the witness of all other men, and the witness of a good conscience is
more desirable than the witness of good men: so the witness of God is more
desirable than (without which we cannot have it, and with which we shall have
it) the witness of a good conscience.

For as the testimony of God against us, is more terrible than that of our
own hearts (1 John 3.20.) If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our
hearts, and knows all things; and therefore knows more evil by us, and
every evil more than our own hearts do: so the testimony of God for us is
more comfortable, than that of our own hearts. If our hearts acquit us, God is
greater than our hearts, and knowing all things, he knows more good by us,
and every good more than our own hearts do; who can express or tell how
pleasant it is to receive this testimony from God, that we please God. Behold
(says David, Psalm. 133.1.) how good and pleasant a thing it is for Brethren to
dwell together in unity: But O how good and pleasant a thing it is for God and
man to dwell together in unity; for man to be always giving witness to God,
that he is good and gracious, and for God to be always giving witness to man,
that he is upright, and righteous. When conscience speaks us fair, we have
peace and a continual feast, but when God speaks us fair, and gives us an euge
from Heaven, Well done good and faithful Servants, we have peace which
passes all understanding, and not only a joyful feast, but a feast of joys,
which are unspeakable, and full of glory. Yea when we are at the fullest
Tables of this world, this is the sauce in our dish, and the sugar in our cup:
Go thy way (says the Preacher, Eccl. 9.7.) eat thy bread with joy, and
drink thy wine with a merry heart; (why? what is the matter now)? For now God
accepts thy works. Thou have a witness in Heaven.

Thirdly, Observe;

A good man dares appeal and put his cause to God.

A wicked man will sometimes appeal, and put his cause to God out of
presumption, and impudence: but a good man appeals to God in faith, and holy
confidence.

As it is an act of grace or favor in God to receive an appeal from man: so it
is an act not only of grace, but of courage in man, to make an appeal to God.
It is an act of grace, as it is a part of the worshipp of God, but it is an act
of courage, or as I may call it, a daring work, as it is a putting our selves
under the justice of God, yea an implicit imprecating of the vengeance of God,
in case we speak untrue: Thus to appeal or swear, is a daring work, and
such as no man durst do (if he knew what he did) but in a good cause. It is a
fearful thing thus to fall into the hands of the living God. Some have
ventured upon false oaths, and appeals to God, only for fear of men. Such
say commonly, They had rather trust God with their souls (by swearing falsely)
then man with their estates, lives, or libertyes by confessing the truth. Which
is not only as if a man should flee from a Lion, and a Bear should meet, but
infinitely more than if a man for fear of the biting of a Whippet or of the
stinging of a Be, should willingly offer himself to the mouth of a Lion, and
to the sting of a Serpent. To swear is not only to set our naked breasts
before the Cannons mouth, but with our own mouths to give fire to it, if we
utter falsehood.

Fourthly, Observe.

It is the joy and comfort of an upright heart, that there is a God in heaven
who knows his heart, and bears witness of all his ways.

It is the terror of wicked men to think that there is a witness in Heaven,
and a record on high. Hypocrites may pretend they rejoice, that God is their
witness, but its only a joy of the tongue, and from the teeth outward, or to
serve their turn: but an upright heart rejoices indeed at this, he rises
every morning, and walks all the day long, and at night lies down and rests
upon this thought, God is my record, God is my witness, he has searched me,
and known me,, he knows my down sitting and my uprising, he understands my
thoughts, a far off, he compasses my path, and my lying down, and is
acquainted with all my ways. In the midst of all the clamours,
misapprehensions and mis-judgings of men, it is an abundant refreshing and
consolation to the Saints, that there sits one in heaven, who as he knows them
fully, so he judges all men rightly, and will render to every man according to
his words.

Lastly, consider the place into which Jobs faith ascended while he speaks of
God. My witness is in Heaven, my record is on high. Who is in Heaven? who is
on high? you may know whom he means when he says, He that is in Heaven, he
that is on high, though his name be not expressed. There are Angels in Heaven,
but they are nothing compared to God; there are the souls of just men
departed, and made perfect, in heaven, but they are nothing compared to God:
there is no name in heaven but God, God is all in all in heaven, and he should
take up all our hearts and thoughts while we are on earth, especially when we
discourse of heaven.

Hence observe,

Though God be every where, yet he is especially in heaven.

God is upon the earth, yea God is in hell, If I make my Bed in hell thou art
there (Psalm. 139.8.) yet when Job acts faith upon God, he says not, I have a
witness on earth, but my witness is in heaven ( Psalm. 2.4.) He that sits
in heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision. God does not sit
as circumscribed in heaven, but there the scripture describes him sitting, (
Psalm. 123.1.) Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the
Heavens. Christ teaches us to pray ( Matthew. 6.) Our Father which art in
heaven, and when he himself prayed, He lift up his eyes to Heaven, and said
Father the hour is come, glorify thy Son, etc. (Joh. 17.1.) Jesus Christ
speaks to God as in that place, and he speaks of heaven as of a place, as of a
special and distinct place, to which he lifted up his eyes, when he prayed to
his Father.

There is a new Divinity, which tells us, that Heaven is every place, and every
place is Heaven: But why did Christ ascend, why was he carried up (Luke 24.51.)
when he went to Heaven? If Heaven be every where, there is no need of ascending
to get into Heaven, and we may as properly descend into Heaven as ascend up to
Heaven, if Heaven be every where.

Peter Martyr lying upon his death bed, and having many Friends about him,
discoursed sweetly of Heaven and heavenly things: Bullenger standing by,
alleged that of the Apostle ( Phil. 3.20.) Our conversation is in Heaven:
True said the sick man, it is in Heaven, but not in the Heaven of Brentius, Non
in caelo Brentij, quod nusquam est. Vit. P. Mart.
which is no where. He that makes Heaven every where, makes it no where: Though
God be in all places, and wheresoever God is, Heaven is, yet there is more in
Heaven, then is common to all places. That Is Heaven properly, where the glory
of God shines most, and where there is the special revealings of his honor
and power; therefore it is called, The habitation of his holiness, and of his
glory (Isa. 63.15.) Heaven is (as we may speak) the place of Gods glorious
residence: This Heaven is not every where, for though God be every where, yet
he does not manifest himself equally every where. God has built Heaven (as
that great Monarch, Dan. 4.3.) spoke boastingly of Babylon, for the house of
his Kingdom, and for the honor of his Majesty. Quasi a natura insitam suisse
opinionem Deum in caelo habitate asserit Aristoteles. lib. 1. de Anima cap. 3.
A mere Naturalist has told us, That this principle is stamped upon the nature
of man, that God has his dwelling place on high, or in Heaven. Heaven is so
proper to God, that God is often (by a Metonimy) called Heaven in the holy
Scriptures. Thy Kingdom (says Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.26.) shall be
sure unto thee, after that thou shall have known, that the heavens do rule:
that is, When thou shall be humbled and brought to this acknowledgement that
the God whose Throne and dwelling place is in Heaven, sits also upon all
earthly Thrones, and is King in all the Kingdoms of Men. Christ puts the
Question to the Jews ( Matthew. 21.25.) The baptism of John, Whence was it,
from Heaven, or of Men? that is, Was it from God, or from Men? Was it a humane
invention, or a Divine Institution? The prodigal Son cries out, Father I have
sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight: that is, Both against my earthly, and
heavenly Father. Some, because these and the like Scriptures call God Heaven;
and because it is said after the resurrection (when all the Saints shall be
gathered into Heaven) That God shall be all in all; upon these mistakes, I say,
they have run into that gross error, That Heaven is God. But when the
Scripture calls Heaven the habitation of God, the Throne of God, the City of
God, the building of God, an house not made with hands; it cannot be but a
perverting of Scripture and a throwing up of reason, to call it God, or to say
that God and Heaven are the same. Nor does it at all follow, that God is
Heaven, because God shall be all in all to us in Heaven. Paul was not teaching
the Corinthians there what Heaven is, but wherein the happiness of the Saints
shall consist, when they shall all be called up to Heaven, after the general
resurrection from the dead: Then Christ shall resign up his Kingdom (as
Mediator) to his Father, then God shall be all in all, in All: that is, There
will be no more need of a Mediator between God and Man; there will be no more
need of Preaching, nor of making prayers, nor of using Seals. All the glasses
through which we saw God, and the outward Ordinances, in which we enjoyed God
in this life shall be laid aside, when we see him face to face: and then God
will be King, and Teacher, light and life, glory and happiness, to his Saints,
immediately, and for ever.

It Is granted, That Heaven is nothing to us without God, yet God is something,
yea he is infinitely more then Heaven. Solomon bespeaks God thus in his prayer
at the dedication of the Temple (1 Kings 8.27.) Behold the Heaven, and the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have
builded: If Heaven, even the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain God, then, it is
not God. That which does contain a thing, is not the thing contained, much
less is that which cannot contain a thing, the thing which it cannot contain.

Again, that which Job calls heaven in one part of the verse, he calls high in
the other, My witness is in Heaven, my record is on high. God dwells in the
high and holy place (Isai. 57.15.) And Christ after he had finished the work of
man's redemption is said, To sit down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.
(Heb. 1.3.) This high place is the highest place, all that we call Heaven is
high, but all that we call Heaven is not alike high. Heaven is a building of
three Stories. The air is called heaven: The fowls of the air are said to
fly above the earth in the Firmament of heaven (Genesis 1.20.) The Clouds are
called Heaven ( Lev. 2.19.) I will make your Heaven as Iron, and your Earth as
Brass: that is, I will make the clouds which are soft like Spunges hard like
Iron, they shall not yield a drop of water, to refresh the wearyed earth.

The second Story is the starrie Heaven, where the Sun and Moon move, and
where those other glorious lights are set like golden studs to adorn, comfort,
and direct the World. His going for this from the end of Heaven, and his
circuit unto the ends of it (Psalm. 19.6.)

The third is called The habitation of God, the heaven of heavens, the third
Heaven, the highest Heaven. The Apostle says of Christ, that He ascended far
above all Heavens (Ephesians. 4.10.) And yet he then ascended into Heaven; the
meaning is, Christ ascended above all the visible heavens, into that, which is
invisible to us who are on earth. This Heaven Job pointed at while he said, My
record is on high. Take four deductions from it.

First, If Heaven be highest, then there is nothing but serenety in Heaven: The
highest places in a civil sense, are full of storms, and so are high places
in a natural sense, but the highest places in nature are free from clouds,
storms, and vapors. Naturalists tell us of Olympus, a very high Mountain,
lifting up its head beyond the middle Region, whither no breath of wind ever
comes: you may draw Letters and Figures in the Sand, and come many years
after, and find them no more stirred, then if they had been written in Marble;
and if the highest places in nature are always serene, how serene is the high
place of glory? When you are once in Heaven, you are beyond, not only proper,
but figurative storms and winds for ever.

Secondly, Heaven is high, therefore it is a pure place. Every thing in nature,
the more high it is, the more pure it is. Earth is the lowest, and the grossest
of the Elements, the Water next to that, is more gross then the Air; the Air
is more gross then the Fire, which Philosophers call the highest of the
Elements; The higher we go, the more purity we find; and when we are (in
altissimis) at the highest, there is nothing but purity, perfect purity; there
is not the least mixture of dross, nor the least spot of dirt in Heaven:
Heaven is all pure, and none shall come thither but such as are pure. Pure
persons are fit for a pure place and only they art fit: No unclean thing shall
enter there, and he that has this hope (of entering there) purifies himself,
not only as Heaven is pure, but as God is pure, in whose sight Heaven it self
is impure ( Chap. 15.15.)

Thirdly, Heaven is high, Then Heaven is a safe place. High places are secure
places; the high places of the earth are so accounted; and when God promises
safety to his people, he tells them they shall dwell on high, while they are
here below. ( Isa. 33.16.) He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall
be the munition of rocks; and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of
the earth (Isa. 58.14.) When those builders of the Tower of Babell thought to
make themselves safe, they said, Let us build a Tower whose top may reach to
Heaven: If there should come another flood, they hoped to be dry, and to get
above the danger. Once in Heaven, and we are out of Gun-shott; not only beyond
the reach of man, but of Devils too: They who are got into that high place,
shall neither feel, nor fear the Destroyer any more.

Fourthly, Heaven is a high place, then it is a large and capacious place: As a
Sphericall, or round Figure, is the most capacious, so the utmost round of that
Figure is the most capacious round; in Heaven there is room enough; though we
are crowded here, yet there we shall not. We may call Heaven (as Isaac did the
Well, about which there was no contention between his Herdmen, and the Herdmen
of Gerar) Rehoboth, room (Genesis 26.22.) In Heaven we shall not contend for
room; Christ assures us that in his Fathers house are many mansions ( John
14.2.) He had said before to his Disciples ( Chap. 13.33.) Whither I go ye
cannot come: And when Peter, troubled at this speech, put the Question ( Verse.
36.) Lord whither go thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go thou can not
follow me now, but thou shall follow me afterward. Christ perceived his
Disciples more plunged in their spirits with this answer and promise to Peter:
and therefore adds a prohibition of their fears, at the beginning of this
Chapter, Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in
me, in my Fathers house are many mansions: As if he had said, Do not think
that I told you, ye cannot follow me now, and that Peter shall follow me
afterward, as if the place I go to, were only large enough for me and Peter;
for believe me, there are many mansions; I tell you not how many, neither can
they be told, but there are enough, not only for my self and Peter, but for you
all; yea, for all those, who either have, or shall believe on my Name; if it
were not so, I would have told you, I would not delude you with vain hopes, I
am well acquainted with all the rooms in my Fathers house: and though when I
came into the World for your sakes, there was no room in the Inn for me to be
borne in, but a Stable among Beasts, yet I will take care that when you come to
my Fathers house, you shall not be straightened for Quarters, I who am your
Redeemer, will also be your Harbinger, I go to prepare a place for you, and I
am certain my Fathers house will hold all his household.

Tophet is prepared of old, it is deep and large (Isa. 30.33.) Hell is large
enough for a Prison; there is room for all the Children of disobedience to lie
bound for ever: But Heaven is large, as a Palace, or as a Paradise; there is
room enough for all the heirs of promise, to walk at liberty for ever.

JOB, Chap. 16. Verse. 20, 21, 22. My Friends scorn me: but mine eye powers
out tears unto God.

O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleads for his neighbor.

When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall not
return.


JOB having strongly asserted his own integrity, at the seventeenth Verse of
this Chapter; and thereupon as strongly imprecated the heaviest vengeance upon
his own head, (...) Verbum. (...) in hiphil significat Eloqui, facundum esse,
su mitur etiam pro illudere, quia id non sine sermonis venustate fieri solet.
Merc. Coll^quutores mei. Vatab. Rhetores. Pagn. Cum amici mei Rhetorica
oratione contra me agunt, man^ntibus lachrymis Dei opem imploro. Tygur.
in case he had not spoken truth ( Verse. 18.) Having also made his appeal to
Heaven, calling God to witness that it was truth which he had spoken ( Verse.
19.) Here at the twentieth Verse, he gives us a reason why he made that
appeal; and the reason was, he found no comfort in the creature, he had no
hope of help on earth, and therefore he resorts to Heaven.

Verse. 20. My Friends scorn me: but mine eye powers out tears to God.
There is some variety in the translation, but the sense of all meets in one,
My Friends scorn me, or Scorners are my Friends: The word signifies to deride,
or scorn, not in a rude homely way, but to do it with quaintness of speech,
or in refined language, to do it wittily, and cunningly, close and home. Hence
the word signifies a Rhetorician, or an Orator, and is so translated here, by
diverse of the Learned, My friends play the Rhetoricians, they speak
eloquently, they compose fine orations, and set speeches against me; but alas!
I only speak tears.

Yet further it signifies to interpret (Genesis 42.23.) Joseph spoke unto his
Brethren by an Interpreter, it is this word. That Is the interlineall reading of
this Text, Interpretes socii mei. Mont.
My Friends are Interpreters, or rather (for that must be the meaning)
Misinterpreters; they put wrong expositions upon all my speeches, and corrupt
my Text with their unfreindly glosses.

We read in the ordinary acception of the word, My friends scorn me, or, My
friends are scorners: As if Job had said, These my friends, whose profession
and relation call them to administer serious, and wholesome counsel to my
troubled mind, even they break forth into scorn; they power the Vinegar of
their sharpest censures, into my already wrankled wounds, in stead of the
suppling, skinning Oil of comfort and consolation; -- Quis talia fando
temperet a lachrymis.
and therefore mine eye is pressed to power out tears to God: Who can forbear
weeping, while he is but reporting my sufferings? How then should I who
suffer? My friends scorn me, etc.

Hence Observe.

The best of friends may prove unfreindly.

Men are but men, and so they act: There is no repose, either upon the
wisdom, or strength, or affection of the creature, they are all mutable, and
may do that which is most opposite, both to their profession and relation: A
Friend, a Scorner! What more unsuitable? And that may be a second Note.

Scorn is wholly opposite to the Law of love.

He departs far enough from the rules of freindship, who does not pity and
assist his afflicted Friend; how far is he gone from it, who scorns and
derides his Friend in affliction?

Thirdly, Considering the Person who was thus scorned; Job, a man beloved of
God, the great Favorite of that Age to the King of Heaven.

Hence Observe.

They who are highly approved, and honored of God, may fall under the
contempt, and scorn of men.

As they who are applauded and flattered, yet adored by men, may be the scorn
and contempt of God. What Christ speaks of things is true of persons ( Luke
16.15.) That which is highly esteemed amongst men is abomination in the sight
of God: So they who are highly esteemed of God are often an abomination to men;
God sees not as man sees, no not as good men see; God and good men are not
always of an opinion, either about things or persons: and as the worst of men
find some to flatter and applaud them, so the best of men find some to
undervalue and deride them, and they sometimes find good men doing so. There
is no judging either of men or of matters, by what is said of them: In this
sense all men are, or may be liars, carrying a falls report in their mouths:
Should we judge concludingly of men by the opinion of man, how base and
contemptible would many precious souls appear to us? And how precious would
many appear to us, who are only worthy to be contemned? Christ gives the rule
( John. 7.24.) Judge not according to appearance (or by the face) but judge
righteous judgment: (...) Secundum vultum vel faciem.
We must not judge either of things or persons, till they appear, nor may we
judge of them by appearances, especially not by those appearances which the
tongues of men put upon them. The Greek, in that Text of John, says, Judge not
according to the face: For though the face in its natural frame be the Index
or discovery of the mind; yet as a man may artificially set his face to a look
altogether unlike his mind; so others may set a face upon the ways and
actions of a man altogether unlike both the man and his actions. He that had
judged Job by the face, which God had put upon his outward condition, or by
that which Satan and his Friends put upon his ways and actions must have
judged him either an hypocrite, serving God only to serve his own turn, or
else profane, casting off the service of God. All the morally illfavoured
faces in the World are of one of these two features or complexions; the
opinions that went abroad of Job made him appear like both, and yet he was a
man most beautiful in the eye of God; a man that had received the fairest
Letters commendatory under Gods own hand, that ever man had to that day, My
Friends scorn me: What then?

But mine eye powers out tears unto God. As before he had appealed to God; so
now his eye powers out tears unto God.

The Hebrew is, Mine eye powers out: (...) Stillare seu diffluere instar
aquarum and stillando quasi attenuari.
The word signifies to flow forth like water, and to wast in flowing forth; his
eyes were as a Fountain, which flows continually, yet retains a perpetual
stock of water; but his strength abated and his spirits issued with those
waters. Mine eye powers out, we add the word Tears, because tears are the
only eye-waters, or all the waters which flow from the eye, Mine eye powers
out tears.

The word signifies sometimes only to drop, Translatio est a stillicidijs.
either as a Limbeck drops down the water which is raised up by the heat into
fumes, or as the Eaves of a house drop in a time of rain; so, mine eye
distilleth or droppeth tears. Job had a heat within him which might well
cause those distillations, and showers without him, which might well cause
those droppings,

This distilling, dropping, or pouring out of tears, was the pouring out of
his sorrows, and there was more in it then silent sorrow, there was a voice in
his sorrows, or a voice of mourning was mingled with his weeping; yea, this
word implies speaking, in many places of the old Testament, where to drop is to
Prophecy, Phrasi Hebraica stillare saepe pro loqui sumitur.
and Prophesying is a vocal act ( Micah 2.6.) Prophecy ye not say they to
them that prophecy; the word is, Dropp not: Both are expressed ( Amos 7.16.)
Prophecy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the house of Isaac.
So ( Ezekiel. 21.2.) Drop thy words toward the holy places, and prophecy against
the Land of Israel. And the reason of it is, because words fall into the ear
of the hearers as drops of rain upon the dry and thirsty ground, both to
soften and make fruitful. Jobs tears preached; the dropping of his eye was a
kind of prophesying: Tears are not words formally, but they are virtually.
Weeping is inarticulate speaking: And though God (by reason of his infinite,
and unchangeable happiness) never spoke that language, yet he understands it
fully. There are (says the Apostle, arguing against speaking in an unknown
tongue) it may be, so many kinds of voices in the World, and none of them are
without signification (1 Cor 14.10.) The voice of tears is very significant,
yet God only knows the special signification of it, man knows only the
general, that it signifies sorrow. Possibly words went with Jobs tears; but
if not, yet his tears had the force of words: Weeping speaks, though the
weeper speak not: Mine eye powers out (or speaks) tears.

There are seven or eight sorts of tears spoken of in Scripture, and every one
speaks.

First, Tears of wordly sorrow; Esau had enough of them, he found store of
tears when he lost the blessing: He for one morsel of meat sold his
birthright, but he could not purchase it again, with floods of sorrow, For he
found no place of repentance; that is, he could not prevayle with his Father
Isaac to change his mind, though he sought it carefully with tears (Heb.
12.17.) Esaus tears spoke his hunger after that which he had sold to buy off
hunger, or to pay a debt to nature.

Secondly, There are the tears of repentance and godly sorrow; such were those
of Mary (Luke 7.38.) who wept and washed Christ's feet with her tears, and
wiped them with the hair of her head: She had been a sinner, such a sinner as
bore away the name from all the sinners in the City: and she mourned so for
sin, that she bare away the name from all the mourners in the City: Mary's
tears spoke her tender respect to Christ who saves sinners, and her
abhorrence of her self for sin.

Thirdly, There are tears of craft and wicked dissimulation ( Jer. 41.6.)
Ishmael goes forth to meet the men that came toward Jerusalem, weeping all
along as he went: his were made tears, he shed tears that he might shed
blood, and weep himself into an opportunity of doing mischief unsuspected.
Ishmaels tears spoke treachery, but because those plain-hearted men could not
interpret them, they perished.

Fourthly, There are tears of love unfeigned and strong affection: Thus David
and Jonathan kissed one another, and wept one with another, until David
exceeded (1 Samuel 20.41.) When Jesus Christ wept at the Sepulcher of Lazarus,
The Jews said, Behold how he loved him (John 11.35, 36.) They saw his heart at
his eyes: These tears spoke mutual and real endearements.

Fifthly, There are the tears of holy prayers, and fervent desires, Jacob wept
and made supplication (Hos. 12.4.) He cried and prayed: The voice of his tears
was louder then the voice of his supplication; and his prayers were (in this
sense) even drowned in tears: Jacobs tears spoke the fervency of his spirit,
and his faith in prayer: The Angel understood them so, and he prevayled.

Sixthly, There are tears of compassion for the miseries of others, Weep with
them that weeP, is the Apostles rule ( Romans 12.15.) When Nehemiah heard the
report of Jerusalems ruin and of the sad condition of his Brethren there, He
sat down and wept (Nehem. 1.4.) His tears spoke pity to his Countrymen,
and zeal for God.

Seventhly, There are the tears of passion, in reference to our own
afflictions: Such tears speak humane frailty, or the common infirmity of the
flesh.

Eighthly, There are the tears of damnation: Hypocrites and their associates
in Hell are described, Weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth for evermore:
Their tears speak despair, or misery without hope of remedy.

The tears which Job powered forth, were of the seventh sort, tears of passion,
or sorrow, caused by the afflicting hand of God, but especially by the
unkindnesses of his Friends; My friends scorn me, but mine eye powers out
tears unto God. Job knew that as God had a Book for his prayers, so a Bottle
for his tears; yea he knew tears should be heard as well as prayers. Tears
are powerful Orators: God reads our hearts in those lines which tears draw
on our faces. One of the Ancient Philosophers has adjudged weeping unworthy a
man, Lachrymae a viris claris auferendae sunt mulieribus autem relinquendae.
Plat. de rep. Dial. 3.
and tells us it is only for Women and Children to weep: But as there are
tears of effeminate and childish pusillanimity, so there are tears of
heroical and holy importunity. To weep for fear of sufferings from man, is
indeed below man, but to weep to God when we suffer, either under the hand of
God or man, does well become the best of men; not to weep to God, when we
either suffer or have sinned, proceeds not from courage, but from sullenness,
and is not the argument of a noble spirit, but of a hard heart. Who so
courageous as David? who feared not a Lion nor a Bear, who would not be afraid
though an Host of men encamped against him, and though he walked in the valley
of the shadow of death; yet how often do we read him weeping and crying to God
( Psalm. 39.12.) Hold not thy peace (says he) at my tears: David in that case,
could not hold his peace from crying to God, and he was persuaded that God
would not hold his peace at his cry; he expected to have his tears answered:
He did not say, Hold not thy peace at my words, or at my prayer, but as
importing that his very tears had a voice and language in them, he desired
that they might be answered. David did not weep for fear of men, but in faith
to God. And so did Job: Mine eye powers out tears unto God: God was the
object of his tears, as much as of his prayers. God is above, and yet our
tears fall into his bosom: these waters ascend; this rain does not fall but
rise; these showers do not come from the Clouds, but they pierce the Clouds.
As the heat of the Sun draws the water upward, so does the heat of Gods
love. Some of the Ancients use strange Hyperbolies about the power and motion
of tears, I will not stay upon them, we may say too much of them; but thus
much we may safely say, that from a heart rightly affected, and touched with
the sense, either of sin, or suffering, they have much weight in them, and are
pressing upon God: Mine eye powers out tears unto God.

From the conexion of this latter part of the Verse with the former:

Observe.

When we are scorned by men, it is good for us to mourn to God.

My Friends scorn me, now, I weep and pray: It is best for us to apply our
selves to God when we live in the embraces of men, when all men speak well of
us and applaud us, what is all this, if we have not the good word and the good
will of God? unless we have an applause in Heaven, it will do us no good to
have the true applause, much less the flatteries of men on earth. Suppose they
speak right, and give us but our due, yet we must not rest in that, but go to
God. The good word of God is better to us infinitely, then the best word of
the best men; to him let us have recourse when we have the greatest favor, and
fairest Quarter in the World; but when the World scorns, and rejects us, then
is a special season for us to hasten into the presence of God; we should live
nearest and closest to God, when men cast us off, or throw us out of their
societies and affections.

There is a twofold recourse to God, whereof the first is from choice, the
second from necessity. It is best to make our recourse to God upon choice, but
he will not refuse us if necessity drive us to him, God is most worthy to be
our choice, but he is willing to be our refuge; yet he is indeed a refuge to
those only in evil times, who have made him their choice in the best times.
When all goes well with us in the World, we should not think our selves well
till we enjoy God: It is good for me to draw near to God, says David (Psalm.
73.28.) It is good for me to do it in good times, in the best times, this I
make my election: And when David says, It is good, he means, it is best; that
positive bears the sense of a Superlative: and therefore he had said a little
before ( Verse. 25.) Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee: But in an evil time, God is both the choice
and the refuge of his people. He is our refuge properly to whom we come when
others cast us off, and he is our choice to whom we come, when others call for
us, and seem ambitious to be kind unto us. It is not thank-worthy to make God
barely a refuge, to come to him because we can go no where else; we should
think our selves no where till we are in his presence wheresoever we are, and
that we have nothing till we have him, whatsoever we have. Not to prefer the
least of God before all the World, is not only un-ingenuous in us, but sinful
against, and dishonorable unto God. Job who here wept to God in his low
estate, had often rejoiced in God in his best estate, and preferred him before
his chiefest joy: They may confidently weep to God in sad times, who have
delighted themselves with God in comfortable times.

Secondly, Observe.

Liberty of address to God, when men scorn and reject us, is the great
privilege of the Saints.

Every man cannot do this; can the men of the world power out tears to God
when they are scorned by the world? can they power out prayers to God, when
they are ill entreated by the world? Can they go into the embraces of God,
when they are cast out by men? they cannot. They can vex themselves, when they
are vexed by others, and perhaps vex those that vex them; they can be angry
when they are scorned, and perhaps scorn their scorners, but how to spread
their condition before God, or to power out tears to him they know not: they
who can do thus are honored by God, when scorned by men, and God will power
out comforts into their bosoms who can power their tears into his, they can
never be at any loss, who find out God to weep to.

Job having thus given the reason of his appeal to Heaven, enforces it
farther with a stong wish, according to our translation, which is also
confirmed by the concurring vote of diverse other translations.

Verse. 21. O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleads for his
Neighbor.
(...) Vtinam disputare posset vir cum deo et filius hominis sodali suo. Pagn.
Optat ex aequari haeo duo, hominis cum deo, et hominis cum homine
disceptationem. Merc. Certe hic aliquid subauditur ut, et quis deo viro, vel ut
faciat ac concedat Deus sc: hoc viro Merc.
The Sum of his desire may be drawn up into this Breife, that he might argue
his case as freely with God, as men of the same rank and degree, argue out
their cases with one another. Some expound it as a correction of his boldness in
appealing to God. As if he had said I have indeed called God to witness, but
what am I, or what is my Fathers house, that God should descend to my
concernments? The infinite distance which is between the Creator and the
creature seems to forbid and check my motion, bidding me keep within my own
line or sphere, and meddle with my equals; But O that I might speak with God,
as man with man, or man for man, I doubt not but I should carry the day, and
prove my self innocent; not that Job intended a controversy with God, or
would stand upon (his defense with the most high.

I have before showed how far this was from the temper of his broken spirit.
All that he intends by the proposal of this desire, is the gaining of an
opportunity to set himself right in the opinion of men, by that impartial
d^cision of his cause, which he was well assured God would give upon the whole
matter in question between him and his friends, if once he would be pleased to
vouchsafe him a free and familiar hearing of it. As if he had further said, I
have not apealed to Heaven, because I am unwilling to have my condition known
on earth, Vtinam mihi con^ederetur causam meam adversum vos apud Dei Tribunal
disceptare sicut agere homines cum hominibus consueverunt. Bez.
that men should see the worst of me; for my desire is that I might plead
before God, as a man for his Neighbor, and that I might be laid open in open
Court, by the evidence of witnesses, and a full examination of my cause. Taking
these explications of the text, in the form of a wish, The scope of it seems,
to be the same with what he spak before, (Chap. 9. 33.34.35.) God is not a man
as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come together in judgment,
neither is there any Dayes-man, betwixt us, etc. In which words, as in these
before us, while Job lifts up the Majesty of God, and humbles himself, as
unworthy, to have to do with God, yet he discovers the vehement longings of
his soul to receive a judgment or determination from God in this suit or
controversy, which had depended so long between him and his friends.

The Observations which arise from this reading and sense of the Text, are of
the same strain, with those formerly given upon that, and some other passages,
where Job knowing his own uprightnes and integrity, declares not only
willingness, but extreme earnestness, to have his cause tried at the Bar,
and before the Tribunal of God, who both saw his ways, and searched his heart:
who as he had justified him from all guilt in reference to himself, by not
imputing sin unto him, so he would justify him against the sins, which men
imputed to him, by saying he was not at all guilty.

These points having been more then once hinted already, I shall not insist
upon them here.

Secondly, The words are rendered as noting the design which Job had in pouring
out tears to God, and then the connection between this and the former verse
stands thus; Apud Deum stillat oculus meus utdisceptet causam viri cum deo,
sicut filius hominis causam amici sui. Jun.
I power out tears to God, that he would be pleased to plead the cause of a
man with God, as the Son of man pleades the cause of his friend. Mr.
Broughton joins fully with this, Unto the puissant does mine eye drop, that he
mould decide the cause for earthly-wight before the puissant: as the son of
Adam does with his Neighbor.

Our translation carries the sense of a wish; that a man might have liberty to
plead with God, as man with man; this carries the sense of a wish, that God
would plead the cause of a man with God, as a man pleades the cause of his
friend; which is indeed to desire God to be his advocat. Ad Deum stillat oculus
meus ut judicet viro cum Deo, and silium hominis respectu proximi sui. Coc.
How God is an advocat with God, will appear further in the prosecution of the
text.

A third reading keeps to this dependence upon the former verse, and to the
same scope of this, yet varyes the translation, Thus, Mine eye powers out
tears to God, that he would judge for a man with God (and that he would judge)
the Son man in respect of his Neighour.

The first reading makes the latter branch of the words a description of the
manner how Job desired to plead with God even as man does with man. The second
makes it a description of the manner how Job desired God to plead the cause of
man with God, even as man pleades with man; This third makes it a second
distinct desire, and the whole verse to consist of two distinct desires.

First, That God would judge for a man with God.

Secondly, That God would judge the Son of man in respect of his Neighbor.

In the former he petitions for mercy with God; in the latter for right against
man; or in the former he sues for a judgment of acceptance for himself, and
in the latter for a judgment of reproof, and redargution upon his friends.

This difference is grounded upon the different construction of the words in
the original. For the word which is rendered to plead or judge, is construed
with, or governs (as gramarians speak) the Dative case in the first, and the
Accusative case in the latter clause of the verse.

Hence the former is rendered,

That he would judge or plead for a man with God, which notes favor and a
benign defense or patronage of his cause with God, so this is used by the
Prophet ( Isai. 11.4.) He shall reprove (argue, judge or plead) with equity for
the meek of the earth; that is, he shall reprove or plead in favor of the
meek, or on their side, he shall undertake their cause, and make their defense
for them. And thus at last God did judge or plead for Job, giving sentence in
his behalf, and casting the scales on his side against his friends, and
therefore the latter clause is rendered, thus,

That he would judge the Son of man in respect of his Neighbor; that is,
that he would reprehend and reprove him for the wrongs which he has done to,
and for the uncharitable censures which he has laid upon his Neighbor. The
meaning of the whole verse according to this translation, may be represented
and paraleld in that prayer of David, (Psalm. 35.1, 2, 3.) Plead my cause O Lord
with them that strive with me; fight against them that fight against me, etc.
say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. Thus Job, as David, desires the Lord to
speak a word of comfort to him, and to tell his enemies, or his uncomfortable
friends their own.

I shall only leave one observation upon this exposition,

When Christ comes graciously to assert the innocence of his own people, he
will severely rebuke those who have done them wrong. Laban had given Jacob hard
usage, while he was a Servant in his House, and when he was gone, Laban
persued him with hard thoughts, but God pleaded for Jacob, and rebuked Laban
(Genesis 31.42.) the Prophet foretells, That the mountain of the Lords house shall
be established in the top of the mountains, that is, he will not only
deliver, but advance his oppressed Church, The house of the God of Jacob,
(Isai. 21.2, 3.) and when he does this, He shall judge among the Nations, and
shall rebuke many people (Verse. 4.) Some have observed the same difference in
these latter words of Isay, which has been noted in the text of Job, and
render it thus, He shall judge among the Nations, that is, the Heathen Nations
who have vexed his Church, And he shall rebuke or plead (it is the same word in
the Grammatical construction, as here in Job) For, (or in the behalf) of many
people; that is, for many of his own people, who have been opposed by those
Nations; the effect whereof we have in the next words, And they shall beat
their swords into plow-shares; that is, God will so judge those Nations, that
his people shall not need to stand upon their guard, or learn war any more;
because their enemies shall either be turned to them, or be totally overturned*
woe to the Nations, when God stands up for his people, he will certainly ruin
Babylon, when he undertakes the controversy, and pleades the cause of Zion.
Yea the day hastens when he will Convince all that are ungodly, of all the hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him (Jud. verse. 15.) that
is, against his people, for his sake.

Fourthly, Besides these three expositions of the Text, I find another which
is more litterall, and yet more spiritual then any of the three: and it is that
which our late learned Annotators have given us, Mine eye powers out tears
unto God.

And he will plead for a man with God, and the Son of man for his friend, The
mind of which translation is this, He, that is, Christ Jesus the Mediator
between God and man will plead for a man, that is, for me; he speaks in the
third person for modesties sake, though he means himself; he will plead for
me, (though you plead never so much against me) for me (I say) he will plead
with God, that is, with God his Father: the Hebrew word here used for God, is
in the singular number, Eloah, not Elohim, and so it is in the close of the
former verse, Mine eye powers out tears, to (Eloah) God, and he will plead
with God, which more then intimates a distinct personalitie or subsistence in
the divine nature, One, who is, and is called God acting toward another, who
is, and is called God, though God be but one or (unissimus) One-most in nature.
Job weeps to God the Son, in assurance that he will plead for him with God the
Father, He will plead for a man with God.

And the Son of man, that is, Jesus Christ; whom he called God before, he calls
now, The Son of man, this Title is frequently attributed unto Christ in the
New Testament ( Matthew. 8.20.) The Foxes have holes, etc. but the Son of man
has not where to lay his head, so ( Matthew. 10.23.11.19.12.8. etc,) Jesus
Christ is called the Son of man,

First, to show the truth of his humane nature, he being lineally descended
from David, according to the flesh, and is therefore styled, The Son of David.

Secondly, to show the depth of his abasement, Christ humbled yea emptyed, and
nothing'd himself, when Being in the form of God, he was made in the likeness
of men (Phil. 2.) when being the Son of God, he submitted to so mean a
style, The Son of man. Ezekiel amongst all the Prophets is oftenest called
Son of man. The reason which some assign is very probable, That God spoke to
him under that Title, to keep him humble in the midst of his many visions and
revelations, for which, end, Paul in the same case had A I horn in the flesh,
the Messenger of Satan to buffet him (2 Cor. 12.) and though Jesus Christ
needed nothing either to make or keep him humble (he being infinitely beyond
the reach of pride) yet he needed much to show and give proof how humble he
was. Nor could there be any greater evidence of it, then this, that he was
pleased to be The Son of man. Yet I conceive, Son of man may be here only an
Hebraisme denoting man, which kind of speaking is also usual among the the
Greeks. And that Job might speak of Christ under this notion, is clear from
that faith which he discovered in the mystery of his incarnation, that great
mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, of which he spoke so
confid^ntly (Chap. 19.25, 26, 27.) I know that my Redeemer lives* and that he
shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, whom I shall see for my self,
and mine eyes shall behold, etc. Job believed, that he should see this Redeemer
with humane eyes, and therefore he did believe, that his Redeemer should have a
humane Nature, or be The Son of man. Jesus Christ, was A Son of man, in
reference to his participation with us in all things, which concern created
nature, And he was The Son of man, by way of Eminency in reference to his
freedom from any participation with us in corrupted nature, otherwise then in
the paenall effects of that corruption as the Apostle states it ( Heb. 2.17.
chap. 4.15.) In all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren,
and he was tempted in all points, like as we are, yet without sin. He that is
in all things like man except sin, is rightly called The Son of man, for
sin is not at all the form, but all the deformity of man: Hence Jobs faith
prophesied, The Son of man will plead,

For his friend. The word in the Hebrew comes from a root which signifies to
feed either our selves or others, because friends use often to feed together,
and sometimes one friend seeds, or provides, and offers food to another. It is
taken sometimes largely for a Neighbor, and not seldom strictly for a
special friend ( Deuteronomy. 13.6.) if thy friend who is as thine own soul entice
thee, etc. that is, if the nerest and friend that thou have in the world entice
thee, etc. in this strict sense the word is to be taken here; Job was not one
of Christ's friends at large, he was a special a Bosome-friend, Job was not
(according to the known use of that word among us) A friend of Christ
extraordinary, but he was Christ's friend in ordinary, a man who daily conversed
with Christ, and Christ with him; a man who daily performed Offices of dutiful
love to Christ, and a man to whom Christ daily performed the Offices of
bountiful and merciful love. Hence his holy assurance that Christ would
perform that Office of mercy for him, The Son of man will plead for his fiend.

The words thus opened are (as I may say) An Epitome of the Gospel, a little
gospel, yea I may call them the whole Gospel; what is the Gospel but this good
news, that Christ, God-man mediates for his people. All that Christ was is
expressed in this, what so-Christ did more then this on earth, is employed in
this, and this is all Christ now does, for us in Heaven, He ever lives to make
intercession for us says Saint Paul (Heb. 7.25) which is the same in effect,
with what holy Job professes in this Text, He will plead for a man with God,
and the Son of man for his Friend.

There is one thing further to be noted, for the clearing of this Text: For
possibly the Reader may scruple how the same words should be rendered by some,
as a wish, O that one might plead for a man with God: and by others as a
conclusion, He will plead with God for a man. Again, how the latter branch
should be rendered by some in the form of a similitude, As a man for his
neighbor, and by others as a direct assertion, And the Son of man for his
Friend.

I answer to the first, That the same word may be thus diversely rendered
according to differing Moods of Grammar; and so the sign of the Optative Mood
which is in the form of a wish, is by some judged most suitable to the scope of
this place. So that a wish may here be understood and safely supplied, though
it be not expressed.

To the second scruple I answer, that the particle Vau, in the Hebrew, placed
at the beginning of a word, though it be usually taken as a Conjunction,
knitting one sentence to another, yet according to the exigence, and scope of
the Scripture, it undergoes diverse other significations.

As first, A disjunctive ( Exodus 12.15.) Ye shall take it out from the Sheep,
or from the Goats: The Hebrew is, And from the Goats; but because the Law did
not command both, but gave a liberty to choose either of the two; therefore we
render not And, but Or, from the Goats: So ( Judge. 11.31.) See the Margin of
our Bibles; which shows that Jepthtah did not bind himself to offer up
whatsoever should meet him, in Sacrifice, but one of the two he did bind
himself to, either to dedicate that to the Lord, or to offer it up for a burnt
Offering.

Secondly, It is often used Adversatively, and is rendered, But (Genesis 42.10.
Psalm. 44.17, etc.)

Thirdly, Causally, and it is rendered For (Psalm. 60.11. Isa 64.5. etc.)

Fourthly (Besides diverse other acceptions of it, which I shall omit) it is
used Comparatively, or as a Note of likeness (Prove. 25.25.) As cold water to a
thirsty soul, so is good news from a far Country: The Hebrew is, And good
news. So ( Pro. 26.7.) and very frequently in that Book. Thus in the Text the
particle (Vau) is taken by some as a note of likeness; comparing the two parts
of the Verse with each other; but by others it is taken only as a conjunction
copulative, knitting both parts of the Verse together: He will plead for a man
with God, and the Son of man for his Friend.

From the words according to this latter readin^^

Observe, First.

There is an Advocate between God and Man.

Sin has made a breach, there needs a Mediator to heal it. God and sinful
man are (as we speak) Two, and they cannot be made One but by a Third. Man was
created in a state of amity with God, that state needed no Mediator; man being
restored is in a state of reconciliation unto God, that state needs a
Mediator, both to settle and continue it: And he who is the Mediator
between both parties, is an Advocate, a pleader, a Patron for the one party.
There was need of a Mediator, even in regard of God himself, that both his
State might be preserved, and his Justice satisfied: But there was need of an
Advocate, only in regard of man, that so his wants and miseries might be
declared, and that mercy together with help in the time of need might be
obtained. The Apostle ( Gal. 3.20.) describing the nature of a Mediator,
says, A Mediator is not of one, or (as we supply) not a Mediator of one. A
Mediator is of two, yea and for two. But an Advocate, though he be between
two, yet he is but for one, or of one, either of one individually taken, or of
one specifically taken, either of one man, or of one sort or company of men,
who though they are many in number, yet their state, or case is one. Thus
Christ is an Advocate for one, or of one; all that he is an Advocate for, being
in one and the same condition for the maine, though some particulars in every
man's case may vary*

The Greek word which is rendered Advocate in the New Testament is applied to
the holy Ghost: But there is a great difference between Christ his being a
Paraclete, or an Advocate, and the spirits being an Advocate ( John 16.7.) If I
go not away (says Christ) the Comforter (or the Advocate) will not come unto
you: that is, The holy Ghost, will not come unto you. One Advocate goes away,
that the other Advocate may come. Christ is an Advocate by way of impetration,
the spirit is Advocate by way of application: Christ is an Advocate with God,
to get mercy for us; the spirit is an Advocate with us, to prevail on our
hearts to receive that mercy: Though Christ be our Advocate in Heaven, pleading
for us with the Father, yet if we had not the spirit to plead in our hearts on
earth, we ^ould never receive the good that Christ has purchased for us of his
Father. Christ appears for us in Heaven (Heb. 9.24.) He appears as an
Attorney in Court for his Client; he is gone to Heaven to appear for us; the
spirit comes from Heaven and appears in us. Christ began the work of his
intercession here ( John 17.) He is gone into Heaven to continue and perfect
it. The spirit does both begin and perfect his intercession here; he does not
plead for us, but in us; or the spirit makes intercession for us by stirring us
up to prayer, by teaching us how to word and mould, or rather how to sigh and
groan our prayers; Christ makes intercession for us, by presenting, and
tendering those prayers to the Father which the spirit helps us to make, or by
making prayers for us himself to the Father.

Some dispute how, they inquire much after the manner how Christ makes
intercession or performs the office of an Advocate for us; but it is enough
for us to know that he is an Advocate, or that he makes intercession for us,
though we are not able to describe the manner how: Whether it be,

First, Only by presenting himself to the Father, and his appearing for us,
which is an equivalent, if not a formal intercession:

Or secondly, By the tendering of his righteousness, and merits, as
satisfaction to the Father.

Or thirdly, By expressing our wants and his desires for us: Whether by all
these, or by which of these, or whether by some other way, is not determinable
by us; yet this is clear that he performs the office of an Advocate for us,
and that we receive every good thing from the hand of God, through his hand.

Further, Christ may be considered:

First, As an Advocate for the whole Church: There are some causes of common
concernement to all the people of God. Thus he was an Advocate for Jerusalem,
when under bonds and captivity in Babylon (Zech. 1.12.) Then the Angel of the
Lord (not a created, but the creating Angel, or the Angel of the Covenant, who
is the Son of God) answered and said, O Lord of Hosts, how long, will thou not
have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah against which thou have had
indignation these three score and ten years.

And as Christ pleads for the whole Church, so for every particular member of
the Church, and that also under a twofold notion.

He is Advocate, first, to take away our sins; If any man sin (says the
Apostle John, 1 Epist. 2.1.) we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, etc.

Secondly, Christ is an Advocate for us with the Father in our sufferings and
troubles, to get them taken off from us, or sanctified to us. Doubtless Job
made use of Christ continually as an Advocate, to take off the guilt of sin;
yet here he makes use of Christ as an Advocate to get off his sufferings,
especially these misjudgings of his Friends, who deeply censured and aspersed
him, because of his sufferings; yea a Believer makes use of Christ as an
Advocate, to get any good thing, whether little or great, whether for soul or
for body, as much as he does for the removing of any evil, whether of sin or
trouble.

Secondly, Observe.

The Doctrine of a Mediator between God and Man was known and believed in the
World, long before Christ came into the World.

Many saw Christ by Faith before he was seen in the flesh: Faith is the
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen (Heb. 1.1.) And
as it is the evidence of things, so of persons that are not seen. Christ tells
the Jews ( John. 8.56.) Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day; and he saw
it and was glad: And when the Jews quarrelled at this, Thou art not yet fifty
years old, and have thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, before Abraham was, I am. As Abraham saw his day by Faith, so
David in spirit called him Lord (Mat. 22.43.) And as these persons, with all
the holy Elders saw Christ by Faith in the promise, so the whole Ceremonial
Law was a representation of Christ to faith by sense: Every slain Sacrifice
spoke the death of Christ, and the sprinkling of that blood, the sprinkling of
their consciences and ours for the remission of sins: Yea, They did all eat
the same spiritual meat (that is, the same which we now eat) and did all
drink the same spiritual drink; for they drank of that spiritual Rock that
followed them (and least we should mistake what was meant by that Rock, the
Apostle expounds it himself) And that Rock was Christ. The Rock did not follow
them, but Christ who was signified by that Rock did follow them. They who are
built upon Christ the Rock, shall never be moved, yet Christ is a moving, as
well as a living Rock, to those who are built upon him; whither soever they
move, he follows them. Thus Jesus Christ was meat and drink to the Jews as
well as to us; for he is the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World
(Revel. 13.8.) that is, The virtue ot his death saved all who have been saved
from the foundation of the World. As Christ was slain from Eternity in the
counsel of God; so he was slain from the beginning of time in the promise of
God ( Genesis 3.15.) which was the publication of his death; he was then also
slain as to the heart of Believers, whose Faith (having once a word for it)
makes that which is absent, in regard of place, spiritually present, and that
which is not, in regard of time, truly to be.

Thirdly, Observe.

The Mediator between God and man has been known and believed in all Ages
under a twofold nature, both God and Man.

We have both in this profession of Jobs Faith: He believed the Mediator to be
God, for he says, Mine eye powers tears to God. There is the divine nature.
He believed that the Mediator should be man, and therefore adds, The Son of
man for his friend; there is his humane nature; so that not only the general
Doctrine of the mediatorship of Christ, but this particular about the
constitution of his person as Mediator, was also known. Had not our Advocate
been man he could not have suffered for us, and had he not been God he could
not have satisfied for us. These points of Gospel Catechism are so necessary
and fundamental, that in every Age Believers have in some measure been
instructed about them. And whereas the Apostle says (1 Timothy 2.5.) There is one
Mediator between God and men, or, of God and men the man Christ Jesus: He
does not add man, to exclude the Divine nature from the Mediatorship, but
emphatically to demonstrate that nature, in which he gave himself a ransom
for us, of which he speaks in the next Verse. For though the ransom was paid
by him who is God, or had a divine nature, yet it was paid in the Manhood, or
humane Nature only. The humane ture was the matter of our ransom, but from
the Divine nature gave worth and value to it.

Further Job speaks with much confidence and assurance, both of Christ's
willingness to undertake his cause, and of the success or good issue of his
cause, if once Christ did but undertake it: He will plead for a man with God.

Hence Observe.

Fourthly, Christ is very ready to speak for, and plead the cause of poor
sinners before God his Father.

He will do it, says Job; Christ is easy to be entreated, he is found of
those that seek him not, then surely he will be found of those that seek him.
His promise is ( John 6.37.) Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast
out: As if he had said, Whatsoever I do, I will not do this: And when he
says, he will not do this, his meaning is, that he will do much more for
them, then the not doing of this comes to; he will readily receive their
persons, and undertake their suites, though they have no Fee to give him,
nothing to move him, but the need they have of him.

Fifthly, Observe.

Christ is a powerful, and an effectual Mediator with the Father.

He carries the day; he is a prevailing Mediator. Christ is such a Physician,
that no man ever dyed under his hand, and he is such an Advocate, that no man's
cause ever miscarryed under his hand. The Arminians maintain a propitiation
made, or a Sacrifice offered by Christ for all, yet they dare not say, it is
effectual for all; but the intercession of Christ (in their opinion) is
effectual for all. Christ dyed (say they) for those that he does not save;
but Christ prays for none but those that shall be saved. They are not for
universal Intercession, though they are for an universal Sacrifice, or
propitiation; and their reason is, because they cannot deny but many shall
perish for ever, which yet they could not, did Christ but pray for them. We
believe that his Sacrifice is as effectual as his Intercession; and that
therefore he dyed for none but those for whom he prays, his Intercession being
for the drawing out, and bringing home the benefit of his Sacrifice to those,
and to all those for whom he offered himself to God. But to the point in hand,
The Arminian who leaves the death of Christ in the hand of man's free will,
assisted only by general Grace, to make it effectual to himself, or not, he
(I say) asserts the Intercession of Christ not only sufficient, but effectual
for all, in whose behalf he intercedes: So that we are sure all shall go well
with us in the Court of Heaven, while we have Christ our Advocate with the
Father.

And that we may have fullness of confidence to come to God by Christ, let us
consider these five things.

First, Christ is most wise to manage our cause; so wise that he is the
wisdom of the Father: If we had an Advocate at the Bar, furnished with as
much wisdom as the Judge, it were a great step to obtain in a right suite.

Secondly, Christ is an eloquent Advocate, a powerful Orator. As the Lord has
given him the tongue of the learned, that he should know how to speak a word
in season to him that is weary (Isa. 54.4.) So he has a learned tongue to
speak a word for him that is weary: Christ is the Essential word, and the
flower of all declarative words is with him; when he spoke on earth, he spoke
with authority ( Matthew. 7.29.) All wondered at the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth ( Luke 4.24.) Yea, his hearers somewhere testify,
never spoke man as this man speaks: And as no man ever spoke like him to man,
so no man ever spoke like him to God.

Thirdly, Christ is a faithful Advocate; his intercession is a part of his
Priestly office, we have a faithful high Priest, says the Apostle, therefore
a faithful Advocate: He will never either desert our cause, or betray it; he
is as sure to us as our own souls; yea, he and the souls of his are one.

Fourthly, Christ is a merciful Advocate, he lays our cause to heart, our
cause is his cause: He has espoused the Interests of his people, and does all
for us upon his own account. When Saints are persecuted, we may tell him that
he is persecuted, and that he is afflicted when they are: The Church may plead
with Christ to plead for the removing of her sufferings, under the title of his
sufferings, he being the head of the Church, and the Church being his body.
Christ is, as a faithful, so a merciful high Priest ( Heb. 2.17.) and the
Apostle says, That in all things it behoved him to be like his brethren, that
he might be so. Christ had an ability of sufficiency to be merciful to us, as
God, though he had never been made like unto us by becoming man, but he had
not that ability (as some speak) of Idoneity, or fitness to be merciful. His
being made like unto us, has given him a double Idoneity, for the tenderness
of his heart toward us.

First, In that he himself has suffered being tempted (Heb. 2.18.) His
passions in the flesh were great.

Secondly, In that himself suffers still in all our temptations, his
compassions with our flesh are great.

Now an Advocate, who either has had an experience of trouble in his own
person, or is full of the sense of his Clients trouble, and feels his smart,
will certainly do his utmost to releeve him; because in his releife, himself
is releeved also.

Fifthly, Christ is the Favorite of the Judge; it is a great advantage to have
one pleading for us at the Bar, who is in favor with the Bench: Christ is
highly in favor with the Bench: God has testified from Heaven, This is my
wel-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased (Matthew. 3.17.) The Judge is our
Advocates Friend and Father.

Lastly, That we may be further assured that he will do his utmost for us. Our
Advocate calls us his Friends: As the Judge is his Friend, before whom he
pleads, so every Saint is his Friend for whom he pleads. Some will do more
for freindship then for a Fee. We know it is so with Jesus Christ, he pleads
for his people, because they are his Friends: This, Job makes use of here, He
will plead for a man with God, and the Son of man for his Friend. As if Job had
said, I know I have a Friend of Christ, and Christ looks on me as his friend,
and therefore I have highest confidence that he will plead my cause, and take
off this scandal. So much for Jobs earnest desire upon his appeal, that his
cause might come to a hearing, and that Christ would undertake the pleading of
it before his Father.

He gives a reason, in the last verse why he was thus pressing to have the
business brought to an issue; why he did thus appeal to God as his witness,
why he did power out tears to Christ, that he would plead for him? Why all
this?

Verse. 22. When a few years are come, then shall I go the way whence I shall
not return.
Deum vellem jamjam in presentia disceptationem in se recipere quia ad mortem
propero Jun.
As if He had said, For as much as I must dye shortly, I desire to have this
difference taken up before I dye, I cannot live long in this world, and I would
not go out of the world, under such a cloud as is now upon me: Is it not time
for me to hasten my cause to an end when mine end hastens? and to get my
business determined before my years are?

Anni numeri. Heb. i. e. qui numerati sunt adeo et brevissima periodo
circumscripti.
When a few years are come. The Hebrew is, years of number, that is, Years
which may easily be numbered (Isai. 10.19) The trees that remain shall be few
that a Child may write them, they shall be trees of number, that is, a small
number, and ( Genesis 34.29.) Jacob says, We are but few, the Hebrew is, We are
men of number, we may soon be told, a Child may tell us, and yet you provoke
City and Country against us. We very well translate according to the
Hebraisme, years of number, a few years. When a few years are come.

I shall go the way whence I shall not return. What way is that (which has,
Vestigiv nulla retrorsum) where all steps are forwards, and none backward: this
is such a way as we meet not with in all our earthly travels, yet every man on
earth is traveling toward such a way: travel which way you will, you have as
many steps backwards as forwards, men coming, and going: but (says Job) I
shall go the way I shall not return.

What way is this,? This is the way of all flesh ( Joshua 23.15. 1 King 2.2.)
This is the way to the grave, that way has no steps backwards.

But are there no return from the grave?

It is true, some have risen; there have been some first fruits of a
resurrection: but they who have come from the grave are so few, that their
footsteps are worn out by those many and many thousands of thousands who have
gone to the grave. What multitudes have gone the way to the grave, and are not
returned? some few have returned, but these so few, that we may still affirm,
the way to the grave knows no returning. That which is very rarely done (the
contrary being very frequently done) is said not to be done at all, or never to
be done.

But Job seems to deny his own return; he speaks as if he should not be
only lodged for a while, but lost for ever in the grave; I shall go the way,
whence I shall not return.

I answer, That Jobs faith was clear in the point of the resurrection of the
body appears by the confession which he makes (Chap. 19.25, 26.) and therefore
when he says, I shall not return, his meaning is (as was showed upon a like
passage Chap. 10.21.

First, That he should not return by any power of nature.

Secondly, That he should not return to a State of nature; he believed fully
that he should return by the power of God, to an estate of glory. Our bodies
which are sown natural bodies, shall be raised spiritual bodies. Though that
which was sowed shall return, yet when it returns it shall not be as it was
sowed.

Lastly, whereas Job says, I shall not return, his meaning is, when I dye,
or if I dye, I shall no more return to my house and dwelling in the world, I
must take my leave of all these things for ever. My place shall know me no
more, as he speaks to the same subject (Chap. 7.10.)

From the first branch of the verse note.

The years of man's life are few.

You may quickly number them.

Secondly, As the years of man's life come about quickly, so when they are
come, we must go certainly, we must go with death. I shall go (says
Job) there is no hindering, no stopping of that journey; it will not serve any
man's turn to say, He has no mind to go, he must go; it will not serve any
man's turn to say He is not at leisure to go, he must go; it will not serve
any man's turn to say, he is not fit to go, He is not prepared to go, he must
go as he is, fit or unfit, prepared or unprepared, he must go. It will not
serve any man's turn to say, he will give all the treasure in his house, all
the money in his purse, to be spared this journey, he must go. It will not
serve any man's turn to say, he will get another to go for him, or he will
send one in his rooome. There is no dying by proxy; every man when his few
years are come must go in person.

Thirdly Observe.

A Believer can speak of death familiarly.

It is a comfort to him in his sorrows, to think that he shall dye shortly,
When a few yares are come, I shall go the way, etc. he speaks pleasantly, the
mention of death was a life to him, Jobs life was a kind of death, and
therefore to him especially death would be a kind of life; were our hearts
rightly affected, they that have the most lively life, would think death
better th^n this life, I desire (says Paul) to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, which is best of all. Death was better to him then life, and lest any
should say, no marvel if Paul desired to dye, who could scarce tell where to
live, and no marvel if he would dye once for all, who was in deaths often: to
prevent this cavil, he adds, Which is best of all. Barely to dye is better to
some then a troublesome life, but to dye and be with Christ, is better then the
best life, much more is it better then that life in this world, which is a
continual death, as Jobes was, how shoul such a man sing out Job's verse, When
a few days are come, I shall go the way, whence I shall not return.

Fourthly Observe.

It is good to put death before us under the easiest notions.

Here Job calls it only a going, a going out of the world, that is all, he
elsewhere calls it a sleep, and the Spirit of God every where (in reference to
Saints) speaks of it in the most comfortable expressions. Death it self is so
embalmed, yea and clothed in the holy language, that there is even a sweetness
and a beauty in it. When a man has worn a suit of Apparel a great while,
and has even worn it out, or it becomes foul and nasty, would he not be glad
to put that off, and get a new one upon his back? therefore death is called an
uncloathing, a putting off the flesh; there is no hurt in that; when a man has
tired himself all the day at his work, would he not gladly go to bed? therefore
death is called rest or sleep. Under these or the like considerations held
forth in Scripture, we may (as it were) bury al hard thoughts of death, as was
further showed (Chap. 14.12) especally while we remember that as now life is by
many degrees, bits or morsels, swallowed up of mortality, so then death shall
(at one bit or morsel) be swallowed up of life (2 Cor. 5.4.) For Christ has
not only conquered, but abolished death, and has brought, not only life, but
immortality to light through the Gospel (2 Timothy 1.10.) Life is good, yet when
it may be said of a life it shall dye, that puts an evil into life: But if
life be good, how good is immortality, which is a life that cannot dye?

Sixthly, Note, Job is very importunate to have a blot upon his good name wiped
out; his conscience was clear, his soul was well, he could say ( Chap. 13.)
He is my Savior, and I know that I shall be justified, yet because he was
under aspersions and harsh censures, he hastens to have these taken off,
because he was to dye shortly.

If we should on this ground, be careful to settle our outward estates and
credits; how much more should we be careful upon this ground to see that our
souls be well settled? How should each one say, I will hasten to get my sins
pardoned, my person justified; I will hasten to have all clear between God and
my soul; For when a few years are come, I shall go the way whence I shall
not return: And if I do not see these things done, while I am here, I shall
never come back to see them done, nor can they be done at all in the place
whither I am going There is no repenting, no reforming, no believing in the
grave: if our spiritual change be not before our natural change, it will
never be. This ^rgument should provoke us to settle the affairs of our souls
speedily. It is not unlawful, nay, it is a duty to vindicate our credit, and
to order the affairs that concern this life, because we have not long to
live: The have of death should make us have our work, even the work of this
life; much more upon this ground should we see that our hearts be settled, that
our eternal peace be settled, how should the haste of death make us haste the
work of the life which is to come? But as it should make us hasten that work,
so it must not make us huddle that work, or slubber it over, or do it to
halves. Such haste is waste indeed: For, if we leave our souls half settled,
and our peace half made; and our repentance and turning to God in the midd
way, we shall never come again to finish and perfect them, no more then we
shall, to begin them. Therefore set speedily about the work, and give your
selves no rest till the work be perfected; for when a few days are come, you
shall go the way where ye shall not return.

Lastly, Which was Jobs special case.

It is an affliction for any man to dye under a blott of disgrace. Our credit
and good name should be precious to us while we live; especially we should be
careful to dye with good credit, and not to let a blott lie on us when we are
going out of the World. Job would not dye under the name of an Hypocrite, or an
Oppressor, with which black titles he had been charged by his Friends. It is a
mercy to go to the Grave with honor among men, and to dye desired; though it
be enough that we go to our Grave having honor with God, and being desired of
him. A good name is a Box of ointment powered forth; and a good report
(especially among those that are good) is as the embalming of our memories to
posterity. And yet the Saints are not so sollicitous for repaires in honor,
because of that esteem which they have of their own esteem (that is the
strain of ambition) and they have learned to go through good report and evil
report, through honor and dishonor; they know how to go forth without the
Camp, bearing the reproach of Christ: But they are unwilling that Christ
should bear their reproach, or that his name should be dishonored through
them. And therefore seeing they desire while they live, to adorn the Doctrine
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in all things, they cannot but be careful
before they dye, to remove from their own names whatsoever might reflect
dishonor upon his. How near Job was (in his own opinion) to the valley of the
shadow of death, is yet more evident in the first words of the next Chapter:
Here he only tells us, he must dye shortly, there he tells us, upon the
matter, that he was dead already; here he says, When a few years are come, I
shall go, there he says not only that he had no more years to come, but no
more days: My days are extinct, etc.

JOB, CHAP. 17. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. My breath is corrupt, my days are
extinct, the Graves are ready for me.

Are there not mockers with me? And does not mine eyes continue in their
provocation.

Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee, who is he that will strike hands
with me?

For thou have hid their heart from understanding: therefore shall thou not
exalt them.

He that speaks flattery to his friends; even the eyes of his Children shall
fail.


THE beginning of this Chapter pursues the Argument laid down in the close of
the former: Or as a learned Expositor speaks, Job in this does enliven the
premises, Hoc capite intendit inanimare praemissa. Aquin.
and (as it were) put fresh spirits into what he had spoken before. For whereas
he had before desired the Lord to hasten his cause to a day of hearing, because
his day of death hastened ( Cha. 16. Verse. 22.) When a few years are come, I
shall go the way, whence I shall not return: Here to show that he was a
dying man, he describes himself as a dead man; My breath is corrupt, my days
are extinct, the graves are ready for me.

Secondly, There Job made an appeal to God, O that a man might plead with God,
as a man pleads with his Neighbo^r (Verse. 21.) And he gives the reason why, My
Friends scorn me (Verse. 20.) He does the same here in other language ( Verse.
2.) Are there not mockers with me? And does not mine eye continue in their
provocation? And therefore he renews his appeal to God, and beggs to be heard
before indifferent Judges, or Umpires, Lay down now, put me in a surety with
thee, who is he that will strike hands with me? In the fourth and fifth Verses
he further urges the reasons of his appeal, or he backs his motion, that God
would do him right, from the insufficiency of his Friends to do him right:
Thou have hid their heart from understanding: As if he should say, Who would
stand to the judgment of those, who want understanding? Thou have hid their
heart from understanding: therefore shall thou not exalt them; so: To this
honor of judging my cause, and deciding this controversy, yea, I find them
so unfit to be either my Judges, or my Arbitrators, that they are indeed but
Flatterers; and therefore they may rather expect some sudden judgment upon
themselves, or their Children, then that God should do them this honor to
judge for me: He that speaks flattery to his Friends, even the eyes of his
Children shall fail (Verse. 5.)

Thus I have opened Jobs scope in the context of these five Verses; which I
have put together, because the matter runs in a continued dependence. And
though for the maine it be the same with which he concluded in the sixteenth
Chapter, yet the variety of reading and expression will yield us variety of
meditation: I descend to particulars.

Verse. 1. My breath is corrupt, my days are extinct; the graves are ready for
me.
Here are three things, every of which speaks a dying man.

First, Corrupt breath. Secondly, Extinguished days. Thirdly, A grave made
ready.
Pereo spiritu agitatus. Sept. (...) Vox (...) ligavit, constrinxit per
antiphrasin significat solutus, ruptus, corruptus, accommodatur etiam ad
dolores intensissimos quales sunt parturientium, quia cor valde constringunt.
First, My breath is corrupt: Ruach. There are three interpretations given of
that word [My breath] some understand it of his mind, or whole inward man: As
if he had said, My thoughts are, or my mind is exceedingly troubled; and so
most of the Greek Interpreters read it; and then the word which we translate
Corrupt, may signify greived, pained, or afflicted, and it is often applied to
those pains which are most painful; even the pain of a Woman in travel.
And so the sense is made out thus, as if Job had said, I am extremely
troubled, 'or I am pained, like a Woman in the hour of travel; as she is in
bodily pain, so I am pained in mind; I hvve felt many inward pangs, and
throws, and yet I am not delivered: But I conceive this exposition unsuitable
to the scope of the place, Job being about to describe the state of his body,
or of his outward man, and not the affliction, and trouble of his mind.

Secondly, The word (Ruach) signifies the vital powers or spirits, which
support man, Spiritus vitales qui animae instrumentum sunt ad vitae functiones.
Aquin.
and serve him in all the functions of life; spirits are the promoters of
action, and when the vital spirits are corrupted, man is unable, not only to
act, but to live. The expense of spirits, is the most chargeable expense to the
life of man, and when a man's spirits are much spent, he is like a dead man,
though he be alive: We say ordinarily when we are weary, Our spirits are
spent; that is, Our vital spirits which give activity and strength to the
whole body.

Thirdly, Rather understand it literally, and strictly for the breath, which
comes forth by respiration, My breath is corrupt: and then the corrupting here
spoken of, is not to be taken for any ill savor in his breath: they who have
corrupt breath are offensive to others in breathing. Corruption non hic denotat
spiritum graveolentum, sed spiritum qui cum ingenti nisu and dolor emittitur
Pined. Medici Asthma vocant; and quia Asthmaticus suffocari videtur, ideo
legitur hic; jam quidem Ago animam. Tygur.
The breath is said to be corrupt, because it smells of the corruption of those
parts from whence it is drawn; we must not understand Job so: But when he
says, My breath is corrupt, his meaning is, that either he had obstructions
and stoppings of breath, which distemper Physicians call the Tissicke; a man
under that infirmity may be said to have his breath corrupted, because he
breathes difficultly. And as it is so in some diseases, so it is always so in
the approaches of death; a little before a man dies, his breath shortens, he
breathes hardly, or he hardly breathes, he lies gasping for life, and catching
for breath: Such a state Job here intends, The Tygurine translation takes that
sense, My life is departing, or I am giving up the ghost.

Hence Note.

The breath of man is corruptible, though his soul be not.

These two are very distinct: Some make the soul and brea^h one thing, and
argue the corruptibility of the soul from such Texts as this. But the breath
differs, not only from the soul, but from the life: The soul has a life of
its own, and the life of the body is its union with the soul; breathing is
the acting of life, proceeding from that union, and ending when that union is
dissolved. Breath may be corrupt, and life may banish, but the soul continues;
the breath is so vanishing, that the Prophet gives caution ( Isa. 2.22.) Cease
from man, whose breath is in his nostrills. The breath of man is so ready to
cease, that it is our wisdom to cease from man; for when breath goes, man is
gone, and all goes with him, in that day his thoughts perish; and therefore Job
had no sooner said, My breath is corrupt, but he adds, My days are extinct.

(...) Vox tantum hoc loco reperta significat excidere amputare extinguere.
[My dayes] that is, The time appointed for my life, which is measured by
days, by natural days, or by artificial days: Our days come and go
continually, and when our tale of days is come and gone, our days are
[extinct] The word which here we translate extinct, is found no where else in
the Hebrew of the Old Testament: It is rendered three ways.

First, Thus, my days are cut off; which metaphor is often used in reference
to life; our days are (as it were) so many threads, Excissi sunt. Pagn.
and our life is like a piece of clooth woven together by many days; when the
Webb, be it more or less, longer or shorter, is finished, the thread is cut: My
days are cut off.

Secondly, The Vulgar reads it, my days will be shortened; they shall be put in
a narrow room, into a little compendium, I shall soon be able to read over
the volume of my days, Breviabuntur dies mei. Vulg
they are but short, a mere Epitome.

Thirdly, We read, my days are extinct, or put out. Which is a metaphor taken
from fire, from a Torch, or Candle, which is the sense of the Tygurine
translation.

My days fail, as a Candle, or as a Lamp, which, when the oil is consumed,
goes out: Mr. Broughton keeps to the metaphor of fire, Deus mei ritu lucernae
deficiunt. Tygur.
My days are quenched. There is a flame of life in the body, the natural heat
is preserved by the natural moisture; these two, Radical heat, and Radical
moisture, work upon each other; and as long as Radical moisture holds out to
feed the Radical heat, life holds out; but when the heat has once sucked and
drunk up all the moisture (in some acute diseases it drinks all at a draught)
as the flame drinks up the Oil of the Lamp, Vita extinguitur quando humor
nativus in quo vita consistit extinguitur.
then we go out, or as Job speaks here, Our days are extinct. Excessive
moisture puts out the fire, and for want of moisture it goes out.

Hence Note.

First, Man's life, as a Fire, or Lamp, consumes it self continually.

There is a special disease called a Consumption, of which many dye; but the
truth is, every man who dies, dies of a Consumption; he that dies of a Surfeit,
may be said (in this sense) to dye of a Consumption. The fuel and food of
man's life is wasted sometimes more sparingly and gradually, but it is always
consumed (except in those deaths which are merely occasional, or violent)
before man dies.

Again, Job speaks peremptorily, My days are extinct. He was not then dead;
but because he saw all things in a tendency to death, and was himself in a
dying posture; therefore he concludes, My days are extinct.

Hence note, Secondly.

What we see in regard of all preparatorie means and ways ready to be done,
we may speak of as already done.

The Scripture speaks often of those things which are shortly and certainly to
come to pass, as come to pass, and as the Apostle argues in spirituals, We
know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the Brethren,
and he that believes has eternal lif: So we may argue about naturals, he
that is sick beyond the help of means, and the skill of the Physician, is
translated from life to death, and we may conclude of a man in this case, he
has tempoall death, or he may say of himself; as Job does in the next words.

The graves are ready for me. The Original is very concise, it is only there,
The graves for me; we supply those words Are ready. And because of that
shortness of the Language, (...) Sepulchra m^hi. Cum mutila sit oration
indifferens est ut variis modis porfici possit.
there have been many conjectures for the supply or filling up of the sense.
Some thus, The graves for me; that is, there is nothing for me to thnke of now
but only a grave, I may lay aside all other business, and attend that alone,
how I may lie down in the dust with peace. I am not a man for this world, it
is best for me to retire or withdraw my soul quite from the earth, seeing I
have no hope to keep my body long out of it; or if I do let out my soul to
the earth, it shall be only to so much of it, as will hold my body, or serve to
make me a grave. The graves for me.

Secondly, The graves for me; that is, I desire or wish for nothing but a
grave, A grave for my money, as we say of a thing that we greatly desire: so
says Job, A grave for me:

As if he had more largely spoken, thus.

As I perceive I am going to the grave, so I desire to go thither, I have (as
to this sense) made a covenant with death, Sepulchra mihi; supple opto, quaero,
cogito, aut quid simile. Sepulchra mihi inhiant, ego sepulchris. q. d. Aliis
omnibus rebus valedico atque renuncio. Jun.
and an agreement with the grave. The grave and I shall not fall out, now that
I am ready to fall into it. For if I had my vote or might put down in writing
what I would have, I would write, A Grave, A Grave for me; as I am declining,
and decaying in my body, so my spirit, and my mind are as willing that my body
should decay: I am as ready for the grave as that is for me. A grave for me: So
the words carry a reciprocation of readiness between Job and the Grave, The
grave gapes for me, and I gape for the grave: We may parallel this kind of
speaking with that in the Book of Canticles (Chap. 2.16.) where the Spouse
says, My beloved is mine, and I am his: The Original is, My beloved to me,
and I to him: There are no more words then needs must be. The largeness of
their affection, bred this concisenesse in language, My beloved to me, and I to
him: We are to one another, as if we were but one.

The expression notes two things.

First, Propriety, My beloved to me, or, my beloved is mine; that is, I have a
propriety in him.

Secondly, It notes possession, I have him, I have not only a right to him,
but I enjoy him; I have not only a title, but a tenure; God has given me
Liverie and Seisin (as our Law speaks) he has put me into possession of Jesus
Christ, and I have given Jesus Christ full possession of me, I am no longer my
own, but his, and at his dispose. So here, The grave for me, and I for the
grave: The grave is my right; yea, the grave is my possession. The grave is a
house that every one has right to, and some are so near it, that they seem
possessed of it. The grave is mine, says Job, or I am as a dead man, ready to
be carried to my grave: The grave is not made ready, till man is undressed by
death, and so made ready for the grave. We say of very old men, though in
health, and we may say of very sick men, though young, They have one foot in
the grave. Job speaks as having both his feet in the grave: Yea, we may say,
that Job speaks as if he had not only his feet in the grave, but (which is
far more) his heart in the grave. There are many who have their feet in the
grave, whose hearts are at furthest distance from it, Job had both. Heman
(Psalm. 88.4, (5.) describes his condition in such a language, My soul is full
of troubles, and my life draws nigh to the grave, I am accounted with them
that go down into the pit; I am as a man of no strength, free among the dead;
like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou remembrest no more, and that
are cut off from thy sight: That Scripture may be a Comment on this, My breath
is corrupt, my days are extinct, the graves are ready for me.

Further, Job speaks in the Plural number; he says not the grave is ready
for me, but, The graves are ready for me. Why, how many graves must Job have?
Would not one grave hold him? Or, was Job covetous to have many graves? Many
houses will not serve some men when they live, but one house will serve any man
when he dies. A little room will hold those dead, for whose covetous and
ambitious minds the whole World was not room thy enough while they lived.
Ordinary men will have here their Winter-houses, and their Summer houses their
City houses, and their Country house, their houses on the Plain, and their
houses on the Hill; men have variety of houses while they live; but one is all
when dead: Why then does Job say, The [graves] are ready for me?

He says it to show that death abounded to his apprehension or that he could
not escape death: As if he had said, Wheresoever I set my foot, I step upon a
grave. Plurima mortis imago.
The Poet describing a tragical state, says, There was much of death to be
seen, or many appearances of death. Job saw deaths, and b^held graves every
where gaping for him. Paul was in deaths often, and Job was in many deaths at
once: The graves are ready, there are many Pits making, I am sure to fall into
one, there is no avoiding it.

Learn from it, First

That,

In times of sickness and affliction, discourses of the grave, are the most
seasonable discourses.

Death should be much in our thoughts, and much in our speech at all times, but
most of all in times of sickness, or of danger. Some when they are sick,
cannot abide to hear a word spoken of the grave; others will forbid such as
come to visit the sick, to speak a word of death. Com^naeus. lib. 10.
Lewis the eleventh King of France, was so excessively afraid of death, that
he had given command to his Attendants not to give him any warning of the
approach of this his last Enemy by Name. It was worse then death to him to
hear of death; and yet before he dyed, he was told of it, not only plainly,
but rudely. The French Historian reports, that his very Barber, with some other
inferior Servants (as if they had rather come as Judges to pronounce the
sentence of death upon him, then as friends to be his remembrancers of death)
told him bluntly and abruptly, without preface or preamble, or the least word
of comfort to sweeten such a bitter potion, That his fatal hour was come,
that neither his Hermit nor his Physician, could keep him alive a day longer.
They who are unwilling to hear, or speak of death, shall hear it spoken of
whether they will or no. Death should be much upon the tongue, and more in the
thoughts of good men when they are in health, but when they are in their
natural preparation for death (sickness is a natural preparative for death)
they should be very often in their spiritual preparations, by thinking and
discoursing of it.

Secondly, From this manner of speaking, The grave for me.

Observe.

That,

A godly man is sometimes as ready for the grave, as the grave can be for him.

Let it come as soon as it will, it cannot come too soon; as the grave gapes
for him, so does he for the grave; as the grave hungers for him, so does he for
it, and nothing can satisfy him but a grave. I desire (says Paul) to be
dissolved: He was ready for the grave: And ready he was, not in a vain wish,
O, I would dye, and I desire to dye; but from a grounded hope that he should be
well in death. Saul (2 Samuel 1.9.) was sorely wounded, the graves were ready for
him, and he was ready for the grave too: But whence was it? It was not from his
preparedness to dye, but from his impatience to live; as appears both by the
true History of his death, and by the false report of it made by the Amalekite.
The former says (1 Samuel 31.4.) Then said Saul unto his Armor-bearer, Draw thy
sword and thrust me through therewith, lest these uncircumcised come and thrust
me through and abuse me: Saul, upon this account was so ready for the grave,
that he begged to be thrust into it, and when he could not obtain that
miserable favor, he thrust himself into it; so the latter part of the Verse
informs us, But his Armor-bearer would not, for he was sore afraid: therefore
Saul took a Sword and fell upon it. The Amalekite reports Saul thus bespeaking
him (2 Samuel 1.9.) Stand I pray thee upon me, and slay me; for anguish is upon
me, because my life is yet whole in me.

Man dies not by peece-meale, now a little, and then a little, nor is life
divisible, when it departs it departs together, but when Saul had no mind to
live, it troubled him that he was no nearer death: A dishonor was fallen upon
him, the day was lost, and he was wounded: Saul could easier dye then out live
this disgrace. Such a readiness to dye many have had, it vexes them to live,
dye they will, because they cannot live as they would: this is a readiness of
desperation, not of preparation. Job was much troubled, pain and smart
afflicted him, and they had some influence upon his desire of death; but his
chief motive was above: what old Simeon desired, to depart in peace because
his eyes had seen his salvation, Job desired, because he knew by Faith, that
God was his salvation.

Thirdly, Job speaks chearefully of the grave:

Hence learn.

A Believer in the greatest afflictions of this life, sees ease and refreshing
in death.

He knows that he shall bury all his sorrows when himself goes to the grave;
yea, that then his sins, as well as his afflictions go to their grave too, and
shall never rise again.

Fourthly, Job speaks confidently he shall dye presently, the grave was ready
for him: But it was not so, Jobs grave was nor ready, and he outlived this
black day many a fair year.

Hence Observe.

A good man may mistake the times and seasons of Gods dispensations to him.

He thinks, yea concludes, he shall dye, when he shall not dye: Wicked worldly
men, do not believe they shall dye, when they must; they cannot be persuaded
that they shall dye, when they are ready to dropp into their graves. Job seemed
to have an assurance that he should dye, yet he did not, God reprived him from
death, and restored him from trouble. We are never the nearer the grave,
because we prepare for it, speak and meditate on it, or resolve to go into it:
It is not our holding back from the grave, that will keep us out of it, nor our
willingness to go to the grave, that will put us into it. It is good to
mistake upon the best side; God usually recalls those from death, who are most
ready at his call to dye.

Fifthly, In that he speaks of Graves in the Plural number: Learn this.

There are many ways of going out of the World, though there be bilt one way
of coming in.

Whither soever we are going, we are going to the grave, and when we have
stepped over, or scrambled out of one grave, we may quickly slip into another,
and be locked in fast enough.

Lastly, Take this from the whole, by way of Correllary; It is our wisdom to
stand always ready for death, and the grave, for they stand ready for us: Ours
is a dying life, a decaying strength, ours are consuming days, our days
cannot be many, possibly they will be but very few; for ought we know the
grave is now ready for us, and we are sure it is a digging and preparing for
us: Therefore let us be digging in the Word of life, that we may be ready to
meet and welcome death and the grave, which are so ready for us: The graves are
ready for me.

Job proceeds to reinforce the cause of his appeal.

Verse. 2. Are there not mockers with me? And does not mine eye continue in
their provocation?
(...) a illusit derisit. (...) Formula jurisjurandi huic linguae familiaris.
Merc. Dispeream nisi amici mei studeant mihi imponere. Vatabl.
Master Broughton translates by way of affirmation, Surely mockers are bestowed
on me. We by way of Question, Are there not mockers with me? Yes, there are
mockers with me: Some read it as the form of an Oath. It is familiar in the
Hebrew to use such forms of swearing and imprecating; so the words are rendered
by a learned Interpreter, Let me perish if my friends are not mockers, if they
go not about to delude me. Job spoke this a little before, My friends scorn
me (Chap. 16.20.) Here he is at it again, Are there not mockers with me? I
find three words applied by Job to his Friends, while he reproves this their
unfreindly usage.

(...)
The first ( Chap. 12.4.) there he uses a word which signifies to mock with
derision. (...)
The word ( Chap. 16.19.) notes them such as mocked, with wit and jesting. The
word here used signifies to mock by deceiving or deluding, as if his Friends
had carried matters with him more like Sophisters, then Comforters: So the word
is applied ( Genesis 31.7.) Jacob tells Leah, and Rachell, You know that with all
my power, I have served your Father Laban, and your Father has deceived me and
changed my wages ten times: that is, He thought by changing my wages to deceive
me, and get all the stronger Cattle to himself. When Moses went out upon the
request of Pharaoh, to sue unto the Lord for the removing of a present plague:
Moses said, Behold I go out from thee, and I will entreat the Lord that the
swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his Servants, and from his
people to morrow; but let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more (Exodus 8.29.)
as if he had said, You have mocked me two or three times, and said you would
let the people go, do not so any more, lest your deceiving of my expectation,
prove the greatest deceit of your own.

The deluding Doctors which some delighted in, are expressed by this word ( Isa.
30.9.) This is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not
hear the Law of the Lord: They did not love the Law of the Lord; What then?
which say to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us
right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits. The wickedness
of that people lay in two things; either they would have the Prophets silent,
and not speak at all, or if they did speak, they must Prophecy deceits: They
loved to be cozoned, truth made them smart, and they could not abide it. A
guilty conscience cannot endure plain words, but it loves smooth words; as
many as you will of these words (say they) or else not a word; either prophecy
deceit, or cease prophesying. Here Job complains, Are there not deceivers with
me? As if he had said, You tell me you bring the mind of God, but you bring
false Doctrine, you preach deceit. Though we cannot say they preached smooth
things to Job, they spoke hardly enough of him, and harshly enough to him, yet
we may say they preached deceitful things to him; for though they did not
speak with an intention to deceive him, yet they were deceived in speaking,
and he had been deceived if he had yielded to what they spoke. In which sense
Job calls them (which one would think he had little reason to do, considering
how roughly they dealt with him, he, I say, calls them) Flatterers at the sixth
Verse of this Chapter: And what is the business or chief design of
Flatterers, but to catch others with words, or to deceive them into a
compliance with their own ends. And this is often (and was in this case) the
end, Finis operis and finis operantis distinguuntur.
or tendency of the action, when it is not the end, or intention of the Agent.
From this notion of the word,

Observe.

First, To be among Deceivers is a great misery.

Secondly, To be a Deceiver is a great sin.

Thirdly, To publish that which is false, though there be no intendment to
deceive, is to be a Deceiver.

As most are ignorantly deceived, so there are some ignorant Deceivers: and as
some think what they do to be very just, and that it is their duty to do it,
when indeed it is very sinful, so there are some who think what they teach to
be very true, and that it is their duty to teach it, when indeed it is very
erroneous. There are but few who know they are Deceivers, when they are: now as
that Servant which knew his Lords will, but did not according to his will,
shall be beaten with may stripes, and yet, he who knew it not, and did commit
things worthy of stripes (shall not escape a beating, he) shall be beaten with
few stripes (Luke 12.47, 48.) So he that knows the truth of God, and yet
deceives others with false Doctrine, shall be beaten with many stripes, and he
who not knowing the truth, deceives others shall not escape unbeaten, or
unblamed, as Jobs Friends did not.

Non peccavi. Vulg. q. d. innocens heu morior. Quandoquidem non sunt
ludificationes apud me. Jun.
There is another reading of this first clause, differing from ours, Are there
not mockers with me? The Vulgar thus, I have not sinned. A second to the same
sense, thus, For as much as there are no mockings or deceivings with me. I am a
man who deals plainly and simply: The word which we translate Mockers, as
noting a Person, is rendered by the act, and that negatively: There are no
mockings with me; that is, I use no mockings or no false play, as I am accused;
I have spoken my heart nakedly and clearly, And yet mine eye continues in
their provocation: therefore lay down now, put me in a surety with thee, etc.
(Verse. 3.) This is a good reading, but I will not stay upon it; only take two
brief Notes from it.

A good man is upright hearted, and downright in all his dealings and
sayings.

There are no mockings with me, I am what I appear, and I appear what I am:
An Hypocrite is full of tricks and shifts, he disguiseth both his person and
his actions: No man can tell where to have him, or what to make of him. When
he speaks, his words do not signify what he means, if they signify any
thing; and when he acts his works do not signify what he is, they signify
any thing rather then that. All are mockings of others, though he will find in
the end, that he has mocked himself most of all.

Secondly, As he joins this with the next clause, There are no mockings with
me, and yet mine eye continues in their provocation. Note, that, How
plaine-hearted soever a man is, yet it is very hard to persuade those who are
once prejudiced against him that he is so.

Let Job say and profess what he would, yet he could not recover his credit,
nor set himself right in the opinion of men till God did it for him ( Chap.
42.) But I pass that, Are there not mockers with me? What the mocking and
scorning of Jobs Friends was, has been opened ( Chap. 12.4. Cha. 16.19.) and
therefore I referr the Reader thither.

Does not mine eye continue in their provocation? Should he not rather have
said, Does not mine ear continue, etc. Mocking is the object of the ear, and
not of the eye. There are some mockings indeed, by mimicall foolish gestures,
and they are the object of the eye; Assidue in id oculos and mentis aciem
intentam habeo quod me assidue irritant, in eo defixae sunt omnes meae
cogitationes. Merc. Isti dies noctesque non cessant exacerbare animum meum,
Iun. Intenta cogitatio somnum impedit.
but here Job speaks of what he had from them in conference, which is properly
the business of the ear; and yet he faith, Does not mine eye continue in their
provocation? By the eye we are to understand the eye of the mind. Does not
mine eye? that is, Have I not a representation in my spirit, or upon my fancy
of your mockings, and bitter provocations, even as if they were visible before
mine eyes? Have I not night visions and apparitions upon my Bed, of what you
speak or act against me every day?

Again, We may expound the Text properly of his bodily eye, b cause the
trouble which they gave him in the day time, hindered his sleep in the night.
The letter of the Hebrew favors this sense, Does not mine eye lodge in their
provocation? So we put in the Margin of our Bibles: Hence Master Broughton
reads, In these men's vexing lodges mine eye; that is, When I go to Bed and
hope to sleep, then in stead of lodging in my Bed, I lodge in the thoughts of
my Friends unkindnesse; and indeed, a man may sleep better upon the bare
boards, then upon hard words. Such words keep the eyes waking, and are as bad
to sleep upon, as a pillow of thorns; especially when (which was Jobs case)
the eye continues in them. Intentnesse of mind, or vehement cogitation about
any thing, keep open the eyes, and forbid the approach of rest; Does not mine
eye continue?

In their provocation. [Provocations.] He called them Mockers, and their
mockings were provocations. Vel a (...) amarum esse. Sive a (...) quod est
irritare sive exacerbare.
The word (as some derive it) signifies that which is bitter, Provocation is a
bitter thing: Others derive it from a root signifying to irritate and stir up
the spirit of a man; which is provocation properly. Provocation is a high act
of wrong: A man may do another wrong, on this side a provocation; as the
provocation of God is a high act of sin in man, ordinary acts of sin do not
amount to a provocation ( Ps. 106.7.) They provoked him at the Sea (it is this
word) even at the red Sea, that is, There they sinned extremely. So ( Ps.
95.8.) which the Apostle quotes ( Heb. 3.8.) The holy Ghost calls the whole time
of that peoples froward walking, or sinning against God in the Wilderness, The
provocation: Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation: that is, In the
time when ye sinned, not only to the offending, but to the provoking of God
against you, not to the breaking of his Laws, but to the vexing of his spirit.
When sin is complete, and iniquity grown to a full stature, that day is justly
marked in the Calendar of Scripture, with a red letter, implying wrath, and is
therefore called, The provocation: So when any man deals very unkindly,
frowardly, or unfaithfully, against his Brother, then it is a provocation, Does
not mine eye continue in their provocation?

Now for as much as the same word signifies both bitterness and provocation,
and that most provocations are given by uncharitable and unconsiderate speeches;

Observe.

First, Unkind words are bitter to the hearer.

The Apostle gives the rule to Husbands ( Col. 3.19.) Husbands love your Wives,
and be not bitter to them: that is, Do not give them bitter words in stead of
faithful counsels. Some Husbands speak their Gall to their Wives, to whom they
have given their hearts. Among the Heathens the Gall of the Sacrifice which
they superstitiously offered at Marriages, Quo instituto legis Author non
obscure innuebat a conjugio semper debere bilem iramque abesse. Drus. Prove.
Clas. 2. l. ^.
was pulled out and thrown away, before it was presented at the Altar,
signifying that Man and Wife should be (as Naturalists say the Dove is) without
Gall one toward another. Wholesome counsels and admonitions for the matter,
are often administered with such an undue mixture of heat and passion as renders
them, not only distastefull but hurtful to the receiver.

Secondly, Note.

Harsh words carry much provocation in them. (...), animum despondeo.


The same Apostle in the same Chapter enlarging his Institutes for the
direction of Believers in all Relation, bespeaks Parents ( Verse. 21.) Fathers
provoke not your Children to anger: The word signifies any kind of
provocation, but that especially which is caused by contumelious and upbrayding
speeches. A Father provokes his Child, when he speaks hastily, and
threatningly, terrifying his Child, rather then instructing him: The reason
why Fathers should not thus provoke their Children, is added, Lest they be
discouraged, or (as the word imports) be as if they were without souls,
^noop't (as we say) and heartlesse. For as there is a provocation (in a good
sense) which heightens the spirit in well doing, and enlivens it for action:
The Apostle exhorts to that ( Heb. 10.24.) Let us consider one another to
provoke one another to love, and to good works, that is, let us set such copies
of holiness that others may be stirred up, beyond their ordinary pitch, and
elevation of spirit, to a zealous doing of good. Or speak such winning words,
give such pressing exhortations, that the hearts of your Brethren, may be
carried beyond their usual course in holiness. Thus he tells the Corinthians
(2. Epist. 9.2.) That their zeal had provoked many: But to what had it
provoked them? Not to anger and passion, toward any, but to charity, yea and
liberality toward the poor. And though the Apostle uses another word in the
Greek, yet he means the same thing, when he assures us ( Romans 11.11.) that
the Jews stumbled not that they should fall (but that they might rise) for so
it follows, But rather through their fall salvation is come to the Gentiles,
for to provoke them to jealousy. The salvation of the Gentiles bred emulation
in the Jews, What? Shall they go away with all the salvation? Shall the
Gentiles possess Heaven alone, whom we thought the meanest people upon the
Earth? Come, let us also put in at least for a part, and get a share in
Gospel-mercies and privileges with them. Thus they were provoked to emulation,
and this emulation was and shall be (through the power of God, who is
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working) a help to faith in Christ,
and so to their rising from their fall. And the Apostle was so intent upon the
promoting of this design of God, that he professes ( Verse. 13, 14.) that he
magnified his Office among the Gentiles, not only to save them, but (says he)
If by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and might
save some of them: He hoped the Jews would, at last, believe for anger, or for
very shame, and go to Heaven in a holy chafe.

Now (I say) as there is a provocation which heates and hightens the mind of
man to an eager pursuit of the best things; so there is a provocation which
abates and blunts his edge, which chills and flats his spirits to any thing
that is good, which was the ground of the Apostles dehortation, Provoke not
your Children, lest they be discouraged: And as the effect of such provocations
is to some a discouragement in doing their duty, so the effect of it in others
is a thrusting them onn to do that which is most contrary, not only to their
duty, but to their disposition.

Railing speeches, uncomely and uncivil language, have provoked many, both to
speak, and to do that which they never dreamt of, or which was most remote
from their natural temper and inclination. For though such distempers lie in
the bottom of nature, yet unless they had been stirred and spurred up, those
distempers would not have appeared and broken out. Moses was the meekest man
upon the earth, yet when they provoked his spirit, he spoke unadvisedly with
his lips (Psalm. 106.33.) There are three ill effects of provocations.

First, Provoking speeches raise up hard thoughts of the speaker. It is a high
work of grace to think well of them, who speak ill of us, or to us.

Secondly, Provoking speeches blow up hard words of the speaker; many excuse
it, when they give ill language, You provoked me: And though they be not to be
excused who do so when they are provoked, yet their sin is the greater, who
provoke them.

Thirdly, Provoking speeches are sometimes the cause of revengefull practices,
and very often of licentious practices. Sober admonitions and grave reproves,
reclaim those who go astray, but violent rebukes make them desperate. Some
care not what they do when they hear others say they care not what. Many
Children have run ill courses by over much indulgence, and neglect of
discipline; and so have not a few, by the over mvch severity and sharpness of
those that are over them. Patience is hard put to it, to keep either mind or
tongue or hand in compass, when we are provoked: Great provocations are great
temptations. When God is provoked he is tempted ( Heb. 3.8.) Harden not your
hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the Wilderness,
when your Fathers tempted me, etc. We may expound it two ways.

First, That while they tempted God, by questioning his power for them, and
presence with them, they provoked him, he was greatly displeased with them for
it.

Secondly, That while they provoked God they tempted him, they tempted him to
destroy them, or to act that power against them which they did not believe
(after so many experiences) able enough to deliver or protect them. If then God
himself be so tempted, that (as he is pleased often to express himself after
the manner of men) he can scarce hold his hands, or forbear to do that which
he had no mind to do when he is provoked, how much more is weak man tempted
to do that which his corruptions are always forward enough (and too too much)
to do, when he is provoked.

Again, When he says, Does not mine eye continue in their provocation?

Learn, thirdly.

Hard words stick upon the spirit. They hang about the mind, and are not
easily gotten off. Good words dwell much upon the spirit, and so do ill words;
when a man has onee got a word of promise from God, about any mercy set home
upon his heart, the eye continues in that consolation: O it is a sweet word,
the soul lies sucking at it night and day. And when a man has once got a word
of command from God about any duty set home upon his spirit, his eye continues
in the direction of it. O how I love thy Law (says David, Psalm. 119.97.) It is
my meditation all the day; he could not beat his thoughts off from it, when
love had fastened on it. As these good words cleave to a gracious soul, and
dwell with it; so it is hard even for a gracious soul to dislodge hard words:
O how does the eye continue in those provocations? And does not experience
teach us, that vain thoughts thrown into the mind by Satan will not easily
be driven out? How often does the eye continue in his provocations? The spirit
of a man has a strong retentive faculty, it will hold the object close, and as
it were live and lodge in it. How many make their abode in provocations, and
reside upon bitter words, received from their Brethren? How many lie down with
them at night, and rise with them in the morning; yea, and walk with their eye
upon them all the day long. And here it may be questioned.

Was not this a sin in Job? That rule of love then was in being, which is now
expressed ( Ephesians. 4.26.) Be ye angry and sin not, let not the Sun go down
upon your wrath. Then, how could Job suffer his eye to continue in these
provocations?

I answer, There was an infirmity in this; it is our duty, as to forgive, so to
forget, or lay aside the thought of injuries and wrongs received: And it is the
Character of wicked men, They sleep not unless they have done mischief (Pro.
4.16.) Their eye continues in their own corruption, or in the temptation of
Satan till they have brough it forth. For as when good men have strong
impressions unto good upon their spirits, they cannot sleep till they have done
good: their eye continues in that holy provocation ( Psalm. 132.4.) I will not
(says zealous David) give sleep to my eyes, nor slumber to my eye lids, until
I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob: So
wicked men give no sleep to their eyes till they have done that mischeife, or
executed that revenge to which they conceive themselves provoked. But the eye
of Job did not continue in those unfreindly provocations, to watch an
opportunity for selfe-revenge upon, or of doing mischeife to his Friends: He
did not let the Sun go down upon wrath, that he might devise their ruin in
the dark. He was not so wise as he should have been to hurt himself, and
hinder his rest, by such a continual poring upon their unkindnesses; but he
was not wicked at all, much less so wicked (which some from this passage may
conceive him) as to pore upon their unkindnesses, with a purpose to hurt them:.
So, that act might have somewhat of sin in it, because he troubled his own
peace more then he needed, but it had not this sin in it, that he studied how
to trouble the peace of others.

Lastly, We may rather interpret these words to the blame of his Friends, who
continued to provoke him, then to his, whose eye (because they did so) could
see nothing but provocation, or at least must see that, whatsoever it saw, and
therefore could not but continue in it. How could the eye of Hannah choose but
continue in the provocation of Peninnah, when it is said (1 Samuel 1.6, 7.) That
as her Husband Elkanah gave her special tokens of his love, year by year, so
she provoked her to make her fret year by year, therefore she wept and did
not eat. While a provocation is continued, our sense of it can hardly be
intermitted.

Job having complained of received provocations, renews his appeal to God.

Verse. 3. Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee, who is he that will
strike hands with me?
The words are an Apostrophe to God. That Job, speaks to God, not to Eliphaz,
is cleerer then needs be proved. The word which we render lay down, signifies
also to appoint, ( Exodus 1.11.) They did set (or appoint) over them
Taske-masters. And again ( Exodus 21.13.) I will appoint thee a place whither
he (the manslayer) shall flee. Appone cor tuum. i. e. adverte quaeso animum
meis verbis. Vatabl.
In the present Text both rendrings of the word are used. We make use of the
first, Put, or lay down: What would Job have God lay down?

Some give it thus, Lay down, or apply thine heart to me, attend I pray thee
to my words, and consider my cause.

Secondly, The words may be conceived as an allusion to those, who going before
a Judge, or having a cause to be tried by Umpires, use to lay down an
engagement, or as we call it, an Ass^mpsit, that they will stand to the award,
or arbitrament, which shall be made.

Put me in a surety with thee. (...) a (...) Est fideijubere pro aliquo, seu
aliquem in suam fidem recipere. Hinc arrabo spiritus. Pone pignus, vadem, aut
fidejussorem mihi tecum. Pagn-Dispone quaeso consponsorem mihi tecum. Jun. Number
Arrabonem dabis?
The Original word properly signifying to undertake for, or to give credit and
assurance in the behalf of another; and hence the Noune derived from it,
signifies an earnest, because an earnest laid down, is a real surety, that
such a thing shall be performed. In which sense Thamar uses the word ( Genesis
38.17.) who when Judah promised to send a Kid of the Goats, said, will thou
give me a pledge til thou send it? and hence in the new Testament the word
Arrabo is used in the Greek, as also in the Latin, for the earnest of the
spirit, or for that assurance which the spirit settles upon the hearts of
Believers in this life that they shall inherit eternal life (2 Cor. 1.22.) Who
has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. And
again (2 Cor. 5.5.) Now he that has wrought us for the self same thing is
God: God having prepared a place for us, prepares us for the place, and then
gives us our evidences, that in due time we shall take possession of it. Who
also has given us the earnest of the spirit The same Apostle tells the
Ephesians, that, After they believed they were sealed with the spirit of
promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, till the redemption of the
purchased possession (Ephesians. 1.14.) So that an earnest is a real su^ety, and a
surety is a personal earnest. While Job says, Put me in a surety, his meaning
is, he would have some person to be an undertaker for the ordering of his
cause, or an ensurer that all should be performed according to the
determination that should be given about it, Put in a surety with me.

Who is he that will strike hands with me? (...) Sig: Defigere, infigere, and
si de contractibus dicitur, percutere manum.
He proceeds in the same allusion. These words are disposed two ways: Some put
the Interrogation after He; Give, or put me in a surety, Who is he? I would
gladly see the man, or know who it is; Who is he? let him come and strike hands
with me, whosoever he is: As if he had said, I shall easily agree that any man
should have the hearing and determining of this business, whom thou shall
appoint. Quis est? manui meae plaudatur. Jun. Quisquis ille sit fide jussor
meus veniat and paciscatur mecum. In sponsionibus manus invicem complodebant,
hinc manum complodere, pro pacisci, stipulari. Merc.


We put the Interrogation after the whole sentence, Who is he that will strike
hands with me? And then the sense appears thus, If God once put in a surety to
undertake for me, who is he that will contend with me, or engage in this
Quarrel against me?

To strike hands, is a phrase of speech grounded upon that ancient form of
making bargains or entering contracts, by joining, or striking hands: And these
contracts may be taken two ways, or under a double notion.

First, As they concerned suretiship for Money, in which sense Solomon speaks
of it more then once ( Prove. 6.1.) My Son if thou be surety for thy Friend: If
thou have stricken hands with a stranger; that is, if thou have entered into Bond
for him, and have testified it by striking hands, then, etc. (Prove. 22.26. Haec
est sponsio quae proprie ad mammorum negotium spectat. Aben Ezra. in Prove. 6.
) Be not thou one of them that strike hands; that is, Be not too forward to
engage thy self, or to undertake for others; as it is expounded in the next
words, or of them that are sureties for debts; such hasty engagements may bring
thee into more trouble, then thou will be able to get off in haste: There are
many who have struck, yea wounded their own hearts incurably, by striking
hands for their Friends. Go to the Courts of Justice, and there is nothing
more frequently heard of, then the sighs of Sureties: He disassures his own
Estate, who assures for others.

Secondly, As Contracts and Suretiship for Money were confirmed by striking
hands; so it is very probable that those suretiships which were given about
Trials, and for appearing to the Action of the Plaintiff in Judgment, were
also confirmed by that outward ceremony; in which sense we are to understand it
here.

Further, The word which we translate to Strike, signifies also to Fasten,
which shows another part of the ceremony; for as striking, so joining and
clasping of hands was used.

Once more, the word signifies, Clangere tuba. Complosis manibus sonus editur.
and often is applied to the sounding of a Trumpet, or the giving of any sound:
This also carries on the same allusion, because when two men strike hands, they
make a sound, the interpretation of which is, that the bargain is made, or it
spe^kes the parties agreed; and hence that known expression among us, Of
striking up a bargain, or a business.

Thus the whole Text is carried on in terms alluding to the ordinary
proceeding, either in becoming Bound with another for Money, or in giving
assurance to perform, and stand to the arbitrament, or award of those who
shall judge, and determine any matter in difference: But how are we to apply
this to the present case?

Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee, who is he that will strike hands
with me? There are three or four expositions given about it.

First, That Job, in these words, desires God to give surety that he would
stand to the judgment which should be given: or he would have God assure him,
Da fidejussorem apud te, qui in hac contentione quae mihi tecum intercidit
spondeat te staturum iis quae judicata fuerint; ut te non tanquam judicem geras
sed tanquam litigato rem. Merc. Familiarius quam par erat cum Deo agit. Merc.
that he would not deal with him according to the severity of his Justice, or
the excellency of his Sovereignty as a Judge, but descend to such a course as
is usual among men, while they are engaged in any controversy between
themselves. Job has spoken the same sense clearly before, in some other
passages of this Book, especially ( Chap. 9 33, 34.) But this sense is not
clear to the scope of the present place: And therefore as they who maintain
it, confess, that Job was somewhat too bold with God, so we may say that they
are somewhat too bold with the Text.

For the reason or ground upon which Job desires that God would give him a
surety, has no correspondence with this interpretation ( Verse. 4.) For thou
have hid their heart from understanding. Now, what coherence is there between
these two, that Job should say, Thou have hid their heart (that is, the heart
of these men) from understanding: therefore give me a surety that thou will
proceed with me after the manner of men. Besides the words of the fifth Verse
oppose it yet more. He that speaks flattery to his Friend, the eyes of his
Children shall fail. Now, for Job to desire God to put him in a surety that
he would deal thus, or thus with him, because the man who speaks flattery to
his Friend, his Childrens eyes shall fail, has no argument at all in it; yet
the abetters of this Interpretation mollify all, by saying, that Job spoke
from a disturbed spirit, being much moved with the ill dealing of his Friends,
and though there may be some inconsistence with the context, yet the Text
considered in its own compass, bears it well enough; but I pass from it.

Secondly, That Job desires God to appoint a Surety between him and his
Friends, who should undertake both Gods cause and his against them three: As if
he had said, Lord, my Friends have wronged me, and they have wronged thee too,
O that thou would provide a man furnished with wisdom, and a spirit of
discerning, both to right thy honor, and to clear up my integrity. Such a one
was Elihu, who appeared shortly after, upon the Stage, and there acted such a
part as this.

Thirdly (say others) Job desires that God himself would be his Surety, and
take up the whole matter between him and his Friends; which he also did in
the latter end of this Book, giving judgment for Job, and blaming the
miscarriage of his Friends. So the word is used ( Isa. 38.14.) when Hezekiah
lay sick, even unto death, he prayed, Lord I am oppressed, undertake for me, It
is this word, Be Surety for me. A learned Translator renders it, Weave me
through, or weave me to the end; for the word signifies the Thread in weaving,
Pertexe me. Jun.
called the Woofe, which being put upon the Shuttle, is cast through the Warpe,
in making Cloth, whether Linen or Woollen; thus it is used ( Lev. 13.52.) and
so these words of Hezekiah carry on the Allegory of the tenth Verse, I said in
the cutting off of my days, etc. and of the twelfth Verse, I have cut off like
a Weaver my life, he will cut me off with pining sickness. In both which
Verses, Hezekiah compares man's life to a piece of Cloth in the Loome, which is
made sometimes shorter, and sometimes longer, and wheresoever it ends, the
Woofe, or running Thread is cut off: Hence Hezekiah prays, Lord, these
sicknesses, like a sharp Knife, threaten to cut the thread of my life, yet I
beseech thee, do thou weave on, weave me to the end of that Warpe which is
given to man, in the common course of nature, and let not this sickness cut my
thread in the midway: This is a good sense of the Text.

But when our Translators render the word, Undertake for me; the meaning is, I
am sore oppressed with the violence of this sickness, which like one of the
Sergeants of cruel death has arrested me, nor is there any way for me to
escape, unless thou, O Lord, rescue me out of its hands, or (as it were) give
Bail, and become surety for me, I am oppressed, O Lord, undertake for me.

David having done a great piece of Justice which contracted him much envy, and
had drawn many Enemies upon him, thus bespeaks God ( Psalm. 119.121, 122.) I
have done judgment and justice, leave me not to mine oppressors, be surety for
thy Servant: that is, mainetaine me against those who would wrong me because
I have done right; put thy self, or interpose between me and mine Enemies,
as if thou were my pledge. Impartial justice upon oppressors, lays the Judges
open to oppression; but they who run greatest hazzards, in zeal for God, shall
find God ready to be their Surety, when they pray, Be surety for thy servants.
And thus we may conceive Job entreating the Lord to be his Surety, and
Protector against all those oppositions, and misapprehensions which were heaped
upon him by man. David was assured that God would be his Surety ( Psalm. 27.5.)
In the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion; and he assures all
that fear God, that he will be their Surety ( Psalm. 31.20.) Thou shall hide
them in the secret of thy presence, from the pride of man: Thou shall keep them
secretly in a Pavilion, Pone me juxta te and cujusvis manus pugnet contra me.
Vulg.
from the strife of tongues. To this sense the Vulgar Latin translates the
whole Verse, Put me near thy self, and then let whose will contend with me;
that is, Do thou stand by me, and undertake for me, and then I fear not who
opposes me: Which answers that of the Apostle ( Romans 8.) If God be with us,
who can be against us.

This exposition holds out a comfortable truth to us, yet the Text s^emes to
aim at somewhat else; for the words are not barely, Put me in a surety, but,
Put me in a surety with thee; which shows that God and the Surety he desired,
were two, or distinct; his prayer was not that God would be his Surety, but
that he might have a Surety with God. And therefore,

Fourthly, The whole Verse is thus read word for word out of the Original;
Appoint I pray thee, my Surety with thee, who is he then that will strike upon
my hand; that is, Appoint Christ, who is with thee in Heaven (and has already
agreed with thee, to be the Surety of distressed sinners, appoint him I say) to
plead my cause, and to stand up for me, and then no man will dare to contend
with me. So the words are of the same meaning with ( Chap. 16.21.) where Job
having made his appeal to God, declares his confidence that Christ would plead
for him, and appear his Advocate.

Hence Observe.

FIrst, Jesus Christ is not only an Advocate for his people, but their Surety.

He does not only plead our cause, but pay our debts. Christ entered into
Bond for us, and took all our debts and duties, whatsoever we owe to God, upon
himself, to see all performed, that we might go free, and be accepted ( Heb.
7.22.) By so much was Jesus made the surety of a better Testament. Where the
same word which is here used by Job, is (with the difference only of that
Dialect) used also in the Syriake version of that Epistle. Jesus Christ may be
called the Surety of the Covenant two ways.

First, Because he ratifies it on Gods part, making Faith of it unto us, or
assuring us that all the mercies and good things therein granted and promised,
shall be made good, and fulfilled to every Believer; as the Apostle concludes
(2 Cor. 1.20.) For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen:
that is, He will give a being and an accomplishment to them all. Whatsoever God
has spoken, he will see it done.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is called the surety of the Covenant because he
ratifies it on our part: For though (as Socinians object against this point) we
sent not Christ unto God in our name, but God sent him to us in his name, yet
Christ did undertake, as in our nature, so in our Name, and did restipulate
with God on our behalf, that whatsoever was owing to his justice and holiness
by man, either as a penalty for past defaults, or as a duty to present
commands, should all be satisfied and performed by himself: And as Christ
(being our Surety) did both these in his own person, by active and passive
obedience, so far as it was satisfactory; so (as a Surety) he helps us to
perform the latter so far as it is gratulatory. For whatsoever duty God
requires of us, and calls us to, in testimony of our thankfulness for his
benefits, and of our submission to his will, this Christ undertakes to his
Father that we shall do, and accordingly out of his fullness gives us grace
and strength to do it.

Secondly, Observe.

If Christ be surety for us, we need not fear any opposer.

Put me in a surety with thee (says Job) who will strike hands with me: who
will contend with me, or sue me? When either the Money or duty which a man is
bound to pay, is already paid by his Surety, or is undertaken for by a Surety,
who is not only able but willing to pay, what needs he to fear? The Creditor
cannot Arrest the Debtor, if the Surety have discharged and canceled the Bond.
Thus the Apostle teaches Faith to triumph ( Rom 8.33, 34.) Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns; it is Christ who dyed, yea rather who is risen again? Jobs
challenge, Who is he that will strike hands with me? is very parallel in
words, and full to the sense of Paul's, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect?

Thirdly, Observe.

Our Surety is of Gods appointing, not of our own.

Appoint, I pray (says Job) put me in a surety with thee. We sinned of our
selves, but we could not find a Surety of our selves. God sent his Son, made
of a Woman, made under the Law, to deliver those that were under the Law (Gal.
4 4.) God sent his Son, man did not send for him, no nor sue for him: The way
of our deliverance was as much from the will and wisdom of God as from his
mercy ( Heb. 10.10.) By the which will we are sanctified through the offering
of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. It was as impossible for man to
contrive this way of his deliverance, as it was to deliver himself. Job did
not direct God to this way of acquitting by a Surety, but God having revealed
it to Job, he prays for the effect and comfort of it, to his own soul: when
a Believer burdened with sin, or distressed by temptation, spreads his
condition, and makes his moan to God, he in effect beggs of him (as Job here
did) to appoint and put him in a surety with him, by persuading his heart, that
Jesus Christ became bound for him, and has discharged all his engagements
according to that eternal Decree and Ordination of saving lapsed man by his
mediation. To which Ordination Jesus Christ most willingly consented, as the
Apostle expresses it ( Heb. 10.9.) Then said I, Lo, I come to do thy will, O
God, etc. Which readiness and freeness of Jesus Christ to undertake for us,
is also elegantly described by the Prophet Jeremiah (Chap. 30.21.) by that very
word which Job uses in this place, For who is this, that engages his heart to
approach unto me, says the Lord? The Jews had been long under the Babylonian
yoke, and their Governors were either strangers, or appointed by strangers.
But the Lord promised in this Verse, that their Nobles should be of themselves,
and that their Governor should proceed from the midst of them: Which was
verified, when God turned their Captivity as Rivers in the South, and raised up
Zerubbabel, and others of the Jewish line, to reassume the Government of Judah.
But this Prophecy was chiefly intended and verified in a spiritual sense,
when God sent Jesus Christ, A Governor, proceeding from the midst of them (of
whom Zerubbabel was but a type) for of him the Lord speaks chiefly in this
admiring Question, Who is this, that engages his heart to approach unto me? Or
who is this that with his heart (that is, with so much cheerfulness and
willingness) has put himself as a surety for this people with me, to
approach to me in their cause, and to take upon him the dispatch of all their
affairs, and concernments with me, in the Court of Heaven? Who is this great,
this forward Engager, but he who also said, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God?
What will came he to do? Even this, To be a Surety, and so a Sacrifice to God
for sinners ( Heb. 10.) Thus the whole business of our deliverance, and the
first motions to it, lay quite without us. God appointed and put in Christ our
surety with him, and Christ freely condiscended to be our surety, knowing that
the whole debt must lie upon his discharge: Put me in a surety with thee.

But here it may be doubted, how this notion of a Surety, suites with this
place, seeing Jobs controversy was with man, not with God; and himself also
had professed that all was clear for him in Heaven.

I answer, That although men accused Job, yet their accusation reached his peace
with God, for had he been such a one as they represented him, he must needs
have fallen under the divine displeasure, more then he did under theirs. And
therefore while he pleaded Not-guilty to their charge, he beggs further
discoveries of the favor of God to him through the Mediator, by the
remembrance of whose Suretiship his heart was confirmed in the pardon of all
his sinful faylings against God, whereof he was guilty, as well as his heart
told him that he was not guilty of those wilful sins wherewith he was
accused by men. When we lie under wrongful accusations, of which we indeed
need no surety to acquit us, it is good to view and renew our Interest in the
Surety, who will acquit us where there is need.

Job proceeeds to reinforce the reason why he desired God to undertake, or to
provide a Surety for him.

Verse. 4. Thou have hid their heart from understanding, therefore shall thou
not exalt them.
Or, Thou have hid understanding from their heart; As if he had said, Thou have
cast such a mist before the eyes of these men, who mock me, and judge me
wicked, that they are unfit to be trusted with the determination of my cause;
for did they not want a due light of understanding, they might quickly discern
my integrity, and clear me from their own suspicions. God sometimes (as it
were) wraps, or folds up the hearts of the Children of men in ignorance,
blindness, and darkness, and so hides not only understanding from their
hearts, but their hearts from understanding. As God is said to circumcize the
heart, to open the eyes,, to take away the veil, when he gives the knowledge
of his truth; so he is said to blind the eyes, to cover the heart with fat,
and to cloud the understanding when he denies, or withholds the knowledge of
the truth: Thou have hid their hearts from understanding.

(...) Est men's, ratio, intellectus, dexteritas in agend^.
The word which we translate Understanding, signifies any of, or all the
intellectual powers, together with a readiness, or activity for dispatch in
any service we are called unto, Thou have hid their heart from understanding,
therefore they do but bungle at the business, and cannot judge aright; they
cannot discern the manner of thy dispensations toward me, nor see the bottom
of my condition. Job did not censure his Friends as fools, or ignorant, as if
they were witless, or worthless men; they were wise and learned, yea honest
and godly too. But when Job says, Thou have hid their heart from
understanding, we are to restrain it to the matter in hand, or to his
particular case: As if he had said, Thou have hid the understanding of what
thou have done to me from their hearts; thy providence are mysteries and
riddles which they cannot unfold; and as they know not the meaning of what thou
do, so they know not my meaning, when I said (Chap. 9.17.) He has multiplied
my wounds without cause, Nor when I said ( Verse. 22.) He destroys the
perfect and the wicked. These sayings are secrets to my Friends: Now, Lord, for
as much as these men have no true insight in this present controversy,
therefore I beg that thou would undertake for me, or put me in a surety
with thee.

Further, For the clearing of this Scripture, it may be questioned: First, how
God is said to hide the heart from understanding? God does this four ways.

First, By speaking darkely, or in such a manner, as the understanding cannot
easily find a passage to the things that are spoken. A Parable is a dark
saying: And when Christ Preached in Parables, His Disciples came and said unto
him, Why speak thou to them in Parables (Matthew. 13.10.) Now among other
reasons which Christ was pleased to give of that dispensation, this was one (
Verse. 14.) In them is fulfilled the Prophecy of Isaiah, which says, By
hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand: and seeing ye shall see and
shall not perceive. As if Christ had said, These men have justly deserved to be
punished with spiritual darkness (which is not Understanding) and therefore I
have spoken to them in a dark way. They did not hear to obey what was plain
and easy to be understood, and therefore now they shall hear, what they
cannot understand.

Secondly, God hides the heart from understanding, by denying, or not giving
light; and that a twofold light.

First, The outward light of his word: Thus all those people are said to sit in
darkness; that is, To have no understanding in the things of God, where the
Gospel is not published.

Secondly, By denying, or not giving the inward light of his spirit, though the
light of the World abound. For as a man may have the Sun shining in his face,
and yet be in the dark, if he wants eyesight: So (as the Apostle speaks, 2
Cor. 4.3, 4.) the Gospel is hid in the most glorious shining of it to those,
whose minds the God of this World has blinded. Now, every man is borne
spiritually blind, or he is blind by nature, and he is blinded by the God of
this Worlds, till the God of all Worlds sends his spirit with the Word for the
opening of his eyes.

Thirdly, God hides the heart from understanding, as by not giving, so by
vvithdrawing the light which he has given. Many have forfeited their
eyesight and their light, and God has taken the forfeiture of them: Which he
does first, when men are proud of the light, and puffed up with knowledge.
Secondly, when men are unthankful for the light, and will not acknowledge
God the giver of it. Thirdly, when men grow vvanton or vain in the light,
when they abuse it, and having the light walk in darkness. All which
reasons of Gods vvithdrawing light, as many Scriptures testify, so they are
all testified in that one Scripture ( Romans 1.21, 22.)

Fourthly, As God may be said to hide the heart from understanding, by a total
withdrawing of light, so by vvithholding it for a time, or in part, by clouding
or eclipsing it. God hides the heart of some men from understanding, only in
such a point, or at such a season, giving them light in other things, yea and
in that thing too at another season. This fourth way I conceive most proper to
this Text of Job; for his Friends were not under that terrible judgment of a
total hiding their hearts from understanding; only the light was withheld
from them in and about that transaction. As when Christ after his resurrection
appeared to those Disciples ( Luke 24.26.) the Text says, Their eyes were
held, that they should not know him. And ( Verse. 31.) Their eyes were opened,
and they knew him: Thus God at one time holds the intellectual eye of some
good men, that they cannot discern such or such a Truth, yet afterward he
opens their eyes and they discern it.

Hence Observe.

First, The wisest men do not see all truths, nor are they able to judge of
all matters.

These were wise men, very wise men; they spoke excellent things, and very
understandingly about God, they gave Job very good counsel, but yet they
failed here. Elihu (Chapter 32.9.) says, Great men are not always wise; we may
say wise men are not always wise: and as no man is wise at all times, so
there is no man wise in all things. We cannot conclude, that because a man has
given a right judgment in some one, or in many points, that therefore we may
trust his decisions in all points. As God hides all wisdom from some men, so
he very rarely, if at all, trusts any one man or sort of men at one time with
all wisdom. Jobs Friends were well acquainted with, and they have
acquainted us with many excellent notions about that great Doctrine of
Providence, but they were much mistaken about the Providence of God with Job,
nor did they show themselves acquainted with that excellent Design of God in
his afflicting Providence, thereby to try the strength and manifest the graces
which he has bestowed upon his people.

Secondly, Observe.

The hiding of the heart from, and the opening of the heart to understanding,
are the work of God.

We see no further then God gives us light, and so far as he leads us, we go
right; if he withdraw, we turn aside, and quickly wander from the way of
truth and righteousness. We have nothing of our own but sin and ignorance,
wisdom is of God; Every good and perfect gift comes from above. As God hides
all Gospell-truths and mysteries from vvorldly wise men; so no Gospel
mystery is known to any man till God discover and make it known ( Matthew.
11.25.) At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
but have revealed them unto babes. By wise and prudent, he means wordly wise
men, mere Philosophers and Politicians, or hypocritical Professors, such as
the Scribes and Pharisees were, from these God (in judgment) hides the things
of the Kingdom of Heaven; and reveals them unto Babes, even to such as are at
the greatest distance in natural considerations from the capacity of such rich
and heavenly manifestations. There is no greater argument, that God opens the
heart to understand, then to see Babes understand: If true knowledge in
spiritual mysteries were from man, they who have most of man in them would
have most of that knowledge; but we are taught by experience, that such men
as the World calls Fools do not err in the way of holiness (Isa. 35.8.) And
that the course of all Worldly wise men, is a continual erring from that
way, and that some godly men, who are higher by head and shoulders then some
of their Brethren in natural wisdom, have run into, and maintained errors;
whither can we ascribe all this, but to the power of God. Moses speaks of the
many signs and miracles which God wrought in the midst of that people, which
they did not understand: Why, what was the reason? Moses tells us expressly,
what, Yet the Lord has not given you a heart to conceive, nor eyes to see,
nor ears to hear to this day (Deuteronomy. 29.4.) They had sensitive eyes and ears,
yea, they had a rational heart or mind, but they vvanted a spiritual eye to
see, a spiritual care to hear, a spiritual heart or mind to apprehend and
improve those wonderful works of God: And these they had not, because God
had not given them such eyes, ears, and hearts. Wonders without grace, cannot
open the eyes fully, but grace without wonders can. And as man has not an eye
to see the wonderful works of God spiritually, until it is given, so, much
less has he an eye to see the wonders of the Word of God, till it be given
him from above; and therefore David prays ( Psalm. 119.18.) Open thou mine
eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. And if the wondrous
things of the Law, are not much seen till God give an eye, then much less are
the vvondrous things of the Gospel. The light of nature shows us somewhat of
the Law, but nothing of the Gospel was ever seen by the light of nature: Many
who have seen and admired some excellencies in the Law, could never see and
therefore have derided that which is the excellency of the Gospel, till God
has opened their heart to understanding.

Thirdly, Observe.

It is a great judgment to have our hearts hidden from understanding in the
things of God.

It is a sore judgment not to have the light, but it is a sorer judgment not
to see by the light when we have it. To have a heart hid from understanding, is
far worse then to have a heart unable to understand. Our inability to
understand, arises two vvayes.

First, From a natural infirmity in the understanding.

Secondly, From the natural obscurity of the matter presented to the
understanding.

Plain truths are not apprehended by a weak understanding, and the strongest
understanding cannot apprehend some obscure truths, as the Apostle Peter says
of Saint Paul's Epistles, that in them there are some things hard to be
understood (2 Pet. 3.16.) Now as there is an affliction in it, not to be able
to understand any truth which God has revealed for our use, so there is much
wrath and judgment in it, when God hides understanding from the heart in any
of those things which he has revealed for our use, but especially in those
things which are necessary, either to our future, or our present peace. Thus
the Prophet Isaiah was sent to Preach that people blind, and deaf, and
ignorant ( Chap. 6.9, 10.) Go tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but
understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not: Make the heart of this
people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and
convert and be healed: As if the Lord had said, This people shall want neither
means nor Ministers, neither word nor light; but they shall reap no benefit
neither by means nor Ministers, neither by word nor light; yea, all these
means shall produce contrary effects, they shall be hardened and not softened,
blinded and not enlightened, their ears shall be deafned, not bored by the
Word. They would not hear, therefore they shall not; they would not
understand, therefore they shall not be able to understand. They who refuse the
offers of mercy, shall be destroyed with the offers of mercy. And as God does
often take away the Gospel in wrath, so he sometimes sends it in wrath. It is
a great misery to have the Gospel hid from a people for want of revelation,
but it is lowest misery to have it hid in the revelation. Jerusalem signifies,
The vision or sight of peace; and this was the glory of Jerusalem; yet at last
this glory was taken from Jerusalem, though her name continued; Jerusalem (the
sight of peace) could not see her peace ( Luke 19.41, 42, 43.) When Christ came
near to Jerusalem, He beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, If thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy
peace: What then? Christ suppresses the happiness which they should have
enjoyed by such a sight, with a silent admiration; and only tells them
weeping, But now they are hid from thine eyes; How hid? Was there no more
Preaching in Jerusalem, no public Ministry after that day? Yes, the whole
College of Apostles Preached there, and they Preached the things which
belonged both to their temporal, and to their eternal peace; yet as the
things which belonged to their eternal peace were hidden from most of their
eyes, so the things which concerned their temporal peace, were hidden from so
many of their eyes, that their ruin was unavoydable. God hid their heart from
understanding, therefore he did not exalt them; yea, therefore he cast them
down.

Thus Job describes the sequel of that sad dispensation to his Friends, Thou
have hid their heart from understanding: What follows?

Therefore shall thou not exalt them. Master Broughton renders it; Therefore
thou shall not give them Honor: And is this all; That they shall not be
exalted or honored? No, the Negative has this affirmative in it, Thou will
therefore cast them down, or humble them: As ( Prove. 17.21.) Solomon speaks
of the Father of a Fool, He that begets a Fool, does it to his sorrow, and
the Father of a Fool has no joy: Is that all, that he has no joy? No, the
meaning is that the Father of a Fool, has much sorrow; yea, the denial of
all joy, affirms more then the feeling of much sorrow, for it speaks all
sorrow. So, to accept persons in judgment is not good; that is, It is extreme
ill: There is nothing worse then that, which in this sense is not good. Thus
here, thou have hid their heart from understanding, therefore shall thou not
exalt them: that is, Thou shall humble and abase them; and though
Non-exaltation, in this place, does not carry all kind, or the extremity of
abasement, yet it carries a very great abasement: Why? What was this abasement,
or non-exaltation?

We may interpret it two vvayes. Thou shall not exalt them: that is,

First, Thou shall not give them this honor to determine my cause; thou will
take the matter out of their hands into thine own, or thou will put it into
some other hand.

Secondly, Thou shall not exalt them to the honor of a conquest over me, Hinc
colligo te nolle ut de reportata super me victoria glorientur, Bold.
or to carry the cause against me; yea, they shall be overthrown, and the
cause shall go against them: Both these ways answer the event. Jobs three
Friends had neither the honor to end this controversy, nor did they at all
prevail in the end; they went not away with victory, nor could they glory,
that they had got the day of Job: Thou shall not exalt them.

Note hence.

First, Exaltation is from God.

Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South;
that is, It comes not by the power of any creature, in any coast or quarter of
the earth. Whence comes it then? The next Verse directs us, For God is the
Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another ( Psalm. 75.6, 7.) we can no
more make our selves great men, then we can make our selves men: Our civil
frame is as much from God as our natural; by what hand soever we are exalted,
it is God that exalts us.

Secondly, Observe.

God hides understanding from them, whom he is about to abase, or cast down.

The fall of most men is from their own folly, and usually God takes away
their wisdom, whose honor he takes away. They shall not see the way to their
own preservation, who are intended for destruction. All Ages have taught us
this Doctrine in the downfall of the greatest Princes; who have refused all
counsels and overtures for their own good, Quos perdere vult Jupiter hos
dementat.
till their evils have proved past cure, and themselves irrecoverably lost.
That which a Child might foresee, they have had no eyes to see, nor hearts to
consider: because God would either not exalt them, or not establish them in
their exaltations, therefore he hid their hearts from understanding the things
of their own peace. Fools are not fit to be exalted to high places, and when
once we see those who are in high places, acting the foolish man, we shall
soon see them tumbling down from their high places, and acting the miserable
man. Some who were never very wise, have been exalted to, and continued in high
places, but there was scarce ever any man, who (in this sense) lost his wits,
that has either been exalted to a high place, or continued in his exaltation.

Thirdly, Considering those particulars wherein the Non-exaltation here
prophesied of, did consist.

Observe.

It is an honor to hear and judge the cause of another man.

God is the Judge of all the Earth, he will hear and determine the causes and
cases of all mankind. He that has the hearing but of any one case, shares in
this honor of God, and they who are set apart by office to do so, are called
Gods ( Psalm. 82.) God puts so much of his own work into the hand of a judge,
that he therefore puts his own name upon him.

Again, We may look upon Jobs Friends, not as Judges of his case, but as
Parties, putting in their accusation, and pleading against him.

Hence Observe.

It is an honor, and an exaltation to win the day in any cause, or to get the
better.

Whatsoever the contention be, or in what way so ever managed, whether by the
Sword, or by the tongue, or by the Pen, to be victorious in it, is honorable;
and he that loses his Causes, loses much of his credit also. And though
prevailing, or success does not at all justify the matter (it is the matter
which must justify the success) yet success does always exalt the man. He
that overcomes in a dispute carries away the honor, though possibly he carry
not away the truth.

Lastly, From the connection of this with the former part of the Verse.

Observe.

They who maintain error among men, shall not find favor with God.

A heart hid from understanding is hid from the truth; God loves his truth so
well, that he will not exalt those who depresse his truth. Jobs Friends being
left in the dark (as to that point in question) Did not speak of God the
thing that was right (Chap. 42.7.) And therefore the Lord said to Eliphaz, My
wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two Friends. Though an error be
held unknown and in zeal for God (as they did) yet the jealousy of God
waxes hot against such: These repenting, were, and such as they, repenting,
may be pardoned, but they shall not be exalted. And if they who for want of
light of knowledge, and in much heat of honest zeal, defend a lesser error
(such was theirs) shall not be exalted, how will the Lord cast them down who
broach, and spread blasphemous errors, and damnable Doctrines, in a time of
clear light, and against frequent admonitions, if not convictions. Whosoever
(says Christ, Matthew. 5.19.) shall break one of these least Commandments, and
teach men so (Joining the error of his practice with, or turning it into the
error of his opinion) he shall be called least (that is, nothing at all, or
Nobody) in the Kingdom of Heaven: And he who is nothing in the Kingdom of
Heaven is not exalted, how high soever he may get in the Kingdoms of the
earth. And if the teacher of error against the least Commandment of the Law
shall have no place in Heaven, where will their place be who teach errors
against the greatest Commandments of the Law, yea against the most precious
and absolute necessary principles and foundations of the Gospel?

Verse. 5. He that speaks flattery to his friend; even the eyes of his Children
shall fail.
There is some variety in expounding these words; because of the several
notions into which the Original is rendered: As we read the Text, it is a
plain affirmation of judgment upon the posterity of Flatterers.

The word which we translate Flattery signifies in the Verb to divide into
parts, and hence in the Noune, (...) Divisit in parts; in Hiphil emollivit,
laevigavit, blanditus fuit.
a lot or portion, because every lot or portion is divided from the whole; it
signifies also a prey or booty, which men take in War, or which Thieves and
Robbers take from Travelers upon the high way, and that upon the former
reason, because when a prey is taken, they divide, or cast it into several
portions, or parts: Hence also (say some) it signifies to flatter; because the
tongue of a flatterer is divided from his heart.

Further, It signifies to smooth and pollish or (as we say) to make a thing
very glib and neat. This comes nearest our translation; for a flatterer has a
smooth pollished tongue, and his trade is to smooth, or sooth both things and
persons. The flatterers tongue is like the Harlots tongue, to whom this word is
applied ( Prove. 7.21.) With much fair speech, she caused him to yield, with
the flattering of her lips (with the smoothness, or as some translate, with
the lenity of her lips) she forced him: Flattery seems to be far from force,
yet nothing puts, or holds men under a greater force then flattery.

He that speaks flattery to his friend. Flattery is a special language,
though it be spoken in all languages. (...).
Men learn to speak flattery, even as we learn to speak Latin, French,
Italian, Spanish, or any other language: Flattery is an Art, it has rules of
its own, and terms of its own; he that speaks flattery: Master Broughton in
this place calls it, Vaine-goodly-speech: And the Apostle Paul calls it, Good
words, and fair speeches (Romans 16.18.) The expressions which the Apostle
uses, are most proper to the description of flattery; they are both Compounds,
as the spirit of the Flatterer also is: He hates simplicity, or singleness of
heart, making a show of much goodness in word, but is void of deed and
substance: He promises fair, and when he speaks, you would think he
minded nothing, or were sollicitous about nothing but the Honor and advantage
of him to whom he speaks, when indeed he minds nothing but himself, and
selfe-concernements, as the Apostle in that place desciphers him, He serves not
our Lord Jesus Christ, Haec est blandities quae a Graecis, vocatur (...), and
Aristoteles vulgo (...), appellari docet eos, qui comiter cum omnibus
conversantur, sed veram amicitiam cum nemine colunt. Arist. l. 8. ad Nicom.
Pertinax Imperator dictus (...) quod blandus esset magis quam benignus. Bez. in
loc. ex Aurelio. Vict.
but his own belly, and by his good words and fair speeches, he deceives the
hearts of the simple. The Greeks have another characteristicall word for this
sort of men, by which they mean all such as seem to carry it fair with all
men, but maintain true freindship with no man, we may call them Men-pleasers,
but Selfe-seekers. As also one of the old Emperors had his Surname from that
word used by the Apostle in the place last mentioned; because he was observed
very ready to give all men good words, but had no regard to do good, yea, he
did very much evil; or as another gives the reason, because he was a Fanning
Prince, rather then a kind one. Job seems to charge his Friends, that they
were men of such a temperament, and had rather faund upon him then been real
friends to him.

But here it may be questioned, Why does Job speak his Friends speakers of
flattery? He had little reason to complain he was flattered; and we find
him often complaining that he was roughly dealt with: Job heard few pollished,
or buttered words, but bitter words great store, why then does he say, He that
speaks flattery to his friend?

We may understand it two ways.

In reference to Job. God.


First, His Friends had spoken flattery to him; for though in some things they
were very severe and harsh, yet in other things he might interpret their
sayings to be but soothings; Is est (...) qui verbis multum pollicetur re nihil
praestat. Bez. Blandiebantudum externa bona illi pollicebantur. Merc.
they made him large promises of a restoration, that his estate should be like
the morning, that he should outshine the very Sun, and be a great man again.
Thus they spoke ( Chap. 5.19, 20. Chap. 8.5. Chap. 11.15, 16, etc.) he looked
on all these fair promises as flatteries, because in his own thoughts he was
a dead man, and his calamities past all hope of recovery in this World. As if
he had said, Why do you feed me with such vain hopes, and prophecy to me of
Wine, and of strong drink, of earthly honor and riches, of length of days,
and of a multitude of years yet behind in the race of this present life; I
cannot but call this flattery, and a departure from the laws of freindship: For
alas! My days are extinct, my breath is corrupt, and yet you are telling me of
long life, and good days in this World. And indeed this is at once the custom
and the fault of many who visit their Friends upon the borders of death; they
think they are not freindly, unless they labor to give them hopes of life,
and deliver their opinion peremptorily, We doubt not but you will do well
enough, you will recover from this sickness, and getting over this brunt, and
see many days. This is flattery: it is our duty to speak comfortably to our
dying Friends, to set forth the love of God, and his readiness to pardon, to
prepare them for a better life, and to make their passage out of this more
easy: But when we see them at the Graves mouth; when death is ready to seize
on them, then to tell them of long life, is rather the office of a Flatterer
then of a Friend. We show more love to our dying Friends, by offering our
counsels, and tendering up our prayers for their fitness to depart out of this
life, then by showing our desire, that they should live, and our loathnesse to
part with them.

Secondly, Jobs Friends may be said to speak flattery to God; and then the
words are an Argument from the greater to the less; as if he had said, If he
who speaks flattery to his friend, a man like himself, shall be punished,
then much more shall he, who speaks flattery to God. But, you will say, How
can God be flattered? There are two ways of flattering men.

First, By promising them more then we intend.

Secondly, By applauding them more then they deserve.

When we cry up those for wise men who are little guilty of wisdom; or
commend those as good, who are very guilty of evil; both these are strains of
flattery: It is impossible to flatter God in this latter sense, for we cannot
speak of God higher then he is; his glory, wisdom, and goodness, are above,
not only our words, but our thoughts. But we may flatter God in the first
sense, by promising him more then we intend; they on their sick beds do but
flatter God, who tell him how good, and holy they will be, when their hearts
are not right with him: Yet neither is this the flattery of God which Job may
be supposed to suggest against his friends. The flattery here suggested, is
their justifying the proceedings of God in afflicting Job, by condemning Job;
as if there had been no way left to clear up the righteousness of God, but by
concluding that Job was unrighteous: This manner of arguing, Job calls,
Speaking wickedly for God, and talking deceitfully for him: This he also calls,
The accepting of his person (Chapter 13.7, 8.) As if they had been the Patrons and
Promoters of Gods cause and honor, while they thus pleaded against Job, and
laid his honor and innocence in the dust. That there is a sinful flattery of
God in such a procedure against man, was showed more largely in the place last
mentioned, to which I referr the Reader for his further satisfaction.

He that speaks flattery to his friend, What of him? The next words tell us
what.

The eyes of his Children shall fail. But shall he himself escape? Shall not
he smart for it? Says not the Scripture, Whatsoever a man sowes, that shall
he reap: the sower shall be the reaper.

This is not spoken to free the Flatterer from punishment, but to show that
more then he shall be punished for his flattery; as he himself shall not
escape, so he may bring others also into danger with him: As sin spreads it
self in the pollution of it, so in the punishments of it. When but one sins,
many may be defiled, and when but one acts a sin, many may be endangered; a man
knows not upon how many he may bring evil, when he does ill himself.

The eyes of his Children shall fail. What is meant by the failing of the
eyes, was showed ( Chapter 11.20.) where Zophar says, The eyes of the wicked shall
fail, and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost. In general it is
this, They shall be disappointed of their hopes, or they shall expect so long
and nothing come, that their eyes shall fail with expectation, The eyes of his
Children shall fail.

Some by Children, understand, not his natural Children, or the Children of
his body, but his Children in a figure, Morum atque vitae imitatores. Aquin.
such as imitate and follow him, who take his course, and tread in his paths;
for as they are called the Children of the Devil, who are like him, and do
his works; and as we are called the Children of God, not only in reference to
our new birth and spiritual generation, but also in reference to our new
obedience and holy actions ( Mat. 5.44, 45.) So they may be called a man's
Children, who resemble him in his manners, as well as they who issued from his
loins.

Hence Note.

First, The punishment of sin does not always rest or determine in him that
committed the sin.

The bitter fruits of sin are often transmitted, and handed over to those who
had no present hand in them when they were committed. The whole Family, and
Posterity of sinners may smart many a day after, and inherit the sins of their
Progenitors, as well as their Lands; when the Father purchases, or provides an
Inheritance for his Child by flattery, or any other indirect way, the eyes of
his children may fail for it. I have met with this point before ( Cha. 15.33,
34.) and elsewhere, therefore I only touch and pass from it.

Secondly, Consider the particular sin against which this judgment is
pronounced: It is the speaking of flattery.

Hence Observe.

The sin of flattery is a very provoking sin.

That sin which shall be punished in posterity, is no ordinary sin: Those good
actions which the Lord promises to reward in posterity, or in after times,
have a special excellency in them: It showed that the deed of Jehu, in
destroying Ahabs House, and rooting out his Idolatry (though Jehu himself was
a very bad man, and did it with a bad heart, yet I say, it showed that the
deed) was very good, because the Lord promised to reward his Children for it,
with the possession of the Throne of Israel to the fourth generation (2 Kings
10.30.) Now as those acts have a great deal of excellency in them, for which
God rewards and blesses to posterity; so those sins have a special malignity
in them, which are threatened and pursued with revenges to Posterity. Such sins
have a touch of the first sin in them. The punishment of Adams first sin is
hereditary to the last man; all have smarted for that sin, and the eyes of his
Children have failed because he looked upon, and eat the forbidden fruit. Now
every sin which is thus spoken of in Scripture, as Idolatry in the second
Commandment, and here flattery, has a special stamp of the first sin upon
it; not only as being a sin, and so a derivative from it, but as having much
of the sinfulness of that sin in it: The evils of which did not dye with those
who gave it life.

And as all flattery is very sinful, so spiritual flattery, or flattery about
spiritual things is most sinful; both because about them we ought to be most
plaine-hearted, and because a deceit about them does most hurt. Any kind of
flattery is bad enough, but this is worst; such was that of the falfe Prophets,
who daubed with untempered mortar, and cried Peace, peace, when there was no
peaee. Who set themselves to please, not to instruct the people, and were
therefore busy in sewing pillowes under every elbow. A flatterer would make
all men lean soft, sit easy, and be well persuaded of themselves, though
their case be stark naught: He that thus speaks flattery to his Friend, does
indeed speak misery, yea, and death to his Friend. The flatterer is the
greatest hater, and no man speaks worse of another then he who speaks better
of him then he deserves, or then his state will bear. It is dangerous to
speak all the good of a man that is true, but to speak good of him which is
not true, may be his utter undoing.

And though it has been said, and often experienced, that flattery gains
Friends and Truth-speaking hatred; yet none have run into so much hatred as
flatterers. For as it is said of Treason, That many love the Treason, but all
hate the Taytor; so many love to hear themselves flattered, but all hate
flatterers. And though true reproves are bitter Pills, and very distasteful to
most in the taking down, yet wise Solomon has assured us, That, he that
rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor (even with that man) then he
that flattereth with his lips (Prove. 28.23.) There are many who as the Psalmist
speaks ( Psalm. 36.2.) Flatter themselves, they are their own Parasites. But
as they who flatter others, do most commonly fall under their displeasure, so
all they (sooner or latter) shall fall under their own displeasure (and that is
worse then the displeasure of any, yea then of all men) who have flattered
themselves. It is our wisdom and our peace, to be plain with our selves and
with all men, how much present disquiet so ever we get by it. Paul speaks it
out to the Thessalonians (1 Epist. 2.3, 4, 5.) Our exhortation was not of
deceit, neither at any time used we flattering words. But as we were allowed of
God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men
but God.

Further, these words may be expounded not as a threat against his Friends for
their flattering of him, but as a threat against himself, in case he should
have flattered them. And so they carry also the weight of a reason, why he
used so much freedom in reproving them, and showing them the danger that hung
over their heads: As if he had said, You my Friends may perhaps wonder at my
boldness and plainness of speech, while I tell you that God has hid your
hearts from understanding, and that he will not exalt you: But you must pardon
me, I had rather incurr your frowns by my downeright dealing with you, then
Gods by flattering you; I had rather make your ears tingle by reproving you,
then make the eyes of my Children ache by my applauding you; for this I have
learned as a certain truth, that he who speaks flattery to his Friend, the
eyes of his Children shall fail.

Hence Observe.

That even a godly man does, and ought to strengthen himself in doing his
duty, by the remembrance of those evils which are threatened against the
neglect of it. A Believer makes use of the threatenings, as well as of the
promises, to keep his heart close in obedience. That is the best obedience
which springs from the fear of the Lord and his goodness, but that may be a
good and a pure act of obedience which springs from the fear of the Lord, and
his wrath. Christ exhorts and forewarnes his friends to fear him, who after
he has killed, has power to cast into Hell (Luke 12.5.) It Is noblest and
most spiritual, to obey God for himself, without respect either to Heaven or
Hell; yet we may have respect both to Heaven and Hell, to reward and
punishment in our obedience. Joseph resisted temptation by the highest
argument, when he said, How can I do this great evil and sin against God?
(Genesis 39.9) He resists temptation by a good argument, who says, How can I sin
against God, which will do so much evil to my self, or draw many evils upon
mine? And thus Job argued according to this interpretation, when he said, He
that speaks flattery to his friend, the eyes of his Children shall fail: Or,
as Master Broughton renders, The eyes of the given that way (that is, to
flattery) shall be consumed.

Vox Ban in non filios sed intelligentes vel considerantes significat a Verbo
(...) quod est intelligere, hinc sic conficitur textus. Et ooculi
considerantium eum deficient. Bold.
There is another reading of the latter clause, and so of the whole Verse, The
eyes of those that consider, observe, or attend him shall fail; and so they
derive the word (Bamin) not from (Ben) a Son, or a Child, but from (Bin) which
signifies to understand or consider, The eyes of those that consider him shall
fail: Then the meaning is, my friends are so exact, and accute in flattery, in
composing and uttering fauning speeches, that they who hear them are wrapped
into an ecstasy, and their very eyes do fail with their intentnesse in
beholding them. They are such powerful Orators, that they can draw the minds
and eyes of their Auditors whither they please, and cause their eyes to ache
with looking so wistly on them, having (as the Apostle speaks in a like case)
their persons in admiration.

Job having thus complained against, and taxed his Friends of flattery, goes on
to aggravate the sadness of his condition, and upon the whole, to move the
Lord to hasten an end of his miseries, or to hasten his end, either to
determine them, or to determine him.

JOB, Chap. 17. Verse. 6, 7. He has made me also a byword of the people, and
before time I was as a Tabret.

Mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow, and all my members are as a shadow.


IN these two Verses, Job repeats and aggravates his affliction; and he does it
(as he had done before) by showing the effects of his affliction. We judge of
causes by the effects, that which produces a great effect, must needs have a
greatness of causality in it. Two effects or his affliction are laid down in
this context.

The first tells us what his afflictions wrought in others.

The second, what it wrought upon himself.

What his affliction wrought in others, is set forth ( Verse. 6.) He was become
the talk of all, possibly, the sport of not a few. The argument stands thus.

That is a very great affliction, which every man speaks of, or which makes a
man a byword.

But such is my affliction, every one talks of it, and I am made a byword of
the people.

Therefore my affliction is very great.

What his affliction wrought upon him self, is expressed in the seventh Verse:
Dimnesse in his eye, and weakness in his whole body, Mine eye also is dim, by
reason of sorrow, and all my members are as a shadow. The Argument may be
formed thus.

That is a very great affliction, the sorrows whereof dim the eyes, and
macerate all the members of the body.

But such is the sorrow of my affliction, that my very eyes are dim; and all my
members are macerated; therefore mine is a great affliction.

As if he had said, Should I hold my peace and sit down in silence, yet my dim
eyes and dried bones, my withered skin and cripled limbs, are as so many
tongues, yea trumpets, to speak and speak aloud the sorrows of my heart, and
the sufferings of my outward man. This seems to be Jobs scope in the words now
under hand.

Verse. 6. He has made me a byword of the people.
[He] Who is that? The antecedent is inquired for: Our late Annotations fix it
upon Eliphaz who spoke last, and at whom he pointed in the Verse before. He
has talked so of me, that now I am a common talk: He has spoken such words
by me that now I am made a byword. We had need take heed what we say of any
Brother, for if one man give out the word, e-now will follow to make him a
byword.

Haec de domino dicit, quem ubique facit suarum calamitatum authorem. Merc.
Others resolve it upon God himself, He, that is, God has made me a byword.
Job at first acknowledged God the author of his troubles, and so he has done
all along, as has been touched in diverse passages of this dispute: As no man
lifts up his hand, so no man lifts up his tongue without God. As afflicting
actions, so afflicting speeches are at his dispose: He has made me.

[A byword.] (...) Potestatem quandam habet and excellentiam; significat
proverbium, parabolam, axioma quod vocatur propositio maxima.
The Hebrew word in the Verb, signifies properly, to rule, to govern, to have
dominion, or supretme power, as a Prince or Potentate: And by a Metaphor it
signifies any thing that excels, or is eminent in any kind: upon this
account it is often employed to signify those rules of truth and holiness, to
which every man's reason must yield obeisance; such are called in a way of
excellency by Moralists, Proverbs, by Orators Sentences, by Logicians Maxims,
or Principles, which are not to be proved, but supposed, No man must deny them,
or if any man do, he is not to be disputed with; such rules are Rulers; and
they are thus expressed upon a twofold reason.

First, Because of the difficulty and mysteriousnesse of their meaning; they
are of few words, but of so large and multiplying a sense, that they do as
much master, as enlighten the understanding.

Secondly, They are so expressed because of the extent or universality of their
usefulness, they being such as bear sway in, and have an influence upon all
transactions; that, One sentence, or rule of Equity, What you would have others
do to you, do so to them, runs through the whole course of man's life, and
reaches us in all acts of Justice, whether distributive or commutative. And as
those proverbiall sentences which direct justice and good manners, are of great
command and authority among men; so likewise are those which had their rise
from the reproof of any man's injustice, or evil manners. If once a man be
made a byword (whether the grounds of it be true or false, makes no matter as
to this point) it will stick by him, and overcome his credit; let him do what
he can, he shall hardly claw it off again as long as he lives. Thou have made
me a byword.

Further, to clear the Text, In parabolizare populorum. Nam est infinitum, q.
d. ut sim illis proverbio and vulgi fabula, vel ut de me proverbium faciant.
Merc.
we may consider that the word Byword in the Hebrew is of the Infinitive Mood,
and so some render it, Thou have made me for the parabolizing of the people; or
that the people make Parables and Proverbs of me; which we render fully to the
sense, Thou have made me (a Parable, a Proverb, or) a byword among the
people. Two things are usually employed when a man is said to be a byword.

First, That he is in a very low condition; some men are so high, that the
tongues of the common people dare not climb over them, but where the Hedge is
low, every man goes over.

Secondly, That he is in a despised condition: to be a byword carries a
reflection of disgrace. He that is much spoken of, in this sense, is ill spoken
of; and he is quite lost in the opinion of men, who is thus found in their
discourse. It is possible (though rare) for a man to be in a low, or bad
condition, and yet to be well spoken of, yea to be highly honored; some are
had in precious esteem, while they lie upon the dunghill: but usually a man
greatly afflicted is little valued, and he whose state is laid low in the
World, his person is also low in the opinion of the World. Job was at that time
a Byword in both these Notions; he was low in state, and he was lower in
esteem.

Hence Observe.

First, Great sufferers in the things of this World, Fieri solet ut insignes
virorum illustrium calamitates in proverbium abeant deque iis fiant cantiones.
Merl.
are the common subject of discourse, and often the subject of disgrace.

Such evils as few men have felt or seen, all men will be speaking of. Great
sorrows, especially if they be the sorrows of great men are turned into Songs,
and Poetry plays its part with the saddest disasters. When Sihon King of the
Amorites had taken many strong Cities from the King of Moab, the misery which
fell upon the Moabites by that War was put into Verse, and passed into a
Proverb ( Numb. 21.27, 28, 29, 30.) Wherefore they that speak in Proverbs
say, Come into Heshbon, let the City of Sihon be built and prepared: For there
is a fire gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the City of Sihon, etc. That is, A
feirce hot War is made, which has consumed Ar of Moab, and the Lords of the
high places of Arnon. Holy David met with this measure from men in the day of
his sorrows ( Psalm. 69.10, 11.) When I wept and chastned my soul with
fasting, that was to my reproach, I made sackcloth my Garment, I became a
Proverb (or a Byword, it is Jobs language) to them: In the next Verse he tells
us who did this, by way of distribution, They that sit in the Gate (that is,
Great ones) speak against me, and I was the song of the Drunkard, that is, Of
the common sort. When those false Prophets, Ahab and Zedekiah (who to put the
Jews into a hope of a speedy return from their Captivity in Babylon,
prophesied the speedy ruin of Babylon it self, when, I say, those false
Prophets) should be cruelly put to death by the command of the King of Babylon,
according to the Prediction of the Prophet Jeremiah, then the same Prophet
foretells also, that this judgment of God upon them for their lies, should be
made a Byword, and their names a curse ( Jer. 29.21, 22.) And of them shall be
taken up a curse, Plagae Zedikiae tangant te, sit frater and servus Zedekiae.
Vatabl.
by all the Captivity of Judah, which are in Babylon, saying, The Lord make
thee like Zedekiah, and like Ahab, whom the King of Babylon roasted in the fire.
That signal Victory of Gideon over the Midianites became a Proverb in Israel
( Isa. 9.4.) As in the day of Midian. And the Lord promises his people, that
the fall of the King of Babylon shall be so notorious, that they shall take up
this Proverb, and say, How has the oppressor ceased? The golden City ceased
(Isa. 14.4.) The Prophet Habakkuk assured them that this should be, while he
said ( Chap. 2.6.) Shall not all these (certainly they shall) take up a
Parable against him, and say, Woe to him that increases that which is not bis;
how long? And to him that ladeth himself with thick clay.

Secondly, Observe.

It is a great burden to be made a disgraceful byword.

^hus God threatened his own people, and numbered it among the sorest
punishments of their disobedience ( Deuteronomy. 28. 37.) The Lord shall bring thee
and thy King whom thou have set over thee, to a Nation whom thou nor thy
Fathers have known, and there thou shall serve other Gods, Wood, and Stone,
and thou shall become an astonishment, and a Proverb, and a byword, among all
the Nations whither the Lord shall lead thee. This threat was renewed (1 Kings
9.7.) And the Psalmist bewailes it that God had brought his people into such a
condition, Thou have made us a byword among the Heathen, a shaking of the head
among the people: thou have made us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and
derision to them that are round about us (Psalm. 44.13.) The Prophet Jeremiah
speaks terror from the Lord ( Jer. 24.9.) I will deliver them to be removed
to all the Kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach, and a
proverb, and a taunt, and a curse in all the places whither I shall drive
them: The Hypocrite, who puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his
face, and comes to a Prophet to enquire of the Lord, has his doom denounced
in this tenor ( Ezekiel. 14.8.) I will set my face against that man, and make him
a sign and a proverb, and cut him off from amidst my people. Again ( Ezekiel.
16.44.) They that speak in proverbs shall say, Such as the Mother is, such is
the Daughter; The Hittites and the Israelites were both alike in sin, and they
should not be unlike in punishment: Such short sentences are an advantage to
memory, and serve in stead of larger Histories of eminent providence, whether
mercies or judgments.

Thirdly, Observe.

God often turns that to the honor of his servants, which men intended to
their disgrace.

Job was a byword, in disgrace; God made him a byword too, but for his
honor. Job is famous to a Proverb at this day: for as when we would set
forth the greatness of any man's suffering, we say, He is as poor as Job; so
when we would set forth the greatness of any man's patience, we say, He is as
patient as Job, or, he is another Job: All the virtues, In proverbium abiit,
Jobi patientia.
and graces which the Saints have manifested under sufferings, are proverbially
expressed under the sufferings and patience of Job. Never did Caesar, nor
Alexander, nor any of the great Hero's of the World obtain such a Name and
glory, by victories over men, as Job did by patient suffering under the hand of
God.

And as he is proverbially spoken of for his suffering, so likewise for his
holiness, God made his Piety a Proverb too, though his Friends suspected him
for an Hypocrite. When the Lord would show himself so unalterably resolved,
that nothing should take him off from bringing judgment upon a sinful people,
he says, I will not do it, though Noah, Daniel, and Job stood before me
(Ezekiel, 14.14.) As if he had said, I will not do it, though the most eminent
men in holiness, or the greatest favorites that ever I had in the World should
sue that they might be spared; if any in the World could obtain this of God,
Noah, Daniel, and Job could, but they should not, therefore none shall. See
with what honorable Names he is listed, Noah and Daniel, men remembered, (...)
Interpretatur, antea, prius, i. e. (...) vel ante facies, i. e. in conspectu
hominum and in oculis eorum. Exemplum sum coram eis. Vulg. Sumitur ver bum
Tophet ut (...) portentum, prodigium, res mira i e. Exemplum quod dam
prodigiosum. (...). Et nollet eam ignomi iae exp^nere. Bez. Graeci dicunt
(...), nam (...) dicita^p oscriptus public in cippo.
yea crowned with honor by God and all good men, are but company good enough
for Job: Thou have made me a byword.

And aforetime I was as a Tabret. [ Aforetime] The word may be taken two ways.

First, As signifying what was or has been done in former times, in which
sense we translate, Aforetime, or formerly I was as a Tabret.

Secondly, As signifying what is or has been done in the presence of others,
Before them I was as a Tabret: We put in the Margin, Before their face, or in
their sight; that is, They being witnesses of it, I was as a [Tabret.]

The Vulgar Latin translates the word which we render Tabret, an Example, I
am a byword and an example before them; which is a good sense; and then the
word Tophet (of which more by and by) is used for Mophet, which signifies a
wonder or some strange unusual thing which appears, or is reported to the
admiration of all beholders and hearers. I am a Proverb, and a strange
example: Strange examples grow often into a Proverb. So the Greek expresses
it; and we in English say to a man who has offended greatly, You shall be made
an example; that is, You shall be severely punished (Mat. 1.19) Joseph being
very tender of the honor of Mary his espoused Wise, perceiving that she was
with Child before they came together, he was loath to make her a Paradigme, or
an example, of dishonesty and disloyalty; he was unwilling to make her a
public example, and therefore was minded to put her away privily, till the
Lord gave him warning in a dream about it: So says Job here, according to
this rendering, I am a byword among the people, and as it were, a Paradigme, a
public example. Great afflictions have these three things in them, in
reference to others.

First, They are a wonder to others.

Secondly, They are a terror to others.

Thirdly, They are an instruction unto others.

We find all these and more in one Verse ( Ezekiel. 5.15.) So it shall be a
reproach and a taunt, an instruction and an astonishment unto the Nations round
about thee, when I shall execute judgments in thee in anger, and in fury, and
in furious rebuke, I the Lord have spoken it.

The Apostle Peter describing the judgments of God, first upon the Angels,
secondly upon the old World, and lastly, upon Sodom, and Gomorah, says, that,
God turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorah into ashes, condemned them with an
overthrow, making them an ensample to those that after should live ungodly (2
Pet. 2.6.) The burning of those five Cities by immediate fire from Heaven, made
them examples, or instructions to all succeeding Generations; we may read the
odiousness of those sins, and the severity of God against them, by the light
of that fire to this very day. Great afflictions are teaching afflictions;
Those calamities which destroy some should instruct all: We are not only to
admire and wonder at them, to be amazed and terrified at them, but to be taught
and admonished by them. So the Apostle concludes concerning the several
judgments which God brought upon the Jews, while they murmured and disobeyed
him in the Wilderness: All these things happened to them for examples (or
types) and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World
are come (1 Cor. 10.11.) There are two sorts of examples written in the Word.

First, There are examples for our imitation.

Secondly, There are examples for our caution.

Some are examples by the good which they have done, these must be imitated;
others are examples by the evils which they have suffered, by these we must be
warned: This translation of the Text intends Job an example of Caution.

Again, Aforetime I was as a Tabret; that is, Aforetime I was in good repute,
or I was pleasant company: As if he had said, I am now derided, mocked at, and
tossed upon the tongues of men, yea, I am now voted an Hypocrite, though
heretofore in my prosperity, report gave a very pleasant sound of me, though
absent, and my person was as welcome to them as a Tabret. To speak of me
where I came not was music, and I was music wheresoever I came; but now what
am I? A byword, music still if you will, but in scorn, a song of disgrace.
That Is the first sense.

Hence take one Observation, before I proceed to further explication.

The affections and opinions of men are very variable.

I am now a Byword, before time I was as a Tabret. As the estates of men
change, so usually do our opinions of them. Jobs heart was the same as before,
he was as holy as ever he was, only he was not so wealthy as he was, his
spirit was as full of grace as before, only his Purse was not so full of Gold
as before; he had not so many thousand Sheep, nor so many hundred Oxen, he had
not such a Family, and retinue, such worldly riches and honor, and because he
endured such a change in his condition, see what a change he suffered in men's
affections, he that before was as a Tabret, all were glad of him, is now a
byword, the scorn of all.

Christ gives testimony of John Baptist (John 5.35.) He was a burning, and a
shining light; and what follows? And you rejoiced in him for a season. Though
John did burn and shine all the while which God continued him in the
Candlestick of the Church with equal heat and luster, yet they rejoiced in him
but for a while, or for a season. The Jews changed their thoughts of John, and
their esteem of him was weakened, though John continued in the same strength of
parts and gifts: Then, how would they have changed if John had changed. The
peoples hearts were flatted toward him, though his abilities were not; John
had not that repute and honor after a few years which he had at the first.
And the word in the Gospel which we translate to rejoice, comes near the word
which we have in this Text, a Tabret; for it signifies to leap and dance; and
the Tabret is a musical Instrument, at the sound of which men dance and leap;
for a time they leaped about John; he was a burning and shining light, and they
danced and skipped about him, as Children do about a blazing fire in the
Streets, but this was only for a season: John himself found the World a
changling, his followers kept no constant tenor toward him, how constant
soever his tenor was. How great a change did Christ himself find; He is
yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, yet one day the Jews cry Hosanna,
they will needs make him a King, he had much ado to keep himself from a
Crown; the air eccoes with Blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord: yet presently after, the cry was, Crucify him, crucify him, he is not
worthy to live, he could not keep himself (by all his power as man) from a
Cross; a murderer is preferred before him, Not this man, but Barrabas. We
read ( Acts 14.) how suddenly the Tide and Stream of affections turned, and
how opinions varyed about Paul; when he and Barnabas had wrought a great cure,
the people came and would needs adore them and offer Sacrifice, and said, The
Gods are come down in the likeness of men; They brought Oxen and Garlands,
and would needs worship them, there was much ado to stave them off from
Deifying, or making Gods of them, and yet before that Chapter is at an end,
their acceptance of him was at an end; and Paul was stoned as unworthy the
society of men, by the same men, and in the same place where he was saluted as
a God. It is no new thing in the World, to see those a byword of the people,
who even now were their Tabret: to adore one while, and to despise another, to
applaud to day, and to dislike to morrow, now to smile, and anon to frown, is
the constant inconstancy of the creature.

Therefore, Live not upon the breath of men, upon popular air, or the speech
of people: Though to have credit with men be a blessing, yet let us live upon
the credit which we have with God, and rejoice only in his esteem. Most men
are full of change, and are apt to vary their aspects every moment, their
affections are as moveable as their outward condition is. Only God never
alters his opinion of any man, he never rejects where he has accepted, nor
casts off where he has embraced, once a friend and always a friend, once
pleased with us and always pleased with us; yea God is pleased with his while
he manifests a fatherly displeasure against them; and they are as a Tabret to
him while he makes them a Byword among the people. Job was a Tabret in the
ears of God, when he was a Byword among the people.

Thirdly, Because a Tabret or Drum is empty of all but air, and gives nothing
but a sound; some interpret thus, I am before them as an empty Vessel, or as
one who has nothing in him but wind, and from whom nothing comes but a sound
of words; that is, They look upon me as a man of no real worth. Paul says of
himself, that though he spoke with the tongues of men and Angels; that is,
With the most excellent tongues. Angels have no tongues, nor have they any
faces as men have, yet in Scripture, the face of an Angel is put for the most
beautiful face, and the tongue of an Angel for the most eloquent tongue among
all the children of m n: Now says Paul, though I had the tongue of Angels, or
men, and were the best speaker that ever was, yet (being void of true charity)
I should become as a sounding brass and a tinckling Cimball (1 Cor. 13.1.)
Such a tinckling Cimball was Job esteemed, a Drum full of air, or an empty
Vessel, as Jerusalem was left by the King of Babylon ( J^r. 51.34.)

Fourthly, Some both of the Rabbis and latter Writers tell us, Existimant esse
vocem Chaldaicam quae significat, Dominum vel principem. q. d. qui princeps
eram factus sum in proverbium and fabulam. Rab. Lev. Vatabl.
that Tophet is a Chaldee word, signifying Lord, or a Prince: And they referr
us for a confirmation to ( Dan. 3.2.) Where we find the word put into the
Summons which Nebuchadnezzar sent to his Nobles and great Officers, for their
attendance at the dedication of the Image which he had set up: We render it,
Sheriffs, whether our word hits that is doubtful, but without doubt it
signifies such as were in high Authority, being there marshalled before the
Rulers of the Provinces.

Taking this interpretation of the word, Jobs meaning is, I am now a proverb,
or a man of no credit, though heretofore I was as a Prince, or a Ruler in their
presence. Some reject this because the mixture of the Chaldee with the Hebrew,
was long after Jobs time, which yet may easily be reconciled. And the sense is
good, being indeed the same in substance with the second Exposition.

Fifthly, This word Tophet which signifies a Drum, or (as we) a Tabret, which
is a smaller Drum (for there is the Martial Drum, or the Drum of War, and the
Tabret, which is a Mirth Drum, a Drum used at sports, and dancing, this word I
say) gives denomination to a place very famous or infamous rather in the
Scripture of the Old Testament: A part of good Josiah his reformation is thus
described (2 Kings 23.10.) And he defiled (in the opinion of Idol-worshippers,
though indeed the purest worship used there, was more filthy then any filth
which Josiah threw into it, He, says the Text defiled) Tophet which is in the
Valley of the Children of Hinnon, that no man might make his Sons and Daughters
pass through the fire to Moloch. The Prophet Jeremiah complained of, and
threatened that place ( Chap. 7.31, 32) They have built the high places of
Tophet which is in the Valley of the Son of Hinnon, to burn their Sons and
Daughters in the fire, etc.

Now, the reason why that place was called Tophet, from the word in the Text,
arose thus, because when the Jews in those abominable Idolatries offered their
own Children, the fruit of their bodies, in sacrifice to Moloch, the reputed
God of the Moabites and Ammonites, who was so called from Malac, signifying to
rule or reign (for as all Idols would rule as Kings, so this was a chief, a
King Idol; hence some conceive Moloch to be the same with Baal, which is also a
name of supremacy, signifying Lord, or Master) This Moloch was an hollow Image
of Brass, into which they put much fire, having the face of a Bullock, and
hands spread abroad like a Man: He had seven Chapels, and whosoever offered
his Son to him entered into the seventh; which when any did, they used to beat
upon Drums and Tabrets, Barathrum quod supplicii locus erat apud Athenienses,
pro inferno usurpatur. Be^m. de Orig. Ling. Lat. A nomine Gehinnon, i. e.
Vallis Hinnon, infernus dictus est Gehenna. Hieron. in 10. Cap. Math. (...)
Vallis and (...) ruguit gem^it.
that the shreekes and cries of the poor Child might not be heard by the
Father: Hence the place was called Tophet from Toph, a Drum, which comes from a
radical word signifying to beat, or strike with the hand, because Drums are
artif^cially beaten, and we ordinarily say, Beat the Drum, or, At the beat of
Drum.

And hence this place Tophet, where those Children were superstitiously
tormented by fire and burnt to ashes, grew to a Proverb; so that any place of
extreme torment was called Tophet: As Hell is called Barathrum, because
Barathrum was a place so called among the Athenians, into which they cast
notorious malefactors. Hence also Hell is called Gehenna, from the Valley of
the Son of Hinnon, where those Children were sacrificed, or from Ge, signifying
a Valley, and Naham, roaring or crying: So that it was called Gehinnon, from
the cry of the Children, and Tophet from the beating of Drums to drown the cry
of the Children. And upon this account some learned Translators render the
sense thus, Et ignis gehennae prius ero. Rab. Da. Pagn. Sum velut Gehenna. q.
d. Etiam me vivum adjudicant Gehennae, vel miserandae alicujus mortis generi.
Sed^res haec quadrare non potest nam ignis illius vallis Gehennae multo
posterior suit quam Job. Pined. Merc.
He has made me a byword, and I am as Hell: that is, They judge me worthy of
Hell and damnation; yea, that I am a very Hell, I am as Tophet before them; or
they look upon me, as a man in Hell already: But I find this Interpretation
discharged from this Text upon good reason, especially by a demonstration of
the invalidity of that reason upon which it is grounded, either by the first
discoverers or maintainers of it. For the Idolalatry of sacrificing Children to
Moloch in Tophet, and the fire in the Valley of Hinnon were not heard of in the
time of Job; the first mention of the Valley of Hinnon is ( Josh. 18.16.) at
the distribution of the Land of Canaan among the Tribes of Israel; and the name
Tophet was not given it till some Ages after that, not till the Idolatry of the
Jews was grown to its height (which was not presently, but by certain
degrees) for that act of theirs in offering their Children to that Idol seems
to be the highest growth and top-branch of it. And therefore I pass this
exposition.

Sixthly, The word Tophet is conceived to set forth the manner of a punishment
or torture used in those times: Some Malefactors were adjudged to have their
bodies stretched out by the four quarters upon an Engine, Existimo Toph,
significare tympanizatum. i. e. hominem qui passus est illud supplicium, quod
Graeci, vocant (...) Latini quoque Tympanum. Bold. Tympanizatio illa videtur
esse qua reus per quatuor membra distentus bacillis ad numerum in ventre
tanquam tympanum percutiebatur. Id.
and then to be beaten upon their bellies to such a number of strokes as the
Law, or sentence of the Judge appointed. Which manner of torture was called by
the Greeks Tympanization, or as we may express it in our language, Drumming,
and the person adjudged to that punishment was said to be drummed, when it was
inflicted upon him, because he was beaten upon his body like a Drum, and beaten
also like a Drum in measure, or to a certain number of st^oakes, the greatest
number not exceeding forty, as the judicial Law of Moses appointed ( Deuteronomy.
25.2, 3.) which may be a confirmation of this Notion upon Jobs Text; to which
also we may add the present custom of the Eastern countries, especially among
the Turks, who commonly punish their Captives and Gally-slaves stretching them
naked upon a broad Planke or Board, and giving them many cruel strokes upon
their Bellyes: But above all, the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews gives a
clear light to this ( Heb. 11.35.) where describing the several torments
which the Saints of the old Church among the Jews endured, he says, (...)
Women received their dead raised to life again, and others were tortured. So
we translate: The Greek is, Others were drummed, that is, they endured the
torture of Tympanization, or Drumming; which word is also used by the Compiler
of the History of the Maccabees (2 Macchab. 6.19.28.) who tells us that
Eleazer, (...).
and other Martyrs were tympanized or drummed; he offered himself willingly
to the torment or Drum; the manner of which may be easily collected from the
thirtieth Verse of that Chapter in the Maccabees, where the Author says, As
he was ready to give up the ghost, because of the strokes, etc. which shows
two things.

First, That the torture was by beating with Staves, or Cudgels.

Secondly, That it was not usual for men to dye under such beatings, that
punishment not being to death, but to pain and disgrace; as appears also from
that of Pilate concerning Christ, who when he found nothing in him worthy of
death, said, I will chastise (or beat) him, and release him (Luke 23.15, 16.)
And Paul received forty stripes save one, five times of the Jews (which seems
to have been a torture somewhat like this we are now upon) and was thrice beaten
with Rods, and yet survived them all (2 Cor. 11.24.25.)

The Prophet Nahum also may thought be to allude to this custom ( Na. 2.7.)
And Huzzab (which some take for the proper name of the Queen of Ninevie) shall
be led away Captive, she shall be brought up, and her Maids shall lead her as
with the voice of Doves, tabring (or drumming) upon their breasts, it is this
word in the Text; that is, They shall inflict that punishment upon themselves,
which others use to inflict on evil doers; as if he had said, They shall
torture themselves, or be their own tormentors for very grief and vexation at
those miseries which their enemies shall bring upon them. As the poor Publican
filled with godly sorrow and remorse for his sin, Smote upon his breast (Luke
18.13.) So it is usual for such as are overburdened with worldly sorrow, to
smite upon their breasts, and add a voluntary pain to that which is inflicted.

Job is conceived to aim at this form of punishment; and then (taking the
former part of the Verse, not as we render it, I am a byword, but as the word
properly signifies, to Govern, or bear Rule, and then I say) the sense
appears thus, I who have been a Ruler, Statuit me ad dominari populis and
tympanizatus palam ero. Bold.
or in place of Authority heretofore, am now looked upon as a man who either
had been, or deserves to be tortured, drummed, or cudgelled; as if I were at
once an ordinary man and an extraordinary Malefactor: We may also keep to our
translation of the former part of the Verse, and suite this Exposition of the
latter part very well unto it; Thus, He has made me a byword of the people,
Ac si public fuissem tympanizatus and bacillis caesus.
and before them I am in no better repute then a man who for his faults has
undergone public shame; as if we should say (according to our customs) then
a man that has been whipped about the Streets, or that has stood upon the
Plliorie, or that has been branded with a hot Iron in the hand or face; both
which applications of this Exposition center in that Observation lately given,
about the changeableness and inconstancy of man's opinion concerning and of his
affections toward man: And therefore I shall not insist further upon the use
of it, but only add, that,

Bolduc.
A learned Interpreter takes much pains to make out a proof of this exposition
from that passage of the Prophet Isaiah (Chap. 30. Verse. 30, 31, 32, 33.) where
the Lord having made gracious promises to his own people of their deliverance
from the Assyrian bondage, thus threatens the Assyrian, the Rod of his anger,
and the Staff of his indignation ( Ver. 30.) The Lord shall cause his glorious
voice to be heard, and shall show the lighting down of his arm, with the
indignation of his anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with
scattering tempest and hailstones. For through the voice of the Lord shall the
Assyrian be beaten down, which smote with a Rod. And in every place where the
grounded staff shall pass, which the Lord shall lay upon him, it shall be
with Tabrets and Harps, and in battles of shaking will he fight with it. For
Tophet (which is the word of the Text) is ordained of old, yea for the King it
is prepared, he has made it deep and large: the pile th reof is fire, and
much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it.
In these words (says my Author) there is a clear description of that kind of
torture, called Tympanization, or Drumming, with which the King of Assyria is
either threatened (in specie) particularly, and properly, or by a Synechdoche,
to show that God would lay severe punishments upon him. For (says the Prophet)
Through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrian he beaten down, which smote
with a Rod: He smote with a Rod, but he shall be beaten down with a Staff;
for in every place where the grounded staff shall pass, or, every passing of
the Rod founded; that is, Of the Rod founded in the Decree of God, which so
establishes it, that no power nor policy of the Assyrian shall avoid, or
remove it: For though God will not let the Rod of the wicked rest upon the lot
of the righteous (Psalm. 125.3.) yet the Rod of God shall rest upon the lot of
the wicked, There shall be the rest thereof (Zech. 9.1.) The Rod of God, by the
lighting down of his arm (V. 30.) shall strike home to, yea into the flesh of
his Enemies, and there make deep gashes or cuts, running like so many rivelets
with blood; and (says he) The Lord shall lay it upon him, or, as our Margin
has it, Shall cause it to rest upon him; when the Lord lays it on, let who so
will, or rather who so can (and indeed none can) take it off, The Lord shall
lay it upon him; and (as it follows) it shall he with Tabrets and Harpes;
which, as most Interpret of the joy which the Jews should have at the
downfall of the Assyrian, so my Author expounds it suitably to his Notion, of
the manner of Gods smiting the Assyrian; which should be as a Drum, or Tabret
is smitten, with many repeated strokes, which in some exercisings of that Art,
pass so thick, and so uncessantly, that the Sticks seem to rest upon the
Drum, as also the finger upon the Harp, and not to move at all off from
either; even thus shall God lay his Staff upon the Assyrian: and in battles
of shaking will he fight with it, or with them; that is, by the shaking of
Battles, or by frequent renewed Battles, will he fight with and destroy them.
For (as it follows) Tophet is prepared of old; that is, The Engine upon which
he shall be tortured; the form and manner of which is in many particulars
described out of ancient Writers, by the Author of this exposition, but I shall
not stay upon them. This Tophet is prepared of old, or, from yesterday; that
is, God has prepared it aforehand, and made it ready, He has made it deep and
large; that is, proportionable in all i^s dimensions for that use and purpose;
yea for the King it is prepared (the great King of Assyria) which is added,
because this was a punishment for common men, yet the King (says he) shall be
thus tortured, he shall no more escape the hand of God, then the meanest of his
Subjects, and he shall be handled in the same manner as the meanest among them
shall. The dishonor of such a suffering is a greater punishment to a great
King, then the pain of it, yet he cannot be dispensed with, yea for the King
it is prepared. The pile of it is fire, and much wood: What Is the meaning of
that? My Author answers, This punishment of drumming was sometims but
preparatory another: first they were beaten, and then they were burned; and
therefore (says he) before the Engine a great fire was made, into which when
they were tortured by beating, offenders were cast and consumed to ashes. Jubet
amoveri noxialem stipitem plebeia clarum paena me damnet virum. Prud. in Romans
Martyr.
Our Martyrologyes tell us of some, who have been first hanged, and then
burned; and ordinarily among us, when Traitors are put to death, a fire is made
at the place of Execution, into which their bowels are cast, when their bodies
are cut up and quartered. Thus here, The pile thereof is fire and much wood:
And the breath of the Lord as a stream of brimstone does kindle it; that is,
The Lord being extremely angry with, and incensed against the King of Assyria,
will therefore kindle this fire of his wrath totally to consume him.

But here it may be demanded, Did any of the Kings of Assyria, who captivated
and afflicted the Jews, suffer such a kind of death as this? I suppose none
of them did: Some tell us that the Army of Senacherib which invaded Judea, was
overthrown and destroyed by the Angel in that place called Tophet, or in the
Valley of Hinnon, which is also given as a reason why that word is used in the
Prophet; but Senacharib himself was slain in the Temple of his Idol (2 K.
19.37.): Nor is it (as I conceive) the mind of our Expositor, to conclude from
hence that the King of Babylon was put to death by such a torture; but only to
show under the description of that kind of death, that the death and
destruction of the King of Babylon should be very terrible, and that God would
judge him, even as notorious offenders are, both to a painful and a shameful
end.

As this Interpretation of the Prophet gives much light to that of Job, so it
is an ingenious conjecture upon that place, and carries a fair correspondence
both to truth and reason. Nor is there (that I have met with) any Interpreter
who does not understand that Text of Isaiah in its first and literal sense, of
the temporary judgments which God threatened to power out upon the State and
King of Babylon, as most in a Tropologicall and Allusive sense, Interpret it of
eternal judgment in Hell, which is indeed a fiery Tophet, and is prepared of
old, yea for the King it is prepared, for the great King of Assyria, as well as
for the meanest person.

There is a seventh Translation and Exposition of these words which takes the
former part of the Verse as was touched upon the last, and reads the whole thus;
For he will make me a Governor among the people, Nam fore ut instituat me ad
praesidendum populis, quamvis tympanotribarum materia ante fuerim. Jun.
Restituet me Deus in dignitatem meam and altius provehet. Jun.
though I have thus been made as matter for the Fiddlers or Taberers Song. So
that, as the former Exposition renders the Text as a complaint, proceeding from
Jobs grief, that he who had been a Great Man, a Governor of the people,
should be now punished as a slave, or as a Malefactor; so this renders it as a
Prophecy, proceeding from his Faith, That God would restore and raise him
again to be a Governor among the people, though now he was the scorn and
derision of the people.

This reading rises clearly enough from the words of the Text, yet I have one
exception against it, as to the constant tenor of Jobs profession; who though
he were full of Faith in God, that it should go well with him for eternity,
yet he constantly disclaimes any hope of restoration to a temporal
greatness; and having said at the beginning of this Chapter, My days are
extinct, the Graves are ready for me, it seems unsuitable to say h^re (which
is the sense of this translation) My worldly joys are blossoming, the Throanes
are ready for me: And therefore (with much reverence to the learned Author) I
lay by this Interpretation.

Lastly, Master Broughton translates thus, That makes me a byword to the
people, and I am openly a Taber: He applies it not (as we) to the former time,
but to that time, I am a Tabret, and that openly, or in open view, in the sight
of all. We say of a man that is abused and jeered, He is played upon; so says
Job (according to this rendering) They play upon me as a Taber, they rejoice in
my sufferings, they make themselves merry with my sorrows, and rejoice at my
calamity; so the Lords of the Philistims dealt with Sampson, having put out his
eyes and imprisoned him, they sent for him to make them Blessed sport (Judge.
16.25.) Thus (as the sense of this Translation leads us) Job aggravates his
sorrows, Posuisti autem me fabulam in gentibus and risus eis deveni. Sept.
by the joy which others discovered at it; which is also the meaning of the
Septuagint, whose reading is, Thou have made me a talk among the people, and I
became a laughing stock to them.

Hence Observe.

Grief is most grievous when others rejoice at it.

Those afflictions which make others laugh, make us most mournful: when Nero
had set Rome on fire, he made himself music at it, and that calamity upon
the City, was as a Tabret to him, while they were sorrowing, he was singing. As
to rejoice at the evil which others suffer is base joy, the worst of joys in
it self, so it makes the evils which we suffer worse to our apprehension.
The Prophet laments over Jerusalem, because of this ( Lament. 2.15.) All that
pass by, clap their hands at thee, they hiss and wagg their head at the
Daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the City that men call the perfection of
beauty, the joy of the whole earth? All thine enemies have opened their mouth
against thee, they hiss and gnash the teeth, they say, We have swallowed her
up certainly, this is the day that we looked for, we have found, we have seen
it. Jerusalem was as much burdened with her Enemies joy, as with her own
sorrows. If when we mourn, we have some to mourn with us, we are comforted
in our mournings; but when God leaves us to the scorn and contempt of men,
when they make themselves merry with our troubles, and exult at our calamities,
when our tears are as Wine to them, and the Bread of our affliction becomes
the Bread of their desire, this renders our sorrows out of measure sorrowful.
Hence David (Psalm. 25.2.) prays so hard, Lord let not mine Enemy triumph over
me: It is easier to lose a Battle, yea to dye in Battle, then to be led in
triumph, or to be triumphed over after the battle: David being freed from that
fear, gathers a strong argument that God had respect to him ( Ps. 41.11.) By
this I know that thou favourest me, because mine Enemy does not triumph over
me, It is greatest mercy when we triumph over our Enemies, but it is great
mercy when God delivers us from being tryumphed over by our Enemies, for as the
mercies of the wicked, so the joys of the merciless are cruel. The Apostle
reports it as a great part of his affliction, that he was made a ^aging stock,
or a spectacle to the World, to Angels and men (1 Cor. 4.9.) The word which
the Apostle uses is an Allusion to the Roman Theaters, (...).
whither all the people resorted to sport themselves, and their special sport
was, to behold the Combats of Men with Men, or of Men with Beasts; such a
sporting spectacle were the Apostles made (in their combats with the World) to
the World, and to Angels, and to Men: They had Spectators enough, they were a
Spectacle to the World, that is, To the Inhabitants of the World, who are
distributed into their first and greatest division in the next word, Angels and
men: Heaven and Earth are the Fabric of the whole World, Angels and men are
all the Inhabitants of both, yet some restrain Paul's Text, to evil Angels
only, or Devils, because it sounds harsh to the ear, that the good Angels
should delight themselves in beholding the sufferings of good men; but it is
not Paul's scope to show that every beholder of their sufferings took delight
in their sufferings, but that all did, or might behold them, for those things
were not done in a corner. The Apostles were set forth by their Adversaries as
if they had invited all the World, Angels and Men, good and bad, to laugh at
them; yet as good men could not behold them without weeping, so the good Angels
could not behold them with rejoicing, unless it were at their constancy and
courage for God, or at that Crown which they saw ready prepared for those
who overcome: And in this sense good men ^lso rejoiced at their sufferings.
But when any man's sufferings are rejoiced at, because he suffers and is in
pain; this is very painful.

This was Moabs burden ( Jer. 48.39.) They shall howl, saying, How is it
broken down? How has Moab turned the back with shame? So shall Moab be a
derision, and a dismaying to all them about him. And when the Psalmist would
express how highly God was offended at the counsels and plottings of wicked
ones, he tells us, He that sits in Heaven shall laugh, he shall have them in
derision (Psalm. 2.)

And if ever people had cause to bless God because he has not made their
Enemies to rejoice over them, we have cause to do it. What a byword should
we have been by this time, what a Tabret to the Nations round about, what
music to many thousands at home, had the Lord given but that occasion to them,
that he has often, and often put into our hands? Blessed be his Name that he has
not made us a Tabret to others, but has often put a Tabret into our hands, and
a new Song into our mouths, even of thanksgiving to our God.

Job having aggravated his sorrows, by their effects upon others; now shows
what effect they had upon himself.

Verse. 7. My eye also is dim by reason of sorrow, and all my members are as a
shadow.
[Mine eye] The eye is taken two ways, either properly for the corporal eye,
Vt illa de inferiori sensibili cognitione quae fit per phantasmata, sic ista de
intellectuali oculo exponi debet. Bold. (...) Denotatur in illo verbo activa
provocatio, indignatio, irritatio. Caligavit ab indignatione oculus meus. Vulg.
or tropically for the understanding: Some interpret Job of the eye of the
mind; and that has compliance with the translation which is also given of
the latter clause, as I shall show when I come thither. But I rather take it
literally for the eye of the body. Mine eye, that is, That Organ of sight which
is as the Glass or light of the whole body, even that is dim by reason of,
[Sorrow.]

The word signifies more then ordinary sorrow, it signifies sorrow with
indignation, or from provocation: Jobs sorrow had a touch of indignation, and
it stirred him up to some undue provocations: Sorrow is taken two ways.

Actively. Passively.
Actively, for the sorrow, sorrowing.

Passively, for the sorrow, sorrowed.

Magna cogitatio obcaecat adducto intus visu in morbo comitiali aperti nihil
cernunt animo caligante Plin. lib. 11. c. 37. de oculis and lachrymis.
Sorrow is the affliction it self, or sorrow is that passion which moves in us
when we are afflicted, By reason of sorrow mine eye is dim: Sorrow is a wast
both to the vital and visive powers (Psalm. 6.7.) Mine eye is consumed because
of grief: Again ( Psalm. 31.9, 10.) Have mercy on me O Lord, for I am in
trouble; mine eye is consumed with grief, yea my soul, and my belly. This
effect of grief has been touched before ( Chap. 16.16.) Mine eye is dim by
reason of sorrow.

And all my members are as a shadow. (...) Formavit.
[Members.] That is, First, all the members of my body: Secondly (the Hebrew
bears it) all the creatures, and imaginations of my mind are as a shadow.

The same word is used ( Genesis 6.5.) The thoughts of the imaginations of man's
heart (that is, The figments, Creata in^ ea quasiuinb a omnia. Merc. Per creata
alij membra, alii cogitationes volunt. Rab. Lev. Vocabulum illud quadrat in
illa omnia quae externa figura aut interna cogitatione effigiantur; hinc multi
legunt cogitationes phantasias Pagn. Reg. Vatabl.
or features of things which are formed up there) are evil, and only evil
continually: We put, All my thoughts, in the Margin of our Translation: As if
he had said, My mind is so enfeebled that I can scarce think or frame any
solid notion; my mind is so unsettled that I know not how to make up my
thoughts, or bring them to a rational issue about any point. Sorrow weakens
the intellective part, as well as the sensitive: As if he had said, My mind,
which heretofore was apt to conceive, and to bring forth the exactest Ideas and
platformes of truth; I, who could shape and fashion excellent meditations, am
now so weak-headed, that I can scarce put two thoughts together, and all I do
is but a shadow to what I have been able to do.

This is a fair sense, yet considering the context, I rather understand it of
the members of his body, which were so decayed and poor, that he looked like
a Skeleton, or (as we say of such) an Anatomy, nothing being left but skin
and bone, nothing but a pack of bones; so that he was rather the shadow and
appearance of a man, then a man.

Hence Observe.

The sorrows of the mind break the body, as well as the mind.

This effect of sorrow has been met with in other places, and particularly (
Chap. 16.16.) I shall only add, that although godly sorrow (as was there
showed) may work deeply to the expense of bodily strength, yet there is a very
gracious promise ( Isa. 58.11.) that God will make the bones of such fat, that
is, Fill them with marrow, which is the strength of the whole outward man.
And they who are weakened by the continual exercises of godly sorrow, here, are
in preparation to an estate, where they shall sorrow no more: There will be no
dimm eyes in Heaven, nor members like a shadow: Our vile body shall be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, and all tears and mourning shall flee
away. Perfect happiness is inconsistent with a blubbered eye. And though in
Heaven a Saint may be called Adam (because his body, for the substance of it,
shall be the same that it was here on earth, though extremely refined and
sublimated, yea, spiritualized, yet earth still, now I say, though a Saint in
Heaven after the resurrection, may (in this sense) be called Adam, made of
Earth) yet no Saint can be there called Enosh, that state being incapable of
the least mixture of sorrow.

JOB, CHAP. 17. Verse. 8, 9. Upright men shall be astonished at this, and the
innocent shall stir up himself against the Hypocrite.

The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall
be stronger and stronger.


IN the two former Verses Job showed the greatness of his affliction from a
twofold effect.

In these two Verses he shows two reasons why his afflictions were so great,
not as Eliphaz and his Associates had suggested, because he was a great
sinner, or had sinned beyond the common line of man; but,

First, That men, even upright men might be astonished, at the strangeness of
this dispensation of God, and of his strength, supporting a vveake creature
under it, and carrying him through it: God will do some things which shall at
once teach and astonish his people, and gives them not only matter of
instruction, but cause of wonder

Secondly, That, the innocent and righteous might be encouraged by my example
to proceed vigorously in the vvayes of holiness, notwithstanding all the
opposition they find from men, and the afflictions laid upon them by the hand
of God; for as much as the favor of God shines in upon me through all these
Clouds, and I have no doubt of his love, though I feel all this smart. Naki
non tam in conscientia purum a peccato, quam ab omni, passione, humanoque
respectu immunem virum hic significat. Bold.


Verse. 8. Upright men shall be astonished at this.
Who is an upright man has been opened before; yet here the upright man is a
man free from passion and prejudice, as well as from hypocrisy and
false-heartednesse.

The word which we translate [Astonied] signifies astonishment with admiration,
or such an admiration, as leaves a man astonished and senseless, or puts him
quite beside himself; (...) Tacitu miratus est, prae admiratione stupuit.
when natural reason is much overpowred, we act as if we had had no reason.

Upright men shall be astonished. Master Broughton reads it in the Imperative
Mood, Let upright men be astonished at this: He carries the same form to the
end of the context, Let upright men be astonished at this, and let the innocent
stir up himself against the Hypocrite: Let the righteous hold on his way, and
let him that has clean hands be stronger, and stronger: As if the words
contained a use of exhortation or direction to several duties which Jobs state
calls us unto.

We say, Upright men may be astonished, as importing the event, or what was
intended in the act: As if he had said, Men of a right temper will not be
transported with ungrounded jealousies and uncertain conjectures concerning me,
when they see all this upon me, but will referr my strange disasters to the
unconceiveable wisdom of God, who thus orders the afflictions of his people,
and seems to reward their holy services with sharpest sufferings.

Upright men shall be astonished, at what? At this: or upon the consideration of
this thing: but what is this thing, the consideration whereof, shall raise up
such astonishment? When the Bush burned and was not consumed, Moses resolved, I
will turn aside now, and see this great thing: Strange sights call us to
consideration. We have in this Text, A bush burning and not consuming, upright
men may well be astonished and turn aside to see it.

More particularly, there are four things upon which the occasion of this
astonishment is pitched.

Upright men shall be astonished at, or upon this. First, At your hard dealing
with me, at your rigid censures of me, your bitter by-words and taunting
Proverbs against me, will certainly cause upright men, men of a clear
judgment and conscience, to stand astonished: As if he had said, It is not my
single opinion that you have wronged me, but all men of integrity will not
only say the same, but be amazed at your dealings with me.

Secondly, At this, that is, At the deliverance which God will give me out of
these troubles; thus the sense is made out by those who render the sixth Verse
as the Prophecy of Jobs Faith that he should be restored and set up to govern
among the people: This turn of things shall work astonishment in the best and
most sober spirited men, upright men shall be astonished, Animo, dictis, factis
viri boni glorientur in Deo and de hypocritarum confusione exultent. Jun.
to seem translated from the dunghill to the Throne, from a state of greatest
contempt to a state of highest honor. Good men shall glorify God in me, and
shall rejoice at the downfall of Hypocrites; but though the event did verify
this, Job was at the last restored, and was made as a Prince among the people,
and his restoration was such as might justly astonish and draw all that either
saw or heard of it into admiration, yet I much doubt whether Job had any such
scope in these words, which rather continue and heighten the aggravations of
his then present troubles, then hold out any intimations of his hope, much
less of his assurance of a raising to a future worldly prosperity.

Thirdly, Some conceive this matter of astonishment to be the patience of Job
under his sufferings, that he should endure and hold out in such extremities,
till his eye was dym by reason of sorrow, and his members were like a shadow:
Upright men shall be astonished at this; Is it not mavelous that a man should
act a life of grace, when it could scarce be perceived that he acted the life
of nature? As God does often work miraculously for the deliverance of his
people out of trouble, so they sometimes (by his power) work miraculously
under troubles, before deliverance comes. Such patience, such humility, such
meekness, and faith, are recorded in Scripture, as have caused upright men to
stand astonished. This is a good sense, but I rather pitch upon a fourth, as most
proper to this place.

Cladis haec mea universis est stupenda sed justis praesertim. Pined. Quod ita
atrociter affligar cum sim innocens, etc. Merc
Fourthly, I conceive when Job says, Upright men shall be astonished at this: He
points at the greatness of his affliction: As if he had thus expressed it, My
being made a byword among the people, my dym'd eyes and lean body will make
such a report and be such a sight, as will set all honest men a wondering,
upright men shall be astonished at this. What! Has the Lord dealt thus with Job,
a holy man, concerning whose integrity he has given such ample testimony? This
is indeed the Lords doing, but it is mavelous in our eyes.

Hence Observe.

First, That the best of men, upright men are sometimes at a loss how to
interpret the outward dealings of God.

Some providence of God put the wisest to a stand; not only are Fools and
wicked men, but men of the greatest experience and understanding in the ways
of God, so puzzled that they know not what to say, or how to answer? The Lord
is pleased to give as hard Texts and Chapters in his works as he does in his
Word; many outward administrations lie so close, yea so cross to his ordinary
proceedings, that we know not what to make of them: If we see a wicked man
afflicted, we shall see a godly man afflicted much more: If we see a godly man
prosper, we shall see a wicked man prosper double to it; these are strange
things, at which not a few are amazed, and at their wits end; should we judge
of all the dealings of God by humane reason, we should conclude some of them
without, or against reason, though indeed they are only above our reason, or
have a height of reason in them, which we cannot reach, and therefore must
admire.

No man wonders at that for which he can give a reason, and therefore we
say it altogether unbecomes a Philosopher (who would be thought knowing about
the reason of every thing) to vvonder: There are depths in the providence of
God which no man is able to reach or fadome, else upright men need not be
astonished at them. The Preacher gives a caution, that we should not be over
curious in prying into such secrets (as some make the connection of those two
Verses Eccles. 7.15, 16.) All things have I seen in the days of my vanity:
Solomon was a man of vast observation, and though he had not seen all things
in their particular existence, yet he had seen all things in their general
nature; and he gives instance in two sorts of things which he had seen, There
is a just man that perishes in his righteousness (Job was a righteous man,
and he perished outwardly) and there is a wicked man that prolongs his life in
wickedness. Among all his observations, he thought none of greater moment then
these two: Now when God puts the righteous into a perishing condition, and
sets up the wicked in worldly glory; this is matter of much admiration and
inquisition, therefore he subioynes (according to this interpretation) his
caution ( Verse. 16.) Be not righteous over much, neither make thy self over
wise; that is, Be not anxious in searching out every particular, or every
little little about this administration of God; make not thy self over wise,
do not think that thou can reach the reason of all that God has don in
causing a righteous man to perish, Dum plus scire vis quam opertet, prae
admiratione rei humanum captum vincentis ad mentis stuporem devenias. Pined.
and a wicked man to flourish, there is more in it then thou can compr^hend,
Why should thou destroy thy self? that is, Thou may amaze and bewilder,
yea undo and destroy thy self, if thou venturest too far upon those secrets
of providence, but thou will not be able to extricate or resolve thy self by
all thy venturing.

Now, If the providence of God be such a deep, that upright wise men are
astonished at them, then what a deep are the counsels and decrees of God?
Providence are the dispensations of God to the eye, they are the objects of
sense, if we cannot see to the end of that which is before us, as providence
are, how shall we see the end of that which is so far off from us as the
Counsels and Decrees of God are? The Apostle stood as a man astonished at both (
Romans 11.33.) when he had spoken of that amazing dispensation of God in
casting off the Jews, and receiving the Gentiles, he cries out, O the depth of
the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: How unsearchable are his
judgments; and among them, this special judgment in taking the Gospel from
the Jews, and breaking them off, who were the natural branches, that the
Gentiles who were the wild Olive might be graffed in: How unsearchable is this
judgment, and this way of God past finding out; Upright men are astonished at
this.

Secondly, Observe.

How strange soever the dealings of God are with his, yet righteous men are
only astoni^d at them.

They are not scandalized, they are not offended at God for them, they do not
blaspheme the name, or apostatize from the ways of God, nor do they quarrel
at his dispensations. For as when they are astonished at the prosperity of the
wicked, they preserve high and holy thoughts of God, and only seek resolution
at the mouth of God: as the Prophet Jeremiah did ( Chapter 12.1.) Lord thou art
righteous, yet let me reason with thee, Why does the way of the wicked prosper?
Or as Habakkuk (Chap. 2.2.) propounds his question to find out the knot in the
ways and dealings of God: Now I say, as it is thus with the righteous, when
they see the great prosperity of the wicked, so when they see the greatest
adversities of the godly, they are only amazed at the dealings of God, they
do not despond, much less blaspheme because of his d^alings. But when carnal
men see those who have gone for righteous or upright, under afflictions, they
run into desperate extremes.

First, They despise and slight them.

Secondly, They judge them Hypocrites.

Thirdly, They look upon them as the most miserable men in the World: Afflicted
grace and innocence has no beauty in a carnal eye.

Fourthly, They judge hardly of God, who deals thus severely with men; what?
Are these the servants of God, and does he use them thus? Does he recompense
them thus for the pains which they have taken, and for the work which they
have done him?

Fifthly, They grow into an abhorrence of holiness, and into a distaste of
Religion it self. If God pay his Servants wages in such coin as this (say
they) let who so will serve him, we are not ambitious of his Livery. If this be
the portion of Professors (as you call them) let who will profess; thus they
are scandalled and offended.

It is storyed, that when Aygoland a King of the Moors (who had long
maintained War against Charles the Great, hoping to make a fairer agreement
with him) had promised to receive the Christian Faith, and be Baptized, he
coming with a gallant retinue to the French Court, saw there a number of poor
men fed and clothed by the Emperors charity, Aygolandus abjecto servorum Dei
statu offensus a Christianae fidei professione abstinuit. Lampad. in Sleyd.
part. 3.
and enquiring who they were, it was answered, That they were the Servants of
God: What, said he, Are the Emperors Servants so rich and brave, and are the
Servants of God so poor and squalid? I had a purpose to be baptized, but now I
am resolved never to serve that God, who keeps and rewards his Servants no
better. What this King spoke out, many speak in their hearts; they will not
serve Christ upon selfe-denying and suffering terms.

As when the Cross falls upon Hypocrites, they depart from the Faith, and
(with Demas) embrace this present World; they will not endure a storm for
Christ, nor hazard their worldly possessions for all the promises in the
Gospel; so when the godly fall under crosses and afflictions for the Gospel,
evil and profane men reject it, they will none of it: The righteous may be
astonished and wonder, but the wicked blaspheme at this.

Thirdly, Observe.

Good men are apt to have strange thoughts about afflictions and crosses.

They who are well acquainted with the Theory of sufferings, yet when they
come to suffer indeed, find much loathnesse and averseness to it. The Apostle
Peter saw this and labored to remove it (1 Pet. 4.12.) My brethren, think it
not strange concerning the fiery trial, as if some strange thing had happened to
you, but rejoice, etc. They looked strange on trials, as if they had never seen
nor heard of them before: They knew not how to digest such hard-meate as
sufferings are, under the profession of the Gospel; their hearts were somewhat
cold to those sires, and they had no mind to come near lest they should burn
their fingers, and were therefore warned, Think it not strange concerning the
fiery trial. Jesus Christ (as the Prophet describes him, Isa. 53.3.) was a man
of sorrow and acquainted with grief. Christ and grief were no strangers, why
then should a Christian think strange of it? The Apostle uses that argument (
Verse. 13.) But rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings:
Ours are the sufferings of Christ, not only because we suffer for him, and he
suffers with us, but because he suffered the same things, yea far greater
both before us and for us: Christ took our sufferings upon him, when he took
our nature upon him, yet our nature thinks strange to partake in the sufferings
of Christ.

The Apostle Paul (1. Ep. 3.3, 4.) tells the Thessalonians, that he sent
Timotheus to establish them, and to comfort them concerning their Faith, That
no man should be moved by these afflictions: q. d. Tribulationum justorum jam
nobis causa and ratio explorata est; at quondam ut pote ignota, multam
admirandi and philosophandi materiam ipsis justis praebebat.
Intimating that the best of men, the best of Saints are apt to be moved by
afflictions; he means it of an inward motion, that is, to have their spirits
disturbed and troubled, as David's was when he put those questions to his soul
( Psalm. 42.11.) Why art thou cast down O my soul, and why art thou disquieted
within me? But why should no man be moved by those afflictions? The Apostle
shows why, For your selves know that we were also appointed thereto: for
verily when I was with you I told you before that we must suffer tribulations,
as it came to pass, and ye know it. Paul gave them notice before affliction
came, lest they should be moved when they were come. Thus Christ warned his
Disciples. and he warned them for this end ( John 16.1.) These things have I
spoken to you that you be not offended: What things were these? They (says he)
shall put you out of the Synagogues; yea, the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think that he does God service: Christ foresaw that when
these things came they would find work enough to quiet their spirits in, and
to quit themselves from troublesome motions: And as Christ to keep or make
their hearts quiet, tells them of their sufferings aforehand, so he therefore
tells them that he himself had suffered before hand ( John 15.18.) If the
World hate you, you know it hated me before it hated you; you know it, and
knowing it, you ought not be troubled when you meet with hatred in the World:
The Servant must not expect better usage then his Master. When we see so much
laid in to fortify our spirits against outward crosses, in, or for the
profession of the Gospel, it is an abundant argument that our hearts are apt
to startle, and we to be astonished at them.

And the innocent shall stir up himself against the Hypocrite. [ The
innocent] Here is a different Character, (...) Evigitavit, excitavit.
or clothing of words, but the person is the same. The innocent shall [stirr]
up himself: The word signifies to stir up from sleep, and to stir up from
sloth, it signifies also such a stirring as the Eagle uses to provoke her
young ones to fly ( Deuteronomy. 32.11.) Thus the innocent shall awake and stir up
himself.

[Against the Hypocrite] The Hypocrite is taken two ways: Either strictly,
(...) Sun^ qui reddunt improbum quo modo ea vox exprimitur ^pud Hebraeos. Drus.
as opposed to the upright in the former part; and under that notion I have
heretofore spoken of the Hypocrite ( Chap. 8. etc.)

Secondly, The Hypocrite may be taken largely, and so every wicked man is he,
except he who openly professes wickedness, and yet even he may go for an
Hypocrite, for he is more wicked (when he has professed his utmost) then he
does profess himself to be.

The Septuagint render him, Unjust, Reddunt iniquum Sep. De^ latorem. Targ
and the Caldee Paraphrase, The backbyter or defamer: And another of the Greek
Interpreters calls him the Enemy; The innocent shall stir up himself against
his enemy, Justus super inimicum consurget. Olymp.
or against his opposite: And who is that? but the wicked man, under what
notion soever we put him: The single terms thus cleared, fall yet under a
different sense, as joined together.

Suam orationem pa ulo incitatiorem excusat. q. d. quid mirum me ita loqui cum
res ipsa tam indigna sit? Pined.
First, Some conceive that Job makes an apology, or an excuse for himself in
these words, why he expressed so much passion, and used such sharpness of speech
toward his Friends: As if he had said, Blame me not for doing it, things are
carried so, as upright men may be astonished, it would make a wiseman madd, and a
meek man furious; a very post would be awakened and stirred, at what my Friends
have again and again pressed upon me; therefore pardon my passion, and (if
you will needs call it so) my impatience.

Non me latet ad rem tantam sapientes percelli, atque adeo in ejusmodi casu
interdum insontes adversus eos qui sic affliguntur, tanquam adversus hypocritas
commoveri. Bez.
Secondly, Master Beza expounds Job, aiming at a good man in great troubles
mistaken for an Hypocrite, by those who are good: he represents him speaking
thus, I am not ignorant that not only ordinary and common men, but even the
wise and the upright will be troubled and astonished at my sufferings, and that
sometimes (in such a case as mine is) innocent men will stir up, or set
themselves against him that is thus afflicted, as if he were an Hypocrite:
When God puts a disguise of great troubles upon his faithful Servants, they
who are faithful will scarce own them; they are ready to number them among
enemies, at least to doubt very much (as they did about Paul upon another
account, Acts 9.26.) whether he be a Friend or a Disciple. Afflictions have
made the sincere appear as Hypocrites in the opinion of those who are sincere.

Indignabitur contra hypocritam quod ille calamitates tribuit peccatis. Cajet.
A third makes this the ground of the innocent man's quarrel against the
Hypocrite, why does he stir up himself, and engage against him? Why is he so
angry with the Hypocrite? Even because he sees the Hypocrite foolishly
condemning the godly as wicked, because they are afflicted, or ascribing their
calamities merely to their sins.

Excitabit se contra impium florentem and faelicem, quod videat illum non
recipere digna peccari^.
Fourthly, Thus, The innocent shall stir up himself; that is, His spirit shall
be troubled at the Hypocrite, or wicked man whom he sees in a flourishing
condition; so we may expound it by that caution which David gives ( Psalm.
37.1.) Fret not thy self because of evil doers, neither be thou envious
against the workers of iniquity. Good men have been much moved and fretted at
the prosperity of the ungodly: But surely Job is not here declaring the
infirmities of the innocent, but their graces. And therefore,

Lastly, The innocent shall stir up himself against the Hypocrite, carries in
it the commendation of the innocent persons perseverance and constancy in the
faith and sincerity of his profession, what changes soever are upon him: As if
he had said, Though a godly man be afflicted and brought low, though he be
scorned and trampled upon when he is brought low, yet he will not forsake his
principles, or disclaim his profession; Quamvis ab eo rideatur quod
affligatur, haud tamen proptere^ desiderio ducetur ejus sequendi aut ei se
adjungendi sed excitabit se, etc. Merc.
nay he will be so far from slacking in, or turning away from his profession,
that he will manifest more holy zeal for God and his ways, together with more
holy opposition against wicked men, and all their ways, their ever he did
before: The upright shall be astonished at this, but they shall not be
disheartened, their wisdom and courage shall still appear in maintaining
their quarrel against the generation of evil doers, wheresoever they meet
with them The innocent shall stir up himself against the Hypocrite.

Hence Note.

First, There is an everlasting opposition between the godly and the wicked.

The innocent stirrs up himself (like a Lion) against the Hypocrite: His heart
rises against him, not as a man, not as his enemy, but as a wicked man, and as
an enemy to God. The foundation of this holy War was laid in that word of God
( Genesis 3.15.) I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, between her seed,
and thy seed. As there is an enmity, de facto, in wicked men against the
righteous, they will ever be opposing them: So there is an enmity, de jure, of
right, and duty in the righteous against the wicked, they ought ever to oppose
them: that quarrel, those feudes must not be laid down: and therefore the
Apostle John, who though he was the beloved Desciple, and was most pressing and
persuasive to love among Saints and Brethren, yet he forbids the love of wicked
men, Love not the World (1 Epist. 2.15.) which referrs as well to worldly
persons, as worldly things: And the Apostle James is direct ( Chap. 4.4.) The
freindship of the World is enmity against God. Our peicing in, or making peace
with the World, is a proclaimed War against God himself. It is our duty, and
it is our spiritual safety, to stir up our selves spiritually, against the
wicked. As we deny not civil peace with Hypocrites, and the worst of men, so
there is a spiritual warfare which we are bound to continue (how chargeable
soever it may prove to us) against all Hypocrites and wicked men. And if they
say (of this Sword) as ( Jer. 47.6.) O thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it
be ere thou be quiet? We must answer as the Sword does there, How can I be
quiet seeing the Lord has given me a charge against Askelon? The Sword of that
War receives its Commission from God, and is designed now to one coast, anon
to another: The Sword of this War has long since received its Commission from
God, against all the coasts of sin, and powers of darkness, nor can it be
quiet, or put it self up in its Scabbard while there is an Hypocrite appearing
upon the face of the Earth.

Gods quarrel must be perpetuated, it can never be taken up, Let them return
to thee, but return not thou to them, was the Prophets charge ( Jer. 15.19.)
There Is no compounding of this difference; they must return and give
themselves up to God, and his ways, else we cannot give them an inch of
ground, or make truce with them for an hour, much less may we make peace with
them, or give them the right hand of fellowship.

Secondly, Here we have the Hypocrite in his flourish, and the innocent in his
affliction, the Hypocrite aloft, and the innocent below; yet when it is thus,
even then the innocent is described stirring up himself against the Hypocrite.

Hence Observe.

A godly man afflicted, does not at all approve or applaud the Hypocrite, but
opposes him in his greatest pomp and worldly splendor.

When the wicked are at the highest, even as happy as the World can make them,
yet a godly man will not change states with them, or (as we say) turn Tables
with them; he would not have his outward prosperity, with his heart, if it were
worth ten thousand Worlds: He sees and knows there is more excellency and
worth in afflicted grace, then in the most prosperous wickedness: The love of
God is better then life, and if so, what are all the things of this life
compared to it? Hence a godly man has no better opinion of the wicked in
riches, then in poverty, and he has no worse opinion of himself when he is
poor then when he was rich: He does not account grace the less glorious,
because it has so little of outward glory upon it.

And seeing he will not change states with him, he cannot envy him: We envy
those only whom we judge in a better condition then our selves. David under a
temptation, was envious at the foolish, when he saw the prosperity of the
wicked (P^al. 73.2, 3.) and his feet were almost gone, his steps had well-nigh
slipped, but when he recollected himself, and went to the Sanctuary, such
thoughts were quickly down, and envy was extinct, he saw much matter enough to
pity wicked men, but none to envy them, they stand in slippery places, and are
suddenly cast down. How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment they
are utterly consumed with terrors.

And as he does not envy them, so thirdly, much less does he imitate them, he
is so far from imitating them, that he sets himself to oppose them, and he
opposes them all those ways, and with all those weapons that God has put into
his hand: He opposes ever him by counsel and conviction, by reproves and
prayers. And as he fights against the Hypocrite by prayer, so by prayer he
fortifies himself against all sinful complyances with him.

Thus David prayed ( Psalm. 141.4.) Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to
practice wicked works with men that work iniquity, and let me not eat of
their dainties: As if he had said, Though wicked men be fine-fed, and diet
upon dainties every day, though they devour the fatt, and drink the sweet,
and have all things that their hearts can desire, yet Lord ever keep me from
the practice of wicked works with men that work iniquity, and let me not eat
of their dainties, who find a sweetness in sin, and take pleasure in
unrighteousness.

It is the counsel of the wise man ( Prove. 1.10, 11.) My Son if sinners entice
thee, consent thou not: Do not associate with them, they will tell thee of
great matters; they will say, Come let us lay wait for blood, we shall fill our
houses with spoil; cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse, My
Son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their paths;
for their feet run to evil, etc. He that would refrain his foot from walking
in, must first refrain his heart from approving of, the paths of wickedness.

This the innocent does and more, while he stirs up himself against the
Hypocrite. And as he sets himself against the way of the Hypocrites, so he
labors to set forward with all his might in the way of holiness, for that is
his way, as appears in the next Verse.

Verse. 9. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands
shall wax stronger and stronger.


[The righteous.] Ex tanti viri exemplo atque memoria incrementum accipient
singular. Sanct. Tenebit mordicus. Merc. Apprehensam tenebit firmiter, non
discedet ne latum quidem unguem, sed haere^it firmior in suo vivendi instituto
and pietatem audentius colet.
It is the same man still, who should be encouraged by Jobs example to a
vigorous progress; He, the righteous man,

[Shall hold on.] The word signifies to hold with strength, to hold toughly, to
hold as with the teeth, resolving never to let go, but ever to go onn,

[In his way.]

What way? It may be taken either particularly for that way of opposition which
he maintained against the Hypocrite, or secondly, for the way of
righteousness, and that twofold.

First, The way of his heart, or his inward way.

Secondly, The way of his hand, or his outward way.

The righteous man holds on in both these ways; he continues his course both
in the holy motions of his spirit toward God, (...), inhaerebit justus viae
suae. Theodol.
and in the holy actings of his life toward man: in this way he is full of
motion, but he will not move a step nor willingly decline to the right hand or
to the left, out of this way: Here he walks as to industry, and here he stands
as to constancy. The righteous shall hold on his way.

Hence Observe.

First, The righteous shall persevere, perseverance is at once the duty and the
privilege of the Saints.

As they are in a good state, so they shall go on in a good way, The path of
the just is as the shining light that shines more and more, unto the perfect
day (Prove. 4.18.) The goodness of Hypocrites is as the morning cloud, and
goes away as the early dew (Hos. 6.4.) The wind scatters the morning cloud,
and the rising Sun exhales the early dew; thus the goodness of the Hypocrite
is gone, but the goodness of the righteous (like the goodness of God of, and
from whom it is) endures (in its proportion) continually (Ps. 52.1.) As they
who join works to grace, make grace to be no grace; so do they who say the
work of grace may be lost, or that grace may for ever lose its working; The
work of grace may be clouded, but grace is no cloud, the working of grace may
decline, but grace cannot dye.

The righteous shall hold on his way. Further, This Scripture tells us that he
shall hold on, not only in fair way, and in good weather, but in stormy
weather, and rugged ways, when his way lies among sharp stones, and ragged
rocks, through briars and thorns; yea, I may say, when his way lies among
Bears and Lions, he will on.

Hence Observe.

A godly man perseveres, notwithstanding all seeming discouragements from God,
and all real oppositions from men.

Though God seem to cast cold water on him, yet his fire never goes out, and
often (by a holy Antiperistasis) he is inflamed the more: while the evil World
thinks to dash him out of countenance, and dampe his spirit, he is the more
emboldned: As the Apostles approved themselves the Ministers of Christ, so does
every Believer (in his Sphere) in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, by honor, and
dishonor, by good report, and evil report, etc. (2 Cor. 6.4, 8.) Let the way
be what it will, foul or fair, a green Carpet way, or a deep pochy way, let
it be what it will, he goes through thick and thin. Paul puts the question, and
resolves it ( Romans 8.35.) Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? He
puts it of a person, Who shall? And he answers about things, Shall tribulation,
or distress, shall these separate us from the love of Christ? That is, Either
from that love which we bear to Christ, or from that love that Christ bears
to us; what shall make Christ out of love with us? Or what shall make us out of
love with Christ? Shall any thing? Nothing shall, for those things shall not
which might seem most able to make us out of love with Christ, or to tell us
that Christ does not love us. Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution,
or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or Sword? Nay in all these things we are
more then conquerours through him that loved us: He loved us, therefore he will
love us, and we shall go on to love him: for through him, we shall not only
conquer but over-conquer, or more then conquer, whatsoever stands in the way to
divert us from his love, or to render him unlovely. Nothing can separate
Believers from the love which Christ bears to them; if any thing can do it,
sin can, but sin cannot, because he has more then conquered it by his own
power: Nothing can separate Believers from the love which they bear to Christ,
if any thing can, tribulation can, but that cannot, because we shall more then
conquer it through his power. The righteous shall hold on his way; he neither
turns back, nor stands still. David was sorely shaken, and tempted ( Psalm.
73.) yet his feet were (but) almost gone, and his steps were (but) wel-nigh
slipped. As Hypocrites at the most are but almost Christians, they are not
Christians altogether, and as they step at their nearest, but wel-nigh Heaven,
they shall not enter in; so the feet of true Believers may almost be gone out
of the good way, but they shall not go out altogether, and their steps may
wel-nigh slip from God, but they shall be upheld; and hence it is, that though
they have many, not only slips, but falls in the way, yet they shall neither
slip nor fall quite out of the way; this David's experience taught him, at the
twenty third Verse of that Psalm: Nevertheless (says he) I am continually
with thee, and thou have held me by my right hand: that is, Though I have many
troubles in thy way, yet I depart not out of thy way: I have temptations to
leave thee, but I will not leave thee; I am still with thee, I am where I was,
yet not by any power of my own, but by thy power, for thou hold me by my
right hand: It is not the hold which we have of God, but that which he has of
us that makes us hold on our way: We should quickly let go our hold of God if
God had not infinite faster hold of us; thou hold me by my right hand. There
is a (manutenentia Dei) an invisible Hand-holding of God, by which the whole
visible Creation is supported, without which no creature could hold on in the
way of nature, much more is there an invisible Hand-holding of God, by which
the spiritual creation is supported, and without which the new creature cannot
hold on in the ways of grace. It Is the hold which Christ has of us, and the
rooting which we have in him, by which we are confirmed. Cum creverimus in
Domino mittemus radices nostras sicut arbores Libani, quae quantum in aurat
consurgunt vertice, tantum radice in ima demergunt, ut nulla tempestate
quatiantur sed stabili motu consistant. Hieron.
Israel the people of God, is said, to grow as the Lilly, and to cast forth his
roots like Lebanon (Hos. 14.5.) The Trees of Lebanon are high, and spread out
their branches, but they are also deeply rooted, they have as much under ground
as above, they have as much hold in the earth as they have show in the air. As
the Saints grow up and spread forth their branches, so they grow down and cast
out their roots like Lebanon; so that the winds and storms which shake them, do
indeed but settle them. It Is the goodness of the root which at once makes them
fruitful, and makes them firm: he that stands by this strength shall stand,
and he that is fruitful by these roots shall be fruitful still, and bring
forth more fruit in age. The righteous shall hold on his way. As Christ speaks
terribly to the wicked, that they shall hold on their way ( Revel. 22.11.) He
that is unjust, let him be unjust still, he that is filthy, let him be filthy
still: These are not permissions to wicked men to be wicked still, much less
are they persuasions unto wickedness, but they are dreadful comminations;
wicked men are threatened with this plague, to be given up to the wickedness of
their own hearts: Now as Christ speaks terribly thereto his Enemies, so he
speaks comfortably and encouragingly to his Friends, He that is righteous let
him be righteous still, and he that is holy let him be holy still: which
carries not only the force of a command upon them, or the direction of a rule
to them, but also the sweetness of a gracious promise, or of a special
privilege, that they shall be maintained in righteousness and holiness unto
the end, or that they shall hold on their way. Hypocrites may make a fair
flourish, and stand some brunts, they may endure for a season, but they endure
not long, much less to the end. They went out from us, says the Apostle John
(1 Epist. 2.19.) they had once an appearance, and a presence with us, but they
were not of us, that is, They had no real communion and fellowship with us;
their bodies were with us, but not their hearts; and when we lost them, we lost
no more then the Corn does when the Chafe is winnowed away, or then the body
does, when hurtful humors are purged away. Who were these? He means the
Apostate professors of that age, Ebion, Cerinthus, etc. These were not of us:
How did the Apostle know that? He tells us how in the next words, For if they
had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, but they went out,
that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us. Saint John puts
it beyond all dispute, and himself had not the least doubt of it, that they
who are once in Church, shall continue in it; and that they who depart, do not
depart from grace, but from a shadow of grace: They do not fall from what they
were, but manifest what they were not: They went out from us that they might be
made manifest that they were not all of us. But why does the Apostle say they
were not all of us, Were any of those Apostates of them? Not all, is a known
Hebraisme for none ( Psalm. 143.2.) In thy sight (not all men, that is,) no man
living shall be justified. So (1 John 3.15.) Ye know that every murderer has
not, that is (as we translate) no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.
So here, They were not all, that is, None of them were of us: Many have
forsaken a profession of Faith, but he that has Faith will not forsake the
profession of it. The righteous shall hold on his way: and not only so, but,
He that has clean hands shall wax stronger and stronger.

To continue in the right way is very good, but to increase in it, is far
better; he that holds his own in sad times, is to be commended, but he that
thrives and gains in godliness in sad times is to be admired: And who is
that? Job tells us, [He that has clean hands.]

The words are a Circumlocution, describing the same person, who was before
called, upright, innocent, and righteous. And yet surely it is not a bare
repetition of the same person, under another title; for though we must take
this cleanenesse of hands in conjunction with cleanness and uprightness of
heart: and though it be not so hard a matter to show a pair of white clean
hands, as it is to have an upright, or a clean white heart; yea though it be
true, that clean hands will not wax stronger and stronger in a day of
affliction, unless joined with an upright heart, yet (I say) these clean
hands imply somewhat else, not only besides that uprigh^nesse, but also
besides that innocence and righteousness spoken of before.

The hand is the instrument of action, and clean hands are an emblem of holy
actings: So that Job seems to intimate, that he, who besides the uprightness
of his heart, and the general innocence and righteousness of his way, is also
careful to keep himself free from every spot which might foul his hands. He
(I say) who is thus complete and spotless, is fullest of courage when
troubles and sorrows are upon him. It Is true, a man's general uprightness and
innocence will mightily uphold him, in the maine, yet if he have got a
visible blot or defilement upon the face or hand of his conversation or
dealings with men, this will be a dampe upon his spirit, and a deadning to his
heart, though the bent of his heart stands fair toward God.

Again, this may be added in answer to a Plea which some make when they are
taxed with the uncleanness of their hands (say they) O we have good hearts,
we are upright toward God; we confess we fail many times, but we have good
meanings, and we would both do and be better: Is thy hand unclean? Thy heart
is a thousand times more unclean: Is thy way evil? Thy spirit is worse: How
c^n any man have a good meaning, or a good heart, when himself is evil? No
man can. There is no excuse for the uncleanness of the hands, by saying the
heart is clean? For where there is a clean heart there will be clean
hands. Many have clean hands, that have unclean hearts; but no man has a
clean heart whose hands continue unclean; much less will such a one plead
the cleanness of his heart in excuse for the uncleanness of his hand; nor is
there any ground for such a Plea. Should a man say, here is a Tree that bears
ill fruit, but it has an excellent root, I am sure it is of a right kind but
(I confess) the fruit is naught; would not any man of reason condemn such
reasoning? Would he not say, This is to belly nature? For every good tree brings
forth good fruit: Is it not also a belying of the spirit of grace, to say, The
heart is upright, but the hands are unclean: For an upright heart makes a
clean hand, as clean hands are a probable evidence of an upright heart.

He that has not both these, has neither of them to purpose; which (we may
conceive) was Jobs scope while he puts them here together.

Further, while Job speaks in the third person, He that has clean hands; he
answers Eliphaz for himself, who in a third person charged him with the
uncleanness both of his heart and hands ( Chap. 15.14.) from which he also
vindicates himself ( Chap. 16.17.) As if he had said, You have often charged
me with the uncleanness of my hands, but though I will not boast of my self,
yet this I feel and speak by experience, He that has clean hands shall
wax, [Stronger and stronger.]

(...) Addet fortitudinem, purus manibus sumet audaciam Sept. Is cujus vita
pura est addet robur, i. e. magis ac magis invalescet ut been aget. Merc.
The Hebrew is, He shall add strength; that is, He shall go on from one degree
of strength to another. But what strength shall he add? He means not bodily
strength: The best of Saints may loose that in the battles of affliction, and
grow every day weaker and weaker: But he shall add spiritual strength, so the
Apostle states it (2 Cor. 4.16.) Though our outward man perish, yet the inward
man is renewed day by day. The more evil a Believer suffers, the stronger he
is in goodness, and to do good; while his flesh wears off and wastes, he gets
new spirits; he takes heart, and is more courageous, as the Septuagint render
Jobs text.

Hence Observe.

First, Grace is of an increasing nature, it grows stronger and stronger.

True grace lives, and therefore it must needs grow. The grain of Mustard Seed
proves a great tree ( Psalm. 84.) They go from strength to strength, or from
company to company, that is, From one good company to another, still gathering
up goodness as they go: As the Be goes from Flower to Flower, to gather
Honey; so Believers go from duty to duty, from Ordinance to Ordinance, from
praying to hearing, to gather grace and strength; every grace has strength,
and the more grace the more strength, till we come to that, which is strictly
called, Strength of grace.

Secondly, Observe.

A through godly man does not only not fall from grace in time of trouble, but
he increases and grows in grace; he adds strength.

As affliction gives a proof of grace, whether it be true or no, so where it
is true, it is improved by affliction. Naturalists tell us that the reason of
thunder and lightening is, Tanto magis integritati studebit. Bez.
because the heat being pent in, and imprisoned by the cold of the middle
Region, breaks out (by an Antiperistasis) with terrible noise and flashings:
And thus when grace is pent in by opposition, persecution, and affliction, it
enlarges it self and breaks out with greater strength, yea with a kind of
heavenly violence; and not only maintains its own, but is a gainer.

It is said of the Lacedemonian Republique, That when all other Kingdoms were
undone by War, that only grew rich, was bettered by it. We may say, that
whereas all profane persons, and Hypocrites, are undone by affliction (all
their Paint is washed off, their Varnish discovered) only true Believers
thrive, and are advantaged by it: He that has an upright heart, and clean
hands, grows stronger and stronger: His inward man increases in outward
decays. It is said of the Israelites ( Exodus 1.12.) that the more the
Egyptians afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew: They multiplied in
number, they grew in strength and stature; their oppression their was addition
in temporals: It is so with all true Israelites in spirituals, the more they
are afflicted and troubled, the more they increase: And whereas the Lord
speaks in reference to wicked men ( Isa. 1.5.) Why should you be smitten any
more? ye will revolt more and more. (The more evil men are smitten for their
good, the worse they are) We may say on the contrary, that the righteous, the
more they are smitten with evil the better they are; yea, they sometimes put
wicked men to such a stopping expostulation, as God makes there concerning
wicked men: Why should we trouble them any more? They will hold fast more and
more, they will not be beaten off with sour looks and hard words, no nor with
our hardest blows: We may trouble and weary out our selves, yea and break our
own hearts, but we shall never dishearten them. All Ages have given
experiments of this: The Apostles in the Acts rejoiced when they were
threatened, and were emboldned with scourging. It Is said of the suffering Saints
( Heb. 10.34.) They took joyfully the spoiling of their goods: They were glad
of an opportunity to put off their worldly goods at so great a rate, as a
proof of the sincerity of their graces: Our goods never go off at so high a
price, nor come to so good a Market as when they are spoiled in a good cause.
Paul tells us, That many waxed confident by his bonds (Phil. 1.14.) They were
so far from withdrawing from the profession of the Gospel, because Paul was
clapped up in Prison, and laid by the heels, that they were more bold to avouch
it: As some have been weakened and terrified by the sufferings of others, so
many have been confirmed and heartned, they have been not only kept from
discouragement, but they have waxed confident by bonds, and their spirits have
been at greater liberty by seeing others in Prison, though they had reason
enough to expect their turn would be next.

Exquisitior crudelitas gentium adversus Christianos, illecebra est magis
sectae, plures efficimur, quoties metimur. Tertull.
One of the Ancients tells us, The more cunning and exact our Persecutors are,
the more constant and exact Believers are. The Christians of those times grew
into a kind of artificialnesse in grace, while the Heathens grew so
artificial in cruelty; and the oftener they were mowed down by the bloody
Sword, the more were begotten and quickened by the Word: The opposition which
truth and holiness found, was a provocation to own the truth, and to them a
sweet temptation unto holiness.

Thirdly, Note.

When God gives new trials, he will give new strength.

The righteous grow stronger as their afflictions grow stronger: Never fear
greater trials, when you are promised greater strength: If you have more
burdens, you shall have more shoulders. Whether the Lord calls us to passive
obedience, or to active, he is wise and faithful to proportion, and give out
suitable ability. It is not from the improvements of Free Will, but from the
fresh annoyntings of the spirit, that we are strengthened with might in the
inner man (Ephesians. 3.16.) And again ( Col. 1.12.) We are strengthened with all
might according to his glorious power, unto all patience, and long-sufferance
with joyfulnesse. Affliction it self cannot strengthen us in grace, it rather
weakens us; the increase of strength flows from the same Fountain, whence we
had the first strength: All is from God. In the Lord have we righteousness and
strength (Isa. 45.24.) And he is an everlasting strength, the rock of Ages
(Isa. 26.4.) As he is an everlasting strength in himself, so he is to his
people: And the reason why his people are everlastingly strong, is, because he
is so, Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall
utterly fall, but they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they
shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they
shall walk and not faint (Isa. 40.30, 31.) But why shall the youths faint, and
the young men utterly fall? Are not beginners in grace as sure to be upheld as
the ancient or men of days? And why is fainting and falling, the lot of youths
and young men, who are supposed in their spiritual capacity, or in their
natural, to have the greatest strength? The Apostle John's experience of the
young men seems to differ very much from this Prophecy of them, I write unto
you young men (says he, 1 Epist. 2.4.) because ye are strong, and the Word of
God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. How does Isaiah say,
the young men shall utterly fall, and yet John says, They have overcome the
wicked one? that is, The Devil. Every Victory is an argument of strength,
especially a victory over him who is very strong.

I answer, The Prophet and the Apostle do not speak of the same young men:
The Prophets young men are any men that boast of their own strength in
spiritualls, and trusts upon it; these of what age soever they be, he calls
young men, not because like young men they have a real great strength, but
because (which young men are very apt to do in the strength they have) they
trust in a strength which indeed they have not; so that these are called young
men, because they boast of, and trust in their supposed strength, not because
they are really very strong; and therefore these young men shall not only
faint, but utterly fall. But the Apostle John's young men, are such as have much
strength in them, and yet live, and walk and fight in the strength of Jesus
Christ; these young men are so far from falling utterly, that they shall stand
for ever, and all their enemies shall either flee or fall before them, because
as the battle renews, so Christ will renew their strength, and recruit their
hearts with further aid at every further charge.

Only by going out of our own strength we get strength, that was Paul's
experience of himself (2 Cor. 12.9, 10.) When I am weak, then I am strong;
that is, When I am weak in my self, and have low thoughts of my own stock,
then strength is sent me in; and I am supported by an Almighty power, when I
see that I have no might: Therefore (says he) most gladly will I rejoice in my
infirmities, that the strength of Christ may rest on me: Paul was no sooner
convinced that the strength he had was not sufficient, but he heard that
comfortable word from Heaven, My grace is sufficient for thee: We are stronger
by the grace in Christ, then by the grace we receive from Christ. He that
lives upon the grace received from Christ, and not upon the grace in Christ,
shall quickly feel a want of grace, and a decay of spiritual life.

Now, if grace received from Christ be not stock enough to live and continue
upon, what is nature for any man to begin upon? Peter had received grace, and
he made an honest real profession to Christ, not a flattering verbal
complement, when h^e said ( Matthew. 26.33, 35.) Though all men shall be offended
because of thee, yet will I not be offended, and though I should dye with thee,
yet will I not deny thee: yet because he did not enough (if at all) renounce
his own strength, in stead of waxing stronger and stronger, he was weaker and
weaker, and did not only deny his Master, but forswore him. Not only they who
go out in the strength of nature, but they also who go out in the strength of
inherent grace, may quickly (notwithstanding a sincerity of profession)
dishonor their profession, and fall from their own steadfastness: Therefore
trust in the Lord, and ye shall not only hold on, but grow stronger and
stronger in your way.

And if such be the state of a godly man, that he holds on, and waxes stronger
in times of trouble, what shall we say of them, who turn out of the way, or
languish in it, when nothing troubles them? What shall we say of them who run
out of the way, though there be no Lion in the way, when we hear that Saints
will not out though there be a Lion in the way? What shall we say of them that
depart from God, when (as Job speaks in another place) they wash their
footsteps with Butter, and the rock powers out Oil to them (that is, When God
loadeth them with his benefits daily) when we hear that the righteous, and
he that has clean hands will not out of the way, though every step be up to
the knees in Mire, though he be dashed against the Rocks, and killed all the
day long? Was there ever truth of grace in those who finding nothing but
comfort and outward blessings in the way, do yet go out of the way, grow cold
and sink in their profession? When Christ gives outward pleasure to his
followers, and they forsake him, may they not justly be suspected to take
pleasure in forsaking him? And that they never took any pleasure in following
him, but only followed him for their pleasure? What would these do if they
were assaulted with strong temptations or troubles, who turn aside being freed
from all such temptations? What would they do if their ways were full of
briars and thorns, who go back and Apostatize while their ways are strewed
with flowers, and they tread upon Roses? It Is true indeed, that the warm Sun
(as we say) causes some to cast off their Cloaks, which the cold wind moved
them to keep closer on; but, though it be a truth, that prosperity makes many
forsake God, yet it cannot be denied but that adversity is a greater temptation
to deny him. A sound heart may (possibly) give in a little in boystrous times,
and Winterly days, but it is almost an infallible discovery of a rotten heart,
to flinch in fair weather, or in a Summers day: As they who keep close to, and
hold on in the ways of God in dark and doubtful dispensations, show a pure
love to his ways, so they who warpe and recede, under clear and comfortable
dispensations, show a pure dislike of them.

Lastly, Note the various expressions used in these two Verses, we have here
the description of a godly man under four Titles.

First, The upright. Secondly, The innocent. Thirdly, The righteous. Fourthly,
He that has clean hands.
These meet in one person, yet they have distinct significations: Uprightness
is strictly opposed to hypocrisy; innocence to guilt; righteousness to
oppression; and cleanness of hands to all the pollutions of conversation.
Every kind of goodness, and all the graces concenter in him that is truly
godly.

He that is godly, is any thing that is good, and he that is wicked is any
thing that is evil, you cannot call a wicked man out of his name, how ill
soever you call him. And you cannot call a complete godly man out of his name,
how good soever you call him, he is upright, and innocent, and righteous; his
hands are clean, and his heart is clean, he is clean all over, and holy all
over, while we call him all this we do not call him beyond what God has made
him.

JOB, CHAP. 17. Verse. 10, 11, 12. But as for you all, do you return, and come
now; for I cannot find one wise man among you.

My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my heart.

They change the night into day, the light is short because of darkness.


THough Jobs Friends had severely reproved and threatened him; reproved him for
his supposed sin, and threatened him with further sufferings, in case he
continued in sin; yet did they as often counsel, and encourage him; counsel
him to repent, and return to God, encourage him with promises that God would
repent and return to him, yea turn his captivity and afflictions, as the
Rivers in the South; and that though he then was in a night of sorrow, yet a
morning of joy, or joy in the morning should surely break out and shine upon
him.

Now, as Job had before often (and also in the former part of this Chapter)
supported himself under the weight of all their reproves and threatenings by
the power of God, and the conscience of his own integrity; so he had as often
before, and he does it here again in the latter part of this Chapter, cast off
their promises and encouragements; together with all hopes of any restoration
in this life, to such a flourishing outward condition as he once enjoyed.

And because his Friends discerning this in him by some of his precedent
answers, had judged it as a symptom of secret guilt, and self condemnation,
which would not let him so much as expect any good: So Eliphaz had perstringed
and smitten him ( Chap. 15.22.) He believes not that he shall return out of
darkness: Therefore Job wonders to see them persist in that opinion, and
concludes them under a great d^fect of understanding, who did not perceive that
a man so miserably pined, and worn with sickness and pain, as he was, had
nothing to look after, or prepare for, but only a Grave. And this he does with
much rhetorical elegancy, and passionatenesse of speech, to the end of this
Chapter.

His sense may be drawn together into this breife way of reasoning.

He who is as a dead man already, should not feed himself, or be fed by
others, with hopes of life, or of worldly prosperity in this life.

But I (for my part) am as a dead man, or but the shadow of a man.

Therefore I will neither feed my self, neither ought you to feed me with
hopes of life, or of prosperity in this life.

Yet before he lays down, and illustrates this Argument, he invites over his
Friends to his opinion, and professes that they had not yet spoken any reason,
nor argued like wise men in all that they had argued to the contrary.

Verse. 10. But as for you all, do you return, and come now, for I cannot
find one wise man among you.
Though some wise men go out of the way, yet it is for want of wisdom that
any man goes out of the way; while Job calls upon his Friends to return, he
implies that they going out of the way were not wise, and that it would be
their wisdom to return into it.

[But as for you all.] Job puts all his Friends into one predicament, and
indeed they were much alike to him, having all trodden in the same path, and met
in the same judgment of, and resolutions against him. But what would he have
them do? As he supposed them all in one way, and that out of the way: So he
sets them all to the same work, that they might come right again.

Do you return, and come now. Yet, there are three opinions about his
meaning, while he says, Return and come.

First, Some conceive, that Jobs Friends, being netled (as we say) and provoked
with what he had spoken before, began to renew the dispute, and to rally
themselves with conjoined Forces, Quasi facta testudine una omnes concurrite.
Nicet. Ad disputationem provocat. Sanct. Veruntamen omnes incumbite and venite
quaeso. Sept.
for a fresh encounter, which Job perceiving, he (according to this
Interpretation) dares them in these words, and sends them a Challenge: As if he
had said, I see you are providing your selves, and consulting for a rejoinder
with me; I, do, do if you think good, return, and come, put pour selves
into what posture you please, join your forces together, I am ready to receive
your charge, and make my defense, I am not afraid of you all; you are three,
and I have not so much as a Second, yet I will not turn my back from you all,
therefore, as for you all, do ye return and come now, come, when, or as
soon as you will.

Thus, He challenges them to a further dispute. Return, and come, Convertendi
verbum cum quocunque alio verbo junctum, idem significat quod rursus, aut
altera vice aliquid facere.
is (as the propriety of the phrase in the Original imporrts) come again if
you will, come a second time, come a third. The word that we translate Return,
when it is joined with another Verb (say Grammarians) signifies as much as
Again, or, to do a thing the second time. Take two places of Scripture for it
( Jos. 5.2.) At that time the Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp Knives,
and circumcise again the Children of Israel the second time: So we translate:
The Hebrew is, Return (which is the word of the Text) and circumcise them a
second time: Not that they who had been once circumcised, must have a second
circumcision: But for as much as circumcision, which was first commanded to
Abraham, had been long disused, while the people of Israel were moving and
unsettled in the Wilderness, therefore the Lord gives circumcision a kind of
second Institution, by requiring Joshua to restore it solemnly a second time,
as it was set up at first. Return and circumcise them; that is, renew that
ancient Ordinance of Circumcision.

The like way of speaking, read ( Psalm. 85.6.) where David (in behalf of the
Church) pleads with God thus, Will thou not revive us again? The Hebrew is,
Will thou not return, and revive us? We translate the Verb Return, by the
Adverbe, Again. Will thou not revive us again? Thou have given us many
revives: when we were as dead men, and like carcasses rotting in the Grave,
thou did revive us, will thou not revive us once more, and act over those
powerfully merciful works, and strong salvations once more, or again? So
here, Return, and come; that is, Come again.

The words thus expounded, are an argument of Jobs magnanimity, and holy
courage in maintaining his right, and standing up in the defense of his own
integrity against all comers. As it is our duty to contend earnestly for the
Faith once delivered to the Saints; so for our own faithfulness.

Secondly, Others expound the words as an advise, not as a challenge; not as a
profession of his fixed purpose to oppose what his Friends should say in
maintenance of their opinion, but only as a desire of their attention to what
he had yet to say for his. Come return now, as if he had thus expressed
himself, Ye are not right, let me set you right, and instruct you better;
learn of me; you have need enough to be taught, for I have not found a wise
man among you. Thus David calls his Scholars about him ( Psalm. 34.11.) Come
ye Children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. The
former gloss showed the strength and courage of Jobs spirit, this the piety,
and holiness of his spirit: It Is our duty, in meekness to instruct those who
oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth (2. Tim. 2.25.)

Thirdly, Invitat amicos ad mutandam sententiam. Pined. Rescipiscete. Jun.
The words are more generally taken for an invitation to repentance, Come now,
return; Some translate the word Return in this Text, by Repent, which is the
sense of it in a hundred Texts of the Old Testament. Repentance is a turning
and returning; all returning supposes, either our being out of the way, or
that we have gone as far as our business lies in that way: The returning of
repentance, supposes only the former, for, every step in sin is quite out of
our way; what have we to do in the way of sin, but only to come out of it,
our business lies not there; all that we do there must be undone again, or
else we are undone for ever.

In this returning of repentance, we may consider, first, the term from which,
and secondly the term to which we are called to return? The term from which
is twofold.

First, Sinful practices. Secondly, False and erroneous opinions.
Job does not deal with his Friends about the former; he did about the
latter; they were under a grand mistake concerning the Doctrine of providence,
and from that he invites them to a speedy return.

The term to which we are to return in the actings of repentance, is
threefold.

First, To our selves. Secondly, To God. Thirdly, To him whom we have wronged,
or from whom we sinfully dissent.
Job may be interpreted as calling his Friends to a return, in this threefold
reference.

Ad se redire etiam Eatinis dicitur qui ad bonam mentem redit. Grot.
First, As repentance is a returning to our selves: a man that is carried away,
either to false opinions, or into wicked courses, is gone from his nearest
home: It Is a duty to deny our selves, but it is a sin to depart from our selves:
And as it is a sin to depart from our selves, so every sin is a departure from
our selves; therefore repentance which is a turning from sin, must needs be a
returning to our selves. The Gospel represents the repentance of the Prodigal
Son, under this notion ( Luke 15.17.) And when he came to himself, he said,
etc. He had not been with himself a long time before, yet at last he came to
himself, this was his first step to repentance. An impenitent person is not
only out of his way, but out of his wits; he is gone, not only from Divine
truth and holiness, but from his own natural reason and prudence; if so,
whenever he repents, he returns to himself.

Secondly, Repentance is a returning to God; If thou will return O Israel
(says the Lord) return unto me (Jer. 4.1.) The grace of repentance is most
frequently and most suitably expressed by this act of returning to God; and
they who do not repent are every where said not to return to God ( Amos 4.
etc.) Yet have ye not returned unto me.

Thirdly, Repentance is a returning to man: We must not be ashamed to
acknowledge our faylings one to another, or to return to them in duty from
whom we have departed, either by not giving them their due, or by accusing them
unduely. We must not be ashamed of returning to them, by submitting to the
truth, from whom we have departed by following or holding any error. Thus Job
may be conceived counselling and calling his Friends to a return in these
three senses given: First, to themselves: Secondly, to God; Thirdly, to him,
whom they had so long opposed. But though all three may be included, yet the
scope and design of Job seems to intend the third: Return, and come now;
that is, Return to me, let not truth fare the worse for my sake, do not you
cast it off, because I hold it. It is not enough to turn from any evil,
whether of opinion or practice, and return to the obedience of God, but we
must also return to the love of good men, and unite with them in the truth.

But why must they return? Job gives the reason expressly in the latter part of
the Verse.

For I cannot find one wise man among you. All the ways of sin and error are
ways of folly; they stamp a man for a Fool and unwise, whosoever walks in
them; I cannot find one wise man among you: When he says, I cannot find, It
shows that he had endeavored to find, he had been seeking for a wise man
among them, but he found none; The Lord (says David, Ps. 14.2.) looked down
from heaven upon the Children of men, to see if there were any that did
understand and seek after God (but he found none) They are all gone aside
(Verse. 3.) Job seems to have been upon such an inquiry: He had looked over his
Friends, and weighed them one by one, but he found not one wise man among them.
The Preacher ( Eccles. 7.27.28.) counting one by one to find out the account,
found but one man (that is, one wise or good man) among a thousand: No marvel
then if Job found not one among three, yet considering what three these were,
men numbered among the Worthies, possibly, the first three of that age and
place, it may justly be mervailed why Job should speak at so low a rate, or so
slightly of them: Was he not too censorious and rigid, too bold and
adventerous, to speak thus concerning men of such gravity, authority, and
reputation, for wisdom, and learning, yea, and for holiness too, as these
three were? Shall we say that this censure proceeded from Jobs wisdom, or
from his passion? Was he wise in saying so, or so much as charitable.

I answer, Job did not speak this from any ill will to his Friends, or from
contempt of them; it had been not only unfreindly, but very sinful to have
done it. That word of Christ had its truth in those times, He that is angry
with his brother unadvisedly, shall be in danger of judgment; and he that
says to his Brother, Racha (which signifies an empty fellow, or a man that
has nothing in him) shall be in danger of a Council, but he that says, thou
Fo^le, shall be in danger of Hell stre (Matthew. 5.23.) Job did not call his
Friends Fools, when he said, I find not one wise man among you; So much may
be said without passion or reviling: Nor did he question their wisdom in
general, but (as has been answered for him upon a like passage) only to the
point in hand: As if he had said, after all this arguing, You are still besides
the matter. you have not hit the joint of my case; come to me, I will show you
your mistake, and make it plain that you are all out.

Venite ad me audiendum and ostendam vos omnes decipere. Drus.
Hence Observe.

First, It is no fault to speak of men as we find them.

The rule of Christ ( Matthew. 7.1.) Judge not that ye be not judged, forbids,
first rash judgment of men, secondly, wrong judgment of men, thirdly, final
judgment of men (that is peculiar to God) but it does not forbid all judgment
of men. We may call a Spade, a Spade, and him unwise who is so: All reproving
is taken away, if all judging be, for we must reprove no man but whom we judge
faulty, Let the righoeous smite me (says David, Psalm. 141.5.) He means it
not of smiting with the Sword, but of smiting with a deserved censure, as if he
had said, If I have done amiss let me hear of it, yea let me smart for it, by
a faithful reproof.

Secondly, Observe.

A wise man may do or speak that which is a just forfeiture of his present
reputation for wisdom.

This proceeds sometimes from a special judgment of God upon men, who in
anger blasts their abilities, and commands a decay upon their greatest
treasures of wisdom ( Isa. 29.14.) The wisdom of their wise men shall
perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid: It shall be
so, says God; the understanding of man is as much at Gods dispose, as his
riches or honors are. Now as this proceeds sometimes from the special
judgment of God upon man; so it may proceed at any time from the natural
frame of man, who at the best is a creature composed of light and darkness, of
wisdom and folly, of knowledge and ignorance, of grace and corruption, of an
old man, as well as of a new. The over actings of the worser part, may soon
leave a good and a wise man (in the maine) under an eclipse, both of his
goodness and wisdom. David said in his have (and as he said it, he sinned
in saying so) All men are liars: But we may say it with fullest deliberation
(and not sin at all in saying so) that All men are liars. The Apostle says it
( Romans 3.4.) while he says, Yea let God be true, and every man a liar; that
is, Let this be acknowledged and confessed by all, That God cannot lie, such is
his power that he can neither deceive, nor be deceived; but let it be as much
acknowledged that every man is under a possibility to be deceived, yea and to
deceive in the worst sense, and that in some sense every man is actually
deceived, or a Deceiver: which proves this to be a truth, Every man is a liar:
The lie, is that, which no man will bear at the hand of man, yet all must
bear it from the hand of God; it is indeed a dishonor, but it is no slander
to say, that every man is a liar: and because he is so, he may soon
dis-intitle himself of wisdom. We must not lay too much upon men, for when
they speak and do most unwisely, they speak and do most like men.

The Prophet ( Hos. 6.7.) says, They like men have transgressed the Covenant:
The Hebrew is, They have transgressed like Adam. The Apostle speaks of some,
over whom death reigned, who yet had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression (Romans 5.14.) Infants dye, and they dye in that sin which Adam
committed, though they never come to commit sin actvally as Adam did; but all
who sin actually, sin after the similitude of Adams transgression: He set the
first Copy, and all his Posterity have written after him. We do but show what
we are, and whence we are, when we sin, even a company of men, the Sons of
Adam. To be a man is also to be a sinner. Now, as it may be said, we like men
have transgressed, so we like men are unwise. It is very easy for the wisest
man to do unwisely; we have but showed our selves men when we have showed our
selves unwise. That has obtained as an Axiom, It is humane for man to err:
One of the wisest sentences among men, is, That man may do unwisely: He that
does all things wisely is more like God then a Man, nor can we do any thing
wisely, but as God is pleased to teach and guide us. As we have need to ask
our daily bread from God for the support of our bodies, so our daily wisdom
from God for the management of our affairs. As God takes the wise in their
own craftiness (1 Cor. 3.19.) so he can take wisdom from the crafty; and
unless he supply wisdom to the wise, they will soon be so overtaken by
their own folly, that of a whole throng of them, it may be said, by him that
engages with them, I have not found one wise man among you.

Thirdly, Observe.

Wise men are rarely to be found.

There are store of subtle men, and crafty men there are but too many; but the
wise man is a rare Jewel: It was for a wise man that the Prophet commands a
search to be made, when he said ( Jer. 5.1.) Run ye too and fro, through the
streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the broad places
thereof, if you can find a man: Jerusalem was full of men, and yet a man could
not be found, when diligently sought for: What man was this? The next words
describe him for a wise man indeed, if there be any that executes judgment,
and seeks the truth. I cannot say that such wise men are thick sown, but I
am very sure, they are thinn come up. Paul found so great a scarsity and dearth
of them, even among the Saints in the Church of Corinth, that though he does
not say it positively (with Job here) I have not found a wise man among you;
yet he speaks it Interrogatively, and chidingly (1 Cor. 6.5.) I speak to your
shame, is it so, that there is not a wise man among you? No not one that shall
be able to judge between his Brethren: There are not many knowing wise men,
among all men, but judging wise men are fewest of all.

Fourthly, Observe.

Wise men are apt to show themselves unwise in expounding and judging the
providence and dealings of God toward man.

The works of the most wise God are all right, but few men are wise enough to
pick out the right meaning of them. Providence is carried about the World in a
Chariot of light, and yet there is much darkness in the minds of most men
about it. This arises chiefly two ways.

First, From the seeming confusions which are in the world; God does not keep a
method, nor govern himself by presidents, no man can tell certainly which
way he will go, by looking into the way which he has gone; for though he
uses no liberty in the issue of his dealings, but rewards every man
according to his works, yet he uses much liberty in the means which lead
unto it.

Secondly, This arises from the narrowness of man's heart, who measuring God
by his own line, and comparing what God has done, by what he would do, cannot
(as the Apostle speaks in another case) attain unto the righteousness of God
in what he does.

It Is excellent wisdom to know how to interpret and improve the dealings of
God with our selves or others. The grossest mis-interpretation of his
dealings, is, to conclude the guilt or innocence of man, the love or hatred of
God from them. Jobs Friends upon such mistakes, incurred this censure, I have
not found one wise man among you.

Job having by way of introduction, spoken to the men, or to the persons of his
Friends, proceeds to speak his own case.

Verse. 11. My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of
my heart.
What do you tell me of comfortable days? (...) Transierum.
My days are past, they are gone by: as we say, The Show is gone by, or, the
Company is gone by; so says Job, My days are gone by: There Is no looking
after them any more: they are out of sight, why would you bring them into my
mind again? Days may be taken here in a twofold sense.

First, For the term of his life. Secondly, For the state of his life.
As taken for the term of his life, My days are past, is, Morti vicinus sum.
I am a near neighbor to death, death and I am ready to meet and embrace; the
life of man is measured by daye^, when our days are past, there is nothing left
to measure, nothing to measure by.

My days are past. But how could Job affirm, The term, or days of my life
are past, when, as, he was alive that day to say this, so, he lived many a
fair day after he had said it. Can we call that past, which is still present
with us? or which is yet to come?

He affirms this, First, because he conceived that the greatest part of his
days were actually past, and that it was not worth while to reckon upon the
few days behind, he did not think that remnant so considerable as to measure
it, but threw it by, as a piece of useless nothing: Our days are so passing,
that (with a little Rhetoric) we may say they are past, as soon as they
begin; how much more may we say so, when we are sure they must shortly end,
and are really almost, yea, only not, past.

Secondly, Job might say, My days are past, because doubtless it had seized
on his spirit, that his Glass was run, that he should dye presently, he
never looked to outlive that storm: So that his days were past in his
account, though not in Gods account. Job could say of himself (as we use to
say of those Women, who have gone out their full time of Childbearing) that,
He had not a day more to reckon: As Job had a full assurance that he should
live eternally, so he had a kind of assurance that he should dye very
shortly: And therefore as to his own apprehensions, and the calculation which
he had made of his days, their date was out, and he might say, My days are
past.

Again, As taken for the state of his life, so My days are past, is, My good
days, my prosperous days, are past; you tell me of a day of deliverance, what
a morning I shall have, but I look on all my days here, as days of
darkness; we say of a man who is not only in an evil, but in a desperate, or
irrecoverably evil condition, He has seen all his best days, or all his
good days are gone: Job was full of trust for a good eternity, but he had no
hope of good days. The term of a man's days may continue long, when the
comfort of his days, is, or when his comfortable days are quite past: Though
Jobs days continued, as to the term of his life, yet his days (as he
judged) were past, as to any comfortable state of life, in which sense he might
also say, My days are past.

Nor did Job speak this complainingly, or with a low spirit, My days are
past, he did not whine it out as they do, who are loath to dye, and would
feign live still in the delights of life; but he spoke boldly and cheerfully,
he spoke of his Dying day, as of his Marriage day, My days are past. As a
young man says, My marriage day is at hand, I shall be married shortly; with
such a holy allacrity Job spoke, I shall dye shortly, my days are past: He
looked upon his comfortable days in the World as past, and yet he was
comforted: Job was full of pain, yet usually in the close of his speeches he
gathered up himself, and spoke in a height and heat of spirit: As the Cock
toward morning flutters his Wings before he Crows, and gives warning of the
approaching day; or as the Lion strikes his sides with his Tail, to rouse up
his spirits before he attempts his prey; so Job stirred up himself toward the
close of his answers, and resumed new spirits, acting That dying man to the
life, who having nothing in this World, either to fear or hope, dies without
fear, yet with abundance, yea in assurance of hope: My days are past.

Hence Observe.

First, As the words are taken in the former sense: A gracious heart has peace
in the approaches of death.

His contentments are not done, when the term of his life is done: He can say,
My days are past, as cheerfully, as Agag said, Surely, the bitterness of
death is past. Some godly men have dyed far more pleasantly then ever any
wicked man lived.

Secondly, From the latter sense, Observe.

A gracious heart can take present comfort, and rejoice in this World, while he
knows that all his worldly comforts and joys are past.

Faith overlookes, or looks through and beyond all the evils of this life, to
a good which shall never dye; yea Faith sees and enjoyes a present good, while
sense sees nothing, and indeed has nothing else to see, but evil. A carnal
man parts with his good days, or with the good of his days, as Phaltiel went
to deliver up Michal, Saul's Daughter, and David's Wife by right, weeping all
along as he went (2 Samuel 3.16.) There Is a sad parting between a worldly heart
and worldly things; but he that is spiritually minded, though he does not
despise the meanest of worldly good things, as made by God for the use and
comfort of man, so when God calls him from them, or them from him, he can part
with he use of them, and yet not be dispossessed of comfort; he knows that he
has a present good, and that he has greater good to come, while he says, My
days are past.

My purposes are broken off. (...) Cogitavit plerumque in malum ali quando in
bonum (...) Cujus singularis (...) quod antiquitus legebant Zemma far scelus
denotat (...) autem quod ab eodem themate vocabulum est medium. Drus. Rupti
sunt articuli cordis mei. Sept. Convulsae sunt compages corporis mei. Aug.
The word which we translate Purposes, signifies most usually an evil purpose,
or wicked designements; yet it is used also, as among the Rabbis, so by the
Penmen of Scripture in a good sense, for a warrantable, yea for a holy purpose:
In the Book of Proverbs ( Chap. 1.4. Chap. 2.11.) it is translated Discretion,
or Advisement, proceeding from the teachings of wisdom, which stirrs up
gracious purposes in the soul toward God, and every good.

My purposes are broken off: The Septuagint render, My heart strings are
broken: The heart strings by a metaphor, may be taken for purposes, because
purposes are as Bands or strings upon the heart; and therefore when purposes
are broken, we may say, the bands or strings of the heart are broken.

Another reads, The bindings or fastnings of my body are loosned, or torn
asunder; which translation (as also the former) taken literally, notes only
his neernesse to death; for when a man dies, we say, his heart strings break,
and his whole body is in a fit of convulsion.

My purposes are broken. The word signifies a violent forcible breaking, as if
a Giant had broken them.

But what was it which broke his purposes? The violence and continuance of his
afflictions was this Breaker; or his purposes were broken by the confused
motions and troublesome representations of his own fancy, to which sick men
are very subject.

Again, what were those purposes of his which were broken? If they were evil
purposes, he had reason to rejoice, not to complain; if they were good
purposes, was it not his sin as well as his affliction that they were broken
off.

I answer to that, Purposes may be good, and yet broken without the sin of the
purposer, if himself be not the cause of that breach, and the impediment of
their performance: If our holiest purposes are broken off by the inevitable
providence of God, the holiness of man receives no blemish by it. The purposes
of Job were good doubtless, either spiritually good, or civilly good; and they
may be taken either for those purposes of doing good, which he had, before he
fell into trouble, or for those which he had laid up in his breast, to do,
when he should be again restored and delivered out of trouble. As if he had
said, I once had an expectation of life, and I purposed with my self what to
do with, or in my new life, but now those purposes are all broken off, for I
see my life is ready to be broken off. The next clause seems to explain this,
and in that we shall see more fully what he means by these purposes.

Even the thoughts of my heart. Every thought of the heart is not a purpose,
yet every purpose is a thought of the heart; our thoughts are made up into
purposes, either what to do, or not to do: Hence it is usual to say, I
thought to have done such or such a thing, that is, I purposed to do it.
Therefore Job might well say, My purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of
my heart, because purposes are nothing else but a frame, or pack of thougts:
there is an elegancie in that word which we translate Thoughts. (...)
Possessiones cordis a radice (...) Cogitationes meae avulsae sunt, quas
possidere solebat animus meus. Jun.
The Hebrew is, The possessions of my heart; so we put it in the Margin of our
Bibles: A learned Translator renders it thus, The thoughts which my mind was
wont to possess are pulled or snatched away; he means it not of all his
thoughts, as if his power of thinking had been lost, but of those special
thoughts which he had, or hopes, which he nourished about his restoring to
happy days; these once possessed his heart, but they were gone. Thoughts are
called the possessions of the heart two ways. Dicuntur cogitationes possideri
a cord quid enim magis proprium aut innatum cordi quam suae ipsius
cogitationes. Drus. Coc.


First, In a passive sense. Secondly, In an active sense.
Passively, Because they are possessed by the heart, the heart does enclose and
hold our thoughts: The hear^ is the naturally proper vessel or receptacle of
thoughts, therefore they are called the possessions of the heart: The heart is
the soil and seat of thoughts; there they are planted, and there they dwell.

Actively, For as thoughts are possessed by the heart, so thoughts possess the
heart; thoughts are full of activity; they trouble and they comfort the heart;
look what our thoughts are, such is the state of our hearts; if our thoughts
be quiet our hearts are quiet, if our thoughts be unquiet our hearts are
unquiet, if our thoughts be joyful our hearts rejoice, if our thoughts be sad
our hearts are sorrowful. It Is said in the Gospel, ( L. 24.38.) Why are ye
troubled, why do thoughts rise in your hearts? that is, Why do troublesome and
disconsolate thoughts rise in your hearts? It Is as natural for thoughts to rise
in the heart, as it is for water to rise in a spring, therefore Christ did not
chide them because thoughts, but because such thoughts did rise in their
hearts: We cannot hinder our hearts from thinking, no more then we can hinder
the fire from burning, or water from wetting; but it is our duty to hinder our
hearts from undue or discourageing thoughts, and to check them for thinking so.
Thoughts rule the heart and put it into several frames and forms according to
their own likeness; and therefore it is both our wisdom and our holiness
to put and keep our thoughts in the best likeness. The heart (in a figurative
sense) is nothing else but the frame of our thoughts; and our thoughts in a
proper sense are nothing else, but the possessions of the heart.

Tabulae cordis. Chald.
Further, The Chaldee Paraphrase says, The Tables of my heart are broken; so it
is an allusion to writing: The Law was written at first in Tables of Stone, and
now a heart of flesh (not a fleshly heart) is the Tables of the Law, our hearts
are Tables both for our own writing and for Gods. Job had written many
purposes upon those tables; therefore he might well say as in this case, My
purposes, or all that was written upon the Tables of my heart are broken. In my
thoughts I had written and set down many particulars which I purposed to have
done, Scriptura cordis nunc litura est. Pined.
but now those lines are crossed, or quite blotted out. God writes many of his
own thoughts in our hearts, and our thoughts are the writings of our hearts;
when our purposes and thoughts are broken, the Tables of our hearts are broken.

Hence Observe.

First, Right purposes are good, but it is not good to live upon purposes.

Action must presently follow resolution, and performance must be speeded after
purposes, else they are to little purpose. When David had said, I will confess
my transgressions unto the Lord (Psalm. 32.5.) he instantly confessed them: And
when he said, I will take heed to my ways (Psalm. 39.1.) he instantly took
heed to them. His purpose was in nature, before his practice, but in time they
went together: There is a double danger in delaying purposes.

First, That the mind of the purposer may change, and his spirit grow flat
toward them.

Secondly, that the seasons may change, and though he have a mind, yet he may
want means and opportunity to perform them.

There is danger in both ways, and much sin in the former way of breaking
purposes: The danger of both will be more discovered in the second Observation.

Secondly, Observe.

When great afflictions come, especially when death comes, all our purposes are
broken off.

As man is apt to busy himself about many things, which he cannot know, so
about many things, which (though they are possible to be done, yet) he shall
never do. It is in man to purpose, but we must ask leave of God, before we
can perform: Cross providence break many purposes, but death breaks all.
All our purposes concerning the World, and the things of the World dye with us.
When the breath of great Princes goes forth ( Psalm. 146.4.) In that very day
all their thoughts perish. Great Princes are full of great thoughts, but they
who cannot keep themselves from perishing, shall never keep their thoughts
from perishing. The imaginary frames which they set up, the contrivances,
plots, and projects of their hearts are all swept away like the Spiders webb,
or broken like the Cockatrices Egg, when themselves are swept away from the
face of the Earth, and broken by the power of death. The thoughts of many
Princes and Politicians dye while themselves live: Achitophels purposes were
broken and disappointed, while himself looked on, and he was so vexed to see
it, that he executed himself because his purposes were not executed. In these
times of public shaking, how many purposes have we seen go to wrack: They who
have been long laying their designs, and brooding upon their counsels have had
their eggs broken in a moment, and their thoughts blown away like Chafe before
the wind, or the lightest dust before the whirlwind: Now as the purposes of
many about gathering riches, about taking their pleasure, about advancing
themselves to, or establishing themselves in honor and high places, have
perished before they dyed; so when such dye, all their purposes shall certainly
perish: And as the purposes of all about worldly things perish in the
approaches of death; so do the purposes of some about spiritual and heavenly
things. How many have had purposes to repent, to amend their lives and turn to
God, which have been prevented, and totally broken off, by the extremity of
pain and sickness, but chiefly by the stroke of death; when they have (as
they thought) been about to repent, and (as we say) turn over a new leaf in
their lives; they have been turned into the Grave by death, and into Hell by
the just wrath of God.

Some interpret this Text, as Jobs complaint of the unsettlement of his
thoughts about heavenly things, and the breaking of his purposes in the pursuit
of eternity: He could not make his thoughts about Heaven hold or hang
together, even those thoughts were full of gaps and empty spaces, or rather
like Ropes of Sand. Many honest and gracious souls have found work enough
upon a deathbed, or a sickbed to attend the pain and infirmity of their
bodies. When they have purposely set themselves (the habitual bent of their
hearts being always set that way) actually to seek God, Non poterat jugi
contemplatio in rerum divinarum ut quondam solebat intendere propter vim
doloris. Phil.
to meditate upon the precious promises, to put forth fresh lively workings of
Faith upon the Lord Jesus Christ, they have been suddenly recalled, yea even
forcibly fetched back by some violent assault of pain, or a previous charge of
death: So that those thoughts which should be (and they desired that they might
be) like their objects, most durable and steady, were yet more like some odd
ends or broken pot-sheards, more like vanishing flashes, or wandering fancies,
then that beautiful frame of heart, or those well combined and fastened
meditations which they intended. For though all the troubles of this life, and
the approaches of death it self cannot break, disappoint or scatter those
fixed purposes, and thoughts which a Believer has had, Propter multiplices
animi motus and perturbationes jam dolebat jam timebat, nunc se erigebatin spem
meliorem, nunc iterum concidebat.
or those results and resolves which he has often made in his own soul about
the hopes and concernments of eternal life; yet he may be pitifully puzzled,
amuzed, and interrupted in his present motions and meditations about them.

Hence take this Caution.

Seeing not only our worldly thoughts perish, but our spiritual thoughts may
be much broken by strong temptations, and variety of bodily distempers, in
times of trouble and sickness, let us hasten to settle our purposes and
thoughts about eternal life, yea to see our souls passed from death to life,
before we see sickness and sorrow, much more before we see our selves ready to
pass from life to death. Purposes to repent, or to mind heavenly things, not
only may, but for the most part are broken off, and lost when sickness and
sorrow find us. Beware of this deceit of the Devil, who tells us we shall
have leisure to seek God when we are sick, and that we shall have a fair
opportunity to settle all the affairs of our souls, when we are going out of
the body: then (he tells us) we shall have nothing else to do, and therefore we
shall surely do it then. Let not Satan deceive us with these vain words, for
then he intends us most blows, then is his season to break our thoughts into
a thousand pieces, and to vex us with the splinters, even when we lie upon our
sick beds, or are bewildred with affliction. There is scarce one of twenty,
but finds breakings, and convulsions upon his thoughts, at the same time when
he feels them upon his body: How often have sick men been heard to say, We
cannot set our selves to think seriously of Heaven, or to act Faith, etc. To
suffer and be sick, is work enough for any man at one time: He had not need
to have his greatest work to do when he has such work to do.

They who have had brave spirits, and fixed holy purposes upon their
deathbeds, were such as had been long excercised in them before. Woe to those
who put off their beginnings in grace, till they are readdy to finish in
nature: A dying man is unfit for any business, how much more for this. He is
extremely indisposed for worldly purposes, much more for heavenly: and
therefore as soon as a man that has any Estate, begins to be sick, Friends
will move him, Pray Sir, settle your Estate, make your Will, you know not how
God may deal with you, if your disease should increase a little more, you may
be totally disabled to do it; therefore pray hasten: Yea, we find that most
men of valuable Estates in the World, make their Wills in their health, when
they are free from sickness and furthest from death, when they have the
greatest activity of mind and body: They wisely remember how some who had a
full purpose to make their Wills in sickness, have been suddenly overpowred by
the malignity of a disease, and could never do it, but have left all at six
and sevens. If so, shall any man leave his soul undisposed of, or at six and
sevens, till such a time? A sick man being minded of any worldly business
(unless he have a great mind to it) thinks it excuse enough to wave it,
because he is sick; I pray do not trouble me with it (says he) I cannot
think of it now, you and I will speak about it hereafter when I am recovered.
Do sick men think it reason they should be excused from worldly business
because they are sick, and shall any man resolve that it is best to deal about
spiritual businesses when he is sick? If Job who had a holy and a sound mind
under a diseased body, said, My purposes are broken off, and the thoughts or
possessions of my heart: how much more will they feel these breaches, whose
minds are sick and more diseased then their bodies?

Further, Observe.

The difference between God and man, what a vain creature man is, and how
excellent God is.

God never had one of his purposes broken; whatever he purposed, he has
carried to perfection, he never lost a thought, nor any of the possessions of
his heart, The counsel of the Lord stan^eth for ever, and the thoughts of his
heart to all Generations (Psalm. 33.11.) It Is the glory of God that his purposes
stand; he is able to make them stand, though all the World should combine as
one man to cast them down. It Is the dishonor of man that he so often falls
from his own purposes, and eats up his own resolves; and it is the punishment
of some men, that their purposes receive a fall, that their most solemn
debates and settled resolves are scattered and confounded: The Lord (in
judgment) brings the counsel of the Heathen to naught, he makes the
devices of the people of none effect Psalm. 33.10.) All the thoughts of man are
loseable, and most men lose their thoughts.

It is the comfort of Believers that they are not bottomed upon their own
purposes or thoughts, but upon the thoughts and purposes of God (that is their
basis) and that shall never be broken; God is unchangeable, and therefore his
purposes cannot break: When man's purposes are broken, he either changes, or
suffers a change; of which Job complains in the next Verse,

Verse. 12. They change the night into day, and the light is short because of
darkness.
Here are two things to be opened.

First, What is meant by changing the night into day. Secondly, Who it is that
changes the night into day
They change the night into day. Has not the Lord made a promise, yea a
Covenant (which is more then a promise) and annexed a sign to it, which is the
ratification of a Covenant ( Genesis 8.22.) that to the end of the World, while
the earth remains, Seed time, and harvest, and Summer, and Winter, and cold
and heat, and day and night shall not cease; that is, they shall not cease in
their turns and seasons: How is it here said, They change the night into day;
as if the night and day were out of course, when as the Lord has covenanted,
that they shall continue in their course?

I answer, There is a twofold change of times, of day and night.

First, A natural Change. Secondly, A metaphorical Change.
The united power of all creatures in Heaven and Earth, cannot make a natural
change of day into night, and God the Creator has promised that he will not
make that change, he will not break the succession of night and day, while the
Earth remains.

But a metaphorical change of night into day, and of day into night, has been
often made; for when the night is so full of trouble to us that we cannot
sleep, the night is changed into day, and when the day is so full of trouble to
us, that we can neither do our work, Hoc tormentum cordis, nec nox
interrumpebat quae est tempus deputatum humanae quieti, graviu^ est pati somni
defectum in nocte quam in die. Aquin. Meae cogitationes molestae animum
rodentes noctem mihi convertunt in diem; efficient ut noctes ducam in somnes.
Merc
nor take our comforts, then the day is changed into night: The night is the
time appointed for natural rest, therefore the night may be said to be changed
into day, when we cannot rest, and this is a great affliction; for though in
some sense, and in Scripture sense too, to have the night changed into day, is
a mercy, and notes a change from a troubled estate into a comfortable estate,
yet to have the night changed by our restlesnesse, or want of sleep, is both an
affliction it self, and an argument that we are burdned and over-pressed with
other manifold afflictions.

In this sense Job complains of the change of his night into day; and thus God
often changes times and seasons, both to particular persons and whole Nations
( Dan. 2.21.) Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the Name of God for ever and
ever, for wisdom and might are his, and he changes the times, and the
seasons, he removes Kings, and he sets up Kings: He changes the times and
seasons; that is, He makes seasons comfortable, or troublesome, peaceable, or
unquiet, he changes the night into day, or the day into night, as himself
pleases.

And the light is short because of darkness. Propter calamitates. Jun.
That is, The day is to me as no day, because of my calamity and misery; my day
is short, because darkness suddenly overtakes it. Artificial days are long
or short, according to the distance which the darkness of the night keeps
from them. Our metaphorical days are long or short, according to the distance
which the darkness of trouble keeps from them. Thus the change of day into
night, and of night into day, is to be reckoned by the condition we are in:
When we cannot sleep in the night, our night is changed into day, and when
sorrow seazeth on us in the day, our day is changed into night, or, The light
is short to us by reason of darkness.

Hae meae cogitationes noctem mihi in diem convertunt. Merc.
But who was it that made this change? They change the night into day, and the
day into night: Who? Some ascribe it to his troubled thoughts, of which he had
spoken before; his thoughts were so torn and distracted, that their confusions
turned the night into day, and the day into night; that is a plain sense; as
if he had said, By reason of my continual cares and distractions, I take no
comfort neither night nor day.

Others referr it to his Friends, They, that is, Praesentium malarum
cogitationes efficient ut dies quamvis lucidus, mihi sit nox. Jun.
my Friends turn the night into day, and the day into night; and if his
Friends be the Antecedent, it comes much to one, for his Friends did it by
filling him with troublesome thoughts, and unquiet reasonings; his Friends did
it by filling his heart and head (as we say) with their Proclamations.

Hence Note.

When the mind is unsettled the man cannot rest.

Waking nights and wearisome days are the portion of a troubled spirit.

There is a further elegancy considerable in the latter branch of this Verse,
The light is short because of darkness. The Original is, The light is near
because of darkness. Propinquum pro brevi exponit. Rab. Sol.
The word signifies neernesse, whether in time or place, and it is usually put
in Scripture for short, for that which is of short continuance ( Job 20.5.) The
tryumphing of the wicked is short. The Margin is, The tryumphing of the wicked
is from near; that is, It is hard by, it began but lately, and it will soon
be over, or at an end. In this elegancy the holy Ghost speaks of false gods (
Deuteronomy. 32.17.) They sacrificed to Devils and not to God, Idola dicuntus dij ex
propinquo, i. e. qui diu non durant, vel qui de novo pro diis haberi ceperint.
Merc.
to Gods whom they knew not, to new Gods that were come newly up: The Hebrew
is, to near Gods (it is this word) to short Gods; Gods that are near: that
is, Gods short or near in their original, they have been but a little while,
they are newly come up, as we translate, Whom your Fathers knew not, nor
feared: Idols are new Gods, near Gods: we need not travel far to find out
their descent and pedigree, the oldest of them are but of a late date, or of a
new Edition, upstart Gods, as they are compared with Jehovah the true God, who
is from everlasting: And as they are called near Gods, in regard of their
original, and rise, so likewise in regard of their continuance, they are not
for eternity, we shall see an end of those Gods shortly, they are not
long-lived, much less are they to everlasting. The true God is the same for
ever; false Gods are nothing, Idols are nothing in the World, and they shall in
short time be thrust out of the World; and all the near Gods shall be put far
away. What the Lord speaks of these night-Gods, the Gods of the darkness of
this World. Job speaks of the comforts or light which he once received from
God. The light is short because of darkness; that is, It is ready to end and
expire.

We may say of all the light which we have in this World, that it is short
because of darkness: Spiritual light, or the light of Gods countenance
shining in, or upon his people, has a darkness attending upon it in this
World. The experiences of most Christians answer that of one of the Ancients
about this heavenly light, Rara hora brevis mora. Bern.
It comes but seldom, and it is soon gone: We have but some glimpses and
glaunces of divine favor here, not a steady sense of it; that (except to a
very few) is reserved for Heaven: It Is so also about temporal light; the light
of Gods providence toward us has a darkness attending upon it, yea a
darkness mixed with it: When our comforts have scarce saluted us, or spoken
with us, they are interrupted and taken off by approaching sorrows. Those
creature enjoyments and relations which have most light in them, have also much
darkness hanging about them, and hovering over them. Man at the best estate is
altogether vanity: And his longest light here is short because of darkness.

But Job speaks not this in reference to the general state of man, much less
to the best estate of man in this life; he applies it specially to an afflicted
estate, and particularly to his own: How short is the light of an afflicted
soul, how quickly do Clouds come over him, and Ecclipses shut the shining
from him, when the light of a man in prosperity is but short, and his day in
danger of a night every moment? All our light on earth dwells upon the borders
of darkness; the light of Heaven has no neighborhood with it, and therefore
is not only long, but everlasting.

Illae tenebrosae cogitationes a mente mea discedentes, pro nocte jucundum
quietis diem and pro tenebris licem matutinam i. e. optatam pacem constituunt.
Bold.
Yet I find a learned Interpreter making this Verse speak the return of Jobs
light; The changing of night into day, is to be understood (says he) in a good
sense: And the breaking of his thoughts and purposes is (according to this
Interpretation) nothing else but the scattering of his dark and melancholy
thoughts and purposes, which being removed and gone; the night of sorrow was
turned into a day of joy, and the morning light (here called the near light,
because it immediately succeeds the darkness, which the Noonlight does not)
this morning light (says he) came before the face of darkness.

To which sense the Vulgar Latin translates the last clause, After darkness I
hope for light, Et rursum p^st tenebras spero lucem. Vulg.
or though I be now in darkness, I hope for ligh^: As if Job had said, After
this dark night and dreadful storm, God has spoken to the angry Sea of my
tempestuous thoughts, and behold there is a great calm. But though the Author
of this Exposition be so much in love with it, that he counts all other
spurious; yet I rather persist in, and stick to the to^^^, ^eeing the whole
context runs upon the aggrava^^ of Jobs present troubles, with which this
Interpretation holds no agreement. Nor is there any necessity (as the Author
supposes) to take it up, for the avoiding of that imputation of a low, weak,
and sinking spirit, which the former exposition in his apprehension subjects
Job unto; for though we say that Job does, as often elsewhere, so here again,
make report of his sorrows in highest strains of holy Rhetoric; yet we are
so far from saying that he desponded, or sunk under them, that we doubt not
to say (which is all that this Author would say, or have others take notice of
in his singular Interpretation) that he was more then a Conqueror over them
all. It Is not only granted, that Job did hope for a day of joy after his night
of sorrow, but affirmed that he had a day of joy in his night of sorrow (for he
could say in a true sense what the Apostle Paul after did, as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing) yet his night (by reason of his outward troubles, and many
assaults of inward terror) was changed into a laborious toyling day, and his
outward light of comfort was short and quickly ended, when he had it, By reason
of the faces (as the Original has it) or sudden appearances of darkness.

JOB, CHAP. 17. Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16. If I wait, the Grave is mine house: I
have made my in bed the darkness.

I have said to corruption, Thou art my Father, to the worm, Thou art my
Mother and my Sister.

And where is now my hope? As for my hope, who shall see it?

They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when our rest together is in the
dust.


JOB prosecutes the former Argument, and shows yet more fully the vanity of
those hopes which his Friends would nourish in him about a temporal
restoration. He shows also, that though himself should nourish them, and
even strive to hope, yet he could no more keep such hopes from languishing,
then himself from dying, If I wait, the Grave is mine house.

If I wait.
Verbum (...) affinitatem habet cum (...) perpemdiculum, linea.
Waiting is an act of the mind, in expectation of some future good: The
Original word signifies an earnest waiting, or waiting joined with much
intention of spirit, and strong desires, as if the mind did let out a Cord, or
Line, to take hold of the thing, for which we wait. Waiting is nothing else
but patience lengthened out upon a promise. There are three acts of the soul
upon the promises.

First, Believing. Secondly, Hoping. Dicitis (amici) si me humiliem, manner
meam expectationem: atqui cemitis vires meas and vitam meam venisse ad ultimam
lineam quippe mala mea cur^m respuunt. Co^.
Thirdly, Waiting.
We believe the truth of the promise; we hope for the good laid up in the
promise; we wait till that good be given out unto us. If I wait (says Job)
God waits upon us, and we wait upon God; God waits in mercy, we wait in
duty, God waits to be gracious (Isa. 30.18.) and man waits to be refreshed
with the grace of God. Job, in this place, seems to make light or little of
this duty of waiting: If I wait, or although I wait, or what if I wait, what
shall I get by it? Where Is the profit? Or what are my commings in? He tells us
what; If I wait, all that I shall get by it will be a Grave, or a bed in
darkness: And all my preferment will be to call corruption my Father, and to
say of the Worm, Thou art my Mother, and my Sister: Here Is all I am like to
have for all my waiting.

But was this all he looked for by waiting?

Yes, it was all he looked for, and all he thought himself in a capacity to
receive in this World (though in that he was deceived) he had no expectation
but to dye, and go down to the dust; he had no hope to rejoice in any kindred
or alliance, but worms and corruption, these were his Mother and his Sisters
and Brethren: If I wait here is all I shall have. Thus (as I intimated before)
the words carry a strong confutation of those hopes which his Friends
endeavored to raise up in him, that God would raise him up, Docet praecisam
esse sibi his malis omnem vitae spem vel si eam maxim animo fovere velit. Si
expectem, i. e. si expectare studeam, Merl.
and make him as a Prince among the people, if he repented and turned to God.
No, says he, what do you tell me of a great House, and of a great Name, of
a rising Sun, and of the morning light, why am I so often told of these things,
I tell you once for all, the Grave is my house, darkness is my bed, and the
worms are my kindred and companions; let me hear no more of these groundless
prophecyings, and unsavory flatteries, for my wound is incurable, and I am at
the last cast, If I wait, the Grave is my house.

Again, The word which we translate to wait, coming, as was touched before,
Si aedificavero, infernus domus mea. Rab. Dan.
from a Root which signifies a Carpenters Line, by which he measures his
buildings: Some render the Text thus, If I build, the Grave is my house: As if
he had said; I have no other house to build but a Grave, or when I have
builded my best, I shall have no other house but a Grave.

[The Grave.] The same word signifies Hell, as was showed ( Chap. 11.8.) and
therefore I will not stay here upon it: If I wait, the Grave, [Is my house.]

He calls the Grave a house, because there we rest as in a house: Man goes
forth of his house to labor, and comes home to his house for rest: Aegyptij
defunctorum sepulchra, domos aeternas Appellitant. Diodor. lib. 1.
Some tell us that Job calls the Grave his house, in allusion to those forms
of making Graves or Sepulchers, used in ancient (which are also continued in
these) times, with arches, and contrivances like a house.

[And have made my bed in the darkness.] Intelligi potest de lecto been ornato
super quem reponi solebant principum cadavera Mausoleis, quod juxta Hebraeum in
plurail dicitur, stravi strata mea, magnificum quid s^nat and Pompaticum. Bold.
He speaks still in prosecution of the allusion: In a house there are Dining
Rooms, and there are sleeping Rooms; there is the Bedchamber, and the Bed in
the Chamber. The Grave is my house (says Job) and there I have a Bed, I have
made it: [In the darkness.]

The Grave is a dark place; and the Grave is called Darkness in a double
respect.

First, Because there is no light of the body there. Secondly, Because there is
no light of the Sun there.
The light of the body is the eye, and the light of the air is the Sun; but in
the Grave the Sun shines not, or if it did, yet there the eye sees not,
therefore the Grave is darkness: I have made my bed in the darkness: And
darkness is most fit for a bed, sleep loves darkness: A working Room must
be light, but it is no matter how dark a sleeping Room be: when we go to
sleep, if it be not dark, we make it dark, that so we may sleep the better.
The Apostle gives that as an argument why the Saints should not sleep as do
others, because they were once darkness, but now light in the Lord. He that is
in aeriall light can hardly get his body to sleep, and will you who are in
spiritual light compose your souls to sleep? All sorts of sleepers covet the
dark, and therefore they who sleep in death, are elegantly described making
their b^d in darkness, that so they may have (as it were) all accommodations
for their rest, I have made my bed in the darkness.

It may be questioned (toward the clearing of this Verse) Did not Job wait?
Why does he say, If I wait? Was he upon Iffs or Ands about that great and
necessary duty? He resolved peremptorily ( Chap. 14.14.) All the days of my
appointed time will I wait till my change come: And is he so much changed
already into an unresolvednesse about his waiting?

I answer, This supposition about waiting, is not a negation, nor is it a note
of his irresolution to wait for any thing, but only for that particular, about
which his Friends were so busy to awaken and heighten his expectations. Job
waited upon God for all things which he desired to have, only he did not wait
upon God for that which the visible dispensations of God seemed to tell him
aloud, that he should not have, a temporal deliverance; yea, when he says, If
I wait, namely, for this thing, it is an Argument that he acknowledged it a
duty to wait upon God for all those things, for the receiving of which he had
any rule or ground of hope from God: Every exception confirms the rule. He
that says he does not wait upon God about that for which he has no warrant,
says strongly, that he ought to wait upon God where he has a warrant.

From which consequence we may Observe this unquestionable truth.

That it is the duty of man to wait upon God.

Waiting upon God is a duty of the first Commandment; it is a part of natural
worship: It is not in man's liberty whether he will wait or no, he is
commanded to wait: David speaks it double, and no doubt he labored to act it
double ( Psalm. 40.1.) Waiting, I waited, or I waited patiently upon God: The
Apostle gives that advice to the Saints ( Heb. 10.36.) Ye have need of
patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may receive the
promise: There is doing the will of God, and then there is receiving the
promise; yet we must do somewhat after we have done the will of God, before we
can receive the promise; and that is, we must wait upon him: You have need of
patience, says the Apostle; What kind of patience? There are three sorts of
patience.

First, The patience of laboring, that he puts in the former part of the
Verse, it is our doing the will of God.

Secondly, There is the patience of suffering.

Thirdly, There is the patience of waiting after we have both done and suffered
the will of God.

We have need of this patience, the patience of waiting, that we may receive
the promise, that is, the mercy promised; God has preventing mercies, and they
come to us before we wait for them; but his rewarding mercies must be waited
for: he will exercise the grace of patience in us, by causing us to wait for
our reward, as he exercises the graces of love and zeal, in commanding us to
do his will; and usually without waiting after we have done his will, there is
no receiving of the reward for doing his will. And for the promises and
Prophesies in general, though God never fail his own time, yet he seldom
comes at ours: That great promise about the deliverance of the people of Israel
out of Egypt, was performed punctually to an hour ( Exodus 12.41, 42.) It came
to pass at the end of four hundred and thirty years, even that very night,
it came to pass, that God brought out all the Host of Israel. The time being
out in the night, God did not stay till morning, but brought them out that very
night: We count it a very venial sin to break our word for a day, or to let a
man wait a day beyond the time promised; we commonly say, A day breaks no
square: It is not so with God, he keeps his time punctually, he will not break
his word one day. We read of the shortning of evil times, but not of their
lengthening, God never makes his people wait for good longer then he has
promised. But though God keep his time exactly, and come just at the moment he
has prefixed and foreshewed, yet we are apt to antedate the promise of God,
and to set it a time before Gods time: We are short sighted and short breathed;
that which is but a moment in the Calendar of Heaven, seems more then an age
to us. Now in this regard there is much need of patience, of waiting patience,
to tarry, not only our time, but Gods time; which is the meaning of the
Prophet Habakkuk (Chap. 2.3.) The vision is for an appointed time, but at the
end it will speak and not lie, though it tarry, wait for it, because it will
surely come, and will not tarry: The Prophet advises, Though it tarry, wait
for it; there is our duty, yet he presently affirms, It will not tarry: So
then it may tarry, and yet it tarryeth not; it may tarry beyond our time, but
it tarryeth not beyond Gods time; It will come, and will not tarry; that is,
not beyond the time which God has prefixed, though it may soon tarry beyond
the time which we have prefixed; therefore if it tarry, wait; there is no
remedy but patience.

The Apostle James gives the rule ( Chap. 1.4.) Let patience have her perfect
work: that is, Let all manner of patience work in you to the end, and let it
work to all those ends, or purposes to which it is appointed. Patience has
her perfect work.

First, When it puts forth perfect acts.

Secondly, When it perseveres in acting.

Patience ascends by three steps to the perfection of her work.

The first is a silent (not a sullen) submission or resignation of our selves
to the dispose of God ( Psalm. 39.9.) I was dumb (says David) and opened not my
mouth, because thou did it.

Secondly, A kind of thankful acceptance, or kissing of the Rod which smites
us: If their uncircumcised hearts be humbled (says the Lord, Levit. 26.41.)
and they accept the punishment of their iniquity: The phrase imports a welcome
receiving of it, as of a love-token from the hand of a Friend, or that the Rod
is not only justly, but mercifully and graciously inflicted: This a great
perfection of patience, and to this Jobs patience attained the very first day
of his sorrows, while he blessed the Name of the Lord, not only for giving him
so many good things, but also for taking them away ( Chap. 1.21.)

The third step, is spiritual joy, and serious cheerfulness under sorrowful
dispensations: This the Apostle exhorts the Brethren to ( Verse. 2.) Count it
all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations: And presently adds (intimating
that the highest perfection of patience consists in this joy) Let patience have
her perfect work: As if he had said, I have told you what the perfect work
of patience is, do not give check to your patience till it be got up this
step, and has set your souls, a rejoicing, or (as we speak) a crowing over
all your temptations.

Every grace should have its perfect work in us, and so they have, when
patience has its perfect work; and then patience has done that perfect work
there commanded, when we wait quietly, thankfully, and rejoycingly, till God
has done the work which he has promised. This waiting patience is also
called (by Christ himself) The possession of the soul (Luke 21.19.) Possess
ye your souls in patience. What title soever we have to our own souls, we
have no possession of them without patience: As Faith gives us the possession
of Christ, so patience gives us the possession of our selves: An impatient man
is not in his own hands; and as waiting patience gives us the present
possession of our selves, so it will bring us to the possession of all good
things else that we stand in need of to make us happy. The Prophet pronounces
them blessed, who wait every blessing is a good thing, but to be blessed is
all good things, not only is a blessing but blessedness the reward of a
waiter. The Lord is a God of judgment, blessed are all they that wait for him
(Isa. 30.18.) Waiting is not only a duty, but a benefit, yea our blessedness.
And if any object, How is it blessedness, or so much as a single blessing to
wait upon God under this notion as a God of judgment? To have said, God is a
God of mercy, blessed are they that wait for him, might have taken upon the
heart; but to say, God is a God of judgment, blessed are they that wait for
him: How can that be? Is there any desireablenesse in judgment?

I answer, Judgment is not there opposed to mercy (there is no blessedness in
being near such judgment.) We may consider judgment in a threefold opposition.

First, Judgment is opposed to anger and severity ( Jer. 10.24.) Correct me, O
Lord, in judgment, not in thine anger: It is a blessed thing to wait upon a
God of judgment, in opposition to anger, or as judgment imports the golden
Bridle of moderation upon the passions and affections.

Secondly, Judgment is opposed to injustice, it is a blessed thing to wait
upon a just God, who will certainly do us right; it is a misery, one of the
greatest miseries under the Sun, to wait upon unjust and unrighteous men; but
how great a mercy is it to wait upon a just, and a righteous God?

Thirdly, Judgment is opposed to folly, ignorance, and unadvisednesse; thus
God is a God of judgment, or wisdom, and blessed are they that wait upon
the wise; it is a vexation to wait upon rash, foolish, heady men, who do they
care not what, or know not what they do; but to wait upon a man, much more
upon the God of judgment, who knows how to order and do all things, who has
the full compass of every cause within him, and will time every circumstance
to our best advantage (to wait upon this God I say) is a high p^i^e of
happiness: God being such a God of judgment, Blessed are they that wait for
him; and so blessed are they, that however he may put them to wait long, yet
he at his coming will more then recompense all their waiting; as we find in
that exultation of the Church ( Isa. 25.9.) And it shall be said in that day,
Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, he will save us; this is the
Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoice in his salvation:
Possibly some had said then to the Church (as was said continually to David,
Psalm. 42.3.) Where is your God? Ye have long looked for him, but he does not
yet appear. The Church having borne thoses reproaches long, sees God coming
at last, and then she breaks forth in triumph, as if she had held God forth
in her hand, and cries him up, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him:
The words have a sound of victory, yea of many victories in them. They shall in
the end overcome all difficulties, who can but overcome their own hearts to a
patient waiting upon God: As true repentance for the evil we have done, so
holy patience for the good we would receive, shall never be repented of.

And (to add that further) though, when (as it appeared here to Job) God in his
providentiall actings, determines negatively, and speaks it out by the manner
of his workings, that his will is not to give, or do for us such a thing, it
ceases to be a duty to wait for it, yet to lay down the duty of waiting, or
to throw it up at any time upon such grounds as these four (which are the
usual grounds upon which it is laid down or thrown up) is extremely sinful,
and a high contempt of God.

First, It is extremely sinful to give over waiting upon God, as being
unwilling to tarry his leisure. It Is the prerogative of God, to date all times,
as much as to do all things for us; our times are in his hand as well as our
affairs, and he is the disposer of all things, as in regard of the means, so
also of their seasons. Hence it is our duty to wait as a time, so all the days
of our appointed time (how many soever they are, they are all of Gods
appointment) till our change shall come, as Job professed his resolution to do
( Chap. 14.14.) The Israelites are charged ( Psalm. 78.41.) For limitting the
holy one of Israel: How did they limit him? There is a twofold limitting of
God: First, to means, when we think we cannot be saved unless we are saved
our own way. Secondly, there is a limitting of God to times, he must save us
by such a day, or else we cannot be saved: Thus the Israelites limited the
Holy one of Israel, and set bounds to him, whose power and wisdom are
immeasurable. God may justly limit man, and man never does justly till he
keeps within the limits of God; but it is not a sin but a high presumption, for
man to limit God: nor is it possible for man to break his own bounds more by
any thing he does, then by setting bounds to God, what, or when he shall do.

Secondly, It is exceeding sinful to give over waiting on God for deliverance
out of an affliction, because we are either displeased with God who sends it,
or are angry at the affliction sent. When God throws a stone at us, we should
stoop humbly, and taking it up, put it into our bosom (if we do so, though it
look like a worthless Peble, it will quickly change into a precious Pearl,
however we must) not like the Dog rage at it and bite it, which yet many do.
Now they who are vexed at the affliction which God sends, or at God himself,
for sending the affliction, these will never wait upon God for the removing of
it. Such was the frame of that wretched King (2 Kings 6.33.) who said, This
evil is of the Lord, wherefore should I wait on the Lord any longer? As if he
had said, I will never wait for any kindness at his hand, who has already
used me thus unkindly: He that takes an affliction in ill part at the hand of
God, will never expect good from him; or if he do, it must come very speedily,
or else his waiting is over. It Is not unlikely that this King, by the advice of
the Prophet Elisha had waited a little, but he was soon weary; Why should I
wait any longer? There was reason enough why he should, but his unbeleife
would not let him see what he saw, nor understand what himself had spoken: For
the reason which he gave, why he would wait no longer, is the strongest
reason that can be given why he should have waited longer, This evil is of the
Lord. It Is true, that among men, they, from or of whom evils are, are usually
the unfittest to remove them: Men who wound are seldom skilled at curing; but
the Lord brings no evil, but what he can remove, nor does he make any wound
but what he can heal; yea no power nor art in the World, can heal the wounds
that he makes, or remove the evils which he brings, but his own. Hence the
patient Believer cries out with the Church ( Hos. 6.1.) Let us return to the
Lord, yea let us wait upon the Lord, for he has torn and he will heal:
But the impatient unbeleever says, Let us turn away from the Lord, let us
wait upon the Lord no longer, for it is he that has torn us, therefore surely
he will not heal us. Grace and corruption may take up the same principles,
but they draw conclusions from them as contrary, as themselves are.

Thirdly, It is exceeding sinful to give over waiting, as thinking that God
cannot help. Some shorten their patience by shortning the hand of God. That
such were the apprehensions of the Jews, is more then probable by the Prophets
Negative assertion ( Isa. 59.1.) Behold the Lords hand is not shortened that it
cannot save.

Fourthly, It is exceeding sinful to give over waiting upon God, by turning
aside to sinful ways: Some find out (as they suppose) nearer ways to help
themselves, then by attending upon God; they like not (as such have profanely
called them) those pious delays: and so over Hedge and Ditch they will, to the
overtaking of their own ends. The Prophet Jeremiah describes such ( Chap.
18.12.) And they said, there is no hope; or, our case is desperate, all is lost.
What then? but we will walk after our own devises, and every one do after
the imagination of his evil heart: The Lord had told them ( Verse. 11.) Behold
I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you. But did the Lord
devise a device, merely to ensnare them, or did he frame evil against them
only to undo them? No, his aim was their repentance, not their ruin, and
therefore he adds in the same Verse, Return ye now every one from his evil
ways, and make your ways and your doings good: As if the Lord had said,
Though I am about to frame evil against you, yet do ye return to me and all
shall be well. How do they resent this threatening and this Counsel? They grow
desperate upon it: And seeing God had brought them into such straits, they
would get out as well as they could: And as he was devising devices against
them, so they had devices of their own, and them they would follow. Thus they
would not wait upon God for a remedy in the way of repentance for their old
sins, but they would provide themselves a remedy by running into new sins: They
had a device in their heads, which should match the device of God.

Now what the Prophet subjoynes ( Verse. 13, 14, 15.) as a strong redargution of
that people who refused to wait upon God in that way, the same may we say to
all those who refuse to wait upon God in any way. The Virgin of Israel (he
calls her so to mind her what she should be, not to commend her for what she
was) has done a very horrible thing, will a man leave the Snow of Lebanon,
which comes from the rock of the field? Or, will a man (as our Margin has
it) leave my feilds for a rock, or for the Snow of Lebanon? that is, Will any
traveller be so foolish, as to leave the plain feilds, where he may pass
with ease and pleasure, without let or hinderance to climb over craggy Rocks
and precipitious Hills? will he leave a beaten path, to go through vast Woods
and desolate Forests covered with Snow, where no track or footsteps are to be
seen? or (as it follows in that Verse) shall the cold flowing waters which
come from another place be forsaken: or, shall the cool running waters be
forsaken for strange waters: that is, Will any man who has fresh
Fountaine-water of his own at home, go to seek water in a stinking Ditch,
in standing pooles, and miery puddles when he is a thirst? Such is the choice
or exchange which they make, who cease waiting upon God in his ways, and turn
aside for help to their own crooked ways, Stumbling (as the Prophet speaks
at the fifteenth Verse of the same Chapter) in their ways from the ancient
paths, to walk in paths, in a way not cast up, or, where no Causey is. Though
the hand or providence of God does sometimes bring his people (as the Prophet
speaks ( Isa. 42.16.) By a way which they knew not, and leads them in paths
that they have not known: that is, Into a way which they knew not, by any
former teachings of men, or experiences of their own; yet his hand never leads
them into any way, which is not cast up, or which may not be made out, by some
rule or example in the word: To leave waiting upon God in his ordinary ways,
and to go in any extraordinary way which has no ground in the word, is purely
to follow our own ways, and to go after the imaginations of our evil hearts.

Job in this place apprehended it unseasonable for him to wait for those
worldly seize and enjoyments which his Friends promised him; but he was
not unwilling to tarry the Lords leisure, nor was he displeased with God for
afflicting him, nor did he say, God could not help him, much less did he
turn from God to any wicked way to help himself, when he said, If I wait,
the Grave is mine house.

Secondly, Observe from it.

A good man may give up all his worldly expectations.

A Believer may in this sense be an unbeleever, and lay down all his hopes in
this life, of long life and of good days, of riches and temporal greatness:
When Friends bid such on their sick beds, Be of good cheer, we hope to see you
abroad shortly; we hope God will raise you up again, they will even forbid
those comforts, and say, Do not entice us back into the World with these
hopes, the Graves are ready for us, and we have made our bed in the darkness;
it is not for us to look for life here, indeed to live to us is Christ, but to
dye is gain. A Believer can willingly part with all his earthly possessions
for heavenly hopes, much more can he joyfully part with all his earthly hopes
for the possession of Heaven.

Thirdly from these expressions, The Grave is my house, I have made my bed in
the darkness.

Note.

A Believer looks upon death as a state of rest,

As the whole house is a place of rest compared with the World abroad, so the
Bed is the special place of rest ( Revel. 14.14.) Blessed are the dead which
dye in the Lord, from henceforth, they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them: They shall follow their work no more, who are followed by
their works. The Grave is the house and bed of the body to all who dye: Heaven
is the house and rest of the soul to all those why dye in the Lord. Saints
have here a rest in their labors, they shall hereafter have a rest from their
labors.

Lastly, Whereas the bed of death is made in darkness.

Observe.

There is nothing desirable in death, as considered in it self.

A dark condition is the worst condition: Darkness which in Scripture
signifies all evil is a word good enough to express the state of death by:
What desireablenesse there is in death, what pleasures in the Grave, will
appear further in those arguments which death uses to invite us home to its
house, the Grave, in the next Verse, which tells us our most lovely companions,
yea our sweetest and most endeared relations there, are, Corruption and Worms.

Verse. 14. I have said to corruption, Thou art my Father, and to the worm,
Thou art my Mother, and my Sister.
Hyperbolae sunt quibus significat se omnem jam vitae cogitationem abdicasse.
Jun.
This Verse is of the same sense with the former; only here, Job breaks into an
elegant variation of new metaphors, and hyperbolicall expressions.

[I have said.] That is, I have (as it were) called to, and saluted the retinue
and attendants of death, as my friends and kindred: As I have made my bed in
the Grave, and as that is my house, so now I am finding out my household
relations; I say to this, Thou art my Father, and to that, Thou art my Mother
and Sister.

(...) Est clamare vocare appellare, and per electionem nominare, elegans
prosopopeia: per quam Job tumulum alloquitur. Bold.
The word which we render, I have said, etc. signifies not barely to say, but to
cry, or call out: I have called out to corruption; so Master Broughton, To the
pit I cry, O Father, O Sister, O Mother to the Worm: not barely, I have said,
but I cry, and not barely, I cry Father to the pit, but he adds also a note of
exclamation, O Father.

Secondly, The word imports not generally a calling, or crying out, to any one
that comes next, but to some special person, by way of election and choice, or
to such as we know well, and are acquainted with, as the terms of Father,
Mother, and Sister imply.

Verbum (...) significat etiem occurrere alicui, nam occurrentem solemus
salutatione vel interrogatione aliqua proprio nomine appellare.
Further, the word signifies, not only to call aloud, and to call with
election, but to go forth on purpose to call a Friend, or to invite him in: As
when we see an acquaintance coming toward us, or our dwellings, we step out
to meet and welcome him, so the word may bear in this place: As if Job seeing
death drawing toward him, had gone out, and said O corruption my Father, O
worms my Mother, my Sister, vvelcome, vvelcome, such an elegancy the word
yields us.

I shall not here stay upon any anxious disquisition about the propriety of
these relations, how Job calls corruption his Father, and the worm his Mother
and Sister, or in drawing out comparisons about them; we are to look only to
a general proportion, not to an exact propriety in these words; there is no
need to make out parallels between corruption and a Father, or between worms
and a Mother, or a Sister.

Only thus much may be asserted particularly.

First, He speaks thus to show that he looked on death, not only not as an
enemy, but not as a stranger. Death and he were well acquainted.

Secondly, He speaks thus to show, that death was not only not a stranger to
him, but as one of his kindred: He was upon as fair terms with death, as
with Father and Mother.

Thirdly, Job speaks thus to show, Vt ostendat mortem sibi in votis esse,
cunctis illum amicitiae and necessitudinis nomininis compellat. Pinet.
that he did not only look upon death as in a near relation to him, but as
having a kind of delight and contentment in death: what is more sweet to a
man who has been in a long journey, and is returning home, then to think
that he is coming to his Father and Mother, to his Brethren and Sisters? As
nature gives us kindred by blood, so it is a custom to adopt and stamp to our
selves kindred by kindness; one we call Father, and another we call Mother;
one is our Brother, a second is our Sister, a third our Cozen, by the mutual
ties or by the receipts and returns of courtesy. Thus we are to take these
compellations, as intimating with what spirit Job entertained the thoughts of
death, even with no other then if he had been to fall into the embraces of
Father, and Mother, and Sister: He said to corruption, as we should say to
wisdom ( Prove. 7.4.) Say unto wisdom, thou art my Sister, and call
understanding thy Kinswoman: that is, Acquaint thy self with, and be familiar
with wisdom, so shall thou keep thy self (which is both thy wisdom
and thy happiness) a stranger, From the strange Woman (Verse. 5.)

Further, it may yet be enquired, what it is which Job calls Corruption and the
worm, I have said to corruption, etc. What is this corruption? There are two
opinions about it.

First, Some interpret him speaking to the corruption, and worms which had
already seized upon his body; for his diseases and ulcerous sores had bred
corruption and worms: As if he had said, I may well call corruption my Father,
for I am already full of corruption, I may well call the worm my Mother, my
sister, for the worms creep in and out at my sores continually: my body is as
if it had layne already in the Grave, full of corruption and worms.

Secondly, Others expound him speaking to, and of, the corruption, and worms
which waited his coming into the Grave. The word in the Text which we
translate Corruption, signifies also the Grave; because bodies do not only
corrupt in the Grave, (...) Fovea, corruption, quod in fovea corpus corrumpitur.
but quickly turn to corruption. As soon as a body is dead, it is a carcass,
and after it has been a while a carcass, it is nothing but corruption: Hence
some render it, not, I have said to corruption, but to the pit, or grave; so
Master Broughton To the pit I cry, O Father, to the worm, O Mother, O Sister.
The Grave is so proper a place for corruption, that it is proper enough to
express corruption by the Grave.

And besides those worms which are generated out of the putrefaction of man's
body, there are worms ready generated in the Grave to entertain us; worms
are the proper inhabitants of the Grave; there they keep house as Father and
Mother, and Sister, to vvelcome and embrace such as descend into it.

Master Fox reports of Doctor Tailor, a famous Martyr of Christ in Queen
Mary's time, who was burned at Hadley in Suffolk, that when he knew he should
suffer death by fire, he said, I have been deceived my self, and I shall
deceive many at Hadley, when some hearing this, began to hope he would recant
and shrink from that profession of the Gospel which he had made: At last he
explained himself, I am a man of a very full fat body, which I had hoped,
should have been buried in Hadley Churchyard, but I see I am deceived; and
there are a great number of worms there, which might have had good cheer upon
my carcass, but I shall deceive them all, my body being to be burned. The
Earth breeds worms in its own bowels, and our body which at the best and
alive are but refined earth, being once dead yield another race of worms. Job
may be supposed speaking unto both, or either, I have said to the worm, Thou
art my Mother and my Sister.

We may hence Observe.

That some Believers are so far from fearing, that they are familiar with
death.

Other Texts in the former passages of this Book, have occasioned like
Observations; yet as often as this occasion is renewed it will not be
unprofitable to renew this Observation: To write the same things where we
read the same things (yet the Reader will not find them the same) is not
unprofitable.

I say some Believers are familiar with death, I am far from saying that he
who is not, is no Believer: There are not in all, the same degrees of
holiness, though holiness be the same in all; but a Believer may arrive at
such a composure of spirit, at such a stature of holiness, as not to fear
death. There are some Believers (and it is their sin) who are but little
acquainted with death, they seldom go out to the Grave, or look into the pit
they are going to; he that has often conversed with death in the meditation
(which is a Believers way) of the death of Christ, cannot be affrayd to dye
if he know what that death of Christ means which he has meditated upon. He
that knows it thoroughly, may (as the Prophet speaks in another case, Isa.
11.8.) play upon the hole of this Aspe, and put his hand upon the den of this
Cockatrice; yea, such a Believer may not only play and put his hand upon the
Grave, which is the hole of this Aspe, and the den of this Cockatrice, but he
can play with the Aspe it self, and take up the Cockatrice in his hand; with
this Aspe or Cockatrice he can sport himself as with a Brother or a Sister.

O how different are the thoughts of carnal men, and their words of death?
How dreadfully do they speak and think of the Grave? An Unbeleever says of
the Grave, It is a prison, not a house; he finds no bed in darkness, it is to
him a Dungeon, he says to corruption, Thou art my foe, and to the worms, ye
are to me as Feinds and Furies: He cannot bear the thought of them, much
less their sight and presence. Saints speak courtingly of death; there is a
kind of holy courtship in the language of Job: Agag (1 Samuel 15.32.) came out
to Samuel delicately; for said he, Surely the bitterness of death is past: but
he was deceived, for Samuel hewed him in pieces; and when he said, the
bitterness of death is past, he meant death was past. He did not believe,
but that death would be bitter when ever it should come; but he thought death
was past for that time how ever, and so he came out delicately, he stood as a
Courtier, yea as a King before Samuel, because he had escaped (as he supposed)
that King of terrors. Thus the Saints come out delicately indeed, and court
it, in the very face of the King of terrors, for they know the bitterness of
death is past, though they were assured they must dye presently: They do not
say, Death is past, they know death will come, and they must dye, but the
bitterness is past, the Gall and Worm wood is taken out; and upon this
account they can say to corruption, Thou art my Father, and to the Worm, Thou
art my Mother, and Sister.

Thirdly, Note.

Corruption and worms are the portion and companions of the dead.

Only Jesus Christ was exempt from this portion, who though he submitted
himself to death for sinners, yet having no sin himself, he was not at all
subject to death, nor was it possible that he should be holden of it: he was
the holy one, he had no corruption in his spirit, and therefore his flesh saw
no corruption (Acts 2.31.) But as for all flesh, they having corrupted all
their ways, their flesh shall see corruption in the end.

Take two Corolaries from this.

First, Let no man glory in bodily beauty, in honors, or alliances. Corruption
will shortly seize upon the most beautiful body, worms will crawle upon the
smoothest cheeks, upon the fairest face, and into that mouth which now boasts
great things, and speaks so proudly; this earth must turn to earth, and then
the greatest kindreds, and noblest Pedigrees, will be lost or swallowed up in
this, Corruption is my Father, and the worm my Mother, and my Sister: Man is
corruptible, while he lives, and when he dies he is corruption. Every man
living is but a worm; Jesus Christ who abased himself to the lowest condition
of man, says, I am a worm and no man (Psalm. 22 6) When man dies, as he goes
to the worms, so he makes worms; who would be proud of his flesh, did he know
that it is but corruption and worms once removed, and that it must suddenly
move back again to corruption and worms,

Secondly, Seeing death has nothing of its own but darkness, corruption, and
worms, which are all unpleasing and a regret to flesh and blood, therefore
live much in Christ, who only gives a remedy against all these evils: If we
live in the Grave of Christ, that will make the darkness of our Grave light,
and the corruption of it sweet unto us. He that upon good interest can say to
Christ, Thou art my Father, thou art my Brother, thou art my All, can say
rejoycingly to corruption, Thou art my Father, and to the worm, thou art my
Mother, and Sister. Relation to Christ is so comfortable, that it overcomes the
discomfort of our most unpleasant relations. That which raised the spirit of
holy Job to these free complyances with death, was the light which he had
(even in those darker times) about the Redeemer, of which as the nineteenth
Chapter gives us a clear and an illustrious proof; so the next Verse gives us
more then an intimation.

Verse. 15. And where is now my hope? And as for my hope, who shall see it?
He that cheerfully questions, Where is my hope? puts it almost out of
question, where his hope is.

[Where is now my hope?] Had Job lost his hope, or was it to seek? David's
enemies interrogate him (and that interrogatory was as a Sword in his bones, or
as a Dagger at his heart) Where is now thy God? (Psalm. 42.10.) their meaning
was, Thy God is no where, he is not to be found, thou have none to help, none
to deliver thee: Job puts the question himself, and he puts it to himself,
Where is now my hope? His meaning is not, that it was no where, but that it was
not there where some would have it.

Hope may be considered two ways, either as taken for a grace acting in us, or
as taken for some good upon which that grace acts: Jobs question concerns not
hope as it is a grace acting in us; he that has that hope knows where it is,
and where it is once it abides forever; Hope is no remover, it is an abiding
grace (1 Cor. 13.13.) Now abides faith, hope, and charity, these three: These
are abiding graces; these must and shall keep house, not only in the Church
militant in general, but in the soul of every true member of the Church: and
if in reference to this hope, Job had questioned, Where is now my hope? He
might have answered, It is in thy heart; the grace of hope dwells there. This
grace of hope is no fading quality but a settled power: Hope does not always
act, but it always is, where it ever was: It is not always a lively hope, but
it is always a living hope. As Eliphaz checks Job (Chap. 4.4.) Is this thy
hope: So many a Believer deserves to be checked and chiden, because his hope is
not more strong and stirring, because his hope is so unlike hope, especially so
unlike that hope, which he ought to have, after so much experience. What? Is
this thy hope? is this all? you have talked of hope all this while; is this all
you have to show for it? this is a poor piece of hope, a hope unworthy of thee.
Some good men may justly fall under this check, and whereas hope makes not
ashamed, they may for a time be ashamed of their hope; yet it is with them as
with those Trees of which the Prophet speaks ( Isa. 6.13.) whose substance is
in them, when they have cast their leaves; So the holy seed shall be, and is
the substance of it; and though for a time it appear not, and so may bear
this question, Where is it? yet it will appear again, and by bearing fruit,
answer for it self, Here I am.

Secondly, Take hope for that good upon which our hope is set, or for the
object of hope. There is a twofold object of hope.

First, Eternal, and heavenly. Secondly, Temporal, and earthly.
Spiritual things are the hope laid hold upon ( Heb. 6.18.) That by two
immutable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us: This Scripture teaches us, that as there is a hope by which we lay
hold, that is the grace of hope; so there is a hope upon which we lay hold,
that is the good for which we hope. God himself, and all the good things of
eternal life, which God has promised, are this hope. This hope also Job had,
and he knew where it was: as he knew he had the grace of hope in his heart, so
that he had the choycest good of hope in Heaven, nor would he have parted with
this hope for all the possessions in the World.

But as hope (whether in the object or in the actings of it) respects
temporal, or earthly things; Job says, And now where is my hope? that is, If
I wait and hope about these things, my labor is lost, my hopes are vain and
vanishing, yea already vanished, as the next clause (which is of the same sense
with this, and therefore needs no explication) further shows.

And for my hope who shall see it? That is, Who shall see that which you would
have me hope for? You would persuade me that I shall be a great man; if I
should take up such a hope, who shall ever see it made good, who shall see it
fulfilled? No man shall.

And because the word which we translate Hope in both parts of this Verse,
signifies also a Congregation, Ecquis me talem intuebitur, qualem me futurum
dicitis? Bez.
or the meeting of many things or persons together: That first and great
congregation of waters, or rather the congregating of those waters is expressed
by it ( Genesis 1.9.) and in a like sense it is used concerning persons ( Jer.
3.17.) Hence the whole Verse is thus rendered, And where now is my congregation?
(...) Significat congregare and congregationem. Et ubi nunc congregatio mea,
and congregationem meam quis intuebitur? Bold.
And as for my congregation who shall see it? As if he had said, If ye ask
after my congregation or family, it is in the Grave; there is all that I look
for, there is my Father and Mother, there is my Sisters, and will any man go
down with me into those chambers of darkness to visit my congregation, to see
my family: this is all the family which I have in my eye, and whose eye else is
greedy to see this?

I might from this Verse turn back to that Observation lately given; That a
true Believer is sometimes able to make tryumphant reports about the wrack of
his worldly hope; he can say, Where is it? and who shall see it? With dry eyes
when the will of God removes it out of his sight.

David treating of the vanity of worldly things ( Psalm. 39.7.) concludes in the
mids of all his outward enjoyments, And now Lord what wait I for? where is my
hope? or, What do I hope for? ('it is all one) my hope is in thee; not in the
World, not after worldly things; he easily gave up his hope there: The more
hope we have in God, the less we have in and about the creature. Job had much
hope in God, but he had none, not only in, but none for the creature. All
those hopes were in his light, as himself was, dead or dyin^ and therefore fit
only to be buried out of his sight, as he speaks in the next Verse,

Verse. 16. They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when our rest together
is in the dust.


[They shall go down.] Spes meae, omnia mea; recte in plurali dicit,
significans non spem tantum sibi ab illis propositam sed and omnes alias spes
hujus vitae. Merc.
Who? or what shall go down? There is no express Relative in the Hebrew:
They, that is (say some) these hopes; he speaks in the plural Number, as if
he had said, All my hopes about this life are going down to the pit. The best
of worldly hopes, and worldly things, are dying and perishing, mine are to me
as dead and perished.

Secondly, Others understand it of Job himself; for the word which we
translate Bars signifies also the members of the body. (...) Vectes
significat, and ea omnia quae velut vectes aliquid sustentant. Aliqui Rabbini
ad ipsum. Jobum referant, quod ipsius fulchra, i. e. membra, brachia, vires,
robur descendent. Vectibus sepulchralibus descendent. Jun. M^ae videbitis istas
expectationes quas praedicatis, una cum corpore ferretro efferri in sepulchrum.
Jun.
As if he had said, I my self shall go down to the Pit, or Grave.

A third thus, They shall descend upon the bars of the Grave: The meaning is,
Ye shall quickly see me and all my worldly hopes which ye so much speak of,
put together in a Coffin, and carried out upon a Beire to the Grave for burial.

This going down to the bars of the Pit, according to our reading, imports,
that he and his hopes should descend to the lower parts of the earth, the
Grave, and be buried there; the pit would shut him in, and make him fast
enough. The Grave is a Prison, and there are Bars or bolts belonging to that
Prison which shut the Prisoners in; there is no breaking of that Prison: The
Decree of God is the Bar of the Grave, and his purpose locks it up till the
day which himself has appointed for the resurrection from the dead, and the
judgment which is to follow. As the evil Angels are reserved in chains of
darkness to the Judgment of the great day, so are the bodies of men chained
and barred down in the darkness of the Grave, till God sends out the
Archangel with the sound of a Trumpet to summon them to his Bar.

Yet further, these words are interpreted as spoken in derision of those
overtures which his Friends made to him about worldly happiness: Per
irrisi^nem haec dicta sunt. Cajet.
As if he had said, You persuade me that I shall have much good in the World:
very well, let it be so, but do you think that I can carry my Goods, my
Houses and Lands, my Silver and Gold, my Corn and my Wine, to make merry with
in the Grave? Shall I, and the greatness you promise me live together in the
Grave, and make our abode in darkness? The Septuagint seem to favor that
sense, rendering it, An bona mea mecum ad infernos descendent, aut pariter
super pulverem descendemus.
Shall my Goods go with me to the Grave, or, shall we descend into the dust
hand in hand; when I surrender this battered Fort into the hands of death,
shall I march out with Bagg and Baggage to these Subterranean dwellings? The
Apostle affirms, That we brought nothing with us into this World; and (he does
more then affirm) It is certain (says he) we can carry nothing out (1 Timothy
6.7.) And therefore what does it avail a dying man to tell him of riches,
seeing when he dies he must leave all his riches.

Master Broughton translates plainly thus, To the midst of the Grave all shall
descend, when we shall go down together in the dust. From which, our reading
of the latter clause varies but a little.

When we shall rest together in the dust. The word which we express by rest,
is derived by some, from a root signifying to descend, or go down; hence the
difference of translation. The Hebrew particle (im) which we render When,
signifies also For, or Forasmuch: Further, it is sometimes taken conditionally,
for If, as also interrogatively for (utrum) whether; according to all which
acceptions, this clause has undergone a variety of reading.

But I pass them by, and keep to our own, When our rest together is in the
dust, or, for as much as we shall rest together in the dust. Of this rest I
have spoken before ( Chap. 3.17.) There the weary be at rest, thither I referr
the Reader: We may also take Jobs sense in this place, by that which he
speaks so clearly out to this point ( Chap. 30. Verse. 23.) For I know that
thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living. I shall
not stay here to draw out Observations; matter of this purport, about the
certainty of, and about our rest in death, having occurred heretofore: All that
I shall add for the close of this Verse and Chapter, shall only be an offer
toward the resolution of a doubt, which may arise upon the whole matter of
Jobs continued resolves for death, and his refusals of any entertainment of the
hopes of life.

Hence it may be questioned, Did not Job sin in giving up his hope, and in refu
ing to be comforted, when his Friends, wise and godly men, labored to assure
him of deliverance?

I answer, First, Job was vvilling to be comforted, but he did not like their
way of comforting, which was indeed a wounding; for the promises which they
made him, did all along carry an implication of his guilt, they never promising
him any deliverance, but upon the supposition of his repentance from those
wickednesses, with which they charged him; whereas he utterly denied their
charge in the sense which they laid against him.

Secondly, I answer, We cannot altogether acquit Job from blame, in judging
his state so deplorable and remediless. For though with an eye to the
creature, and all second causes, there was no probability, or possibility for
his recovery, yet Job should have raised his hopes upon the power and
Al-sufficiency of God; he might have remembered that as his affliction was
extraordinary, and the hand of God very visible in it: So his deliverance also
might have been as extraordinary, and that God could have put forth as strong,
and as visible a hand to restore him as he did to cast him down: It Is said of
Abraham (Romans 4.18, 19.) that he against hope, believed in hope; nothing
appeared for the support of his hopes, yet Abraham did not say, Where is my
hope? or why should I wait for Children, He considered not his own body now
dead when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of
Sarah's womb: These natural impediments came not to his mind, while he had a
word from the Lord of nature, He staggered not at the promise of God through
unbeleife, but was strong in Faith, giving glory to God. But we may say of Job
(from the continual tenor of his own answers) that he considered his own
body as dead too much, and so attained not to Abraham's strength of Faith.

Yet we have three things to say for him: First, there was a great difference
between his case and Abraham's; Job had no such ground of Faith as Abraham had;
Abraham received a special, yea an absolute promise from God, that he should
have a Son, but Job received only a conditional promise from man, grounded
upon the general promises of God, that he should be restored: This
consideration abates much from the objection of his unbeleife; though it cannot
be denied, but his Faith might and should have risen higher upon the power of
God, who as he was Al-sufficiently able, so he did afterward actually raise
him up.

Secondly, The design of God being in Jobs example to set forth a pattern of
patience, as his design was in Abraham's example to set forth a pattern of
Faith, he was pleased to let Jobs Faith run it self out about spirituals and
eternals, not minding temporals, that so his patience might have a perfect
work in bearing the full weight of his affliction to the end, while his Faith
did not so much as put under a little finger to ease him with the least
belief, that it should (as to this life) be taken off, or have an end.

Lastly, (As 'twas hinted) Job had much Faith to some purposes, though none to
this; he had a full trust in God, though he should kill him, but he had no
trust that God would not kill him; he believed God loved him while he did
afflict him, though he did not believe that God would deliver him from his
afflictions. As no man's Faith works alike at all times, so it is rare that any
man's Faith works alike to all things: Some who believe and hope mightily for
the things of Heaven, have but little, either Faith or Hope for earthly things:
Not because a Faith which serves for Heaven, is not enough ('it is rather more
then enough) to serve for Earth: But because most of those whose Faith is
strong and much enlarged for Heaven, take so much satisfaction there, and are
there so much at home, that they account themselves Pilgrims and strangers
here, and are not much mindful (as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 11.15.) or
desirous of their earthly Country and concernments. What we do not much
desire to have, we do not much believe (though we believe) that we shall have
it. A full soul, says Solomon, loatheth the Honey comb: Those souls which
are full of Heaven (though they do not loath, yet they) are not hungry after
(though they can thankfully receive and enjoy) any Honey-combe of this World.
No man having drunk old Wine, straightway desires new, for he says the old
is better (Luke 5.39.) Doubtless Job had drunk the old Wine of Gods favor and
love in the Redeemer, and so his thirst was much slacked, if not totally
quenched toward the new Wine of a temporal restoration. And hence we may not
only charitably, but more then probably conclude, That it was not for want of
Faith, that Job did not believe or hope for what his Friends promised him, but
because he had employed his Faith upon better and more pleasing p^^^ises.

Thus Job has finished his answer to the second charge of Eliphaz: And (through
the help of Christ) somewhat is here tendered for the illustration and
exposition of it. His other two Friends, Bildad, and Zophar, stand ready to
enter the Lists with him, and to renew their charge; what they said, and what
answer they received, shall (if God continue life and strength, with these
peaceable opportunities) in convenient time be presented to public view.

A TABLE Directing to some special points noted in the precedent EXPOSITIONS.
A
ABominable; what that is which is called abominable, or an abomination. p. 65,
66. Sinful man how abominable to God, 66, 67. Abundance cannot satisfy 113.
Advocate between God and man, 389. How the holy Ghost is an Advocat^, 389, 390.
In what manner Christ performs the offi^e of an Advocate, 390. Christ is an
effectual mediator or Advocate, 393. Five things to show the effectualnesse
of Christ's pleading for us as an Advocate, 394. Affections of men and their
opinions of others are very variable, 452. Affliction, great afflictions hinder
the sense of tendered mercies, 39. Some afflictions bring a weariness both upon
soul and body, 247. Some afflictions distract, 248. A godly man may grow
extreme weary of affliction, 249. Great afflictions, like great sins, leave a
mark, 261. Great afflictions, how made witnesses of sin against a man, 262. The
witness which affliction gives, censured two ways, 262, 263. God afflicts his
own severely, 290. God seems to take pleasure in afflicting his, 294.
Affliction comes not by chance, but by special direction, 295. God has many
ways to afflict, 297. He sends breach upon breach, 309. Great afflictions have
three things in them in reference to others, 451. Age, old age, three degrees
of it among the Jews, 31. Amalekites, their enmity against the Jews, 126.
Angels, how imperfect, 62. Angels by some called Heavens, and why, 63.
Answering, two things always may, two things usually do embolden men to
answer. 222. Antiochus Epiphanes, his painful life, 89 Appetite of the end
infinite, 207. Appeals to God lawful, 363. It is a daring work to appeal to
G^d, 368. Apis, the Egyptian Idol, why his Priests did not give him the water
of Nilus to drink, 147. Apostasy from profession, worse then continued
profaneness, 286. Archers, seven Archers shot at Job, 297. Arminians, why
they deny the Intercession of Christ for all, 393. Assurance of approaching
miseries, how great a trouble to the mind, 118. A wicked man may have this
assurance, 118. Arrhabo, an earnest, whence it comes, 420. Astonishment at the
dealings of God, 468. Augustus Caesar. his peircing eye, 266. Aygoland a King
of the Moors, why he refused baptism, 471.
B.
Barathrum, why it signifies Hell, 455. Begging, or wandering for bread, a great
affliction, 111. Believing, a wicked man has neither a ground nor a heart to
believe, 104. A wicked man's believing is presuming, 104. Belial, whence
derived, 10. Who is Belial, 85. Blood, what it signifies in Scripture, 347.
Bloody sins shall not pass undiscovered, 357. Why God is said to make
inquisition for blood in special, 358. Body, to mind the seeding of it,
sinful, 148. They take little care for their souls, who take overmuch care
for their bodies. 150. Branch, what it signifies in Scripture, 189. Bread, what
it signifies in Scripture, 111. Breath of God, what it signifies in Scripture,
164. Breath of man, 167, 168. Breath of man taken three ways, 402. The breath
of man is corruptible, 403. Breath is not the soul, ibid. Bribe-takers, and
Bribe-givers, both alike wicked, 195. Bribery is an odious sin, 197. That which
is got by bribery will not hold long, 197. Byword, to be made a byword, notes
two things, 447. Great sufferers are usually made a byword, 447, 448. It is
very burdensome to the spirit of a man to be made a byword, 448.
C.
Carnal reasonings are the strong holds of sin, 135. The armor and weapons of
sin, 136, 137. Changes of wicked men for the worse, 182. Changeableness of our
estate both a part of our misery, and a great mercy, 182, 183. Children of God,
why so called, 441. Children may smart for their Fathers sin, 441. Christ is
comfort clothed in our flesh, 35. They are most free, who serve Christ most,
90. Two battles in which we cannot stand without the help of Christ, 121,
122. The great love of Christ to sinners, how it appears, 286. God did not
spare Christ when he stood in our place, 305. Name of Christ, the essential
form of prayer, 337. To pray in the name of Christ has three things in it,
338. Christ, why called the Son of man, 386. Christ is a surety for his people,
as well as an Advocate, 425. Christ was, and is, most ready to undertake the
cause of sinners, 426. Churches, their happiness when freed from the mixture
of profane and erroneous persons, 85. A double danger by mingling with such in
Church fellowship, 86. Choosing, or to make choice, what, 19. Clean, Man how
clean under a fourfold notion, 59. Company of Friends and Children, a great
mercy, 251. Man a sociable creature, 252. Some company is a burden, 253. The
comfort of society consists in the suitableness of it, 254. None but good
company in Heaven, 254. Comforters, miserable comforters who, showed diverse
ways, 214, 215. Two special sorts of miserable comforters, 217. Three things
to be considered by those who undertake to be comforters, 217, 218. To know how
to comfort others is a special gift of God, 218. Two great duties of a
comforter, 234. He that would comfort a distressed soul, must watch for
advantages both from his speech and silence, 244. Condemnation,
selfe-condemnation strongest, 20. Consolation, it is easy with God to comfort
those who are most disconsolate, 32. Consolations of two sorts, 33. Consolation
is the proper gift of God, 34. God can turn all our crosses into comforts, 36.
It is happy for Saints that consolation is in the hand of God, showed in four
particulars, 37. Consolation rightly administered by man, is the consolation of
God, 38. To count the consolations of God small is a very great sin, showed
upon two grounds, 38, 39. Counsels of evil men disappointed, 188, 203. Though
the counsels of evil men be disappointed, yet they will go on, three grounds
of it, 206. 207. Conscience, how neglected, 99. Conscience evil, and its
defects considered two ways, 99, 100. The offices of conscience, 99. Four
sorts of evil conscience, 100. Guilty conscience thinks every man he meets
his enemy, 107. He is ever in danger, and under the curse, 108. A twofold evil
conscience showed, 343. A guilty conscience cannot endure plain words, 411.
Covetous man an infatiabl^ gulf, 114. Craft alone, how sinful, 19. Cross,
good men are apt to have strange thoughts about the cross or sufferings, for,
or from Christ, 472.
D.
Darkness, five sorts of darkness, 102. Two sorts of darkness, 160, 161.
Day, how changed into night, 509. Death, an untimely death the portion of a
wicked man, 186. Death inexorable, we must go with it, when it calls, 397. A
believer speaks familiarly of death, 398. It is g^ d to put death under easy
notions, 398. Death hastens, so should we to be ready for death, 399. Rest in
death, 525. Nothing desirable in death it self, 525. The familiarity of some
believers with death described, 529. Corruption the portion of the dead, 530.
Deceived, what it is to be deceived, 170. Man is very apt to be deceiv^d, 172.
Man's aptness to be deceived arises two ways, ibid. There are three notorious
deceivers. 172, 173. Deceiver, he that publishes that which is false, though
he had no intent to deceive, is yet a deceiver, 412. Decree of God carries all
before it, 165, 166. Devils trade, what. 200. Disgrace, a great affliction to
dye under a blot of disgrace, 400. Dissimulation, what it is, 346. Drinking
iniquity like water; seven parallels between the drinking of iniquity, and the
drinking of water, 70. Dropping, why put for prophesying in Scripture. 377.
Dust, shaking off the dust of the feet notes three things, 319. To be raised
from the dust, or laid in the dust, what means, 319, 320.
E.
Earth, and all earthly things the gift of God two ways, 83. Earthly things
continue not, two reasons of it, 157. East-winde, why it signifies passions in
man, 7. Earnest, what it is, 420. El^ct persons, how, impossible they should be
deceived, 173. Enmity everlasting between the godly and the wicked, 475. End,
our end will be such as our way is, 183. Envy, what it is, 265. Error, we may
be guilty of errors by consequence, though we do not hold them, 15. They who
mainetaine error among men, shall not find favor with God 436. Everlasting,
things so called two ways, 24. Evils of body or mind, when they may be said to
be incurable, 242, 243. Eye, as man sees, so much of man is seen at his eye,
46. Two sins very visible in the eye, 47. A look of the eye, how powerful,
266. Examples of two sorts in Scripture, 451. Ezekiel, why so often called Son
of man, 368.
F.
Faith, want of faith in times of affliction, how grievous, 105. The great
benefits of faith in such a state, 105, 106. He that has no faith knows not
whither to go for the supply of any want, 115, 116. Faith, how necessary in
prayer, 340. Fatness, wicked men described by it, 146. Father, a wicked Father
brings a curse upon his Children, 190. Fathers provoking their Children, very
dangerous. 415. Fear, of two sorts, 11. To cast off the fear of God is
highest wickedness, 12. Holy fear like a Porter at the door, 16, 17.
Natural fear what it is, 95. Pannick fear, 96. A wicked man most subject to
vexing fear, 96. Three sorts of fear, 120. Fear of evil worse then evil,
120. Distracting fear is the portion of the wicked, 121. Fire, how taken in
Scripture, 194. Three reasons why the judgments of God are called Fire, 194.
195. Flame, taken two ways, 162. Flattery, has a force in it, 437. Flattery
is a kind of language by it self, 438. An ordinary way of flattering sick
friends, 439. Two ways of flattering men, 440. How G^d may be said to be
flattered, ibid. Flattery a very great sin, 441. Especially flattery in
spiritual things, 442. Flatterers prove most hateful at last to those whom
they have flattered, 442, 443. Friends, the best of them may prove unfreindly,
375. Friend taken two ways, 387.
G.
Gehenna, why it signifies Hell, 455. Giants, to run on like a Giant, what,
310. Two reasons why Giants are called Nephilim in the Hebrew, 311. Gifts of
five sorts, 196. A gift and a bribe signified by one word in the Hebrew, and
why, 196. Gnashing of the teeth ascribed to men, notes four things, 264, 265.
God, the cleanest creatures are unclean befooe him, 64. The hand stretched out
against God three ways, 128. That it is a foolish as well as a sinful thing
to oppose God, showed three ways, 138. God is in Heaven in a special manner,
369. God should not only be our refuge, but our choice, 380. Gods, false Gods,
how they are famished, 258. Grace is of an increasing nature, 484. It
increases in times of trouble, 484, 485. Grave, in what sense no returning
from it, 396, 397. We had need see all our work done, and well done, before we
go thither, 399. Discourses of the Grave very suitable for sick men, 407.
Some as ready for the Grave as the Grave is for them, 408. Why the Grave is
called a House, 515. The Grave called darkness in a double respect, 516.
Greenness, what it signifies in Scripture, 190.
H.
Hand, how ta^en in Scripture, 125. Stretching out the hand imports four
things, 126, 127. The hand of a good man, how it is said to be green, 189.
Clean hands, what it imports, 482. They who have clean hearts, will have
clean hands too, 483. Hands, striking of hands, what it signifies, 421. Heart,
an evil heart is a bad tutor, 43. The heart is too hard for the whole man, 43,
44. How the heart carries the man away, 44. The heart strengthens and hardens
it self against God, and how, 135, 136. The heart very deceitful in a
threefold reference, 173. Heart, as a Shop where sin is framed, 205. The
opening and shutting of the heart is the work of God, 431. The vanity of such
as say they have good hearts, when their ways are evil, 483. Heavens, how
they are unclean, 64. Heaven is not every where, 369. Three heavens spoken of
in Scripture, 371. Heaven is highest in Scripture, four deductions from the
highness of Heaven, 372, 373. Hiding, of two sorts, 80. Hills from the
beginning, 23. It is usual in Scripture to set that forth by the Hills, which
is of greatest antiquity. 24. Holiness, no created holiness stable, and
perfect in it self, 62. In what holiness consists, 333. Hope puts men on to
action, though they have been often disappointed, 208. A good Man may give up
all his worldly hopes, 525. Hope considered two ways, 531. A twofold object of
hope, 532. Horn, it imports two things in Scripture, 317. Why strength is
signified by the Horn, 318. Humiliation, outward humiliation is a duty, when
the hand of God is upon us. 322. Husbands bitterness to their Wives, how
unbecomming, 415. Hypocrite, he is under a curse, 193. The fashion of an
Hypocrite, 413.
I.
Idols, how called new, or near Gods, 510. Jews, how God brought the curse
which they wished upon their own heads, 355, 356. Imprecations, of two sorts,
352. We may in some cases use imprecations, ibid. Two grounds of them, ibid.
Four rules limiting the use of Imprecations, 354. Diverse dreadful examples
of such as have used Imprecations rashly and falsely, 355, 356. Infidelity, a
wicked man full of infidelity. that his state is bad, 184. Infirmities of two
sorts, 330. Injustice, two sorts of it, 328. Innocence fears no discovery,
358. Integrity, makes a man strong in bearing troubles, 330. Judge, it is a
great honor to judge another man's cause, 435. Judgment considered under a
threefold opposition, 520. Julian the Apostate, his blasphemy, 126 the opinion
of Athanasius concerning him, 159.
K.
Know, to know, how taken in Scripture, 116. Knowledge, there is a vanity in
some kind of knowledge, 6. Sins against the light of knowledge most
dangerous, 132.
L.
Law, how he that breaks one Commandment of the Law, may be said to break
all, 333. Leanness of two sorts, 259. Lie, every sin is a lie, 89. Life, the
number of the years of our life is a secret to all, 93. That is, a secret is
an affliction to a wicked man, 93, 94. It is best for us that this is a secret,
and why, 94. Life of man like a piece of Cloth in the Loome, 423. Light, a
twofold light denied to some, 429. Three reasons why God denies light, 430.
Limitting God what, the sinfulness of it, 521. Love, the spring of all action,
whether good or evil, 207. What we over-love, we are in danger to lose, 299.
M.
Manutenentia Dei, 480. Mediator, the Doctrine of a Mediator between God and
Man, known and believed, before Christ came into the World, 391. The twofold
nature of the Mediator known in all Ages of the Church, 392. Mercy of God,
how not to be pleaded, 136. There is a fivefold mercy of God, 301. Four
degrees of sparing mercy, 301, 302. Moloch, the Idol, why so called, how
formed, and worshipped, 455.
N.
Neck, stiff neck what it imports in Scripture, 141. Running upon the neck,
the meaning of it, 142. Nero, his miserable end, 153. The clemency of Nero, how
showed, 304. his speech when he made his Grave, 315. Noah's three Sons, how
styled, 82.
O.
Oaths of two sorts, 352, 364. Rules about Oaths, 364, 365. Omnipotency of God,
what, 134. Oppression, wise men most affected with it, why, 248. Oppression
called blood, 350. Oppressors are speedily out off, 92. Ordeal, used
superstitiously by the old Saxons, four sorts of it, 354.
P.
Passions, when violent, are the disguise of a wise man, 8. Passions break out
into unprofitable words, 9. Patience, a threefold patience, 517. The perfect
work of patience consists in two things, 519. Patience ascends by three steps
to her perfection, ibid. Patience gives us possession of our selves, 519. Peace
of wicked men, what it is, and whence it arises, 99. People of God, dangerous
to touch them, 129. Perfection of a thing, what, 158. All the perfection of
earthly things is vanishing. 159. Perseverance both the duty and privilege of
Saints, 478. Pleasure, two sorts of it, which every man should abhor, 276.
Poverty, some poverty is a note of Gods displeasure, 112. Oppressors often
brought to poverty, 112. What it is which makes poverty so great an evil to
any man, 113 Imaginary poverty, or fear of want, makes us more miserable then
want, 114. Power, they who have much power are tempted to oppress, 91. A godly
man has a natural and civil power to do evil, but he has not a moral
power to do it, 231, 232. Practice of duty, the best answer to slander in any
kind, 314. Proverbs, what they are, 446. Providence of God, how exercised
toward his people, when he puts them into the hand of wicked men, showed
diverse ways, 281. Some providence of God put the wisest to a stand, 469.
Five miscarriages of carnal men, at the unusual dealings and providence of
God, 471. Wise men often out in expounding the providence of God, 498. Prayer,
the sinfulness of forbearing, or abating prayer in times of trouble, 15.
Hypocrites never love prayer, and in two seasons they lay it by, 16. To
restrain prayer is worse then not to pray, 16. Prayer taken two ways, 328.
Only pure prayer is acceptable prayer, 335. The requisites to pure prayer,
showed, 336, 337. The general end of prayer what, 344. Prayer, why expressed by
a cry, 351. Not to have prayer heard by God, is the greatest misery that can
befall man. 359. Presumptuous sin, spoken of in the Old Testament, why thought
to be the same with the sin against the holy Ghost in the New Testament, 130.
Pride causes opposition against God, 141. Promises, three acts of the soul
upon the Promises, 514. Prosperity, to have been in prosperity adds to the
bitterness of any present adversity, 285. Punishment proportioned to sin two
ways. 131, 153. Provocation, what it is, 414. There is a good provocation,
415. Three ill effects of provocation, 416. Purposes, must be followed by
action, if not, a double danger, 505. Death breaks all our purposes. ibid.
R.
Recompense of two sorts, 180. Rejoicing, to see others rejoice at our troubles
is very grievous, 462. Reproach, the best Saints on Earth have been deeply
reproached, 271. Good men have often reproached one another, 272. Reproach is a
very heavy burden, 273. A reproaching tongue is compared in Scripture to three
things, 274. Reproof, some in reproving other men's faults, run into the same
themselves. 30. Repentance, a returning, the two terms of it, 494. Revelation
of divine secrets, two ways of it, 26. Revenge belongs so God, man must not
revenge himself, 236. Revenge is very sweet to some spirits, 276, 277. Reward,
it is undoing of some to have their reward, 183. Reins, what they signify in
Scripture, 298. To cleave the reins, what, 299. Riches, it is not in the power
of man to get riches, 156. Riches ill gotten will not hold, 157. A carnal man
would have perfection of riches, 158. Riches, lying vanities, showed two ways,
177. In what sense riches are deceitful, 178. Rich men; the same word
signifies a rich man, and a man at ease, in Hebrew, two reasons of it, 283,
284. Righteous men persevere in the ways of God against all discouragements,
479. Their perseverance is from the power of God, 480.
S.
Sackcloth, taken two ways in Scripture, 315. Saints, who, 62. Saints by some
called Heaven, two reasons of it, 63. Scandal at the cross or sufferings of
Professors, 472. Scorn, how opposite to love, 375. They who are highly
honored by God, are often scorned by men, 375, 376. Three words in the Hebrew
signifying to scorn, their difference, 410. Secrets of God, or divine secrets,
of two sorts, 25. Seeing, a sure sense, 77. Seeing taken two ways, 77. Seers,
old Prophets, why so called, 77. Servants, in what sense they must not answer
again, 50. Security, wicked men are nearest destruction when they are most
secure, 101. Shaddai, name of God, signifies three things, 134. Sick Friends
not to be flattered, how to be dealt with, 439. Sickness unfits most for
spiritual duties, 506. Sin, some sins more proper to some men, 17 Man is most
apt to act his proper sin, 18. Sin kept close hinders the receiving of the
word, 41. Sin, and sin only, makes men abominable in the sight of God, 69.
Multiplied acts of sin argue man's sinfulness, 69. All sins are against God,
yet some are more against him, 130. Sinning with a high hand, two things in it,
130. Sin the greatest evil, and why, 132. Sin runs against reason, 137. No
danger can keep a wicked heart from sinning, 144. Sin deceitful, 174. There
are three emminent evils in sin, 175. Sin deceives by a threefold promise, 175,
176. Some special characters of the sin of a wicked man, 199. To be a
plotter of sin is worse then to be an actor of it, 200. Wicked man cannot but
sin, 202. They are often put to much pain in sinning, 202. Sinful conceptions
often prove abortive, 203. Sin is the stng of affliction, 216. Great sins leave
their mark, 261. It is possible to live without any known sin, 331. Crying
sin, what, 351. Solitatinesse, in what sense good, 253. Sorrow is dry, 257.
Sorrow makes old before the time, 257. Sorrow under sufferings is not contrary
to patience, 322. Sorrow, worldly, and godly, its effects, 324. Sorrow taken
two ways, 464. The sorrows of the mind break and weaken the body, 465. Spirit
of man in an ill sense, what it signifies, 51. To turn the spirit against
God, most sinful, 51. In what cases a man may be charged to have turned his
spirit against God, 52. Smiting on the cheek, what it signifies in Scripture,
269. Sparing mercy, what, 300, 301. Sparing sinfulness, 304. Sparing mercy is
the lowest degree of mercy, 306. Spirit helps to pray, no pure prayer without
the help of the spirit, 340. 341. Strangers, a double notion of them, 83, 84.
Strangers why called Enemies, 84 Soul, put for the whole man, 227.
Soule-sufferings put for all sufferings, and why, 227. Superstition, or false
worship has a tange of baseness and slavery in it, 90. Surety, what it is to
be a Surety, 420. Christ is our Surety, 425. How Christ is called the Surety of
a better Testament, showed two ways* ibid. Christ being our Surety, we need
not fear, 426. Our Surety is of Gods appointing not of ours, ibid. Sword, how
taken in Scripture, 106.
T.
Tamerlaine, the majesty of his eye, 266. Teaching, what we teach others, we
should be well assured of our selves, 78. Tears of three sorts, 320. Tears
have a voice, 377. Eight sorts of tears in Scripture, all vocal, 378. Tears
are very powerful Orators, 379. Temptation, no standing in it without the
help of Christ, 122. Thoughts called the possessions of the heart, why, 503.
Threatenings, a godly man makes use of threatenings, as well as of promises, to
provoke himself to his duty, 443. Tongue, the Scholar of the heart, 17. Sin
has got the mastery of the heart, when it freely vents it self at the tongue,
55. Tongue, a light member, yet falls heavy, 167. Tophet, why so called, 455.
Tradition when in use, of what force now, 80. Trusting in thing or person is
upon a twofold supposition, 61. To trust, and to trust in, or upon, the same,
61. Man will have somewhat to trust to, and why, 178. It is man's duty to trust
God, 179. Man is most apt to trust that which has deceived him, 179, 180. The
creature is most vain to those who trust it, 181. Truth, a precious commodity,
it should be conveyed to posterity, 80. Truth must not be hid, 81. Some truths
are of very common observation, 211. Ordinary truths will not serve in
extraordinary cases. 212. Trials, when God brings to new trials he gives new
strength, 486. Tympanization, or drumming, what kind of torture it was, 456.
Tyrant, the common name of Kings in old time, 84.
V.
Vain, Scripture calls things vain four ways, 5. Vanity, what it is, 171.
Vanity taken two ways, ibid. Vanity of the creature, 176. When a man brings
forth vanity, showed in three particulars, 201. Vau, an Hebrew particle, its
diverse significations, 388. Unbeleife of threatenings as dangerous as of
promises, 184. The use which Satan makes of such unbeleife, ibid. Unbeleife is
the shield of sin, 185. Understanding, how God may be said to hide the heart
from understanding, showed four ways, 429. That it is the work of God to do
it, showed, 431. It is a great judgment to have the understanding clouded,
432. Our inability to understand arises two ways, ibid. When God takes away
men's understanding it is a sign of their destruction, 435. Unity, men are apt
to agree in doing hurt, 276.
W.
Waiting, what it is, 514. Waiting upon God is one of the great duties of man,
517. Waiting has a blessing, 520. Four sinful grounds of giving over waiting
upon God, 521, 522. Weariness of body and mind, 246, 247. Weeping, not
unbecomming the most valiant men, 379 Wedding garments signs of joy, 317.
Wicked man's life, a painful life, 88. He has two sorts of pain, 88, 89. He
has the pain but not the deliverance of a Woman in travel, 89. He makes an
ill construction of all that he hears, 97. The destruction of a wicked man is
inevitable, 109. his misery is decreed, 119. Wicked man falling into misery is
irrecoverable, 161. Wicked men of two sorts, 192. God often delivers his
precious servants into the hands of wicked men, 278. It is an addition to
affliction to be given into the hands of wicked men, 279. Will of God under a
threefold consideration is the rule of prayer, 337. Winking, how sinful, 45,
46. Wise man, who, and how distinguished from a crafty man, 4. It is most
uncomely for a Wise man to speak vainly, 6. The wisest of men do not see all
truths, 430. A wise man may soon forfeit his title, 496. Wise men rarely
found, 498. Wisdom, no one man has all wisdom, 27. The highest strain of
pride to think so, ibid. He that is full of his own wisdom is unfit to
receive instruction, 41. Wishing evil to others, in what sense it may be done,
229. Witnesses, an old custom among them, 19. God is both Judge and Witness,
362. How and in what cases we may call God to witness, 364, 365. The witness
of God is the most desirable witness, 366. It is the joy of an upright heart,
that God is a witness of all he does, 368. Worldly things, are not the rest
of Believers, 283. All worldly prosperity may quickly be dashed and lost, 287.
Worldly things, are tastlesse and worthless to us in times of great sorrow,
326. Words are great doers, 9. Words which do no good, are evil, 10. Salt of
words, what, 10. Our words are suitable to our spirits, 55. In what sense evil
words are worse then evil thoughts, 56. Words called windy in three respects,
219, 220. Bitter and passionate words to man, provoke God, 225, 226. Words
duly spoken, are of great power, 236. Ill sleeping upon hard words, 414.
Unkind words are bitter to the hearer, 414. Harsh words carry much provocation
in them, 415. Hard words stick long upon the spirit of man, 417. Worms, the
companions of the dead, 528. Wrath of God, a consuming fllame, 163. How we are
said to give place to wrath, 235. Wrinkles, in the face caused two ways, 256.
A perfect soule-state, and a perfect state of body, has no wrinkle in it, 257,
258.
A TABLE OF Those Scriptures which are occasionally cleared, and briefly
illustrated in the foregoing EXPOSITIONS. The first Number directs to the
Chapter, the second to the Verse, the third to the Page of the Book.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2. 18. 253, 254. 3. 8. 96. 4. 7. 357. 4. 14. 108. 5. 29. 35.
6. 4. 311. 8. 22. 509. 9. 27. 174. 11. 5, 6. 276. 14. 22. 364. 31. 47. 361. 32.
24. 253. 34. 29. 396.

Exodus.
Chap. Verse. Page. 8. 29. 411. 12. 15. 388. 14. 24, 25. 165. 15. 9. 277. 34.
29, 30. 318.

Leviticus.
Chap. Verse. Page. 26. 41. 519.

Numbers.
Chap. Verse. Page. 5. 21. 353. 15. 30. 130, 127. 20. 10, 11. 224.

Deuteronomie.
Chap. Verse. Page. 8. 18: 156. 29. 4. 432. 32 17. 510.

Joshua.
Chap. Verse. Page. 5. 2. 492. 8. 26. 127.

Judges.
Chap. Verse. Page. 11. 31. 388. 15. 16. 308.

I. Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2. 5. 112. 9. 9. 77. 31. 4. 408.

II. Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 9. 408. 13. 4. 260.

I. Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page. 8. 27. 371. 16. 2. 319. 18. 41. 95. 20. 33. 244.

II. Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page. 6. 33. 522, 95. 7. 6. 97. 14. 9. 137.

Ezra.
Chap. Verse. Page. 9. 13. 53.

Esther.
Chap. Verse. Page. 5. 13. 277.

Job.
Chap. Verse. Page. 20. 21. 114. 22. 15. 256. 30. 18. 316. 36. 27. 14. 42. 6.
319.

Psalms.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2. 1. 203. 7. 3, 4, 5. 353. 9. 12. 358. 15. 4. 67. 19. 14.
366. 22. 12. 146. 22. 30. 149. 23. 4. 36. 25. 14. 26. 33. 10. 288. 32. 1. 347.
35. 15, 16. 265. 35. 19. 47. 37. 25. 111. 38. 1. 297. 39. 12. 379. 45. 12. 149.
50. 20. 72. 51. 8. 261. 51. 14. 348. 64. 8. 167. 73. 22. 248. 73. 25, 28. 381.
75. 5. 189, 141. 78. 31. 146. 78. 41. 521. 85. 6. 492. 88. 15. 249. 95. 8. 214.
106. 15. 259. 106. 32, 33. 224. 106. 40. 66. 106. 7. 414. 108. 7, 8, 9. 165.
109. 6. 280. 119. 18. 432. 119. 96. 159. 119. 121, 122. 424. 119. 126. 289.
119. 176. 170. 120. 5, 7. 224. 126. 3. 279. 141. 5. 279. 144. 7. 84. 145. 19.
113. 146. 4. 505.

Proverb
Chap. Verse. Page. 4. 16. 418. 4. 17. 328. 4. 24. 45. 6. 1. 421. 6. 17. 47. 6.
25. 43. 6. 13. 48. 6. 26. 111. 7. 21. 437. 10. 10. 48 10. 15. 177. 11. 31. 181.
12. 16. 346. 16. 30. 48. 17. 21. 434. 18. 14. 330. 22. 26. 421. 24. 16. 161.
25. 12. 215. 25. 25. 388. 26. 6. 70. 28. 3. 91. 29. 11. 51. 29. 27. 66

Ecclesiastes.
Chap. Verse. Page. 4. 9, 10. 253. 5. 10. 115. 7. 7. 248. 7. 15, 16. 469. 7. 17.
187. 8. 10. 176. 9. 7, 8, 9. 317.

Canticles.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 16 190 2 16 406 4 9 266

Isaiah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 1 77 1 7 84 1 15 349 2 4 385 3 16 47 5 5 446 5 8, 9, 10.
153 6 9, 10. 433 8 20 288 8 21 113 11 4 166, 106 384 22 2 98 22 18 123 25 4 51
25 9 521 26 17, 18. 201 28 10 308 29 13 12 30 9 411 30 18 520 30 31, 32, 33.
458 32 6 6 33 1 158 38 14 423 40 24 159 40 30, 31. 487 43 3 268 43 13, 14. 138
44 9 20 44 20 179 46 8 67, ^0. 47 11 109 49 4 238 50 4 218 51 3 34 52 1 85 53
10 305 57 20 224 65 20 187

Jeremiah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 4 16 308 4 19 95 5 7 150 5 13 4 6 29, 30. 145 14 4 128 15 2
107 17 9 173 18 12, 13, 14, 15. 524 20 3, 4. 97 30 11 302 30 21 427 31 18 323
46 28 302 49 7 31

Lamentations.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 4 257 3 12, 13. 303, 293 3 22 303

Ezekiel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 13 19 217 14 14 450 15 3 69 16 6 348 16 49 150 22 26 327 ^1
2 377 23 42 284 24 7 349 24 13 238 36 31 67 44 15 170

Daniel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 34 109 4 26 370 8 6 142

Hosea.
Chap. Verse. Page. 4 2 349 6 7 497 8 7 5 9 7 220 11 5, 6. 304 12 4 378 13 13
188 14 5 481

Joel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 19 162 2 13 324 3 17 85

Amos.
Chap. Verse. Page. 7 1, 2, 3, 6. 301 8 5 131

Jonah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 8 176

Micah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 5 1 270 7 2 173

Nahum.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 15 85 2 7 457

Habakkuk.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 3 518 2 9, 10, 11. 197 2 12 350

Zephaniah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 11 258

Haggai.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 9 165 ^ 4 245

Zechariah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 12 390 2 8 129 7 7 284 11 1 163 11 17 189

Malachi.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 13, 14. 129

Matthew.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 19 450 5 19 437 5 39 270 6 7 14 6 22 293 7 1 496 10 14 319
10 19 226 11 16, 17, 18. 242 11 25 431 12 37 17 13 10, 14. 429 13 42 265 21 25
370 24 24 173 26 33, 35. 488 27 25 355

Mark.
Chap. Verse. Page. 6 4 241

Luke.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 6 331 1 35 106 2 34, 35. 294 4 20 46 4 23 240 4 24 241 14
31 137 15 17 494 19 41, 42, 43. 433 21 19 519 22 61, 62. 266 23 31 190 24 38
504

John.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 24 302 5 35 452 7 24 376 7 38 7 13 24 45 13 33, 36. 373 14
2 373 16 23, 24. 338 18 6 165

Acts.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2. 42 254 5 38, 39. 130 23 1, 2. 270 26 28, 29. 230

Romans.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 9 363 3 4 497 3 19 335 6 21 175 7 25 200 8 7 10 8 26 341 8
32 35 8 35 479 9 20 50 11 11 415 12 19 235 12 20 236 16 18 438

I. Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 4 8 ^24 4 9 463 4 13 271 7 30 287 8 11 218 10 3, 4. 391 10
11 451 15 28 370 16 13 133 16 26 66

II. Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 3, 4. 34 1 23 363 1 24 28 2 7 325 5 9 366 5 5 420 7 1 247
7 6 36 7 10 324 8 9 286 9 2 4^5 10 5 135 11 20 270 11 24 302 13 8 232

Galatians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 1 40 3 20 389

Ephesians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 4 10 372 5 18 150 5 27 257

Philippians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 27 309 3 19 148

Col^ssians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 19, 21. 415 4 6 10

I. Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 5 363 3 3 295 3 3, 4. 472

II. Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 8 166

I. Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 5 392 2 8 342 6 9 155

II. Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 10 399

Titus.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 16 69 2 9 50 3 14 20

Hebrews.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 17 394 3 8 417, 414 6 18 532 7 22 425 9 24 390 10 34 485
10 9 426 10 22 343 10 24 415 10 26 131 10 30 180 10 36 517 11 1 391 11 26 275
11 35 456 12 4 374 13 13 274

James.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 4 518 2 10 333 3 3, 4, 5, 8. 237 4 3 340

I. Epist. Peter.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 1 41 2 11 133 4 12, 13. 472

I. Epist. John.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 1 78 2 1 331 2 14 487 2 19 481 3 9 231, 7. 3 20 367 4 5 55

Jude.
Chap. Verse. Page. 0 22, 23. 219

Revelation.
Chap. Verse. Page. 13 8 392 17 16 252 18 4 86 18 7 252 22 11 481

Errata.
P. 9. l. 14. for always, read, for the most part. p. 24. l. 19. ad, after to,
or prefer it before. p. 37. l. 1. dele not. p. 49. l. 4. dele or. p. 156. l.
27. make a full point at thrive. Add, in the same line, after the word Peter, A
good man. p. 159. l. 22. for Athenatius, r. Athanasius. p. 232. l. 1. for
wisdom, r. wise man. p. 250. l. 21. dele not. p. 251. l. 39. for in, r. is.
p. 265. l. 1. for 12. r. 112. p. 265. l. 8. for depreson, r. depression. p.
275. l. 1. add, it. p. 285. l. 9. for low, r. high. p. 318. l. 24. for head, r.
hand. p. 321. in the Margin, for videt, r. ridet.

FINIS.

