portraits

CUPIDS MASTERPIECE OR, The Free School of Witty and Delightful Complements.

BEING, The Art of Love Refined: and augmen^^^ with diverse new, pleasant, and
delighful com^^^ments and discourses of Love. With sundry p^^^sant and amorous
Songs and Sonnets. As also ^^^sies for Rings, Handkerchiefs, Gloves, and o^^^^
things, for benefit and delight of young Men (...) Maids. With diverse other
pretty fancies and ^^^tasies, full of Delight and variety of Wit.



When Hearts and Hands united are,
What joy with Love then can compare.
London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White (...) at the Upper end of the
Old Bailey.

Cupids Masterpiece.
A brief Description of true Love.
TRue Love is a precious treasure,
Rich delight, unvalued pleasure;
Men's hearts like to a Maze intwining
Two firm minds in one combining;
Foe to faithless vows perfideous,
True Love is a knot Religious,
Dead to the sins that flaming rise,
Through beauties soul seducing eyes.
Deaf to gold-inchanting Witches,
Loves for Virtue, not for riches.
Such is true Loves boundless measure;
True Love is a precious treasure.
This is Love, and worth commending,
Still beginning, never ending.
Like a wily Net insnaring,
Like a Round shuts up all squaring;
In and out, whose every Angle,
More and more does still entangle.
Keeps a measure still in moving,
And is never Light, but loving.
Twining arms, exchanging kisses,
Each pertaking others blisses.
Laughing, weeping, still together,
Bliss in one, is mirth in either.
Never breaking, ever bending,
This is Love; and worth commending,
Instructions for Lovers: ^eaching them, how to demean themselves toward their
Sweet-hearts.
^Ou must not accost them with a shrug, as if you were lousy: With, your
Lady, ^et Lady, or most super-excellent Lady: ^her must you let your words
come rumb^ forth, ushered in with a good full mouthed, (...), as I love you:
But you must speak the ^-coming language of Love, I do not mean ^e strange
Pedantick phrases, used by some ^ants who (aim at wit but make themselves ^k
asses by it) praise their Mistresses by the (...), Moon, or Stars; whilst the
poor Girls ^gine, they mean the signs their Mercers Perfumers live at. But
you must in fine ^l^ words, deliver your true affection: praise (...) Mistress
Eyes, her Lip, her Chin, her ^e, her Neck, her Face, her Hand, her ^t, her Leg,
her Waste, her every thing; (...) leave your Lillies and your Roses, for your
^ntrie Froes to make Nosegaies with.

Thoughts c Valued may B. Searching c Love may B.
A merry sportive and Delightful Discourse, between a young Gallant, and a
curious conceited Lady.
Gent. Lady, what think you of a handsome man now?


Lady. And a wholesome too, Sir.


Gent. That Is as you make your bargain; a handsome, wholesome man then, and a
kind man, to cheer up your heart, and to lie close to you, to keep you warm;
and get two boys at a birth.


Lady. Two at a birth, that is nothing Sir, I have known a Cobbler, a poor thin
Cobbler, out of moldy cheese, brown bread, and turnups, do as much as that: Me
thinks a Gentleman should scorn to have a poor Mechanic Cobbler outdo him.


Gent. What, then you would have me get two dozen at a birth, like Buttons.


Lady. You do well to brag Sir, but if you perform this at your marriage, then
I will say you are a man indeed.


Gent. You are a merry Gentlewoman, and may make a good wife.


Lady. Not for you Sir, for then I may chance to get nothing: in what a state
am I then Sir?


Gent. But for all this, I know you love to hear of a good husband.


Lad. You say true Sir, for by my troth I h^ve heard of none this ten years*
they are so rare, that there are a great many longing women upon their knees,
to pray for the dropping down of good husbands from heaven, because there is
none upon earth.


Gent. But tell me Lady, can you love a man?


Lad. Yes, if the man be lovely, honest, and modest.


Gent. Then I am the man must make you a wife.


Lad. You make me a wife, no Sir no.


Gent. Ay a wife, a wife I say; you need not be ashamed on it, for its the best
calling a woman can come to.


Lad. A grant it Sir, but I mean not to be your wife.


Gent. Not mine, I believe it will be the best bargain thou will ever make in
thy life.


Lad. Sir, I do believe you look after wealth, and I mean to have one that will
love and respect me for my virtues.


Gent. Wealth, yes by my troth, I must have lands, and Lordships too Lady.


Lad. Cry ye mercy Sir, I mistook you all this while, did not you say it was
for love.


Gent. True, but there is two words to a bargain all the world over; and if love
be one, I am sure money is the other, else its no bargain; pardon me Lady, I
must dine as well as sup.


Lad. Then Sir you may try your fortune, for I am resolved never to be your
wife; and so farewell.


A Song for Maids.
MAids they are grown so coy of late,
Forsooth they will not marry,
Though they be in their teens and past,
They say they yet can tarry:
But if they knew how sweet a thing,
It were in youth to marry,
They would sell their Petticoats, Smocks and all,
Ere they so long would tarry.
The Lass that is most coy of all,
I^ she had time and leisure,
Would lay by al^ he^ several thoughts,
And turn to love and pleasure.
Winter nights are long you know,
And bitter cold the wea^her,
Then who is so fond to lie alone,
When two may lie together.
A merry complemental woing between two jeering Lovers.
Man. FAirest of all faires, will you eat a piece of Ginger-bread?


Maid. You might have more manne^s, or at least more civilitie, then to scoff
at her that never injured you.


Man. Scoff, nay, indeed I love you, I vow I burn in love like some penny Faggot.


Maid. St. Winitrid forbid it man may I believe it?


Man. Ay, and though I say it that should not, I am affected toward you
strangely, there is some thing like thy self comes every night to my beds side.


Maid. And to me every morning, a voice utters these words; Matrimony,
Matrimony.


Man. Now do I shake all over, and doubt its some spirit that would join us.


M. Goodly great ones, may I believe this also.


Man. What not believe, Lady I am wholly and solely yours, yea, more then
this; your servants, servant.


Maid. Now you contradict your self Sir, how can you be wholly mine, and yet my
servants servant?


Man. I do but complement in this Lady: But if thou can love me, I can love
thee; law thee now, I am rich.


May. Sir, I look not after riches but the person, I must have one that can
guide me, for I am foolish yet.


Man. Now see the luck of it Lady, I am so too, but doubt not this noddle
shall perform all I warrant. I am rich.


Maid. But riches create no love, by my virginity, I fear you will flinch.


Man. By my virginity, which is as good as yours, I am sure by my virginity,
if we men have any such thing as we have, I will not flinch.


Maid. Then for the tim^ to come, you must not so much as cast a she (...) eye
after any woman but my self.


Man. If I do at any time, then may I lose one of mine own eyes, but i will keep
the other however.


Maid. Well sir, i will take your word.


A Sonnet in praise and dispraise of Love.
NOw what is Love, I will thee tell,
It is the Fountain and the Well,
Where pleasure and repentance dwell;
And it is like a Passing Bell,
That towls all in to Heaven or Hell:
This is Love, and this is Love, I here thee tell.
Now what is Love, I will thee show,
A thing that creeps where't cannot go,
A prize that passes too and fro,
A thing for me, a thing for mo;
And he that tries shall find it so:
This is love, and this is love, sweet friend I tro.
A merry cross woing, betweeen Tom the Tailor, and Kate of the Kitchen.
Tom. GOod morrow Kate, for that I hear is your name.


Kate. Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing, they call me
Katherine that talk of me.


Tail. You lie in faith, for you are called plain Kate, and bonny Kate, and
sometimes Kate the cursed; but Kate take this of me for thy comfort, I am moved
to woe thee for my wife.


Kate. Moved, in good time, let him that moved you hither remove you hence, I
thought you were a moveable.


Tail. Why what is a moveable?


Kate. A Joint-stool.


Tail. Right, thou have hit it; come sit on me then.


Kate. Sit on you I that I will, Asses were made to bear.


Tail. Come, come, what will you be angry now, you wasp?


Kate. If I be a wasp, then thou had best beware of my sting, or else pluck
it out.


Tail. What with my tongue in your tail; not so Kate, I am a Gentleman.


Kate. A Gentleman, what is your Coat of Arms pray you, a Cocks-comb?


Tail. No a come-less Cock, so Kate will be my Hen.


K^te. No Hen of yours Sir, you look so like a Cravven.


Tail. Nay but Kate, you must not look so sour.


Kate. Sour, its my fashion when I see a Crab, and so farewell.

Fairer then Diana, chaster then Susanna,
O let me thy favor merit.
When as the Fountains, overflow the Mountains,
Then shall thou my love inherit.

The greeting of a Lover to his Dearest, after a long absence.
WElcome, my best beloved welcome, your sight is life's restorative to me, you
are more welcome to me my dearest, then day to the world or rest to the
wearied, or gold to the most covetous Miser in the world; such is the joy I
find in your happy company: So that this day seems to be a day of Iubilee unto
me.

A brief Description of Women.
ALl you that Women love,
And like the amorous trade,
Come learn of me; what Women be,
And whereof they are made.
Their hands are made of Rash,
Their minds are made of Sey,
Their love is like Silk changeable,
It lasts but a day:
Their glory springs from Satin,
Their vanity from Feather,
Their beauty is Stand farther off,
Their conscience is of Leather.
Of Fustian's their discourse,
But Canvas fits them best;
Perpetuana is their folly,
Their earnest is but jest.
Their Life is Love and Idleness,
Their doing is their pleasure,
They lawless are, yet all their ware,
They buy by standing measure.
Their Fore-parts are of Rue,
Their hinder parts of Dockes,
Of hardest Brasile are their Hearts,
Their Heads are made of Box.
Or if in plainer terms,
Withal you would be dealt,
Of Beaver are their tender Thighs,
Their Skins are made of Felt.
A pleasant Discourse between a Bridegroom and a Bride, on their Bridal night.
Bridegr. Will you not come to bed my dear^ why do you so delay? come let me
help you.


Bride. To bed sweetheart, why are you so sleepie?


Bridegr. No, but I shall be worse, if you loo^ sad and melancholy; come
prithee my dear l^t^ to bed: why do thou blush? let me undres^ thee, be not
coy, but smile.


Bride. Alas I feel my self not well my love.


Bridegr. Its only bashfulness my dear, il^ make you well, there is no such
physic as you^ husbands warm arms.


Bride. Be not so hasty my dearest, we stea^ not our content, there is time
enough.


Brideg. Do you then already cease to love me*


Bride. No think not so, for I do love the^ dearly.


Bridegr. To bed then I shall give better credit to thee be not so cold a lover.


Bride. My passion's now over, and now m^ dearest I have to thy embraces.


Bridegr. Welcome my comfort and delight and thus I fold my arms about thee.


Bride. And thus about thee my dear bliss, I ^twine like the female I vie.


Bridegr, Come then let me kiss thee, let m^ kiss again and again, and multiply
them to a^ infinite increase.


Bride. Spare not, for they are thy own, dea^ heart.


The gallant Sea-mans resolution concerning Marriage.
O What strange passions came on board m^ that I should marry! was I drunk? Wh^
to say truth what can I do at home now? what horrible thing would it be to have
horns brough^ me to Sea, to look as if the Devil were i^ the Ship, and all the
great Tempests would be thought to be of my raising, and should (...) the
general course of all Merchants: and yet perhaps they are as deep in as my
self, that is my comfort. O that a Seaman should live to be married, what need I
to have been shackled thus with a wife, and be at charges to keep her for other
men's diets, well if I were once rid of this, I would never play the fool again.

One whose choice was either to be Hanged, or married.
LO here is the Bride, and there is the Tree,
Take which of these best likes thee.
The choice is bad on either part,
The Woman's worst; drive on the Cart.
Dick of the Country his woing of Jone of the Milk pail.
Dick. MY pretty Chicken how do thou? how fares thy body? Did not think me
almost lost?


Jone. I gave thee for dead in good faith love, and was in the humor to marry
another man.


Dick. Sure thou wast not, thou do but jest I trow.


Jone. Truly I was, and could you blame me, ^s it not a torture think you for a
woman to stay ^even years without a husband.


Dick. Me thinks my brows begin to bud already, they are very knotty; have
thou grafted a^y thing there? I suspect it shrewdly. How ^omes your belly so
big?


Jone. Its nothing but a Timpanie, I am troubled with.


Dick. Come you are a W^ore, i will have you before a Justice.


Jone. Spare me, I pray thee gentle Dick, and hearken to my counsel a little:
since thou art a Cuckold (as I do not deny it) choose whether thou will wear thy
hor^^ on thy ^^re-head, for all men to see, or put them in the pocket, and let
no man see them.


Dick. Why then I am a Cuckold it seems: have not I traveled well, and to good
purpose? but do so no more, and all is forgotten.


Jone. It is so, if you stay at home to keep me warm, but if you leave me, have
at your head the^.


The Praise, and Dispraise of Women.
WOmen, the woe of Men, cause of Man's fall,
You whom Philosophers terms Monsters all;
I love your Sex, even from my heart and soul,
From my affections, which do both control.
And I would spend the lives of fifty men,
If possible, to praise you with my pen,
And paint your worth; but you your selves do know,
To paint your selves better then I can show:
But if my praises may your favor win,
I Will set you forth, and thus I will begin.
O you are kind, and kinder far then man,
And equalize your kindness, no man can.
O you are fair, let me that fair unsay;
So's a bright night, compared with a stormy day.
Some say you have no virtue, but they lie,
For you prove constant in unconstancy.
Why you are every thing; Man's whole delight,
I speak for Day; let them that know for Night.
The merry simple woing and winning of Jone of the Cream ^ot, by a Country
Farmer.
Farm. NAy stay, sweet Mistress Jone, here is none but one friend (as they say)
desires to speak a cold word or two with you; how do you veel your self this
frostie morning?


Jone. What have you to do to ask, I pray you? I am a cold.


Farm. It seems you are hot good Mrs. Jone.


Jone. You lie though, I am as cold as ice: feel else.


Farm. Nay you ha cooled my courage Jone, I am past, I ha done feeling with you.


Jone. Done with me, I do defy you so I do, to say you ha done with me.


Farm. O you mistake Jone, I mean not as you mean: no, bring but that Dog that
will say that I ever struck him, or any Cat in the town that will swear on a
Book, that I have so much as set fire on their tails.


Jone. Do you love me then John?


Farm. Love you, what need you question that, I sweat as ice, burning in love:
well we will be (...)


Jone. No haste John to hang true volk, soft fire makes sweet Malt: Yet John
cheer up thy better Leg before,
This is a deed is once done, and no more.



John. And then it is done for ever, as they say,
For each man has his hour, each dog his day.
I Will get my leather dublet new forbusht, and a pair of wisps to swaddle my
legs, for we mu^^ dance on that day sure, and who can dance in Boots?


Jon. Even as you list good John, I am all yours, as they say.

Thus can Country Swain-lings woe,
And express as hot their desire;
Live to love, and love to prove,
Height and heat of Cupids fire.
And a Silibub they will make,
While their Lovers sue and seek
For their love; and do partake,
Of the bliss that all do seek.

A May Day Song.
COme sit we under yonder tree,
Where merry as the Maids we'll be;
For to spin out the third of Sands,
Playing at Questions and Commands.
Or tell what strange tricks love can do,
By quickly making one of two.
Next we will act how lovers woe,
And sigh and kiss, as Lovers do;
And talk of Brides, and who shall make,
That Wedding Smock* that Bridal Cake:
What Poesies for our Wedding Rings,
What Gloves we will give, and Ribonings:
Thus having talked, we will next commend,
A Kiss or two, and so we will end.
To present a pair of Gloves.
SWeet daign to draw these on thy fair white hands
And when you wear them think my being stands
Solely at your appointment. Would that Love,
(By his great power) would change me to a Glove:
Your fair hand then should ever more be kissed,
And I would ever dwell about your wrist.
An amorous Complement between a Young Man, and a beautiful Damzel.
Gent. SWeet Lady, being wounded by your beauty, I acknowledge it a mercy if
you kill me not.


Maid, Sir, though I am not guilty of offense, yet rather then I will be
accounted a murderer, I will study to preserve so sweet a model as your self.


Gent. Fairest then I tell you, I must love you.


Maid. I see no necessity that I should love you, yet I confess you are a
proper man.


Gent. Prithee do not mock me, do but look in my heart, where you shall see
what you cannot despise; there Love has made you a throne to sit and rule, all
my thoughts obeying and honoring you as their Queen.


Maid. But who can see this heart you boast of?


Gent. Alas it is easy for your eyes to pierce into, but your frowns make it
seem cold: But make it yours, and you shall see it spring, and and pay you in a
full harvest of content: but mistake not, I say my heart is cold, not my love.


Maid. And yet your love is from your heart I warrant.


Gent. I say my heart is cold, but yet my heart is fervent still, besides my
heart is not my own but yours, you have it; and while you have it, if you keep
it not warm in your bosom, how can it but be cold?


Maid. Well Sir, notwithstanding your rhethorick, I shall without any art at
all give you a final answer; Your suit is hopeless: And so farewell.


The Young Man's Sonnet.
IS she not wondrous fair? But I do see,
She is too much too fair, too sweet for me.
Just as the Sun me thinks, I see her face,
Which I must gaze upon, but not embrace.
So sure it is heavens pleasure she should be sent,
As pure to heaven again, as she was lent.
And bids us we would hope for bliss,
Not to profane her with a mortal kiss.
Al^^ how cold my Love does grow, how hot;
O how I love her, how I love her not.
So does my Ague Love torment by turns,
As now it freez's, now again it burns.
Coridon and Phill^da, the Shepherd and the Shepheardess.
Phil. Shepherd why do you follow me thus?


Cor. How can I but follow sweet when my heart is with you.


Phil. With me, tell me then where and how I shall restore it.


Cor. It hangs upon your eyes and being there scorcht with disdain* it flies
for ease to your Rosy lips, but being beaten thence also by your harsh
denials, fain would it come here for harbor; for pity then (fair Nymph)
receive it, and if you can, teach it the hardness of your own.


Phil. Well then if my heart be so hard as you make it, it glads me that its
strong enough to be a fence to my honor.


Cor. What the sheep to be guarded, when there is no Woll near?


Phil. Can the sheep he safe when there is a Dog of prey within, I cannot
cherish in my breast, the man that would wrong my chastity.


Cor. Then cherish me, who never attempted to cast the least spot on your white
innocence.


Phil. The more fool you, perhaps if you had, it needed not to have come to
this.


Cor. Yes, you may remember, although I (...)


Phil. Well Shepherd, look you never on me more, for I cannot love at all; or
if at all, not you: let this suffice you.


Cor. O this distracts me more: but since my presence offends you, I must obey:
but when I am dead the Martyr of your beauty, if I thought you would shed one
poor tear on my untimely grave, and say I was unfortunate, to love where I
might not be loved again, my ashes would find rest: And farewell the fairest,
but yet the cruellest Shepheardess alive.


The delicate woing between Oliver and Rebecca.
Oliv. THou art a brave wench Rebecca, come kiss me: will thou be a Lady?


Rebec. Sir, I have no such ambition.


Oliv. I Will buy thee a Parrat to morrow and a Monkey, here take this Ring.


Rebec. Pray keep it, and let me tell you my mind.


Oliv. And i will tell thee then, I know thou love me; and prithee tell me
plainly, when shall we matrimony it, I know thou dotest on my good parts,
speak, do not? prithee be not bashful.


Rebec. Then know I do not love you.


Oliv. Then I have lost all my labor.


Rebec. I question not but it will appear so, for I must tell you the truth; I
cannot love you: and let this suffice you.


This Song in her praise.
THese Eyes which set my fancies all on fire,
These crisped Hairs which held my heart in chains;
That dainty Hand that conquers my desire
That Wit which of my heart does hold the reins.
O Eyes, that pierce our eyes without remorse,
O Heart, of worth to wear a royal crown,
O Head, that conquers more then Caesar's force,
O Wit, that turns the world even upside down:
Then Love be judge, what heart can thee withstand;
Such Eyes, such Hair, such Wit, and such a Hand.
A Letter from a Home spun Lover.
DEarest Duckling, be it known unto you, and to all men; that I have pist blood
three days and three nights since I last saw you, and received that unwomanly
answer from you: blind Cupid forgive you, for I am utterly undone by you.

Here follows their woing.
Clow. O Jug, how do I love thee?


Jug. Nay, thou know best, but I fear I shall never die with loving you.


Clow. No Jug, but I warrant thou would if thou had but a bit of me.


Jug. Pray why should you think so? did you ever see me cast a sheeps eye at
you? or did my nose bleed in your company? And as she spoke it bled.


Clow. How now Jug, who is in love now?


Jug. Not I upon my honesty, however you (...)


A Table.
In the Second Part.
1 A pastoral Song. 2 Patient Grissel. 3 A Song between truth and ignorance. 4
Judith and Holofernes. 5 In praise of the English Rose.
In the Third Part.
1 A Maidens choice twixt age and youth. 2 As I came from Walsingham. 3 The
winning of Cales. ^ Of Edward the third and a Countess. ^ The Spanish Ladies
Love. ^ A farewell to love. ^ The Lover by his gifts thinks to conquer
Chastity. ^ The woman's answer.
FINIS.

