AMORET, OR, Policy Defeated;

In a Satirical DIALOGUE BETWEEN MOPSUS and DAMON.

Jupiter in Coelis, Caesar regat omnia Terris;
Regnet at omnipotens undique, solus Amor.
LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown at the Sign of the Black Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar, 1682.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Earl of KINGSTON.
AS some young Be, bore by high Winds far from his proper Hive, at last in the
Hollow of some stately Oak it is little Stock of Honey lays; which, when found
by some Swain, proves a grateful Present to his Countrey-Love, so I separate
from the vast Swarm of Poets, whose united Buzzings secure themselves, humbly
offer this first innocent Essay to your Probation; which, though not its
Sweetness, may the sincere Respect I bear your Honor, make acceptable: And
trust me, Sir, the Goodness of a Flower is not so much proved by their often
sucking, as yours will be in Pardoning this first Attempt: And where may
Services well meant, hope Forgiveness, if not in your Honorable Family, which,
as it has always met, and deserved, Honor from the Supreme Fountain of Honor;
so those who have had Dependence on You, have in their proper Stations found its
kinder Influnce? And I beg your Lordship would permit me own my self what I
really am,

Your Lordships Most Humble Servant, L. C.

THE PREFACE.
AFter some small Consideration, I found, that Truth, as well as the Ladies,
move us most when nearest Naked; and this sort of Verse (if ever she wore
Poetry) has most become her: others being either so close wrought, they totally
hid; or fine-spun, they immodestly discovered those Secrets that were not to be
seen at all times.

Which possibly may be the Reason why the most ingenious Satyrs have not had
that happy effect that was designed or expected. And may be those that fear her
in that, may embrace her in This. And then no matter whether through the
Mimickry of a Fool, or Precepts of a Wise Man, we see our Failings, so we do
but leave them. I do not expect this will pass for the reason of my Choice with
all; for some will certainly imagine I put this taudry Crape in her hands,
merely because I had no Silk in my Shop; but since I design not Custom, that
will not spoil my Trade.

I do not here, City-Friends, accuse any of you of being Authors of a wicked
Design against the State, but only fear Ignoramus may have so far got the upper
hand of you, as to blind your Judgments, while you may be made Properties by
others. Nay, and when some probably would have plainly told you, that while you
neglected your Business at home, to mind State Affairs abroad, your Wives took
indirect means for Family Duties, and made you London-Cuckolds. I have modestly
withdrawn into the Country, merely to save your Reputations, and the Honor of
your Families.

Yet since I fear I Am still in the same danger 'twixt Whig and Bromigam, as
St. Paul 'twixt Pharisees and Sadduces; I think it Wisdom to make a Party. Know
then Loyalists, I am (as they term you) a Tory, the Son of a Tory, and for the
hope of a restoration of their Wits, to men that are out of them, and Peace
and Quietness to the Realm, am I this day called in question; and unless you
with a Band of charitable Censures make a Rescue, who knows what may become of
me? And I think I have partly obliged you thereunto, in leaving Mopsus and his
Wife unreconcil'd merely for your sakes.

But why do I publish my own Impertinencies, while I endeavor to suppress
others? The truth of it is, if they who understand no more of Government, than
I of Poetry, would but lay aside their curious Inquisitions into, and saucy
Reflections upon, Matters of State; they should be sure of never being troubled
more with Rhyme of mine: though I cut off my hand, and cast it from me, for so
much as once offending them. And if by any means I obtain my End, I shall do as
much good to the Body Politic, as he to the Ecclesiastic, who first purged
the Church from the Superstitious Errors, it once labored under.

AMORET, OR, Policy Defeated; IN A SATIRICAL DIALOGUE BETWEEN MOPSUS and DAMON.
Mopsus. SO; now you're serious, and that Pipe's laid by,
Once more on you I Will Reformation try.
Damon, you know I Have urged, that of all Laws,
Nature's, to us presses most home the Cause:
But since to private Interest you prefer
The public Good, you must it is Ruin share.
Why then so unconcerned do you pass by
Of common Danger the all-moving Cry?
You Have heard what I e'ne tremble to repeat;
Nor vvo'ud, but only to prevent your Fate:
How at last Mart with discontented Look,
Of Plots so feelingly the Stranger spoke,
As us with Ruin's dreadful apprehension shook.

Damon. I heard, and mind not, be they true or shamm'd,
Or whether The Authors shall be saved or damned.

Mopsus. Nay now you are mad, since you are the first that fly,
When by the Winds, or a distempered Sky,
You see some gloomy Tempest drawing nigh.
And when last Winter's Showrs each Chanel swelled,
And the o'reflowing Waters drowned the Field,
Your well-propt Hut alone securely stood
The Impetuous Rowlings of the mighty Flood.
And will you now your wonted care let fall,
When the vast Inundation threatens all,
Because it threatens All.

Damon. Yes; for'ts the way to ruin all, if they
Whose it is to serve, their Ruler disobey;
And to save all, over all usurp the Sway.

Mopsus. Nay called not so, if a distempered Head
Dulled with Disease, or erring Notions led
Forget; and th'hands with use grown skilful should
Supply the Stomach with it is wonted Food;
Without which't cannot subsist, and the Body may
In part, and not affect the Head decay.
Each Member then its force may jointly try,
To save the whole from the growing Malady,
And so preserve the Head.

Damon. Hold; for what might before have past for fear,
And the Effects of self-preserving Care:
Now, gilded wi'the last pretext, betrays
The subtle curling of a Serpent's ways:
Which, when in sweetest Flowers it lurking lies,
It Is pointed Venom least suspected tries.
The Soul, in the Head has always kept its Court,
And there, each Sense to Council does resort:
Nor can you hurt the Body any where,
But Sympathy affects its Agent there.
Now, if the major part enjoin a Fast,
And Members most depending on the Taste,
Under pretense decaying strength to increase
Should apply food (the Appetite to please,)
Would minish that, and heighten the Disease.
New ways of Consequence, because untrode,
Misguide more Trav'lers than the beaten Rode.
Last storm, when you with yours sought safer ground
I kept my Flocks within their proper bound,
And they were saved, and yours dispersed, or drowned.
And since the mighty Pan did never ordain
A King, but aptly fitted him for Reign:
With Heavens peculiar Gifts they are always blessed,
And ours particularly 'bove the rest.
Why then distrusting him or heaven, should I,
Search fates decree with a too curious eye;
Forsake my flock, since the just Pan will keep
As well the quiet shepherds as the sheep.
Safely through life's tempestuous Sea we steer
Who bear our own, but make our selves no care,
And motions rest when in its proper Sphere.
As Story tells, before his time, Sol's Heir,
Mounting but once his Father's burning Chair
Unfit for Rule; though while a Swain, none had
So near resemblance with a rural God:
Perished himself, and with misguided flame,
Endangered Heaven's Universal Frame.
Yet lest you think it is dull Stupidity
Makes me affect this safe Obscurity.
Know I Am more Publick-Spirited than You,
Who Are cautious only of Known Plots, I, New;
Which I Will disclose, to show how far you have erred.
That very Stranger you so lately heard,
Espouse our Cause with melting Words, and Eyes,
That moved us less for our own Fate than his;
Tries each Malicious Satyrs subtlest Arts
To blind our judgments, and betray our hearts.
No Worms more secretly decay the Rose,
Or in our Flocks the hid Contagion grows;
Then they, amongst us scatter Sedition's Seeds;
Strive to lay fallow, or ore-run with Weeds.
(Ere since deservedly they lost,) these flowery meeds.
Nor wants he skill to know which best will move case
Us to his ends, Ambition, Fear, or Love.
With which, when is wrought dislike to our present
Moulds us to any new ones, as he please.
Uneven tempers by the two first are swayed,
And you in both unluckily betrayed.
But I untoucht resisted all his art,
Till beauty made a passage to my heart.
For (though unmoved in Loyalty and Truth)
He found an easy softness in my Youth.
And all the tender symptoms that do prove
A frame by nature pliable to Love.
He showed me then the beauteous Amoret,
And who could see and escape --
He, whilst I stood with all her charms amazed,
And on her heavenly features only gazed,
Whispered soft words, such words that she
Was pleased with them, and for their sakes with me.
Such words! Each Goddess stood with listening ear,
And smiled, and wished to her he would made the prayer.
They, with the innocence of my look and mein
Moved her to pity, and say, she would be mine.

Mopsus. Stay; now you talk of Love, did you not see my Wife,
(For I Am so busy with the affairs of Life)
I Would e'ne forgot to ask, although but now
One of our Lads just told me that he saw
A spruce young Corser of the other Town.
Though 'ts out of season give her a green Gown.

Damon. O name not Women, they have ever been our curse,
And of all ills to us the fatal source.
Through Women first from Paradise we fell,
And through that Stranger, they are Hells Agents still.
Yours must be false, since mine is so, and she
Had all her Sexes truth and constancy.
Till by those arts he won her first to me,
He taught her scorn this low humility.
Urging her merit claimed a Sovereign sway,
(For she was always Lady of the May.)
And since heaven had her frame 'bove ours refined,
For somewhat greater than a Swain't designed.
Then tampered thus with me, now times are fit
For change, side thou with me, I Will make thee Great.
You say, you love; and greatness will regain
Your Amoret, and firmly both maintain.
'Twas well I loved (for the well baited hook
My sinking virtue desperately shook)
Till that, with just disdain my heart did fire,
(For that, where birth fails, can great Souls inspire.)
What though her shape excells all Womankind,
My admiration's not to that confined.
I loved her virtue, and when that decays,
Fancy may live, but real passion dies.
Tell her, said I, I here her loss will mourn.
And use base means, (though to enjoy her,) scorn.
It Is just that You, who your Allegiance loose,
Should have't repaid by Wives, in broken Vows.
But why must I be lost, since none did more
Then Damon, all you Deities, adore.
No Shepherd did more holy Offerings bring,
Lambs, fruit, fresh waters of the living Spring,
Or did in sweeter Notes your praises sing.
Not even they whose virtue grew so high,
As here on earth to share your Deity.
'Twas well-plac'd Love raised most of you to Gods,
And I in Amoret had sure the Odds.
O no! though Beauty finely guild the Face
It Is Golden Constancy that makes the Price;
And such were they, so to their Lovers true,
That had you then been Gods, they had resisted you.
'Twas such I dreamt my Amoret would prove;
And such she was, when led by artless Love.
You may remember; how each Sunny day,
(Wi'th' same Innocence those Young Lambs play)
In every pleasant Shade inclasp'd we lay,
And in soft breathings sighed our Souls away.
No damask rose so purely blushed, as she,
Such was the force of native modesty.
Whilst in her bosom wantonly I threw,
Pinks, Vi'lets, Jes'min, (sweetest Flowers that grew)
Yet sweeter there, then in May's pearly dew.
I carved her name on every growing bark;
With that I did my wandering younlings mark.
There were unfens'd lay open to the Strand,
Her name prescribed the limits of my Land.
I found no Bird that nature framed for speech,
But did there name in various Sonets teach.
That made the sweetest music of the wood,
And Echo, that so plainly understood:
That 'twou'd often self in whistling Winds repeat,
And in just motions neighboring Waters beat.
But now, bleak Winds blast all the tender Sprouts,
And quaking Sheep pierce through their tater'd Coats.
No Birds are heard here, but the ghastly Owl
Shrieking her baleful note; Wolves howl,
And stormy Waves in foaming Billows roll:
You see I Am not the merry Swain I was
But here forlorn, stretched on this witherd grass,
In doleful sighs the tedious hours pass.
She heard (for Cupid so designed) while she
Beneath a Wilows shady Covert lay.
And whether shame made her so long forbear,
Or curiosity of hearing more.
Who knows? at last, she, lest he farther grieved,
His drooping Spirits in such words revived.
I, through another, first to you did yield:
But's your own merit now has won the field,
I heard Maids always did their Lovers try,
Ere they resigned themselves, and liberty.
But lest, through ill conduct in the search, there lie
Some seeming cause for future jealousy.
Know that I stood by all their Arts unmoved,
And most, then when I seemed to scorn, my Damon loved.
And, thus, their ease and wealth I Will quit, for you;
And that is a powerful argument I Am true.
Come, since the night grows on, let us homeward go,
And love, when there, will prompt us what to do.
He, snatched his Pipe, and as they went, he played
Such tender notes, as soothed the yielding Maid,
And she to work his growing passion high,
Sung to his Pipe, in sweetest harmony,
These following Words,
Since Lov's the business of our Sex,
'Ts yours to keep us True.
Pan Shepherds only made for us,
And us, rewards to you.
If we Love on; then cal's not false,
Tho it should prove elsewhere.
It Is you are false, in leaving yours,
We move but in our Sphere.
So Planets, tho they are wandering Stars,
(And yo've often called me so;)
We Have found in their unequal ways
A just proportion go.
Mopsus the while, wi'th' same grizly Beard,
That made him once, as Policitian, feared;
And help of horns sneakt off wi'th' next Herd.

FINIS.

