THE CASE Of All Crucifixes, Images, etc. Made with hands, and for Religious
use, in the Case of Cheapside-Crosse is discussed. Whether their Militia, the
setting of them in a posture of Defense, be according to Law. The contrary is
maintained by him who has little Law, against those who have as little Reason.
Notwithstanding the Dispute is carried all along in a cool and orderly way, so
as the man in understanding may read himself here, and the times, That the
Idol, before the eye and in the heart, has made them fierce and perilous: Yet
blessed be God who has given his servants hearts engaged upon the casting
these Idols forth; has appeared with them; has wrought wonders for them and
the Land, which are briefly recorded for the Cities memorial, after a fragment
of a D. Holdsworth.
Sermon speaking clean contrary to the mouth of God is Answered from His mouth.

JUDGES 6.31. Will ye plead for Baal? Will ye save him? If he be a god, let him
plead for himself, because one has cast down his Altars.

ECCLES. 7.10. Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were
better then these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this.

Printed in the Climactericall year of Crosses and Crosse-men, MDCXLIII.

BY WAY OF PREFACE To the Reader.
SHould I, in rendering an account of this Case, present thee with a Toy, it
might pass with allowance; for experience tells us; That a Toy sometimes makes
a fuller discovery, what men's inclinations are, then a very serious matter can
do.

But surely this Case will be granted to be sad and serious both, if we consult
with Papist, Atheist, or Protestant either: And, I verily believe, of general
concernment also, relating not only to the Street-Crosse, but Highway, Church,
Chapel, Chancell, Window, Closet, Corner, Brow, Breast-Crosses, all the
Crosses in the world, that are the work of the cunning Crafts-man, or
otherwise made with hands and the fingers ends to help devotion or for
Religious use.

And yet I have not named the Master piece, nor the Master workman; this is
the heart, and that the Idol there, set up in that place, where God should have
His Throne: (note in passage, an Idolater dethrones God) for in the heart, the
peace, the love, the fear of God should bear sway; and in token of victory
over the Idol there, bear away the Garland (...). Palmam obtineat. Col. 3.15.
Hos. 13.2.
, as the purpose of the word is. Were all the forementioned Idols (they are the
work of the Crafts-man, according to his own understanding odious to God and
good men God will have no worship of our devising; we may only do what He
bids us, not bid what He commands not. Never did any true piety arise out of
the corrupt puddle of man's brain: If it flow not from Heaven, it is odious to
Heaven. Doctor ^ils contempt. lib 12.
) were they all cast out to the Moles and to the Bats, the heart would fetch
them in again, smooth them over and set them up before the eyes: for not only
these piles of Abominations, but every point of popery, had their original
draught in the heart, there they were first hatched. In very deed the heart is a
Common stew (no better;) therein you may find the Popes Chapel and
Masse-booke too. Therefore, though the Cross in the street, has moved the
quarrel, and it shall be served in its kind; one man or more has (served)
defiled that Baal a little, by the good word of God with me, I shall defile it
much 2 King. 10.18.
: But yet, since the quarrel has its rise only thence, with Gods help it
shall be carried on, to the defiling the Master-worke, and its workman, I
mean the heart and the Idol there, for thereon will the Lord power forth the
fury of His wrath, and the strength of battle. And there is mighty Reason why
it should be so; for, to say all in a word; That Idol has not only mated the
God of Hosts, setting up its self in His Throne, but also has, does, and will
move all the quarrels in the world. Saint James his question can receive no
other answer but his own, Whence comes wars and fightings among you James
4.1.
? Hence, even from your Idols, your lusts that war in your members. That has
been the answer, and that must be the answer to the worlds end. Devils and
Idols do all the mischief in the world.

But yet we will not believe this, and it is a strange matter, and as strange
a conceit, That we should feel our Crosses, feel them smart and sore upon us,
and not believe, that the Idol has caused them. It is a weak and fond conceit
too: as if we could think, That affliction comes out of the dust; Job 5 6.
and trouble springs out of the ground: that the rush grows up without mire
and the flag without water. Job 8.11.


I thought it very fit to mind thee (Reader) hereof on the threshold, that thou
might enter the house with more care and watchfulness: for this will
persuade thee to believe; That the Crosses Case is a sad and serious case,
which now I shall open unto thee so far, as may be suitable to a Preface.

You are not such a stranger to our Occurrences, as not to have seen or heard
what a stir there was some months since, about the Cross; what crossing of
shinnes, and of heads, and of backs, and of hearts too! What bloody noses, and
scratcht faces, and back-blowes there were, and all about the Cross, to
maintain it according to its dignity, in a posture of defense.

A man could not pass that way, but he must declare himself, whether for the
Cross or against it; he must not conceal himself in the Crosses case, (as in
good reason he might in such a presence but) if he did, he was Crossed, as
aforesaid.

One evening, hearing a noise thence, as sometimes from Paris Garden, I stepped
up the street, to resolve my self, whether there were any Bulls and bayting
there: and behold both; for there they stood as dogs at a Bay, bayting each at
other; who? The Psalmist answers, a company of spearmen (carrying their weapons
in their mouths Psa. 57.4.
) the multitude of the Bulls, with the Calves of the People Psalm. 68.30.
. Lord rebuke them said I, and away I trudged; for truly I never liked to
crowd-in amongst unreasonable Creatures, that cannot tell when, or how far to
put forth their strength, nor how to suspend or call it back.

But so every thing acts according to its principles, and I according to
mine; So soon as I returned home, I examined the case seriously and heartily;
and I issued the same, or rather the sacred Scripture for me, thus; though I
could not handle it altogether in the same order.

1. That the defacing the Cross is an act justifiable by the highest Law and
in the Highest Court. Surely it was never questioned by sober men since man was
upon the face of the earth, till now; whether of the two (considering what an
Image it is) had better warrant, the cunning Carver to fashion the nose by day;
or the Carvers adversary, to strip it off by night.

2. That this Cross so defaced is not to be pitied, pity shown to stocks
and stones argues cruelty toward a brother. A Righteous man regards the
life of his beast, but the tender mercies of the wicked are (the tender mercies
of the) cruel. Prove. 12.10.
So we should read it; tender mercies, and cruel! that cannot be: the meaning
is, the wicked have no mercies at all. Plane nullae Jun.


3. That the Cross stands not by warrant of Law; but by the pleasure of Man,
holding only by Tenure of free will and ignorance.

4. That it is an Idol and must down; his covering and ornament must be defiled
also, with the hand and heart both; and this will cause wars, even the strength
of battle; for the heart will struggle to maintain his Idol, and the Idol will
have great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time. Rev. 12.12
Notwithstanding all the trouble, God will overcome at last, and the Idol shall
be defiled. But good provision is made, that the City, parting with an Idol,
may have an Ornament, such as will advance the name of her God, and be to the
heart of the righteous there, the most specious Ornament, that ever was seen
in the world; A pillar shall be raised, named, dedicated, to the Known God,
known by confounding His adversaries, and working salvations for his Israel. An
objection follows touching the Cross, and an answer thereunto, then a little
good counsel, and then I have done prefacing.

Obj. It will be said, the Cross stands defaced only and no more; it is not
defiled: And perhaps his friends will beautify him again (they make him a
god, against propriety of speech, it shall be the masculine gender) wash his
face and wipe the dust from his eyes.

Ans. Perhaps so, yet I cannot believe it: Not, that now God has begun, His
enemies shall make an end. The Crosses case is before a judge, who will do
right, for He is the judge of all the world. He has given sentence in this
case; But yet betwixt the giving sentence against an evil work, and the
execution of the same, there may lie, though no gulf, yet a great space of
time: Therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do
evil Eccles. 8.11.
. while we are let alone (not troubled) we are the more nearely joined to
Idols Hos. 4.14.
. But this is the comfort, sentence is not only pronounced, but in part
executed upon these Idols: God has appeared to be as He has said, I will be
terrible to them, I will famish all the gods of the earth Zeph. 2.11.
: So He has said, then He will do it, no doubt of that. He has begun, He will
make an end. He has smitten the earth more terribly Esa. 2.19.
this last year, then the year before; It is not his manner (for his charge
is against it) to smite like a man, thrice 2 King. 13.18.
, and then stay; He will go on till He Has consumed.

But Reader, let us come home to our selves and consider, what patience have
we? There is need of a great deal, and that it has a perfect work James 1.4,
. Nay, there is a mother Grace, get that, and we have all; What faith have we?
you will say, a little faith, as a grain of Mustardseed. God be thanked for
that little, for that will grow; But we cannot stay the growth of it. It was
well answered to one, who said he was getting such a grace; "you should have
got it before, for you must use it now. Antea parandum utenduus nunc.
We cannot live upon a little in these dear, hard (...)
fierce, perilous Mat. 8.28. 2 Timothy 3.1.
times. A little will not serve the turn now. These are smiting and
extraordinary times. Take we unto us the whole Armor of God: above all taking
Ephe. 6.13.
the shield of faith. And now, supposing our selves standing in a good posture,
like completed soldiers, having our militia well ordered and sure, let us
fall a smiting too; and so (if the expression be fit) save God the labor of
smiting: when He smites, the stroke will be terrible. Either God must smite or
we must smite. At what? Every man at the Idols in his own heart; There they are
set up in that throne, else there had never been a stumbling block set up
before the eye. We must smite at these. And we must smite, not as once the King
did, by halves: he smote thrice and stayed: No, we must smite five or six
times, till we have smitten the Idols set up in our hearts, and have consumed
them; and then the stumbling blocks before the eyes will fall off themselves
and be utterly destroyed.

We, silly men, can be taken with no argument but what may be felt. Behold here
it is, and was intimated before. Look we all over the circumference, and round
about, and to every part of the same, so wide and large, we shall see all the
lines of our sorrows, our troubles and our fears tend directly to the Idol in
the heart, there they be centered, thence they come, be we well aware of it;
That we keep our hearts with all diligence, and our souls from Idols. Then
see the benefit; though we have the bread of affliction for our meat here, and
tears in plenty for our drink (for in reforming times so it may fall out) yet
notwithstanding all that, it will be peace at the last: There is a word of
promise for that; though at evening tide trouble, yet in the morning it is not
Esa. 17.14.
: Though in the midst of our years, and for a moment afterward we are
disquieted; yet, doing as aforesaid, our end shall be peace. Amen.

THE CROSSES CASE.
SECT. 1.
The Case opened. The injury done to the Carvers work there. His blasphemy in
giving sacred Names to that, which his own fingers have made.

THe sad Story touching the Cross begins, which yet made sober men laugh,
others cry, or do worse. Not long since a notable indignity was done upon the
Pile of Images in Cheape-side of ancient standing there. Some body, we are sure
of that, and a Man sure, but whether one or two or more, we cannot so well
tell, stepped up above the bars of Iron there enclosing the Cross, wrencht off
a Leg and part of the Thigh from that Image, they presumptuously called Christ;
plucked away the Popes Miter; disarmed his Cardinal; cracked the Queen Mothers
Crown, took away the half, and most shamefully defaced a fifth, for its Nose
is gone.

In common speech we call those Images so, as an unskilful Painter, drawing
the figure of a Lion, and supposing the beholders might think it an Ass, ^e
writ at the bottom of the Table, This is a Lion. Well then because those
Images stand upright like the Palm, we will take them to be as they are
called, neither Bears, nor Lions, but as in vulgar opinion and common speech;
the first I dare not Name, the second the Pope, the third his Cardinal, the
fourth the Virgin Mary, the fifth I know not who* old Saint George perhaps,
Doctor Heylins Saint, or Saint Innocent, for it stands like an harmless
fellow, more like to take a wrong then to do any; but if it be he, he has
been a brave fellow, a Pope in his days, some say a Bishop now; or Saint
Faux; he had that honor conferred upon him ever since his Fire-worke.

Reader, let us understand our own freedom, that we have as great a liberty
of conceit in these cases as the Carver has, and may use the same liberty in
giving a Name to this Saint now its Nose is off, as the Carver did when he
first put the Nose on. And we will give it a true Name, the same which all its
Ancestors have had before it: As the plain fellow said, he would call a Spade
a Spade, that he would, and so we are resolved to do; or, which more
instucteth, as the good King called the Brazen Serpent in those days, when
they would burn incense to it, not the Brazen Serpent then, but Nehushtan 2
King. 18.4.
plain brass and no more, nor of any more use then; so we must call it (and
there is much more reason for it) (...) a Stone; some more cost and pains
bestowed upon it and its fellows by the Carver, then what they had when they
lay together in the same Quarrey, and yet but a Stone. And it is the Name by
which the Lord calls them; She defiled the land and committed Adultery; with
what? with Stones and with Stocks. Jer. 3.9.
The cunning Carver should well observe this, who, as bold now as ever, dares
give different Names to Similar or like parts, as that this Stone is, I must
add, etc. for I fear to speak forth; but this I will say, a lie is in his
mouth, as it is in his hand, and blasphemy also. All his Art and Cost can make
it no other thing, but what it is, Wood and Stone; therefore the part (of the
wood and stone) Must have the same Name with the whole. Pars similaris est,
quae idem cum toto Nomen habet.
But it cannot be expected that the cunning workman will hear and fear and
do no more presumptuously, because it has been a question long since,
whether the Carver or his stock be more senseless. Psalm. 135.18.


Having now given this Saint its true Name, which belongs to all its fellows,
being descended from the same common stock, and having reproved the Carvers
blasphemy. I go on in my story to enquire the time when this Sacrilege (as
they call it) was committed. When was it done? We cannot tell the precise
time; it was a Night work, that is certain; for, as was said touching the
defiling of such another Image; And so it was because he feared his fathers
househould, and the Men of the City that he could not do it by day, that he
did it by Night. Judge. 6.27.
So here, the Man (for I will take him single) feared the Men of the City, and
did it by Night; what time of the night? whether in the third or fourth watch
is uncertain too. But certain it is he watched his time, and took it whilst
the Watch was fast asleep. So we have the story: now hear what followed.

SECT. II.
The next morning opened the case more clearly, and the thoughts of men about
it. Next night they made their watch strong, but had they thought on it sooner,
they had made a wiser choice. Ancient Records assure us, that Geese are the
most approved watch, and choicest guard about Images.

NExt morning the battery made upon the Cross was in to make supplication;
and, beholding what was done, in stead of supplication they put up a railing
accusation against him, that had done them no hurt: And the wise Citizens,
neighbors there abouts were troubled about it, they chattered, and little
better then railed too. Then they resolved upon the question (for they saw they
had to do with a sleeping watch) to watch it better for after times, so to
keep their Cross in a posture of defense: for that purpose, they had
Soldiers keeping watch about it, and a Captain a good friend to the same. Had
they but one night sooner taken their time for so grave a consultation, and
been pleased to have admitted me into their council, I think I should have
overruled them by a ruled case, and so have diswaded from making choice of
Soldiers to watch their Cross: for they for the most part, and as their
supply is, will eat and drink to the full, and then, as experience tells us,
are fast asleep when the spoyler comes. The Children of darkness were wiser
at this point, then are they, who profess themselves children of light. They
committed the safeguard of their Images to those Creatures, which are very
wakefull, being fed with dry meat, and their drink is as small as water. It
is a Booke-Case registered in the Roman Antiquities, and thereon depends a very
bloody story; I will pass that over, and briefly set down so much as relates
to the case, because it may stand us in stead, if not to watch the Cross, yet
to safeguard our houses.

The Romans had a plurality of Images as we have (...).
(I must not yet call them Gods nor Idols neither, I shall anon by very good
warrant) their Household and their Closset Images; some standing more open,
other some more reserved. But these suffered many indignities and very
scornful usage, not only from Mice, Rats, and Spiders, but from the hands of
violent Men, who have tumbled them about the house, and trod them like mire in
the street, as if the Carver had bestowed no cost nor worth upon them.

They had also their Tutelar Images, such wherein they placed the safeguard of
their City, and whereto they gave the same Veneration, (I must not say
Adoration) as the Papists to their Cross; these they committed to their
strongest hold, their Capitol; and for their safeguard and surest watch, there
they appointed a most wakefull Guard over them, a guard of Geese, which did
discharge their cure very well and like themselves, and so quitted the place in
a time of great extremity and most eminent danger, as we may read if we would
draw out the story a little longer. I will record no more of the story here,
but what honor and dignity was done by the Romans to their Geese for their
good service done to them and their Images; in memory whereof, and in return
of thankfulness for such a deliverance; Luc Fl. lib. 1. cap. 14. Aug. de
civit. lib. 2. cap. 22.
The Romans appointed as great a Festival to the honor of their Geese, as the
Papists do to the glory of their Cross, for it stands upon record at this
day, being registered the Gooses Holiday.

SECT. III.
All that has been said hitherto was intended purposely for the scorn of
Images, their Carvers, Servers, and upholders. The Sober man can turn to a
sacred Story, and learn from it the doom of Images, and Image servers.

IT will be said now, That all this hitherto is ridiculous. Indeed it is so
acknowledged, and so intended, as best befitting now the brutish workman and
his work; The Name he presumptuously puts upon it; the regard also and watch
he foolishly sets about it: He that will be serious, can turn to the sacred
story, thence observe a greater defilement then was all this here with us, upon
the Images and their worshippers, for there was a Guard and Captain set about
them, who smote the worshippers with the edge of the Sword, then brought forth
the Images and burnt them. 2 King. 10.23.25,26.
They ceased not here, for they brake down the very chief and Prince of the
Images (the Image of Baal) Verse. 27.
and they brake down its house over its head, and about its ears too. What
then? then Baals friends called a guard to watch it by night, and cunning
workmen to build it by day; and Carvers to form and fashion it anew; was it
not so? No, Baal had not a friend that durst appear for him. I pray you let us
read on in the story, and observe it well; The Soldiers and Captains brake
down the house, (the covering of Baal, that which sheltered it from the injury
of weather, we shall hear more of that anon) and made it a draught house unto
this day. Here was a defilement indeed, a notable indignity, greater by far
then had been, if they had plucked off his Leg and Thigh too, and Nose also;
they shattered the Image to pieces; they brake down the house of Baal; and
which was the highest indignity that could be offered, but best befitting that
Lordly thing, they set there in place and stead thereof, a vessel, wherein is
no pleasaure, Hosea 8.8.
for they made Baals house a Draught-house unto this day; Now Baals friends
will appear in his case, and object here, First.

Ob. That these worshippers so smote with the edge of the Sword were the
worshippers of Baal.

An. Yes there is no doubt of that, for the context is plain: Verse. 23.
but yet this is more then they will grant us anon; when they will say, it is
one thing to serve an Image, another thing to worship it (but of this in due
place) Those worshipped Baal, that is plain, and were called Baalites, such,
who cut and flashed themselves till the blood gushed forth upon them, 1 King
18.28.
much after the manner as the Papists use upon their Good Friday.

Obj. 2. And the Image was Baals Image; and then it was served well enough, for
it was an Idol, and the most filthy, beastly, most abominable Idol that ever
was gazed upon; some conclude the name of it was Priapus, and there is searce
any man, Scholar or no Scholar, but he knows what that was, a filthy god
indeed.

An. 2. My little reading can give little satisfaction what this Idols Name
was; (...)
Baal is a common Name as Lord with us; and he was resembled by diverse figures
according to the pleasure of the Carver and the employment he was designed
unto: He served the Sechemites according to Covenant, as their Guardian or
Tutelar god, which they called Baal-Berith, Jud. 8 33
and his Figure was (I conjecture so, and the wisest can no more) a Goose. He
served others to drive away the flies, which they called Baal-Zebub, 2 King.
1.3. vid. junium.
their Fly-god; and his figure was a fly. He served others to watch their
fields, and gardens to fright away the Crows thence, which they called
Baal-peor, and his figure was, Priapus as some affirm at this day. These are
but conjectures wherein we take a latitude: The truth is, Baals Image was a
very proteus for his various shapes; he was every thing, what the Carver
pleased, and yet nothing, neither fish nor flesh; but if any thing in the world
then wood or stone, a very stock, which is the Name was given to all his
Ancestors, and must serve to all the pedigree of Images unto the worlds end.
The holy Ghost gives us his proper Name, calling him, That shame. Hosea 9.10.
We are sure that is his Name, and belongs of right to all the stock of Images
that ever were, or ever shall be framed by the cunning Workmen, not a
shameful Idol, but in the Abstract, That shame. And yet let us take good
notice of this, that Baals Image, that-shame, was not such a shame, such a
filthy thing as is that Image so lately defiled. Why so? Because Baals Image
was, as it was named, Baals Image; and this had its form or figure as you
heard, a Goose, a Fly, or a loathsome thing, which I will name no more, being
called by his proper Name, and so it was named, that shame; like to like, a
very good agreement. But the Image now so lately defiled is as filthy all over
as Baals Image was: and that which makes it more filthy and more abominable
yet, is the Name, the daring workman at first put upon it, was received from
his mouth and so continued to this day, he named it and so do others from his
mouth; (I fear to speak after them, yet I must) Christ, the Lord Christ
declaring himself to be the Son of God with power by the resurrection from
the dead Romans 1.4.
All this suggested in the Name, for they call the Image now defiled. Christ
rising from the grave.

Truly I want words to set forth the abominations and Blasphemies of this
generation, I mean the generation of those cunning vile men, those
Image-Carvers. And yet, now I remember, words could stand us in no stead,
because the workmen and their works are alike, so blockish, and senseless,
as aforesaid.

We will conclude from the premises, that, since this Image is so filthy and
abominable, yet is called by so excellent a name: Since, it is that shame, that
shame to Christianity, to profession, to the Gospel, to those who would show
themselves Men, and yet is Named that glory, the glory of the Church her
Christ, a King, a Prophet, and a Priest; since I say it is so named, and yet
this Glory is changed into the similitude of a Stone or Lead, such vile and
contemptible matter; therefore the person that plucked off the Leaden Leg and
part of the Thigh from the Image did very well: And if the Magistrate now shall
break down all the Images, and defile their Covering, so destroying them out
of Israel, he shall do better: for besides what has been said, we must
consider this, That Baals Image, though a filthy thing, that shame, yet was the
Image (as ours are) pleasant to the eyes, and to be desired; which appears,
because Israel, a wise and understanding people were inamoured with it, so as
they joined themselves to it. Numb. 25.3.
See how insnaring these filthy things were! They were a trap and a snare and a
ginne to Gods own people. Are they not as insnaring still? I will inquire into
that anon, and resolve it. In the mean time sober men will learn by this, to
observe their charge and do thereafter; Esa. 30.22
Ye stall defile also the covering of thy graven Images of Silver, and the
Ornament of thy molten Images of Gold; thou shall cast them away as a
menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto it, get thee hence.

We shall make very good use of this sacred Scripture anon, in defense of the
accused if he stood at the bar: In the mean time we will take a view of what
is said; The madness of these men is rebuked, who miscall their Images; their
folly manifest for keeping a guard and watch over them: sober men have taken
forth their lesson also. Now I must reprove these so pitiful men for showing
mercy and brotherly compassion toward stocks and stones. Surely a scorn will
be put upon them for such foolish pity.

SECT. IIII.
Their foolish pity is laughed at by the Ancients, Jews and Gentiles; Living
Images command pity, the dead scorn.

I Will not ask the former sort (the Papists) what ayleth them Judge. 18.24.
, for their gods are defaced. Nor will I at present say to the other sort, as
he to the men that stood by, will ye plead for Baal, will ye save him Judge.
6.31. Barn. 6. Hor. Sect. 1. Sect. 8. Mar. 8. Ep. 39. Tib. 1.10. M. faelix in
fol. h. 16. l. 2. v d. Com. Lact. 2.2.
? I think it may sit very well to reason out the case a little in scorn of
that Image, as I find both Jews and Gentiles, Heathens and Christians have
done before me in the like case; and so I shall make way to my scope after this
manner; Here is a battery committed; What though? let him complain that is
damnified, hurt, or grieved.

First, here is no damage none at all; the Popes power is not a jot the less
now his Miter is gone; his Cardinal can do as much with one hand, as he did
before with two. And the Mother can command her son as imperiously as ever
she did, though half her crown be gone. And the defaced Saint smells as well
now without a Nose as before when it was fresh and new out of the Carvers shop.
They have received no damage none at all.

Secondly, nor are they hurt or grieved; It is their patience you will say to
stand stock still and silent, when vilified or injured: yes, be it so, but
here I should rather think it the effect of use and custom: for these Images
have been so long exposed to the scattering of Crows and other birds, to the
spitting and spauling, to the injury of weather, hail, rain, winds; that now
they can suffer any thing, even dust to be cast into their eyes, and yet not
wipe it off. Here is no hurt done, no grievance at all. The Image next cried
not Oh, no not when the fellow plucked off its leg and thigh both; nor did it
resist at all, nor thrust the man from it, when he more then played with its
nose; doubtless there was no hurt done, for then it would have cried out in
the ears of its neighbors. Why then do the men of the City complain? where
lies the grief? they are a little wiser I hope then Demetrius the Silver
Smith, and pretty well persuaded Acts 19.26.
That they are no Gods which are made with hands, why then should they
complain as they do and call out so bitterly?

SEGT. V.
These so pitiful men show compassion to the Cross and none to the City;
they are questioned and rebuked for so doing.

THey have but one thing to answer, and truly they will speak against their
own Souls; they tell us a goodly pile of Images is defaced, which (they will
tell us anon) they accounted an ornament to the place.

Well but fith they will cry out of this indignity, which was offered to a
pile of stones; I must question them about their outcry in the presence of God,
and they must answer as in the same presence. But who are they that are now to
be questioned? if they are not known by their contrary walking; nor their
folly yet made manifest, it shall not be made so by my pen. The duty of
private persons is to go backward and cover the nakedness of their brethren;
and in reference thereto, I hope my care shall be to carry all level to this
mark, the good of my brother and his information; therefore I must question
them for their foolish pity (indeed you cannot give it a lighter word.) But
before I question them I must put down a Thesis first, a truth which no man
can deny, and it is this.

"Man, as he is the most excellent creature in the world so is he the most
noble and venerable Image that ever was looked upon since Jesus Christ was upon
the earth; he is a living Image of God, made by the very hand of God, and in
this respect a thousand fold more excellent then all Images made by the hand of
Man; this is the Thesis; I must premise three words more.

Six years ago or thereabouts, three Images were defiled all at once, which
could breath, and smell, and hear, and wipe the dust from their eyes; yea,
such they were, that had knowledge to open the eyes of them, who were borne
blind. These three were Pillored, defaced, stigmatized, in plain English,
marked for Rogues, because they were faithful and kept close to the Law of
their God, as was made manifest when their cause was made known, and the Word
of the Lord had tried them; we read on there, Then they sent and loosed them,
the Peers and the people, let them go free. Psalm. 105.18,19,20.
But when time was, so villainously they were used, and for the reason above
said.

Now I put the question to these pitiful men, much after the same, which
Gidion put to Zeba and Zalmunna; Judge. 8.18
What manner of Images were they, which ye saw (or heard were) so abused? They
must answer as their brethren in that place did, As thou art so were they, each
one resembled the Children of a King. Then I must reply as follows, Verse. 19.
They were your brethren even the sons of your mother. I may go on, for the
case will allow of the same zeal; As the Lord lives the pity and compassion
these men have shown to stocks and stones when they showed none to their own
flesh, cries for vengeance against them. What? can they pity Images, which
cannot wipe the dust from their eyes, and can they show no pity at all to
these, who resemble the children of a King, who are their Brethren, even the
Sons of their Mother? As the Lord lives they have done and spoken all this for
and behalf of the Cross against their own souls. What? so careful to
maintain the honor of their Cross, and so careless of their brethren? Zech.
11.9.
That that dies let it die, and that that is to be cut off let it be cut off.
What care they? (I allude to these words, which are indeed the words of the
Lord, showing Himself careless of a stubborn people, who would be careless
of Him, and of His words) what so careless of their Brethren? David was not so
toward his enemies; Psalm. 35.13.14.
But as for me when they were sick my clothing was sackcloath; I humbled my
soul with fasting, I behaved my self as though he had been my friend or
Brother; I bowed down heavily as one that mourncth for his Mother. It is a
point of humanity to pity men in their adversity; it may be our own case,
being our selves also in the body; Heb. 13.13.
I ask again, what, so careless of their Brethren? why not as careless of
stocks and stones?

The Lord smote Jonahs Gourd, and it withered, He prepared also a vehement
wind, which with the Sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and
then he spoke like a distempered Man, unadvisedly with his lips. We must
observe how the Lord questions him. Jonah 4.8.
Do thou well to be angry for the Gourd Jonah? Yes; Then said the Lord, Verse.
10.
Thou have had pity on the Gourd, for the which thou have not loboured,
neither made it grow, why then is thy eye evil? wherefore art thou
displeased, that I should spare so great a City, where are so many persons and
so much Cattle? This reproof would fall heavy upon these men, for they have
pitied a more base, vile, and contemptible thing then was the Gourd; but they
have not pitied their Brethren, nor that place, where are so many persons and
so much Cattle; I do present it only to their saddest and most retired
thoughts, and conclude it with a yet sharper reproof from the Lords own Mouth
in a very like case, for then they did lavish gold out of a bag to beautify an
Image; here they have done as much and more, for they lavish words also to
defend the same; The reproof is, and it is a sharp one; Isa. 46.8.
Remember this, and show your selves Men; bring it again to mind O ye
transgressors.

SECT. VI.
They justify themselves.with a little Reason, and as little Law, which tells
them, That their brethren were defaced by power from lawful au thoritie; the
Cross not so, but in an unwarranted way. The contrary is maintained, and the
person cleared by the best reason and Law both, and in the Highest Court, the
Law and Court of Heaven.

WE must hear now what these wise Men have to say for themselves, for they
will not be mad without Reason. They have a twofold Reason, and the latter has
some show of Law, why they were so careless of their Brethren, and have
enveighed so much against the defilement of, and injurious dealing (as they
call it) against their Cross.

First, they do acknowledge as Men, Prove. 17.17.
that a friend indeed loves at all times, and a brother is borne for
adversity. Nay they yield too; Prove. 18 24.
That there is a friend that sticks closer then a Brother. But yet in that
they showed themselves neither as friends nor as Brothers to their Brethren in
adversity, they have this only to say, Prove. 21.10.
That better is a neighbor that is near, then a Brother that is afar off.
Therein is the pith of their Reason. The Cross is their Neighbor near unto
them, daily in their eye, which falling into the hands of a thief who wounded
it, commands their pity: their Brethren are afar off, some beyond the Seas,
all out of sight, and then out of mind, and not regarded: So they say, or if
they say not so, yet their actions make their thoughts and words legible.

I would only advise here, that they would turn to the parable, Luke 10.29
and resolve themselves at this point, Who is their Neighbor? The Cross they
say; The fore-quoated place tells them no, their Brother is their neighbor;
and their neighbor their brother all the world over. He that is fallen into
the hands of spoylers; He that needs my hand or my heart, my purse or my
prayers, he is my neighbor, though a thousand miles off from me.

I say again, he is neighbor and brother too. Who? Not that, which is
nearest to me in place, for so stocks and stones may be, as in this case: But
he who pertakes of the same common nature with me; and so chalengeth a
nearenesse with my affections and place in my heart; he is my neighbor. The
neighborhood then (for so we may call it) of the Cross should not have taken
up any room in their thoughts, living Images were spoiled and left wounded;
they stood bound to show themselves neighbors; to show mercy what they could;
But clean contrary they neglected their brethren and showed themselves
neighbors unto dead Images, for there they showed mercy, and would not be
accounted uncharitable men for all that, for they have now a second Reason
which they call Law.

2. What was done to these living Images was done by the hand of lawful power.
So they say.

Answ. I cannot yield that. A power it was, permitted by God, but maintayn'd
against God and His laws, and the undoubted Right of His subjects and people;
but that dispute is needless here, let it pass. Grant them their saying, let
the Authority be whose it will be (the Devils I think, for he does cast the
Righteous into prison) Revel. 2.10.
yet will it not follow, that they should not show pity and compassion to
their Brethren, children of a King, and sons of the same Mother: they go on
reasoning and object.

Obj. This insolent fellow committed a Riot, and made a Battery upon a
venerable Image against all Reason, and in affront to Authority.

Answ. We will examine that, and must reply. The man did not act against
Reason; knowledge and understanding guided his steps, carrying him to that
work, the defiling of those Images: For it was concluded long since from the
Chair at Oxford; That it was expedient the Cross should be taken away: surely
there was Reason and reading both, and this the Man might know being so
publicly known.

Obj. They reply; It was not concluded from the Chair that Common hands should
remove or defile it.

Answ. Why may not common hands serve to remove an unclean thing? It is an
unclean thing; and common and unclean will stand together. But this is to
beg the Question, which we are to resolve anon.

Obj. Their meaning is; It is not concluded that a man should do this without,
or against the command of the Ruler; things must be done orderly, by order from
lawful Authority.

Answ. True, and so he did; not without, or against the command of the Ruler,
the King of kings, and Lord of lords. The command is peremptory, directed not
to one but to the people; Deuteronomy. 12.23.
And you shall overthrow their Altars, and break their Pillars, and burn
their groves with fire, and you shall bow down the graven Images of their
Gods; and destroy the Names of them out of that place; Mark how the charge
runs, like a VVhirle-wind, for it is against Images; overthrow, hew, break
down, destroy.

Obj. But it is meant you shall do this, but not against the mind of the Ruler.

Answ. I answer first: when we have a command from above, no command from below
can counter-checke it: His command who is absolute must stand; according to His
charge things must be done.

Obj. But in an orderly way, not with tumults and noise.

Answ. Here was neither: he did his work neither with multitude nor with
tumult Act. 24.18
. The noise and tumult was the next morning and after night by those who
maintained the Militia of ^e Cross.

We abhor tumultuary courses, heady and unwarrantable proceedings, and have
nothing whereof to accuse the Cross enemies herein: That which he or they did
against it, was done, as was now said, not with tumult or noise, but with as
much discretion and silence as could be. The Crosses friends they came with
multitude and with tumult; with a Guard and a Captain both, against all
presidents of former Ages, except in the case of Baals Altar, They should have
resolved as Jehu (in the like case) and said as he did; 2 King. 10.18.
the person yesternight served Baal a little, we shall serve him much; he
took away the leg and thigh we will take away the whole bulk, he plucked off
the Nose, we will pluck of its head. This had been a work for a Guard and
Captains, and but according to former presidents.

Obj. But that which was done, and that which is argued should have been done,
that and this must have a warrant from the Ruler, his Fiat first, let it be
done.

Answ. Indeed it should have been so, and then it had been done more
decently, and in better order.

How much to be wished, that so it might have been, that the Chief and Prime
Man in the City had been the first that would have consecrated his hands upon
the Image? Exodus 32.29.
Then things are done decently, and in order to a blessing, when the Ruler like
a true Gideon, goes before, and bids his followers look on me and do
likewise. Judge. 7.17
What hopes the man had, that the Magistrate would lead him the way to the
defiling of the Cross, I examine not, but leave the world to judge; certain
it is, the Man saw that nothing did so cross the Militia of the kingdom as
Crosses, and Images (I must not call them Idols yet) out-facing God and His
command there: Therefore he would venture upon the tallest of them all, and
hazard his joints to pluck off a limb, which the cunning Carver had put on.
Who has any thing to say to that? His joints are his own, and well hazarded
in a matter so nearely concerning the honor of God. It was a Zeal according
to knowledge for ought we can see, and well ordered for ought I know, or any
wise man dare judge. And it is to be thought according to the Rule of pure
charity and right reason, that he fe^ God and honors the Ruler as much and
more then they that complain of him, and stand so stiff for the Militia of
the Cross. He waited patiently these seventeene years what the Magistrate
would do, and observing him this year more ready to beautify the Cross then
to defile it, and such a fall of Idols, and Idoll-shepeheards, and yet the
Cross standing still, he resolved to venture a broken shin and to play the
Soldier, so entered the Lists against Pope and Cardinal, and the venerable
Lady too. And truly the success was I think, beyond expectation, such as may
assure us, he had a power with him, a watch and guard over him, for he disarmed
the Adversaries, returned conqueror, loaded with the spoils of Miters, Arms,
Noses, Crowns, and so, by the benefit of the Night he got the day and is safe
enough.

Let them that are grieved complain: It is a very small thing to him who
complains against him in that matter; he thanks God, the Law is open, the law
of Heaven he means, and the two bloody Courts are shut: He takes no more
liberty now then before, for he chose the Night to do that, which should have
been done in the Day time and before the Sun: But he knows, that which
would have been accounted a crime there, is accounted a virtue now in the
judgment of good men, Quae hic mala putautur, hac sunt in coelo bona Lact. 5.
15. ^.
and the Court of Heaven: and thereto he appeals and from thence he has his
Quetus est in this matter. And he is assured that when the Lord comes, Who will
both bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
Counsels of the hearts;he shall have praise for defiling that which God
Himself, 1 Cor. 4.3.
and the souls of all the Godly do loath and abominate.

And so much to clear the person from the cavills of lewd men, who hold up
dead Images and throw down the living, what they can; pitying the one and
neglecting the other. This could not be omitted here because the folly of such
men must be made manifest, who made an outcry now when they should have
rejoiced; and complained not, nor mourned when time was, though they were
called unto both; for so David did, he mourned for his enemies, these not so
for their Friends.

SECT. VII.
Twenty Arguments to maintain the Militia of the Cross, our men refuse them
all, create one of their own; It must stand because it is an Ornament.

THe chief and hardest work is now behind, and is like to cause a hot
contestation. The question is, whether this pile of Images shall stand or fall?
The adversary puts himself in good hope, and the thing out of all question;
The Cross shall stand, for he has twenty arguments for the standing and
maintayning of it in a posture of defense. There is no Papist so silly and
simple but if he can tell, and is sure of it, that twice ten is twenty, he has
so many Arguments for the Cross and the maintayning the Militia of the same.
But I shall not trouble my self and the Reader with any one of those
Arguments, for just reasons; First, because I am not to contend with rigid and
professed Papists: But with Protestants at large, and in Name only: and they
will not urge any one of these arguments for the standing of the Cross*
(indeed they are ashamed of them, they are so ridiculous.) Besides, if I shall
prove anon that the Cross is an Idol, as I think I shall, then those twenty
Arguments and as many more will not be worth two strawes. I do assure the
Reader that our Military men, I mean those that stand for, defend, watch and
ward the Cross do renounce all those Arguments, twenty at the least,
thinking themselves wise enough to frame an Argument, that they may call their
own, which the Papists do scorn also. If my word might be taken I would give
it with the strongest assurance that Man can give; that they have but one
argument for the Militia of the Cross, I mean for the defense thereof, and
that is this. It is an ornament to the place where it stands, and to the whole
City; And for that only reason (such as it is) they can lavish gold out of
the bag for the repayring its losses, and beautifying thereof: And being so
repaired, they would undertake to defend and guard it all the days of their
life.

Why (wise men) would you do so? If Silver and Gold be so plentiful with you,
lavish Gold out of the bag, and weigh Silver in the balance, and send it
into Ireland. No, they will not hear of that, we knew that before; they that
favor Crosses, speak, plead for, and love dead Images, hate the living; we
know it by their practice; But yet I say, they have but this only to say for
the standing of their Cross, It is an Ornament.

What an Idol? and yet an ornament; those words are as we use to say (...), ye
cannot make the words agree, an Idol and an Abomination; there is an
agreement: An Idol I then down with it even to the ground; that agrees well
also, the ground, and an Idol: Thence its original, thither let it go. But
they will not grant it to be an Idol; an Image they will grant it to be, and
no more.

SECT. VIII.
We say the Cross is an Idol, therefore an abomination; they grant it to be
an Image but no Idol; and allow service to it, but no worship; that
distinction is ridiculous.

BUt here they must yield more whether they will or no; it is the work of men's
hands we say; so are your clothes they say, and yet no Idol. I cannot tell
that, our clothes may be Idols, and we little better, but I go on; There is
a bowing to it; therefore an Idol say we: The Papists bow before it, not to
it; he does not terminate his worship there, he is not such a fool, but
carries the worship through the Image unto God, therefore no Idol say they,
an Image if we will, and more they will not grant us; though we should strive
tooth and nail, hand and foot, yet we shall dragge them no further.

Here would be a strife about words and Names; for two Names there are (we
shall hear them anon) which yet signify but one thing, differing no more then
do with us, our meat and food. According to the grave Counsel, I will leave
it off before it be meddled with Prove. 17.14.
, only the Reader must know this; that our Men and the Papists go along hand
in hand thus far; they do allow of Images but no Idols: and they know a way
to give the Image its due, and God His, by a fair distinction, and keep
themselves from Idols well enough. There is they say (...) and (...) I know
not how to English it to their minds, but I think it is this. There is
Veneration and Adoration, or if that like not, let it be worship and service.
The first they give to God only, the other to the Image (and yet no Idol)
They worship God and they serve Images: Here is a divided service, like a ship
cut in sunder, neither Mine nor Thine, but the waters Cassellilus Narim si
dividis nec tu nec socius habebitis. Macrob. Sat. 2. Cap. 6.
: A mongrell Religion, like that we read of, 2 Kings 17.33.
they feared the Lord and served Devils, for it was after the manner of the
nations; next verse you read, They feared not the Lord; no, He must have our
fear our worship and service, and all; and the Image, as it is nothing, so
must it have nothing at all. The forenamed Chapter will clear it to us, that
the Hebrews acknowledge no such distinction, Verse. 12. Verse. 16.
they served Idols and worshipped the Host of Heaven. But they, who would have
further resolution in so plain a case, may read our Churches Jewel Jewel Ap.
Art. 14.
(I could cite Greek Authors here more then two or three) who brings the
dispute to this issue; there is no more distinction between (...) and (...)
Worship and Service in the sacred Scripture, then is betwixt operation and
working. And so he tells us a short but merry tale of the Physicians wife, and
her opinion touching Pepper. The question was amongst the good wives, whether
Pepper was hot or cold; both answered the Doctresse, It is hot in operation but
cold in working; there is the distinction, subtle enough for a woman, who
finds it work enough to understand and guide one Tongue: the Man's distinction
is no wiser, who professes to understand three; for if I serve God aright, I
worship Him aright; if a thing operates well, it works well, and if my meat
be good my food is not bad: he that understands neither Greek nor Latin
understands these words, and no difference in them at all, we will then smile
at the distinction and let it go, for we must be serious Though yet we will
remember what Bishop Jewel said at this point also, what Religion is that,
whose service we cannot mention without suspicion of scoffing?

SECT. IX.
Clear proof made from the clearest light, and truest evidence, that Images
are Idols.

NOw we come closer to the business, to prove that Crosses, Crucifixes,
Images, are Idols. And to make this clear we will:

First, Hear what the Papists say.

Secondly, what our own men must grant.

Thirdly, we will consult with the Oracle, what the Word of God says; I shall
be short in all this, for it were a shame to make it a long work to prove a
Cross an Idol.

1. What say the Papists? In Breviar infra heb. dom. 4. quadra.
hear them if your ears can endure; All hail O Cross, our only hope in
this time of the passion, increase righteousness to the godly, and give pardon
to guilty persons. We have heard them with our ears, do they not tingle? We
will hear no more, for I do assure the Reader, so many words as they have
touching the Cross so many blasphemies. I need not ask now, is the Cross an
Idol? The Papist will say, No, No? They bend before it, they pray unto it,
then it is a God Ecce plumbatur, construitur erigitur, nec ad huc Deus est.
Ecce ornatur, consecratur, oratur, tunc postremo Deus est. Min. Fol. infol.
page 16. line 25.
whether the Papist will or no. But I have done with them, our ears are too
chaste to hear Blasphemers: hear what our Men say, they are a little wiser:
and more sober a little. What say they?

2. They say there is no Idolatry in the Cross, no Idol service given unto
it, none that they see. They see no bending before it, nor praying unto it, so
they say.

We say, that surely they might see if they took time for observation, all
that before mentioned, done before their Cross: others have seen it more then
two or three times, I will name one in the Margent Master Standish without
Cripplegate.
, a man of good report. Certainly men and women both have been observed to bow
there, and to patter out we know not what, not themselves neither. Hist. of the
world lib. 1. Chap. 10 Sect. 7.
And the Devil hears them, that is certain too: for there he is crept into
those stocks and stones, and there has nezled himself, as the learned Knight
says. Those men might consider, and they must grant unto us now, that that may
be done before the Cross which they see not. And therefore I command from them
now, what they cannot deny me, that is this, That the Cross is subject to
possibility of an Idolatrous use. This they must grant me. For what though
they would scorn to bend before a stock? What though they see none that so
do? Yet it is possible, that others do bow to it and pray before it too, I
say there is a possibility, because I will say no more but what they must yield
me a possibility (though we know it is a certainty, and has been so deposed.)
And now I command the rest; Because there is a possibility, that thereby many
may be deceived, and thrust away from the service and pure worship of God; what
follows then? Therefore it is naught and must be thrown down. Then take away
the Bread and Wine both, for Papists Idolize the one and Drunkards the other.
True, but here is a wide difference; Bread is of Gods institution, so is not
the Cross, therefore down with it, thine eye shall not pity it, neither
shall thou spare, (no, though it be thy Brother, Son, daughter, wife, if
these or any of these would thrust thee from thy God) but down with it even to
the ground; because there is a possibility, it may thrust thee away from the
Lord thy God.

We must avoid all possibility of Idolatry, all things that may lead that way;
and walk on straight, turning to neither hand, in a right path, the way of the
upright, for that is safe. There is a worship of God (a worship in spirit and
in truth) which is not subject to a possibility of being Idolatrous: For there
is no possibility of darkness in Light, no possibility of evil in goodness.
A wise man takes a safe path.

So we have heard what our men say and what they must grant, A possibility of
Idolatry in the Cross. And then what is drawn and commanded from them by
necessary consequence. The Cross must down even to the ground. It must not be
spared nor pitied, that hand which holds it up is as he who builds the walls,
which God has cursed. Now we enquire of the sacred Scripture, that will put
the matter out of question, not that there is a possibility of Idolatry in
Crosse-service, but that it is the greatest Idolatry that ever was in the world.

3. What says the word, we are charged to hear that; thus we read, Esaias
28.28.
their Land also is full of Idols, they worship the works of their own
hands, that which their own fingers have made.

Quest. How proves he that?

Answ. They bowed before it, they humbled themselves unto it: so we read in the
next Verse, and a fearful judgment follows, therefore forgive them not.
Why? They bowed, they humbled themselves before Wood and Stone: Therefore, etc.

Obj. The adversary replies, that in that Scripture there is mention of Idols
not of Images; of bowing before Idols, (bowing before an Image makes it an
Idol, but let it go, and let them go on) we speak for Images, and the
fellow brings us a Scripture against Idols, which we condemn as well as he,
so they say.

Answ. Now I must turn them to another shored Scripture, what find we there?
That which should make us tremble, for there we find the Lord provoked to
anger, and the anger of the Lord is like the roaring of a Lion, which makes the
Beast of the Forest to tremble. But what provokes the Lord? Idols I warrant
you: Yes, they ever were, are, and will be a great provocation, a smoke in His
nose, and a fire that burns all the day. But yet this word is not mentioned
there, but such things as ye see in Cheapside, or some of the Chappells,
Graven Images, so we read, Jer. 8.19.
They provoked Me with graven Images, and with strange vanities. And how then?
how does it appear that God was provoked with that people because of their
Images? By the heat of His displeasure, it abides upon them, it scoroheth them
at this day, as the Midsommer Sun does the earth at mid day. Indeed it is as
clear as the Sunshine, when neither mist nor cloud appears, overshadowing the
same: But I keep to the Text; though they thought themselves in a secure
estate, Is not the Lord in Zyon? though they looked good would come to them
from this place, and from that by means here or there, yet no good came, none
at all, Their Images, strange vanities stopped the passage. We looked say they to
that hill, and that mountain, to this time, and to that, now help would be;
but our eye failed with expectation, no help came, The harvest is past, the
Summer is ended, and we are not saved: Let us ponder, and well weigh the words;
I go on to a third Scripture, where they must well consider how an Idol is
described, Hosea 13.2.
A thing wrought according to a man's own understanding; that is an Idol: When
a man in the worship of God, will ^me something suitable to his own judgment
and reason, then he makes Idols. If we would worship God purely, (else not at
all) then we must mingle nothing of our own, nothing of our own wisdom,
understanding, reason: if we do, we mar all. We must be such fools, as to
yield our ear wholly up to hear what God says, and follow close what he
commands touching His Worship. It follows, All of it the work of the
Craftsman. (...) Chrysostom. in Esaias 2. Quasi quicquam esse possit artifice suo
majus lact. lib. 2. 1. ^. (...) (...). 1. Hom. 37.
Yes, he makes God, and Jesus Christ, and the Virgin Mary, this goddess and
the other, he does the deed; I know this is blasphemy, but I must say as he
does, with one piece of the block he has heated his shins; with another piece
of the block he rosteth his meat; and of the remainder he makes a god, for he
resolves to bow before it. No man is such a fool, as to bow before a lump of
gold, or a wooden stock, for then as he goes through Cheapside or through a
Forest, he must bow at every step. But the Craftsman comes, that daring
fellow, the god-maker, he polisheth it according to his understanding, then it
is a god; and then it follows, they kiss the Calves. I do not think so, no
more then the Papists do kiss their Idols. They bowed and did some reverence
before it, so they kissed them: Now we have the description of an Idol, and it
suffices. Yes, it suffices to persuade men that have reason and faith too;
but not sufficient, being barely read and no more, to persuade with
unreasonable and wicked men, and to deliver us from them; therefore let us
conclude with the prayer in that place, 2 These. 3.1,2.
"that the word of the Lord may have free course and be glorified: That is the
ready way to be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men; from the mischief
of Idols and Idol makers, David could not tell which of the twain was the
veriest stock. But let us well consider the judgment that follows. They
made Idols according to their own understanding; They kissed the Calves, what
if they did? Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud, as the early Dew, as
the Chafe driven with a whir lewind, and as the smoke out of the Chimney.
Hosea 13.3.
Mark it good Reader, as a morning cloud; how quickly dispelled? As an early
dew, how soon dried up? as the chafe. a little wind drives it, a greater
whirles it we know not whether; as the Smoke, how presently it vanishes? See
the condition of Idols and Idol men, and their burden from the Lord!

SECT. X.
Though the proofs clear the Cross to be an Idol, yet it must not down
they say, because it is an ornament. Their saying is weighed at the Sanctuary
and found to be as light as vanity, The greatest Prophets, and the best Kings
defiled their Image and their Ornament both.

BUt now if they should grant us, that the Cross is an Idol, which they must
do, if they grant a possibility that any knee ever has in former time, or
ever may in after time bend before it: Why yet they will never grant but that
it may be an ornament for all that, and therefore may stand to beautify the
place as it has done: There lies the pith of their reason, It is an ornament,
therefore let it stand, and let it be maintained in a posture of defense.

Be it so, but they shall never thrive with that Argument, as much might have
been said for the Image in the 3. of Daniel: without controversy a goodly
Image, and beautifying the place very much to the outward eye: And as much for
the Queen Mothers Idol, which notwithstanding her son out down and stamped
it, whether under his feet or to powder, I cannot tell: but, in an holy
indignation, he stamped it and burnt it at the brook Kidron. 2 Chro. 15.16.
And more might be said why the Brazen-Serpent might be spared, which yet we
read was brake to pieces, and must be called by its Name, plain Brass now,
and of no more use. Much also might be said why the Chariots of the Sun might
be spared; for they were goodly Chariots, and for beauty and outward
excellency, far exceeding the Cross, or any one Cross in the world; and yet
the good King burnt them with fire. 2 King. 23.11.
Nay I do verily believe, the Calfe was a goodly piece of workmanship, great
cost bestowed upon it; and doublesse, though but a Calfe, yet the most
specious. Calfe that ever was seen in the world, for they turned their glory
into it: Psalm. 106.20.
And why might not that be suffered to stand for an ornament? Moses will
resolve that, not by his word, but by his hand: Surely he saw reason good
enough, else he had not been carried with such indignation against it, as we
read He burnt it in the fire. Exodus 32.20.
There was an end of a Molten-Calfe. Nay not yet; he ground it to powder. Then
it was small enough, it could never be put together again; no, but the people
might have pitied the Dust thereof, therefore he strewed it upon the water,
they should never see it again. Yes, but they might, the water might cast it
forth, and leave some Ashes upon the sand. Therefore he made the Children of
Israel drink of it; now the nature of it was changed quite. When Idols are
dealt withal, then behold not a cutting down only, but a stamping, a
burning, an utter abolishing: because the heart is so prone to Idolatrous
worship. Truly me thinks if these men will slightly pass over what these
good Kings did, Asa and Hezekiah, when they were dealing with Idols how they
brake them to pieces and stamped them to powder: yet they should regard what
Moses did in such a case; for that is most notable, and he the greatest Prophet
that ever was, and faithful in all the house, his example should be observed
and followed. But notwithstanding these Men well never have done Reasoning and
questioning. I will take leave to put one question, there is but one Answer to
make to it, therefore we cannot miss of it: And the Answer will be to the
shame of their own faces and confusion of Idols for ever. The Question is.

Why might no man know where Moses Sepulcher was? Deuteronomy. 34.8.
The Answer must be; for fear of an Idolatrous worship: had the people known
the place, they would have worshipped the mould there, and kissed his bones.
He was the greatest Prophet in the world, and had the most honorable burial
that ever any man before or since that time; for the Lord buried him. The
people who said to a molten Calfe Exodus 32.4,5.
, They be thy gods, and dedicated a feast to Jehovah, the Calfe I mean:
doubtless they would have done as much to Moses body; therefore there was such
a contention about it. Jude. 9.
Did the Devil strive about a dead man's body for any love or delight in the
same? No, the Devils aim was to gain the hearts of the people, to set up an
Idol for himself there, that was his aim, therefore he contended; and he
gains much upon us this way, by presentations to the eye. Therefore has he
many relics, I know not what, nor of whom, but precious things they say, and
with those (toys and knackes) he takes the simple ones every day; he has also
gloriousness of Altars, infinite number of Images, priestly ornaments very
costly; and diverse fopperies about his service, all to catch the affections of
those, who not receiving the truth in love, are given up to believe lies.

Quest. Now I can answer their question too, why may not the Cross, be it an
Image or (as the Roundheads say) an Idol, yet why may it not stand? it has
stood there time out of mind, why may it not stand till the worlds end?

Answ. I might answer, it may not; because it is an offense and grief of heart
to the strong Christian; a stumbling block to the weak; a very downfall to
the stubborn and wilful. But this one answer shall serve, though they should
ask till to morrow morning; For fear of an Idolatrous worship; therefore the
Cross must not stand. There is possibility of it, at the least it may draw us
from God, therefore the Cross must down.

I know their minds; they are not satisfied herewith. They will keep up the
Cross notwithstanding all that I have said, or any man else can say. Very good
reason they should do as they say, maintain the standing of the Cross
notwithstanding what I have said, or any man else: for what are man's words,
mine or another? But if I have spoken out of the Word of God, and by
authority thereof: They might have so much manners (being reasonable and
ingenuous men, not half so obstinate as are downright Papists, whose will is
their reason) to regard what the Lord says. What though no argument which I
have given, is sufficient why it should down (and insufficient be it, if it be
not the clear Word of God) is not Gods Word enough? His charge sufficient? Ye
shall, etc. Deuteronomy. 12.2. Is not His prohibition strong enough? Thou shall make
no graven Image, etc. And in the last place is it not enough? That in this
case, and to teach us what to do, we have the example of the best Kings and
the wisest Prophets? Certainly this is enough, if we have not to do with wicked
and unreasonable men. I will then be pretty confident, having brought no word
against this Image but what has clear ground in the Word of God;

That the Image is an Idol; Why? what more Why's yet? It was answered before,
because there is as much danger of kissing an Image now, as there was once of
kissing a dead man's bones, or the mould there; therefore an Idol, and then an
abomination, and must down; nay it must be defiled and its ornament also, and
the heart must do it; and that will fret us to the heart, and make tumults and
combustions in the world now, and more anon: It follows.

SECT. XI.
The ornament of Images must be defiled with the hand and heart both; the most
High God will have it so; and the stoutest heart in the world must bend here or
break. But before this be done, look to hear of wars and rumors of wars.

SUppose now these men should grant us this (and it were a large grant) that
the Cross is an Idol, and must be cast down; though they are so pitiful,
they have not the heart to do it themselves, yet they will suffer it to be
done, suppose I say, they will yield so far; why yet they will check at two
things; first, they would not have their ornament defiled, and about this
though we could contend mightily, with our tongues, and hands, and hearts, and
all, yet we must yield, for God will overcome at the last: The second shall be
granted them, they shall have an ornament; but of that in due place.

First, as Amaziah said, 2 Chro. 25.9.
but what shall we do for the three hundred Talents? so also; They have
lavished gold out of the bag, and weighed silver in the balance, and hired a
cunning workman, who has made a god of it, must they now loose all their
cost? now that the leg, and thigh, and nose are stripped off, may they not make
use of the deckings and adornings which are upon the remaining parts? The
meaning is for we will come to a low rate, may they not reserve the scrapings
of their Images? the old ends of gold and silver there? Truly no; for, suppose
they should reserve what is pleasing in their eyes, and to be desired; yet what
could they do with it? That is easily answered, you will say; Pro. 17.3.
The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold a. True, but all the
fining pots in the world and a furnace seven times hoated cannot purify and
refine that silver and gold; for now it is put upon an Idol, it is an accursed
thing.

These men will not believe me now, and no matter; I am very well contented
still that my words be slighted. But I pray you and them, let us hear what the
Lord says, as we desire and expect that He should hear us in the day of our
trouble, when we shall call to Him, make haste Lord to our help, make no
tarrying. Such a time will be, let us hear Him now (that is the ready way to
be heard then) and chew upon His words now one after another; and as the
Prophet says, eat them. What says the Lord? ye shall defile. What is that?
Why, you suppose some sanctity and holiness in an image; see now, you must
defile it; that is, you must deal with it, as with the vilest, filthiest, most
contemptible thing that your eye can look upon; as Moses dealt with the Calfe;
King Asa with the Queen Mothers Image; King Ezekiah with the Brazen Serpent,
and Chariots of the Sun; so must you defile the Images. We remember very well
what overthrowing, breaking, hewing down, destroying, stamping, burning,
drowning, eating, there was when they set upon this work of defiling; so we
must defile Images.

Pretty flexible they are; so they will defile the stone, and the wood, and the
lead, such poor staff; and so I have dragged them on a little further: but
for the silver and gold, the rich and precious things, the Lord must pardon
them for that, they have not the heart to defile such good things. No; they
will hear, I hope what the Lord says, and hear Him out; then they must
defile the silver and the gold, for the Lord will have it so; Esa 30.22.
ye shall defile the covering of the graven Images of silver, and ornament of
gold. Observe we well the covering of silver, the ornament of gold, precious
stuff I warrant you; yet it must be defiled. Truly I am persuaded so well of
the civility of those men, that (...) quidem* they will not so much as mutter
(pine perhaps) at all this, for these are the words and charge of the Lord.

But now they think verily, they have done the deed, the Image is defiled
according to the Word of the Lord. No not yet; the maine and chief work is
yet behind; a work that will plunge the stoutest Papist in the world, and bring
him to his knees, before he does it. Alas, the hardest part of the work is yet
behind. All the defiling hitherto is done by the hand; now the heart must be
employed too, and then the work will be done indeed. We commonly say and we
say very well, What the heart does not do, is not done. Many motives and by
ands may carry the hand to the defiling these Images, their coverings, and
ornaments too. The Ruler may command me (in the Lord) then I must obey: vain
glory, a zeal for our own house, to get my self a Name, so Jehu was moved.
But it is a clean and pure zeal, which mooves the heart with an indignation
against them, and sets that a work to defile the same: Mark we now; Images
are most filthy things, and thy heart must rise against them with a loathing of
them, and so to defile them, as such things thou can not look upon and wilt
not name, they are so filthy. So we read on, Thou shall cast them away as a
menstruous cloth: thou shall say unto them, as to that thy soul abhorres, and
is an offense of heart unto thee, get thee hence. Certainly the Lord God, even
the Lord God, 1 Timothy 6.15.
Who is the blessed and only potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords
has fully answered them at this point. Doubtless the proudest man upon earth
dares not answer again, nay, he dares not whisper. Thus Idols must be
defiled; It is a work which commands the heart, and there are great thoughts
of heart about it. I proceed on to make some discovery of the same.

SECT. XII.
How vain and brutish man's thoughts have been and are touching Images, and the
defiling of them.

I Cannot pass this point, for it is a discovering point: what my thoughts
were about it, I shall speak out to my shame; I care not so God may be
glorified in me, or by me. Truly, I shall tell a fair tale of my self now,
how bruiish I was and ignorant, even as beast before Thee.

1. Time was when I thought Crosses and Images were pretty gaudy things; made
only for children to gaze upon, as the Cross in the horne-booke, pictures and
babies, and the like. It was a childish thought, and may pass well enough:
when I was a child, I thought as a child. I understood as a child, and did as
a child, I delighted in poppers, I played with pictures, and rid a gallop upon
a long Reed: but when I became a man, I put away those childish things, and yet
my thoughts touching Images were not such as became a man of understanding, for
thus I thought, What hurt is in a Crucifix? It will serve the Layman (I know
not who that is, but that is the word in use) in stead of a book; and is able
to work much upon his Imagination, and to affect his heart by his eye. These
were wise thoughts. By the good hand of God upon me, I rectified them thus;
"That nothing was set down by the Evangelists touching the complexion,
stature, feature of Christ: why? That no man might presume to set his hand to
the framing of that astonishing work, wrought once for all, by the Holy Ghost.

Much should be said here: I intend a very little: I weighed the words which I
find cited by our Jewel, touching the bold blasphemy of this god-maker; Qui
creavit me dedit mihi potestatem creandise Apol. Page 260.
He that made me, has given me power to make him: that is good divinity
thought I, but the good Bishop answers him very well; " God has made hell fire
to the destruction of all them, that yield their mouth to such blasphemy: I
instance here in the Cross, because that is the Image most in use, and most
presumptuously framed. I go on to tell how I came to be resolved and settled
in my judgment, that there should be-no Images at all, I mean such as were
lately defiled. Tertullian has much against them; Epiphanius says more to our
purpose, we will hear him. Esiote memores, dilecti filii, ne in ecclesiam,
etc. Sed perpetuo circumferte Deum in cordibus vestris, etc, Non enim fas est
Christianos per oculos suspensum teneri sed per occupationm mentis: Jewel
Apol. page 553.
"My dear children be ye mindful that we bring no Images into the Church:
But evermore carry God in your hearts thither, and forth again. Nay suffer not
Images to be in your private houses, they will undo you, for it is not lawful
to lead a Christian man by his eyes, but rather by the study and exercise of
his mind.

But Lactantius speaks home and convinced me clearly; these are his words, Non
dubium est quin religio nulla fit ubicunque simulacrum est. l. 2. cap. 18.
Determinately and out of all douht, there is no religion where there is an
Image; that is, no Religion which God accounts of; it is a Religion, but such
as his soul hates. There are no people under heaven so rude, brutish, and
barbarous, but have some Religion amongst them: The Sea Loc viru^. de hollo
sacro p. 339. Psalm. 68.30.
Turks have a Religion, and others as brutish as they, whom David calls Psalm.
68.30.
the multitude of the Bulls, with the Calves of the people; " That is no
Religion in Gods account, which is not comely for a Christian.

I must note in the last place (for I do but point at things) that this
consideration wrought with me most of all how the anger of the Lord has
smoaked against His own people because of their Images and Idol services;
They turned the glory of God into a lie;

Therefore the Lord turned them out of the good land, out of the place of their
habitation; ^ King. 17 2 King. 21 13.
He swept them away, and wiped them as one wipeth a dish, turning it upside
down; see! these Images, and that Idol service can stock up a kingdom by
the root, Certainly thought I, these things, that provoke the Lord to anger,
that makes His wrath burn to the neathermost hell, are pernicious things, and
to be defiled, as we heard. And God be thanked, Who has so taught me and
instructed to discretion; that I may be warned and learn to abominate Images
as the Jews do, for so it is clearly intimated, Ezekiel. 16.43.
I will recompense thy way upon thine head, and thou shall not commit this
lewdness above all thine abominations. But I must go on to tell how brutish
my thoughts were; I have not told the half yet.

2. Time was when I thought, that to defile an Image had been an easy work;
cast a little dirt in its face, then it is defiled; and if you wrench from it
his leg and his nose then you have defiled him utterly: Such were my brutish
conceits. Verily thought I the command is very easy to flesh and blood, Ezekiel.
14.6.
Turn your selves from your Idols, and your faces from all your abominations:
the easiest matter in the world: if I turn my back upon them, I am turned;
and if you turn a man into the Church; persuade with him to hear Gods Word
constantly there, then you have turned the man, and he is turned from his
Idols. A brutish conceit; it was mine. I thank the Lord and his good Word I
am better instructed now; that a man must turn from his Idols as from
loathsome things, and his face from them, as from that his soul does abhor
and abominate; then his heart defiles them, and then it is done: Now the man is
turned indeed but this goes to the very heart, and of that anon; only this I
add here; that to turn from an Idol is to give check to the strongest
motion in the world; and to cast it out of the heart, is to cast out ones
self, which will never be done till God, who turned Jurdan back, gives in His
casting voice; and then it will be done. I go on to make my brutish thoughts
more legible yet, that they who observe them may be made wiser thereby.

3. I verily thought, that every Idol had a face like a man, and a Nose there,
which might be defiled before he was aware; and stolen away while he was
asleep; It must needs drop from out of the hands and singers ends of some
cunning work man; he only makes Idols thought I: And they are no where to be
found but in the Popes Chappells, or in other out-places by the appointment of
his holiness, and of his Deputie-Lievtenants upon earth. Were not these wise
thoughts, think you? And no wiser could my conceit be touching Idolaters, such
only, thought I, as do how before stocks and stones, and humble themselves
before a Table. They indeed are gross Idolaters, and no other in the world. I
thank the Lord who has better instructed me: I know now by sad experience,
that I have one within me, the most cunning Idol framer in the world. I Must
speak the truth, God is at my right hand; whatsoever was pleasant and desirable
in my eyes or to my understanding (being but a creature) he I am speaking of,
can make an Idol of it; and so it has done, and made me smart soundly
according to the threat; Psalm. 16.4.
Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another God. What he
made my Idol, God made my Cross: blessed be His Name. I could not pass this
without observation, what a cunning Deceiver and Idoll-maker every man (for I
think heart answers heart, as face answers face in water) has within his own
breast: And let the Child in understanding observe it; That if the heart had
nor made and set up that abomination in that Holy of Holies, (so it should be
kept) there had never been an Idol made of Wood and Stone in the world, nor
set up before their eyes there. This might have bin reserved for the Closet;
But I must go on to tell, that in my Closet and Temple work, I have been an
Abominable Idolater: This Deceiver has beguiled me even in matters concerning
the worship and service of my God. I regarded only the outside of the service,
and if it was performed, if I had said my prayers I had done my duty and it
was enough; for the manner how (which is all in Gods service) it was no matter.
But that very conceit made it an Idol service, which I considered not: so also
the course of the world, the rudiments there; all these were Idols unto me:
Then could I set up my Threshold by the Lords Threshold, and my Post by His
Post, Ezekiel. 43.8.
that is, I could mate the wisdom of God in His ordinances, institutions and
commands with my follies, the addition of my own inventions: Adhibendo
traditiones suas ad praecepta sua Junius.
I could frame something even in the worship of God suitable to my own
judgment and reason; and I could think it as good every whit as that, which
God appointed; not considering what manner of service God commands, nor what
Worshippers He seeks. Joh. 4.23. Jer. 1.31.
It is not utterable how bold and daring the heart will be, to intrude upon the
ordinances of God, mingling such things therewith, which "He never commanded
nor ever came into His heart. We go a whoring after our own inventions. The
heart told me, that the Cross in Baptism was as innocent a ceremony as the
Popes Name. What great matter to make a Cross upon the forhead with your
finger? Yes, it is a great matter, and a very Idol says judicious Calvin upon
Hosea 13.2. for it is an addition of man "according to his own understanding,
others can stand it out perhaps stoutly enough: my understanding must be
carried captive by the Word of God, not regarding what others say who speak
their own words. In cultu dei cessare debent quicquid est prudent^ quicquid
rationis in hominibus quicquid consilii and d^nique omnes eorum se^sus nam si
hic tantillum sibi permit tunt, nihil alind quam Dei cultum vitiant, etc. mera
idola colunt.
Let me fall flat under the power and authority of that sacred Scripture,
which tells me, I must not serve God after my own manner according to my own
understanding (for then I make it an Idol service) but as God has commanded
thereafter I must do.

I shall say least of that, whereof I should say most; how I made an Idol of
both Sacraments, I thought of Baptism as the Jews of their Circumcision, that
there was no other but what was made with hands: Matthew. 3.11.
I dreamed not of a Baptism made without hands, with the Holy Ghost and with
fire. And so this followed, a gross and an idolatrous conceit; I thought it
enough, that I had a sprinkling of water upon my face, or was dipped there, and
so was made a Christian outwardly in name and in a bare profession only. But
when I considered two Scriptures, Jer. 9.25.26. Romans 2.28
I saw it as clear as the Sun, that the Baptism of fire and of the Holy
Chost; some inward work was to be looked after; for the outward, if no more,
did but entitle me to a bare name only, gave me no pre-eminence at all above
the heathen; rather thrust me down below them, and aggravated my guilt Reatus
impii est piam nomen salv. de guver. l. 4. page 145. Lege paginas precedent.
.

I must acknowledge in the next place, how I made an Idol of the other
Sacrament; not but that I did see and feel and taste the bread and wine there.
My Idolatry was of a finer thread, yet very gross and palp^ble, such as I can
feel now: for I looked not to the heart and soul of the Sacrament; neither
how I came addressed thereto, what brokennesse of heart I brought thither; what
life of affection, what strength of faith: Thither I came according to custom,
and after the course of the world, dragging my heart thither, and not my heart
me; and there I sat according to form, and went away after the manner: Let it
be considered whether this be not to make an Idol of a most sacred and
misterious ordinance.

I should pass on to that monstrous Idol Self Righteousness, which takes up
so much room in the heart, that there is no place for the righteousness of
another; has blotted much Paper, and stained, yea spoiled all our good works.
I should also speak something touching the necessity of defiling that monster
(so Luther calls it) and these gods before pointed at; for if that be not done
nothing is done, and if that be done, all is done; if the Idols in the heart
are cast out thence and defiled, stocks and stones cannot stand before the eye,
they shall be defiled too: but as the saying is, this is all the labor, this
the work indeed: I can say but this to it in reference to Paul's words and
Luthers after him: Gal. 1.15. See Luther his excellent Exposition thereon.
When God is pleased (what? for my pharisaicall Religion, or my blameless life
in my conceit? for my prayers, fastings, and good works? No, much less then
for my abominations, my doting upon my Idols, every thing my heart could
delight in: Is He pleased with this? No, how then? For His merce grace alone)
to reveal His Son unto me:

When I shall turn indeed and indeed from Idols, and my face from all my
abominations, then I am sure (for so it has been, and so it is with all the
faithful and true Penitents, so they and so I) shall loath my Gods, and my
self because I made them so. Ezekiel. 6.9. 20.43.
Then my heart must defile his Idols, and when the heart does it, then it is
done. But here the heart will stand out, maintayning his strong holds while it
has a being (in its self and upon his own bottom:) he will maintain his
Idol as long as he can, and maintain war against him, that would destroy it
and take it away. I go on to make yet more manifest those thoughts of heart
about this defiling work, which may yield us a good understanding of our
Selves, and of the Times, and then I am at my Mark, the White I aim at, and
would carry all unto.

SECT. XIII.
The heart, to maintain its Idol, maintains war against him, that would
smite at it, and defile the same. He will not yield up his strong hold while he
has a being in himself.

TIme was when I thought I could read another man's heart better then mine
own; and others to be mad and my self a sober man. I looked into the second
Chapter of Exodus, and found an Iraelite there, I thought, if there were a man
in the world at that time mad and beside himself, that was he. Moses would
have given him good counsel, and have reformed him, how does he accept of such
a kindness? (for truly he that seeks to reform me, does me the greatest
kindness that can be imagined; for he that would destroy my Idol would save my
soul) How does that Israelite accept the kindness of his friend? As we read,
Intendest thou to kill me. Exodus 2.14.
There we may observe how he requited the loving kindness of a friend, he
counted reforming a killing; it was a death to him to be counseled and
reformed: he was not himself sure when he spoke so, and so I thought. See now
how I could judge another man to be mad, who stands or falls to his own
Master: there is no man if the Lords hand has not been upon his heart to tame
it somewhat, and bring it into order, but is as stout and mad as was he; nay,
more besides himself, then was that Israelite, because he may have a greater
light to walk by than had that Israelite; for he lived in Egypt, we live in
the Goshen of the world. This then is the conclusion; "That the heart standing
in its old posture, and frame, settled upon its own bottom and principles,
stands as opposite to reformation or sound counsel ( I will take the former
word all along) as the two poles, which the Astronomers call in English North
and South, or as are life and death: And the demands of the one from the other
are as contrary too, and must be so. And it is as impossible for man, nay for
all the men on the earth, to make a good understanding betwixt these two,
Reformation and the Heart as to bring the North and the South together, those
two poles which stand at an eternal opposition, or to make an agreement
betwixt the Temple of God, and Idols, fire and water, life and death: Jer. 17.
my heart tells me (and though he be the greatest imposture in the world, yet
you and I may believe him now, as you will believe the words of a dying man,
for then he is serious) that reformation is a kind of killing; it is a
mortification, a crucifying (the words sound like Latin, more plainly it is) a
death, it defiles my Idols, it starves my gods; you may say to him, that will
reform you indeed (nay, if the heart be not over powered then you will say) as
the Israelite did, intendest thou to kill me? And he will answer, if he
me^nes to do his office to purpose, yes that he will, he will kill thee, if he
can, he has a mind to it, he will kill in me and thee, that which we call
self; nay, he will deal cruelly with us, he will pluck away our gods which
are as dear unto us as our right eye and arm. This is a killing a death sure
enough. 1 King. 22
Truly the heart is so contrary to it, to reformation I mean, as the bad King
was to the honest Prophet (one against four hundred) the heart hates it and
will oppose it, while it has a being in it self: why? for says the heart,
Reformation intends no good concerning me but evil: (though indeed it intends
nothing but good to me.) For it would defile my Idols, and starve my Gods, but
that is a death, I can no more hear of it than Pilat could, what truth was, he
asked the question, Joh. 18.38.
what is truth? and turned his back upon it, not staying the answer, and so
did most contrary to truth, so will the heart do: The heart may ask, what is
Reformation, what is it to d file an Idol? But the heart will not abide the
answer. I would be understood in this point, and that a child in understanding
might conceive me thus:

If reformation comes toward the heart, it seems to march furiously like
Jehu, slashing and killing where it comes as if it would not spare any one
Image or Image server, It will cast down all the Idols before the eyes, and
cast out all the gods out of the heart. Death seems to march along with it,
where it comes, for it takes away all life from the course of the world,
wherein I walked: All delight from the beggarly rudiments and old customs of
the times, wherein before I took pleasure; it draws forth my hand to remove
the stumbling block before my eyes, and commands my heart to defile all my
Idols there, and that is a perfect death indeed; I say a perfect death, so
far as reformation is perfected; and the heart flies from it as from death,
it cannot abide so much as to hear of it, but if it must hear of it and
entertain it too, then the heart welcomes it as a man takes fire into his
bosom: indeed reformation comes into the world as the Lord Christ came, to
send fire on the earth. It was so in all ages downward to this day, it will be
so to the end of the world: Luke 12.49.
Behold He shall come says the Lord. Who? The Lord Christ, what to do? To
reform His Church, Mic. 3.1.
He shall sit as a resiner and Purifier of Silver. A gracious and a glorious
work; how will it be entertained? As a man welcomes fire and sword, which must
either purify him or consume him: who may abide the day of His coming? and
who shall stand when He appears for He is like a refiners fire and like
Fullers Soap. This refining work is a searching work, and finds bad welcome
in the world. Look we into the Church the Congregations there, upon the Priest
and his people, how do they fret at it, though but one foot and coming
toward them, as if already cut to the very heart. But I need not look abroad
nor unto others; I will return to my own heart, for there I can read all this.

SEGT. XIV.
If reformation be a defiling of Idols, and the work in hand, then a man needs
not go into the Congregations to behold the carriage of the Priest and people
there, nor abroad to enquire, what news? he may return home to his own
heart, and read the news there.

I Can read the times now, what news is most stirring, and and fittest to be
enquired after; and yet not move one step from the Idol and my own heart: I
can tell what is done in the great world, by looking diligently what is done in
my little world. And the way I take must be this, I must read Reformation, and
the processes thereof, and what its demands are; then I must read in my own
heart how that stands toward it, in its natural posture: And behold it stands
in a posture of offense, nay of defiance most contrary thereunto. I will bring
them (I had almost said together, but that is impossible to man) to an
interview, that we may hear how they greet one the other, what is demanded,
and what denied betwixt them. Thereby I shall make more then a conjecture what
is done in the Kingdom, what motions, and contrariety of wills there.

Reformation tells me, I must not walk according to the course of this world.
Ephe. 2.22
My heart makes answer, that according to that course it will walk, though it
be according to the spirit that now works in the Children of disobedience:
Reformation says, I must forsake the beggarly Rudiments, and old customs,
such as were in Queen Mary's days; the heart answers, she will not forsake
them, they are her lovers, she hankers after them, and after them she will
go: Reformation tells me, I must worship God according as He has commanded,
I must not make a mingle mangle in Religion: I must not serve God partly as He
has commanded, partly according to my own understanding; I must not mate the
wisdom of God with my foolish conceits, my silly inventions. The heart
answers she likes her own way, and would hear no more of that matter, for
she is settled and resolved to serve God her own way, and to maintain that way
till she dies: Reformation tells me, I must through down the Idols before my
eyes. My heart is pretly flexible here, so it be but a stock or a stone: God
has given me reason, and I must show my self a man, it were a shame to
stumble in a Sunshine, at stocks and stones.

But Reformation is not contented with this. It goes on, commands me to give up
my two Idols, my ease, which I love so well: The profit and glory of the
world, which I dote upon. Me thinks I find my heart mad upon these Idols,
Jer. 50.38.
now they are demanded of me, and my two eyes sparkle with rage; rather then I
will part with them; My Plate shall go, and, which should be more precious, a
good conscience also: My ease is more then my Plate; and my credit in the world
my chiefest Jewel: -- Reformation hears not, it stands like an upright Judge;
as does the stalk of a balance. It demands as once Moses did, All; All my
gods, how pleasing, how serviceable to mine own ends, how desirable soever;
how dear or near, no matter: I must yield them up and my strong holds there
(the house of my Images, and guardians thereof) with my Imaginations and every
thing that exalts it self. 2 Cor. 20.4.
The heart will stick here, nay it will die here before it will yield: offer
the heart fair, heaven and eternal happiness, it will not yield; offer it
foul, hell and everlasting misery, it will not yield up its Idol, he will not
suffer it to be slain before his strong holds shall be given up, before his
reasonings can give or take satisfaction. As the Lord said, Jer. 22.29.
O Earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord. It cannot hear, no more
can the heart; it is desperately wicked, who shall make a good understanding
betwixt him and reformation? Of this in the close.

Now we have seen at what a distance the heart stands to heaven, that pattern
we are to be conformed unto; how it fights to maintain his Idols, which
he will not part with till he dies. Then we may easily gather by the unquiet
motions within, what is done without; if there be such motions in one man's
little world, what motions will there be in Cities, in Towns, in a Kingdom,
when Reformation assaies to go through the same, to defile the Idols there? If
men will fret and fume and do more, because stocks and stones are defiled;
what will they do for the Idol in the heart, to maintain that in a posture
of defense? If defiling of Idols in one man's heart, cause such a shaking, what
a terrible shake will it be, when the Earth shall no more cover her blood, but
the men there must yield up their Idols to the Moles and to the Batts?
Reformation will cast a spewing upon all our worldly glory; it will defile the
three gods of the world, honors, pleasures, profits, for which the heart will
contend till it die; then the most stirring news is, wars and Rumors of
wars; Saint James resolves it so; whence comes wars and fightings amongst
you, even of the lusts, which war in your members. There they war first, then
they break forth in the world. If we could open the records of all ages, and
then put Saint James his question; we must also make his answer, our own
winds, the winds from within us make our Sea so tempestuous: The counfell is
good, calm it with your Prayers, and resolve to throw out your Idol; Fluctus
maris tuis precibus mitiga, Hier. Ep. 45. ult.
But that work will cause a mighty contention. While there is a Devil in
Hell, a Prince in the Air, a party on earth, and a king over them, which is
the Angel of the bottomless pit, so long Reformation will find a mighty
opposition, what the gates of Hell can make.

And if Reformation be so opposed, as that which destroys defiles Idols,
then it is quickly read, how reformers are accounted of. Eccles. ^.9,10.
The thing that has been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done,
is that which shall be done, and there is no new thing under the Sun. Is
there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? It has been already
of old time, which was before us. They that have been employed in
Temple-worke, and in defiling of Idols, they have ever been accounted
factious, seditious, rebellious, those that would turn the world upside down.
Acts 17.6.
I must add (etc.) for there is a great deal more: yet we read all in these
words, Behold they belch out with their mouth; Psalm. 59.6.
what are their words? very Swords are in their lips, they would slay the
righteous man therewith, for they call him by their own name, Exulem me de suo
nomine vocat. Cicer. Paradox.
and that is a devouring name, as bad as can be; their tongue is as an arrow
shot-out, Jer. 9.8.
which malice ever draws to the very head, as Jehu drew his bow with his full
strength. 2 King. 9.24.
But none of all that is strange: The righteous are not troubled at it, their
patience can digest more then this; besides, their Lord and master has been
so reproached, and Matthew. 10.25.
If they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, How much more shall they
call them of his household? But what shall we think? Can Reformation go on?
Shall Idols be defiled even now? Shall these Refiners prosper? There is some
resolution given hereunto, as follows.

SECT. XV.
Notwithstanding the contempt that is cast upon Reformation and Reformers, yet
both shall go on and prosper.

I Will begin with Questions and Answers.

Quest. Shall this work of defiling Images, (for that I call Reformation)
shall it go on?

Answ. Yes sure, God wills and commands Images to be defiled, and it must be
done.

Quest. At this time?

Answ. There I am at a stand, I cannot certainly tell that; I think so, but in
Gods time it shall be done, which time, the Father has put in His own power.
Act 1.7.


But the righteous, they that walk in the truth, that 3 John 3.4.
do faithfully whatsoever they do, may say as their Brethren before them,
Neh. 4.2.
our work is Reproached and we are despised.

They may say so indeed, but it is a very good sign, that the work goes on,
Idols shall be defiled even now. It is, I say as comfortable a sign as can be
wished; the devil and his party have great wrath, Revel. 12.12.
therefore we know they have but a short time.

Obj. But in a short time they may do a length of mischief.

An. True, but they are held short in a chain, which the Lord holds in His
hand, and they cannot proceed an inch farther, then He lets it forth: And a
great good sign it is, they shall not proceed much farther because the
Almighty has them in His fetters. And they feel themselves checked and
curbed-in as a wild bull in a net. But they think their tongue is their own,
and at liberty, therefore they say as once they did;

Ob. What do these men? will they fortify themselves? Neh. 4 2.


An. Yes, that they will, in the Lord and power of His might, Ephesians. 6.10.
for wisdom and strength are His; Dan. 2.20.
And He is a good Lord, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and He knows
them that trust in Him. Nahum 1.7.
The adversary mooks on.

Ob. Will they make an end in a day? Neh. 4.2.


An. No, nor in a year neither; Temple work, the defiling of Idols there goes
on more slowly then Romes work does; yet we know the proverb, and that Romes
Leaven has not sowred the whole lump yet; and experience tells us, that the
heirs of the beard or head wax not white altogether. One Idol is smitten now,
another to morrow, in good time, they shall all be defiled. The adversary goes
on much cast down (as formerly) in their own eyes, for they perceive, that
the work (now also as then) is wrought of our God, Neh. 6.16
and is so firm and stable, that a Fox cannot break it down with all his
cunning, they must add the strength of a Lion to it too, and therein is their
hope.

Ob. That these feeble men shall not be able to go on.

An. Thus the adversary reproached anciently the servants of the Lord, who went
on the better and more comfortably: though indeed they were then, and are now
but a feeble folk; so are the Conies too, yet make they their houses in the
rocks. Prove. 30.26.
A feeble folk that have the munition of Rocks for their defense; and a
Redeemer that sainteth not, nor is weary; They may do great things: for He is
mighty and strong; The Lord of Hosts is His name, He shall thoroughly plead His
cause, That He may give rest to the Land, and disquiet the inhabitants of
Babylon. Esa. 33.16. 40.26. Jer. 50.34.
Again, we say their strength may well be wasted in all this time; but they
have a continual influence and supply from the Spring head, the God of their
strength, to whom they have a continual recourse: for as the waters near them
run from the fountain every morning and return to it every night; so do they
receive from God and return to God: so they renew their strength like Eagles,
and go from strength to strength with the increase of God; for as was said,
when they be at a low ebb, then they slow upward to their fountain and spring
head; whereas these scorners are like waters we observe running from the
spring head and never return again; and they are feeble men indeed, but let
them say what they have devised.

Ob. That these feeble men shall not be able to carry on the work, and bear up
any longer against the tide of opposition and contradiction of tongues; so some
say and vaunt too and good men fear.

An. I will answer first as Master Jewel (whose face did shine in every man's
eye but his own) in a case not unlike, "I have no skill says he in the
wicked man's Almanac, Gods will be done. It is His cause whatsoever shall
happen, and His Name be blessed for ever for what He has done. But so vaunted
the heathen against the faith of Christ: Ad certum tempus sunt Christiani,
postea peribunt, and redibunt Idola: redibit quod erat autea Verum tu cum
expectas, miser infidelis, ut transeant Christiani, transis ipse sine
Christianis. August. In Psalm. 70. See Ap^l. page 26.
These Christians are but for a while, fall they shall and that shortly: Then
shall our Idols come again, and it shall be as it was before. But, O thou
miserable Infidel, while thou look that the Christians should pass, thou
passest away thy self without the Christians. This conceit is like that of the
country fool, Rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis, at ille Labitur, and
labetur in omne volubilis aevum. Horace l. 1. Epist. 2.
who coming to a quick running stream, thought verily the water would soon
pass by, and he might pass over anon on foot, not considering that the
stream was continually fed from the springhead. Master Jewel goes on and
reads out of Aug. Ecce veniet tempus ut finiantur, and non sint Christiani.
Sicut caeperunt ad aliquo tempore, ita usque ad certum tempus erunt. Sed cum
ista dicunt, sine fine moriuntur, and permanet Ecclesia praedicans brachium
Domini omni generationi venturae.
"They say behold, the day will come, when all these Christians shall have an
end; as they had a time to begin, so shall they have a time to continue. But
while they make these crackes, they themselves die without end. But the Church
continues still, praising the Almighty arm of God to every generation that is
to come. The application is full and easy.

But suppose now, that the work should stop and cease, as the Temple-worke
did, for some years; and the Church should have her Idols again, from which
(the Lord deliver us) we are not cleansed to this day. So far wicked
counselors may prevail as they did in former time. What then? yet not with
standing the Reformers have not labored in vain, nor spent their strength for
naught and in vain Esa. 49.4.
. It is a comfortable speech; "There is no service that is done to the Lord but
shall have its due and seasonable recompense, Whatsoever good thing any man
does, the same shall he receive Ephesians. 6.7,8.
. Mordecay was remembered, and in the fittest season, so were Nehemiah and his
brethren. remembered for good. Temple-worke is an acceptable work; and they
that defile Idols do according to Gods own heart; And shall not that service
be remembered? Judge you: Babels King shall not serve a great service for
naught. The Lord put that King upon the service against Tirus, and He paid Him
wages for His Army: Ezekiel. 29.18,19.
and if the Lord be Paymaster, He will pay like Himself, the wages shall be
no less then a Kingdom. Woe unto him that uses his neighbors service
without wages, and gives him not for his work. Jer. 22.13.
Does the Lord pronounce this woe? Then certainly He will not use any faithful
man's service without wages: He will give him for his work, and better payment
then Babels King had; yet that was a Kingdom.

Indeed, it is very comfortable for them that serve a great Service for the
Church of Christ. Surely their service shall not be forgotten, for they have
done it as to the Lord, and not unto men. Therefore they have a stronger
consolation then all this; that which contains all, they have the consolation
of God, the same with which the Lord Himself was comforted. They can say as
their Lord did, though Israel be not reformed, though her Idols be not defiled
at this time, yet surely our judgment is with the Lord, and our work with our
God. Esa. 49.4.


Thus we have concluded what ever falls out, though things go back as the
Adversary would have it, and our sins do deserve. It is a point of good
discretion, Pro tua sapientia debebis optare optima, cogitare difficilima,
far quaecunque erunt. Cic. Ep. fam. L. 9. 19.
as to wish the best, so to forecast the worst and to prepare to bear what
ever comes: yet still holding to the conclusion of experience, that it shall
be well with them that serve the Lorld, their recompense is sure.

When we look up, sixing our eye where we should, our hopes exceed our fears,
and we conclude, that the Reformation must go on; He that has wrought
hitherto, will work, He that brought them onward so far, will not leave
them within sight of the promised Land; He that has protected will protect
still, and uphold with the hand. Though yet, as Luther said, Gal. 3.2.
"when we are reforming our selves or others, and defiling Idols, the devil
overcommeth sometimes. Why? for our advantage every way, that we may have the
experience of a stronger against that strong one, and may say with Saint Paul,
when I am weak then am I strong, we will then speak confidently, the
Reformers shall go on and prosper, for;

They are in the Work, in the Way, in the Hand of the Lord:

1. In the work, and they wrought with God this day. Reforming work is Gods
work, as we heard.

2. They are in Gods way; this is His way, He lets in a clear light into the
soul: first, He discovers, He manifests Christ there; then the Idols are
casting out and defiling: This is their way also, they labor with all their
might to exalt Christ, then the Idols fall and are defiled: when the soul
comes to see the excelling beauty of Jesus Christ, the glory of the world is
darkness to her; but Idols are as a monstrous cloth. Again, in Gods way
still, He began at the Sanctuary, so did they; and did they make clean work
there, did they carry forth the filthiness thence, 2 Chro. 29.5.
surely things would go on; but they are in Gods way. He purifies the sons
of Levi, Sanctuary men, so do they. But they will not be purged; No, then they
must be consumed, choose they whether. Either the Idol must be left or the
soul must be lost, there is but one way: Ah but they shall never go on in
that way; Sorcerers, Adulterers, false swearers, oppressors (to sum up all)
and those that fear not Me says the Lord; Mal. 3.5.
What all these doutie men can do shall be done as in ancient days, in way of
opposition to this work, and to keep their Idols in a posture of defense.
True, but that which follows now will be too hard for them all, for;

3. They are in Gods hand; There is security against all might and power
whatsoever; there they may be merry in the Lord, laugh and rejoice. As Luther
said, when the Rulers set themselves against him, and the people raged, now
says he, the Lord laugheth, I am not such a fool as to cry: his meaning was
(for there is a figure) he would laugh too, and being merry, he would sing the
46. Psalm. These servants of the Lord may laugh also, and for the same rearon.
They are in Gods hand, a good, a gracious, an Almighty hand; that is the
confidence: five hundred men cannot pluck one man thence. They will hold fast
the confidence; Heb. 3.6.
This Hand brought them together at first, has kept them ever since, has
prospered them to this time: can they cast away their confidence now? No, they
know whom they have trusted; He will keep them as the Apple of His eye; they
have borne the burden and heat of the day: the wicked shall not receive the
wages. They have sought God for this thing, and have sown in tears, the
wicked shall not reap in joy; surely they say, Psalm. 89.42.
The Lord will not set up the right hand of His adversaries; He will not make
His enemies to rejoice. This is their confidence now; so though the kingdoms
are moved, yet they may be still calm and quiet in their minds, for so they
are commanded; Be still: Psalm. 89.10.
what and the Kingdoms moved? What can still the spirit then? this; Know (that
is, trust perfectly) that I am God, and I will be exalted, etc. It is an
ordinary observation, that all the Letters in Jehovah are quiescent i. e. do
import quietness and rest; it is of lively use. I desire not so much to look
upon bare Letter as the Name it self, the goodness, mercy, wisdom, power of
God; and behold there the soul can find rest and sweet repose when there is
terror on every side; when Kingdoms are moved, the earth quakes, then there
is rest: Where? In God. O blessednesses, completely blessed is the man, Psalm.
1.1.
that can say, and knows what he says, The Lord is my God; He reigns, be
the earth never so unquiet, yet He is King, and will be exalted.

When there is an Earthquake, and we look for it; when not the winds, but the
Lord will shake it, smiting it terribly, then, in such a trembling time, this
man is as the Lord has promised to make his people, a quiet habitation. Esa.
33.29.
Who would not be as He is? Who would not rest as he does? in the arms, and
under the shadow of the Almighty? Surely every man. Surely then, if he would be
assured and confident, he must give up his gods; he must yield up their strong
holds, but this must be more fully considered.

SECT. XVI.
Every man must return to his own heart, and enquire diligently the means of
reconciliation, and resolve upon yielding up the Idol.

REformation and the heart stand at a wide distance, as we heard; there must be
a yielding, so as they may be brought together. Reformation cannot yield, it is
stiff as was the Heathens good, made of the same matter the Pepists make
theirs, which they called Terminus, we call it a Bound-stone, the old
Land-marke, cedebat nulli, Prove. 23.10. Aug. de Civit. Dei 4. 23.
it would not yield an inch for any man's pleasure; Reformation is as stiff, it
will yield nothing, not a hoof, not a husk, not such a poor matter as was a
piece of ground full of Lentiles; 2 Samuel 23.11,12.
It was not a considerable piece. What though? yet the Philistims should not
have it. So stiff is Reformation in yielding to any thing against Gods right.
And great reason it should be so, why should it yield that which is another?
God gives all, He must have all, all the heart, and all the soul, and all the
mind. Indeed Reformation can yield nothing; It commands in Gods name, and will
have all its Demands, the heart must bow and submit, or perish for ever. As the
Lord said to Jeremiah, Jer. 15.19.
let them return unto thee: But return not thou unto them: That is, they must
yield to thy terms, thou shall not yield to theirs. Reformation has the same
charge from the Lord, and is as peremptory in her demands. And now it will be
made manifest to the whole world, that the heart is as it is said to be,
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. Jer. 17.19.
It appears thus;

The soul is the most precious thing in the world, never any thing came up to
the price of it, but the blood of God, He gave to the full worth, for He gave
Himself. What is an Idol now? Nothing, We know that an Idol is nothing in
the world, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.4.
or if any thing, then, as he has said, That shame. A goodly price that our
souls are prized at by us; below thirty pieces of Silver, Zach. 11.13.
and no wonder. For so the Lord Christ was prized. But yet we must behold how
desperately wicked the heart is. Reformation requires no more but the giving up
the Idol, with the strong hold (the form without the power) which maintains
it. See now! the heart will not yield; it will venture an eternal soul, the
everlastaing-well-being thereof, rather than it will yield up its Idols: It is
settled and resolved to keep his enmity, to maintain a defiance, it will hold
it out till it die; though if I would quickly, while I am in the way with him,
agree with this adversary, Reformation I mean, and upon its own terms and
conditions, it would be the happiest agreement that could be made; for then the
Idol, which troubled my peace all my life long, will be thrust out, and my
Lord would come in, and with Him all things. Paenitentiam mihi praecipis, sed
talis sum ego miser, and quod sentio me Nolle neque posse, quare tuis postratis
pedibus, etc. Lutheri concio de paenitentia Anno Dom. 1518.
But this is a work I neither will do nor can do: I can stand it out
stoutly, I can hold fast the form only, and that will hold fast my Idol; I
am stubbornely bent to maintain war and all my strongholds: But to make a
good agreement and understanding betwixt Reformation and my heart: To yield to
the Demands there, and so to bring Reformation and my heart together, is as
impossible to me, as to make the North and South meet as friends, and to kiss
each other, which stand as we heard, at an eternal opposition. But with God
all things are possible: Psalm. 147.15.
His Word runs very swiftly, He sent forth His Commandment, and it was
done, Let there be light, and there was light, Let there be a firmament, and it
was so. Nay, He has done a more astonishing work then all this: He has made
Heaven and Earth to meet, and kiss each other He has filled up that gulf
betwixt us, and made it passable. He has brought two together, God and Man,
and has caused a good understanding betwixt them: So as they are no longer two
now, but one Immanuel: Then He can do what He pleases, therefore my eye must
be to Him, Who only does wonders; And it is every man's work who knows his
duty, for surely we have no might against this great company of gods, which
are within us and fight against us, neither can we overpower our own hearts.
But if our eyes are upon the Lord: If we set our selves as one man to seek
Him, we shall find that there is hope in Israel concerning this thing: for
the King of Israel is a merciful King, hear what He says; Jer. 3.^
thou have played the harlot with many lovers: yet return again to Me says
the Lord: My righteousness is near: my salvation is gone forth, and mine
arms shall judge the people. What then? Isay (...)
Then the Isles shall wait upon Me, and on my Arm shall they trust. I have
digressed: I have been upon the defiling of Images and their Ornament, which
is the hardest work in the world; if it has taken up more space here then was
expected it could have done, it was that it might take up more room in the
heart.

I must remember, I am closing the treatise, which I cannot do, before I have
resolved according to my promise, a second doubt.

SECT. XVII.
The heart deceives us in point of Ornament; that which must be defiled, is but
in Name so: The City, in place of an Idol will raise up a Pillar, and write
thereon the former years deliverances. Concerning this present year there is
a great question, wherein she will be resolved in the next Section.

MAn is much mistaken in point of Ornament; that which he counts pleasant to
his eyes, and to be desired, defiles him, and must be defiled. But it is our
infirmity, and more, I may say our Death; that we account that an Ornament,
which is our shame: if that be taken from us, our Idol I mean, or an offer
made that way, we are ready to whine, and can say almost as he did, and what
have I more? Judge. 18.24.
O the darkness that is in our minds! The veil spread over our hearts, not
yet taken away, but of this enough. And yet, O that a deceived heart might
beguile us no longer! It was a good answer the man of God gave Amaziah, making
question about the Talents, the Lord is able to give thee much more then this;
2 Chro. 25.9.
more then our ease, that will slay us: More then our Bargain for a penny a
day, that will prove but poor wages, though it be a Bishopric. More then the
glory of this world, for a cloud will come and overshadow it. More then
Kingdoms here below, which have no foundations; or if any, then like that
foundation the foot has standing upon the waters: Therefore these must be
shaken as the kingdoms before them, which have been shaken and broken to
pieces, but the Kingdom of Heaven cannot be shaken: Heb. 11.10. Heb. 12.28.
(...) from (...) fluctuo, tanquam in Salo seu maristans.
We cannot but know all this, if we will show our selves men. Therefore let
the Idol fall, let his Ornament be defiled, whether without and before the
eye, or within the house of my imaginary; let it go, and be defiled, the Lord
can give us much more, a Peace which may be interrupted, but can never be taken
away. A glory which may be eclipsed here below, but shall shine forth to all
eternity; An inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven. 1 Pet. 1.


I would sharpen this point, and make it keen in the heart of the Idols, the
Kings enemies and ours. Let us then ask our selves this question seriously,
soberly and sadly, Is it peace? 2 King. 9.22.
We must then make answer, What peace? So long as our Idols are so many. It is
a conclusion of experience as ancient as the time, when man was first created
upon the earth; That false gods, and a true peace could never stand together:
If they be entertained, the true God will depart, consider we then of the
matter, and then make our choice.

Is not the presence of God more then the presence of ten Idols? Is not He an
Ornament? the beauty of holiness? Is not His grace the Ornament of beauty?
Let our Idol go, and this God will come, else not; for what agreement betwixt
Him and Idols? But if they go out, He comes in; A good Exchange and as full of
comfort; our wonder will be why we did not yield sooner: why we maintained
war so long, so long loved death; why we were so unwilling to let in Peace;
and so way is made to give full satisfaction to the doubt (what they shall do
for an Ornament?) and to the heart of the City.

The Crosses good friends and neighbors do pine after the Idol; and they
demand of me; "if the Cross must be taken away, and the Ornament of the Images
defiled also (which upon due consideration of the premises, the stoutest
adversary in the world dares not deny) What then shall be done for the Cities
ornament?

2. That which is fully to the mind of the City, and to the heart of the
righteous there: The greatest Reason in the world that a City so famous; that
has done so worthily, quitted her self so like her self; has so magnified
her office, has stood up for God, for His truth obove all the Cities in the
world; great reason, I say that this City should have an Ornament: she may
expect to be dealt with nobly and honorably at this point; so she shall be, and
be put to her own choice, and then we know what she will choose. She will
prepare a Pillar and write upon it, how the Lord has befooled his adversaries
the former year: how He was above them in all, wherein they dealt proudly,
Exodus 18.11.
breaking yoakes and snares, and turning the wisdom of Achitophell into
Foolishness; how He magnified His free grace; exalted His right hand; did
valiantly; was glorious in wisdom, triumphed in power, was marvailous in
working, when He caused His people to pass under the rod so brought them into
the bond of the Covenant. Ezech. 20.37.
Then they will write the Bishops war (so they called it) the beginning, the
progress, the close, all is wonderful. All the Chronicles in the world,
Hebrew, Greek, Latin, English, etc. cannot yield us a story which will run
parallel with this; That two great armies came from their places, stared each
other in the face for some months together, and so stood in open defiance one
against another in as great a contrariety of wills and affections each to
other, as are the Angels in heaven to the Devils in hell: and yet before the
year was up, turned back to back, and so departed without shedding one drop
of blood betwixt them. O wonderful! yes truly. Ezech. 23.32.
But the wonder must be raised higher yet; that a people prayed against,
exclaimed against, proclaimed enemies, rebels, etc. for it contains much,
should in the same place and time of the year, be prayed for in our
Congregations, be styled and enacted our Brethren, loyal, faithful subjects
to God and their King; so they were indeed, O wonderful year that! works of
a God, who only does wonders.

SECT. XVIII.
Touching this present year, a Doctor tells us, that God has done little or
nothing for his Church; but rather much against her. The Preachers conclusion
and respects are weighed at the Sanctuary and found light: And a conclusion
contrary thereunto is set down, and proved to be in diverse respects agreeable
to the mind of God and understanding of the Godly.

THis will suffice for the former year, and fill up two Columns of the
Pillar. But what has the Lord done for His people this present year, which
may now be recorded with rejoicing? We must answer, what ever adversary or
friend says to the contrary, Great things: therefore must the City continue
the Records; for behold mercies after mercies, and loving kindnesses have
followed loving kindnesses as the waves of the Sea. It is asked, where are
they? for hark what a great Clerk says, and a Master in Israel; " Things
are as they were, nay much worse, reformation of corruptions has been
endeavored with much zeal and diligence, yet the end not attained. Nay, in
some respects it is so far set back, that in my understanding, the state of
Religion has never been worse since the first reformation, then this present
year. What respects? these follow, in respect of, first, the greatness of
destractions, which have divided us all, one from another: then,

"Secondly, multitude of Sects and Sectaries, etc.

"Thirdly, dishonours done to the service of God, with so much scorn and
scandal to Religion, that in foreign parts, they question whether all this
time we have had any, so abruptly he breaks off. Upon easy search we may
find these words toward the end of a Sermon printed very lately at Cambridge.
I must ponder them whether they hold weight at the Sanctuary, whether the
Doctor speak according to his charge, as the Oracles of God. 1 Pet. 4.11
I say, I must do it, for it is much against my spirit to fill up this year
with Ciphers, to make it a Leap year, as if God had done nothing this year
worthy to be written upon the Pillar, the City stands charged to raise up now
to the glory of her God. We take then a second view of the Doctors words, he
says.

Obj. "Notwithstanding the much zeal [of our Nobles and worthies he meanes]
and diligence, things are much worse then they were.

Answ. Here is a confusion indeed, for here is much zeal and as much
diligence, and yet things much worse. I hope things are but in an appearance
so, but I answer the much zeal first; (where that is there will be much
diligence) I will be pretty confident the Doctor does not fault the zeal as
too much: But as the man of God, a Master and Seer in Israel, greatly affected
with the House and Cause of his God, he would have commended the reformers
zeal the more, if it had been much more, more hot and boiling against the
light Prophets, and treacherous Priests, their Idols and Idol services.

That is his meaning we hope, and we must deal tenderly therewith, as with the
eye and conscience, and give the fairest interpretation thereof; "That it
grieves him to the heart, that the success answers not; that the end is not
attained, the filthiness is not carried out of the Temple, nor are those
Priests cast out thence, nor are their Idols defiled.

But touching all this, he can consider and comfort himself in these words,
That as God has accepted a zeal for the building of His house, though nothing
was done there: 1 King. 8.18.
so will He accept much zeal for the reformation of corruptions there, though
the end be not presently attained. Surely the Lord takes it kindly that it was
in the hearts of the reformers to do yet more for Gods house, and to show much
zeal there; Let reformers quit themselves in point of zeal and deligence,
that they have labored in singleness of affection, and uprightnes of heart,
then, though their end should fail, and the time should be deferred, yet they
shall not fail of comfort. "Men must part their care so, as to take upon them
only the care of duty, and leave the rest to God. They must make good their
ends, and the means they have used, in confident assurance; that God will make
good the issue, and turn all to the best.

And this is a comfortable consideration even now for they that have given all
diligence about Temple work, have not lived to see the end attained. And he
that had showed much zeal there, thought verily, that his very zeal for God
and His house would occasion his death. Good man! he thought himself left
alone upon the earth; 1 King. 19.
and O that his good Lord, for whom he was so jealous, would take away his
life, and not leave his soul among Lions, for them to tear the Cawle of his
heart, so dismayed and heartlesse have good men been sometimes, when they have
been upon Temple-worke, contending for God, against Baall and his Priests. But
note we this here; That never any man, from that time to this day, did comment
upon Elijahs zeal, saying; It was too much, and he was served in his kind,
that would contend with Princes and bear up against wind and tide. No man was
so mad, and left of his wits, and destitute of understanding, that would blame
the Prophets much zeal and diligence for God and His House, when he was in his
fainting fits. No; There is no other use of all this, but that which the
Apostle makes for the comfort of all those, that have much zeal, and are
jealous for the Lord of Hosts; Heb. 10.35,36.
Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has great recompense of
reward. For ye have need of Patience, that after you have done the will of
God, ye might receive the promise. This is the Cordial Reformers must take,
after they have taken much pains, and have been very jealous for the Lord God
of Hosts, when yet things in appearance seem much worse.

In the second place, I must answer those men, who may be charitable men too,
and yet not acquainted with the Doctors Zeal about Cloisters and Cloyster-men,
those Abbeys and Abby-lubbers who eat the fat, and drink the sweet, caring
for the body only, and no farther, what betides to the precious souls: I say,
not acquainted with the Man and his known zeal, concerning these places and
persons, they may read the Doctors words backwa d, as if the much zeal of the
Reformes grieved the Doctor more then the end not attained. And that is it
which pincheth others also, and so they lay the blame upon much zeal that
things are worse and worse. To these men I answer, I hope not so; things do
but seem so to be, in a worse condition then formerly, but suppose they are
so, shall we blame Reformation or Reformers for this their much zeal and
diligence? God forbid. If there be any want, as sure there is in the best man
living, it is want of zeal, and of double diligence for the service of God,
which we shall never call the Liturgy; The want, if any, is this; that they
have not wrought through work in Temple-worke, and for the cause of God. That
they have not carried out the filthiness out of the temple (which is the prime
and chief work ever) and cast out those light and treacherous Priests out
thence, Zeph. 3.4.
who have polluted the Sanctuary, and have done violence to the Law, that is
all the want, which is, want of zeal, not too much zeal. Be it known unto
the world that these Reformers cannot be too zealous, though exceeding
zealous: for the Lord has been to them exceeding gracious; and the adversary
is exceeding proud, and the Churches friends exceeding cold; the Churches
straights are exceeding great; the Priests and their services have been, and
are exceeding abominable; and the zeal of Churchmen exceeding cold, I said
not well there, zeal cannot be cold; I mean, these Churchmen for the most
part have no zeal at all for God, but their zeal boyleth and runs over
against God, Mal. 3.4.
and those pleasant offerings which God has commanded, must and will have when
all is done. Therefore must Reformers now suffer themselves (if they will show
themselves in any proportion answerable) to be eaten up with an Holy zeal for
the house and household of God; The greatness of the provocation; the
excellency of the object the weight of the occasion bears out the soul, not
only without blame (unless from wicked and vile men) but with great praise in
such ecstasies of zeal, seeming distempers. (...). Romans 12.11. Non amat qui non
Zelat. Aug.
It is the glory of a Christian to be boiling in spirit, to be carried with
full sail, and as it were, with the Spring tide of affection, so long as the
stream runs in the due channel. And if there be great occasions for great
motions, then it is fit the affections should rise higher, as to burn with
zeal, to be sick of love, to be more vile for the Lord, as David, to be
counted out of our wits, with Saint Paul, hereby to further the cause of
Christ, and the good of souls. It was a quick answer that Luther gave
Erasmus, he told Luther, you are too hot Luther, "Be it so Erasmus in your
judgment, but the judge of all the world, who has loved me with a love as
strong as death, for whose cause I am exceeding zealous, will not tell me one
day, Martin thou wast too hot: But it is to be doubted, He will say rather,
Erasmus thou wast too cold. Away with these midling men, dangerous persons, who
say, others have too much zeal, because they have none at all. Master On Rev.
3. ver. 15, 16. Mediocritas hic est pessima nihil in te mediocre esse contentus
sum totum summum totum perfectum de sidero Jero. Ep. 15. ult. 181. Vide Lact.
lib. 6. ca 16. Min. Felix. p. 25. line 36. in folio.
Brightman lessons them very well, so do two or three more, they shall do
well to observe it, that they may prevent a curse, a spuing out. I can but
point to the Margin, adding this to the line; Blessed be God for those
Governors of Israel, who were the more forward in the cause of God, the more
backward others were, that offered themselves willingly among the people. And
blessed be God for the people that offered themselves so willingly also: And
for their zeal (which shamed the Priests) for it is much, but the Lord
increase it yet more, and make it yet more hot and more boiling in, and for the
cause of Christ, for He is worthy. How ever it fares with the world, it shall
be well with them, for the hearts of all that are good are toward all such,
that have offered themselves willingly. And (which is their security) the eyes
of the Lord are toward them for good; who would stand up for His cause against
a crooked and perverse generation; It shall be well with all such, though they
be smitten with the tongue and hand both, yet it shall be well: The Lord will
remember all those for good, Amen. Now we go on.

"In my understanding the state of Religion has never been worse since the
Reformation, then this present year, so the Doctor says,

1. I say first, he answers himself; in my understanding says he; he is but
one man, his understanding must not be a Standard, vvhereat to measure the
judgment of other men, in so high and dainty a cause, wherein the glory of
God is so much concerned. Thousands there are who unde stand themselves as
well as he, who know it to be clean contrary.

2. Seems the state of Religion never worse than now at this present time?
Yes; So it was in ancient time, know we not this of old when Israel was in
Egypt? They had never a worse opinion of their state, then when it was
beginning to mend. Then they were coming out of their furnace, I say, then,
when they thought themselves plunged deeper in: Then they exclaymed against
Moses; O how they sparkled and kindled against Moses! just as we do against
our Nobles and Worthies: he had done them the greatest vvrong and disservice
that could be done. Why so? Because Moses would bring them out of Egypt. But
who murmured so? who was so uncivil? The ignorant multitude. True, they did
complain of their blessings, and murmured with meat in their mouth; But upon
enquiry you will find, that Aaron and Mirian murmured, these strove also; The
Brother and the Sister contended and chid with Moses; and if sisters chide
with their brothers, they will chide bitterly. Add we hereunto, What was
intimated before, and must needs cause a seeming confusion in things; "The
Church-mans Idols are smitten at; then we must expect that he will rage as
they did, when Stephen assured them touching the alteration of things; the
casting out of beggarly rudiments; and how they had persecuted their brethren
and Teachers; Act. 7.54.
When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on
him with their teeth. We go on as follows. "So far things are set back.

1. I answer first, by questioning, how far back? Things are not set farther
back this year, then as they have been always, and ever will be while
Reformation comes on. It pluckes down first, and casts forth the rubbish,
and all this while, behold nothing but ruins. Truly every man's Tabernacle,
as well as David's, if raised according to right order and rule, must be raised
out of ruins. Certainly the building never went up before it went first
back, and fell down even to the ground, and into ruins. Touching this more
anon.

2. I ask again, are things set back? Certainly no; that is a deceit; the
Doctor is quite mistaken. Things do not go back, we go back. The hearts of
the children of men pull back the more strongly, the more Reformation draws
on, and with the more strength. If Reformation comes on, my heart draws back
mightily, and I cannot think I stand single in the world. My heart may be an
emblem wherein to behold the Cloister and College both. I say again, things
go not back, Reformation is not set back; we turn back like a deceitful
bow, and the more strongly, the more Reformation comes on.

3. I ask again, are things set back? They are; who sets them back, but
they who should put to both their shoulders to the setting them forward? It
was so in ancient times. Who set deliverance back, when a deliverer was
sent unto them, but the Israelites themselves with their own hands? So, when
the deliverer came forth of Zion, who opposed Him? The Rulers; Joh. 7.48.
Have any of the Rulers believed in Him? The chief Priests and Scribes; Were
they obedient? No, All these opposed Reformation with all their power; these
professed themselves the most bitter enemies thereunto. The Priests and
Scribes, they (for the most part) that Are (we cannot say properly, they live,
but are) Vatia hic situs est non diu vixit sed diu fuit. Sen.
in Cathedralls, Cloisters, Colleges, these draw back mightily, (and cause
others so to do) when Reformation goes forward. So it has been in all ages;
whether not so now let others judge. I will tell my observation, and every
man's that will observe, which is this; Those places as that earth is, under
which the Mines of Gold and Silver are, nothing grows thereon (say the
Naturalists) for the use of man, no not so much as a grass for meat to
beasts. Then there must needs be a drawing backs.

4. We may note, that the Lord does seem to go back, when He means to go
forward with might and power: And when He resolves to do the greatest matters
for His Church, He then so seems to stand, that the Church cannot easily judge
whether He means to go forward or backward, whether He be for the Church or
for her adversary; Josh. 5.13.
when the Churches burdens were sorest, then her deliverance was nearest, when
her groans were strong, because of cruel Taskmasters, then Moses came, and
deliverance went on a maine, and in full strength: Then in the last place,
because,

5. This falling to ruins first; This setting back of things is a great
offense in our way, Let us consider this with all our hearts, that we may not
stumble at it. What setting back is here? Take it to the utmost extent that
can be, and yet it is no other but as the Lord Christ was set back in His way
to glory. He went on the left hand as far back as possibly could be, before
he sat down on the Right hand of the Majesty on High. To express it as well
as I can; The Lord Christ went a back-way to His Throne; Ephe. 4.9.10.
He that is now ascended up above all Heavens, is the same, that descended
first into the lower parts of the earth. A back-way to glory sure. He was
set-backe so far as is the Cross, and that we sometimes call Hell; and yet
this backe-way was the ready way to His Crown, to His glory. Can the Church
dislike this way, which Her Lord Christ has gone before her in, and paved out
unto her, though seemingly a back and contrary way? Certainly the Church and
every member there must be made conformable to their Head, even in their way to
Glory. They must be set back and back, and yet farther back. How far back?
Even to the place of Dragons; they may dash upon hell it self, that low
bottom, before they rise up to their crown. And yet this backe-way, this
unsearchable, and admirable way, though it seems an uncomfortable way, even as
the shadow of death, yet shall it yield as much comfort as can be conceived,
for the farther back now, the farther forward anon; the lower the descent, the
higher the ascent. It was the way that Christ went in before, and all His must
follow Him in the same way after; The old and ancient way it is, from the
Cross to the Crown, from the lower parts of the earth to the highest Heavens:
from Hell to Glory. It is well with the Body, the Church, if she be as the Lord
Christ her head: But she knows it is well with her Head, yet He was set
back, as far back as can be imagined, and from thence took His rise to
Glory. It is the Churches way also, a back-way and darkesome, but (in that way
God is most glorious) leading to the inheritance of the Saints in light. The
words fit very well, and do afford a strong consolation; Luke 24.26
ought not the Church to have suffered these things, and to enter into her
Glory? This will give full answer to this setting back, if farther back then
yet things are. The Church may be set-backe as far as the gates and suburbs
of Hell; she may be smitten into the place of Dragons, and yet all this while
be in her way to her highest preferment: 1 King. 2.31.
The Church can comfort her self in these words; and will consider this
with all, that, though a man has been smitten at the Altar, whether he did
fly for refuge, yet it is rare to see a man smitten to death, whom God has
truly humbled, and brought upon his knees. My meaning is; we do not read,
that God ever destroyed a praying people, though things seem to that people
much set back. I go on now, for I must examine the Respects, In respect:
first;

I. "Of the greatness of distractions, which have divided us all one from
another.

Not all; Divide and impera.
yet cursed be all that have so distracted us, for thereby they bare rule, and
are multiplied. We say again, and say truly, not all. The good and bad stand
out now, and are as discernable as is the right hand from the left: But joined
we are now the closer together, the Good with the Good, the Bad with the
Bad: The good hold with the good, never faster, the Bad are joined with the
Bad never closer, like the scales of the Leviathan, they stick together, that
they cannot be sundered: Job 41.17
But into their secret let my soul never come; Into their assembly mine honor
be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will
they dug down a wall. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their
wrath, for it was cruel: Lord divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel, Amen. Genesis 49.6.
So much be said in Respect of our destractions. The second follows, In
Respect of;

II. "The multitude of Sects and Sectaries, men are dided in their opinions; so
many heads, so many conceits, every man has his way.

1. I answer first, Sects there are amongst us, not a multitude we hope: and
these that are, (the greatest part of them in my observation, which is not
slight) are occasioned by the Liturgy, which is called, The Divine Service. I
forbear, but handle it and see, whether it be not all flesh, no spirit at all:
And the Lord look upon this cause, and the offense it has caused, and require
it, He will do it. Only let this be remembered in the mean time, that it may
be now as once it was; Acts 24.14.
After the way which some call heresy, so worship they the God of their
fathers.

2. Are there Sects? A multitude says the Doctor. An infallible sign that
light and truth is appearing in more Glory. Why? Because that Sects appear,
because the thoughts of men are discovered. Certainly, we conclude and assure
our selves, because it is so, Therefore the Lord is building up Sion, therefore
He is appearing in His Glory. Psalm. 102.
A great door and effectual, is opened. 1 Cor. 16.19.
What follows? And there are many adversaries, as good a sign as can be
expected.

3. Are there multitude of Sects? Yes, he might as well have said, a multitude
of Rattle-heads. And what if there be a multitude of these? Shall we attribute
this to the zeal of the Reformers? God forbid; for then we should lay blame
upon Christ Himself. Luke 12.52.
When He came, did He give peace on earth? Nay, rather Divisions. Divisions
in opinion, Divisions in affection, five in one house, all divided and at
difference about points of Religion; The father divided against the son, the
son against the father, etc. one thought, this and the other that: It was so,
and it must be so: There must be heresies among you, that they which are
approved may be made manifest. 1 Cor. 11.19.
The third Respect follows, The third Respect follows, and in that Respect
his Zeal boyles up and scaldeth.

III. "In Respect of the doshonours done to the service of God with so much
scorn and scandal to Religion, that in foreign parts they question whether
all this time we have had any.

Any what? if he relates to the former Antecedent, The service of God (in
charity we will think so) by which he means our Liturgy (as now it is) then
we grant that it may be questioned at home and abroad, whether that be The
Divine service or not. And truly if I might conclude the point (it is not so
spiritual, nor in the clouds, too high for me) I should conclude, It is not,
not the Divine Service, as some seem to make it, even the chief, or whole
Service of God. Truly I question much whether it be a Divine Service, or a part
of the same, which yet only is spoken against hitherto, and opposed at this
time. And yet far be it from any sober man to justify any carriage which may
bring scandal to Religion; such as is not decent and according to rule. In the
second place;

2. I say, if we of the common sort are in an extreme, too hot and eager for
the casting out of this Liturgy, if we are so; It is because the contrary
persons are in an extreme also, hot and zealous for the keeping of it in.
Hence our troubles and disturbances in the Church; this the chief, if not the
only cause of the same, let us bear one with another, Some there are, well
known, and their folly is made manifest who have made that Service Book an
Idol, have so honored it, have so advanced it, have so adored it: therefore
have some on the other side used it like an Idol, have defiled and disgraced
it what they could. The Lord look upon this controversy and judge betwixt us
and them. Who am I that I should judge another servants? he stands or falls to
his own master. But these three things I dare confidently affirm. 1. That the
greatest part of these Sects, and all these troubles have been occasioned by
this Service Book; and woe to them by whom the offense comes. 2. That such
affronts (let another call them dishonours, indignities, or abuses) had not
been offered thereunto, had not the adverse party made that Book an Idol. 3.
That those, who have had a zeal for the casting out this Book, perhaps not so
well tempered with knowledge, yet can say as once in a different case, Genesis
20.5.
In the integrity of our hearts, and innocence of our hands have we done this.

3. In the last place I answer, it cannot be imagined that so learned and grave
a Divine can refer that any (as Grammar requires) to the other Antecedent,
Religion, for what if Boys and Girls or other ruder persons will not know
their Rule nor will walk by it; can it be conceived, that friends at home or
strangers abroad will question a whole Nation for this, whether they had any
Religion at all? Should friends or strangers do so, they would put it out of
all question, that they had neither Religion nor Charity neither, who could
question a whole Nation so rashly. I shall say no more to those words till the
Doctor shall clear them, what he means by Gods service: If he means the
service of God indeed; that which is truly called so, I am confident it is not
possible for him to clear this to the world; That the former, or this present
year, Dishonours have been done thereunto.

SECT. XIX.
The Conclusion and Respects mentioned in the former Section are reserved for
this.

ANd now I have cleared my way of this Rubbish, and a Conclusion also
Diametrally contrary to the Doctors words all along, which is agreeable to the
mind of God, and to the understanding of the Godly. You shall have it
presently, but first, Psalm. 149.6
let the high praises of our God be in our mouth. Jer. 32.29.
Blessed be God the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, who has given His
servants, our worthies, one heart, and one way. And blessed be these worthies,
who have offered themselves willingly in the cause of their God, promoting the
same with much zeal and much diligence. This being premised, the Conclusion is
this.

"That the state of Religion has never been better; has never had more
power, more life in it since the Reformation, then it has had these last two
years. Nay I will go farther back. Religion has never been in such a way
to advancement, to an exaltation, since the the day that Christ was carried up
in a cloud to His Glory, then this present year. The Respects follow, for I
follow his order, not very good, because I do conclude first, and prove after
as he does. In Respect first;

"That things are carried in a way so contrary to sense and reason, and yet
carried on. The Finger, the Hand, nay the whole Arm of God is here; His
strength and power is put forth here, that is out of question, when there is no
more probability, that the means can attain the end, then what makes it
only possible to an Almighty Arm. Secondly in Respect;

II. That things are set back, and yet farther back. A great sign that
Reformation goes on, and shall go on; and Religion is advancing now, and in
her ascending line. Why? Because that has been the manner always, and the
Lord Christ went back and back, even to that place we call Hell, and by that
back way, by that descending line, He ascended to His Glory.

III. Thirdly, In Respect of those distractions amongst us; No other, but what
Christ has commanded, and will have when Reformation shall come on. As He
concerning Himself, the same we may say of Reformation in His Name. It comes
not to send peace but a Sword; to set men at variance one against another
Matthew. 10.34,35.
. It comes to send fire on the earth; It does not give peace, but rather
divisions Luke 12.49.51.
. We may record our Lords words with trembling, and yet every faithful soul
can rejoice too; Every kingdom divided against it self is brought to
desolation Mat. 12.25.
. Certainly our divisions are not a destructive sign, not a sign of
desolation, but a sign of good to all that are good. Our kingdom is not
divided against it self, rather one kingdom divided against another; The
Kingdom of Darkness against the kingdom of Light. And the clearer this
light, the more manifest the opposers of it. Again, these Divisions are of an
uniting nature, they tend to unity, and setting us in joint again: Now they
that fear the Lord speak often one to another: Mal. 3.
and amongst them there is a firmer union then ever. Now the wicked are folden
together as Thorns, Nah. 1.11.
they make a tumult now, as once they did a little before they became as dung
for the earth, Psalm. 13.10.
they are taking crafty counsel against His people and consulting against His
hidden ones: What follows now? As once it was, and ever will be in such
distractions and seeming confusion in persons and things; strong prayers are
put up against these adversaries. Now the godly give themselves to prayer, and
they cast not away their confidence; saying, Psalm. 2.6.
yet God is good to Israel, yet have I set my King upon My holy hill of Sion:
Yet the Lord Christ He is King, and His kingdom shall be advanced, and his
enemies shall He dash to pieces like a potters vessel, by those very means,
by which His enemies would dethrone Him, not suffering Him to bear rule in the
world. Fourthly in Respect of;

IIII. The Sects and Sectaries among us. Do they appear? A sure and certain
sign that God is appearing in His Glory. Lastly in respect of, and that is the
chiefest Respect, and has in it the quintessence of all, in Respect of;

V. Those honors (for I take the Doctors word, willing to go as contrary to
him as he goes to the sacred Scripture the Word of truth) "Those honors that
have been done this present year to the service of God, truly called so and
so indeed. Can they point us to a time, our enemies themselves being Judges,
when the day of the Lord; The servants and service of the Lord have been more
honored then the former and this present year? Many Parliaments have done
worthily, but this has exceeded them all, in their honors done to the service
of God. And now I have said this, I have said all: For, honor God, and His
service, and what would we have more? Thanks be to God for their much zeal
and diligence this way; And God grant they may abound yet more in their zeal
for the work of the Lord, and in giving honors to His Name, Amen.

SECT. XX.
God has wrought wonderfully for His Church this present year. The City
writes the remarkables upon the Pillar with a pen of Iron; she names the
Pillar, and dedicates the same.

ANd now after this contention, this is easily cleared to the world, that some
notable things have bin done this present year also, for and in behalf of the
Church. The City then may go on and write the remarkables of this year also;
What remarkables? These which the adversary allows her. Alas what are these
but distractions and fears, wars, and rumors of wars? Yes, something else,
which are these, That the adversary conceived chafe, and brought forth
stubble; That their own breath as fire did devour them. Esa. 33.11
That the lips of a fool have swallowed up himself. Eccles. 10.12.
That the adversaries plotted and plotted, and the Lord brake their snares, and
discovered their plots; That the adversary girded himself, and girded
himself, Esa. 8.9,10
it is twice repeated: And the Lord brake him to pieces so often, and more, for
it is thrice repeated, and this year fulfilled in our eyes. The adversaries
took council together, but the Lord brought it to naught, they spoke the
word, but it did not stand. Verse. 10.
How so? it follows, for God is with His people: All this must be written
first, for thus it was done. Then the Church will write according to her
adversaries allowance, all the forementioned, for they followed close at the
heel, very Paradoxes all along, things managed by an Almighty hand for her
weal against all sense and reason: She writes her distractions, for these
united her; her fears, for these quieted her; violent deeds against her peace
and dignity, these awakened her, and set her people upon their Watch-Towers:
devouring words, these in stead of swallowing up, preserved her, and so the
poison of Aspes embalmed her name for ever, This must be recorded to all
Generations.

The Church can go on and write, what the Lord will do in after times. That she
cannot you will say: Yes she can; for she holds fast the confidence Heb. 3.6.
, That by the greatness of Thine arm her enemies shall be as still as a stone
Exodus 15.16.
; He who has wrought that and this the former year; This and that this
present year, He will do yet more: He will make the adversaries of his Church
to be as still as a stone. He that brought His Church out of Egypt, did not
forsake them at the Sea. To think now, that the Lord will make a stand here,
and lift up the right hand of His adversaries, were to forget the years of the
Right hand of the most High, Psalm. 77.10.
these wonderful years bypast. Such a thought were to provoke the Lord as
they did at the Sea, even at the Red- Sea. But I will not call off our thoughts
from what the Lord has done, That men may know, that thou whose Name alone is
Jehovah, art the most high over all the Earth. Psalm. 83.18.


Now then, the City will name this Pillar. What can she call it but a Pillar?
Yes, it must have a more proper Name as anciently it had, when the Lords of the
Philistims were discomfited, it must be called EBEN-EZAR, hitherto has the
Lord helped us. 1 Samuel 7.12.
Maugre the Malice and rage of the adversary yet HITHERTO. Notwithstanding the
power and policy of the enemy, yet HITHERTO the Lord has helped us. Over this
Wall (that is not high enough) over this Hill, and that Mountain; through that
gulf, and those straites; All along backwayes, and crooked paths; hard by the
dens of Lions, and mountains of the Leopards, has the Lord brought His
Church HITHERTO. Blessed be His Name.

Therefore she will Dedicate this Pillar also. To whom? Not to man; not to his
wisdom, nor to his might; though yet she will give as much to Man, as he is
capable of. Her heart is loyal, choice, and chaste too. It cannot be Ravished
(it is the Doctors word) but with the loving kindness of a God; nor is it
indeared to any thing but to her Christ. The City will dedicate this Pillar to
the KNOWN GOD: known by executing judgments, and showing mercies. This is
all, but she must write this in Brass, and with a pen of Iron, in Capital
Letters, that he who runs may read them, and the generations to come may look
on, and say, What has Jehovah done for our fathers? We their children will
trust in him. Amen. This Pillar will be an ornament to the City, the most
becoming and specious that ever was seen in the world.

SECT. XXI.
The Adversary is offended hereat; better pleased with a pile of Images, then
with a pillar erected for praise. This Treatise with Gods blessing upon it may
inform him and make him wiser; It is concluded with two words to little
children, that they may account these Idoll-pictures fit to be played with now,
and to be cast out hereafter.

THe Adversaries now (I mean not the Crosses Neighbors, I suppose them
reasonable men, and reasonably well satisfied; but the Adversaties) will never
yield to us at this point. They are as stiff against Pillars to be erected for
praise, as they are for Images to be erected for Prayer. No matter what they
are for, or against; The works of the Lord are great sought out of all those,
that have pleasure therein: And the word of the Lord is mighty, and will be
sharp in the hearts of the Kings enemies: Such are they, who turn His glory
into a lie. So the Lord has said more then once or twice in this Treatise. If
we shall walk contrary thereunto, He will walk contrary to us; and then woe
unto us; nothing can be for us, or prosper in our hands, for, Job. 9.13.
if He withdraw not his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under Him: And so we
have our lesson also.

To conclude, here is as much also yielded for ornament, as can be by Scripture
allowance; if they will have more, if nothing will serve them but the cunning
crafts-mans work (who ventureth to make his god with his own fingers) and so
they will carve for themselves, be it at their peril; They have to do with a
jealous God, who will famish all the gods of the earth, their Carvers, and
maintainers all three: So He says also. Let them be well ware of that, and
remember they have a fair warning. I have done, so soon as I have spoken two
words to the little children; they must not be forgotten here; for,

Children will be prying herein I am sure, because here is (...) golden
Crosses, and gilded ^inges; they (...) to be gazing thereon: And very fit
gazing work it is for them, so long as they play with rattles and wipe their
Noses on their sleeves. Two words will serve their turn to instruct them for
hereafter; the one shall be Counsel, the other a Prayer, as short both as may
be, for their memories are short; The counsel is; 1 John 5.21.
Little Children keep your selves from Idols. Amen. The Prayer is as short,
but it must be continued while our mouths are open for our selves and (...)
from dumb Idols, from Idol-Ministers; from brutish and unreasonable men, good
Lord deliver us. Amen, Amen.

Page 64. Line 11. read thus. II "The multitude of Sects and Sectaries, which
cry indeed as the Jews before them, The Temple of the Lord, but with a worse
addition, That the Temple of the Lord may be destroyed. Page 65. Line 6.
manifest, add this, Lastly does not the Doctor wrong these Sectaries? Truly I
think he does. As he makes them more in number then they are, so he makes them
speak, what they speak not; nay, what they abhor to speak. I am confident
his Heritiques say not, Let the temple of the Lord be pulled down; but the
contrary. Let the Temple of the Lord be built up. Let the Altars, the Rayles,
the mock-gods there, let these be put down, which the light Priests and
treacherous Prophets, and bold Chancellors have built up. Down with these even
to the ground: So they say, in a zeal to Gods Glory, and doubtless their
zeal is according to knowledge. The, etc.
FINIS.

