THE CASE AND PROCEEDINGS Of at least Sixty Gentlemen, Participants and
Purchasers, for valuable consideration, of Lands, in the Level of Hatfield
Chase, the Counties of York, Lincoln and Nottingham; AND MORE THEN Two hundred
of their Tenants, Who have been dispoiled of their Estates, by the inhumane and
barbarous Ryots of the Inhabitants of the Manor of Epworth; whereof some have
been murdered, others wounded, the Church with their Houses demolished, and
the materials thereof, with their Goods taken from them by force: For which
cause they the said Rioters were exempted in the last Act of General Pardon.

Humbly presented to the Consideration of this present PARLIAMENT, for Redress
and Reparation of their so great Losses and Damages; As it was also to the
several PARLIAMENTS sitting in the Years 1651, and 1654.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1656.

The State of the CASE.
THe late King, owner of the several Manors of Hatfield, Thorn, Fishlacke,
Dowsethorpe, Stainford, Snaith, Cowicke and Rawcliffe, in the County of York;
Crowle, Epworth, Wroote and Missen in the County of Lincoln; and of Misterton
and Gringley in the County of Nottingham; the wastes of all which lying
contiguous and so hurtfully surrounded by the several Rivers of Trent,
Bickersdicke, Idle, Torn, Dunne and Air, that it yielded little or no profit
to the Commonwealth; but on the contrary nourished beggars and idle persons:
and the said King having a Chase of Red-Deer through five of those Manors, the
rest were much annoyed and oppressed thereby; did resolve by the advice of his
Council, as well for the easing of his charge, and increase of his revenue, as
for the improvement and reducing of so great a quantity of drowned and boggy
ground, to be made good meadow, arable and pasture, for the advantage of the
Commonwealth: did by advice of his Council, under the Great Seal, contract with
Sir Cornelius Vermuyden, to drain and lay dry the same, being in all about
600000 Acres of Land at his own charge; and in recompense thereof he should
have one third part: And thereupon directed Commissions to several Gentlemen
of those Countries, to treat and agree with all such as pretended right of
Common within those several Manors; which took effect with all the Manors
unanimously, except the Manners of Epworth in the County of Lincoln: and
against the Commissioners within that Manor, Sir Robert Heath being the then
Attorney General, exhibited an Information in the Exchequer Chamber; whereupon
370 Commoners (who were all, that at that time could be discovered to have
right of Common there) came and submitted to such an Award as Sir John Banks
the then Attorney General should make therein: who upon several hearings of
all parties and their Council, made an Award; that of 13400 Acres belonging to
that Manor, which was then drained among the rest of the level, 6000 Acres
should be allotted the Commoners as their part or proportion, lying next the
Towns, and so preserved for ever at the charge of the said Sir C. V. and the
remaining 7400 Acres should be set out in the remotest parts of those washes,
to Sir Cor. Vermuyden and his participants for their third part, and for the
late Kings part, in right of his interest as Lord of the soil; and this by
consent was decreed in the Exchequer Chamber, and possession accordingly
established with Sir Cor. Vermuyden and his Participants and their Assigns;
who being in peaceable and quiet possession, did manure, build, and plant a
Town called Sandtoft, and a Church therein, and placed a Minister, whereto
resorted above 200 Families of French and Walloon Protestants (who fled out of
their native Country for fear of the Inquisition, only to enjoy the free
exercise of their Religion here,) who builded and planted above 200 habitations
for husbandry, and plowed and tilled much of the said 24500 Acres of Land, to
the great advantage of the Commonwealth: and quietly enjoyed the fruits of such
their labors, till about June 1642. at which time some of the Inhabitants
thereabout, pretending they had right of Common, said they were not bound by
the said Decree, and taking advantage of the distractions of those times, rise
in tumults, break down the fences and enclosures of 4000 Acres, destroyed all
the Corn growing, and pulled down the houses built thereon. Then the
Participants petitioned the Lord Fairfax and the Earl of Manchester, who gave
express order to quiet those Ryots; but all was in vain, as will appear by the
several Reports made upon a full Examination of the whole Business, and
hearing both parties concerned.

In the year 1645. the Participants being thus grievously oppressed, and
contrary to Law cast out of their possessions; upon their address to the then
Parliament by Petition, they were pleased to make these Orders following. Viz.

Wednesday 10th December. 1645.
WHereas the Participants in the draining, and Tenants and Inhabitants of the
Levill of Hatfield Chase and parts adjacent, in the Counties of York, Lincoln
and Nottingham, have petitioned this House, informing that after the expense of
at least 200000lb in those Works, the Tennants of the Manor of Epworth (being
part of that Draining) consenting to a Decree passed in the Exchequer for
settlement of the proportions agreed on and set out of that Manor, and ever
since enjoyed by the Participants and their Tenants, till of late, and since
the distractions of these times, diverse of the unruly Inhabitants of the said
Manor, have in a tumultuous manner, thrown down and laid waste a proportion of
at least 7400 Acres of Land, and destroyed a very great quantity of Rapes and
Corn growing, by forcible keeping and depasturing their Cattle thereon,
demollished very many houses, burned others, cut and burned the Plowes, beat
and wounded those they have found ploughing, or have resisted them in any their
outrageous acts, and now threaten the drowning of the whole; by cutting of the
banks, and misusage of the sluices, and resist the Participants in levying Taxes
for repair of the Works, to the great damage of the Commonwealth in general,
and scandal of the Justice thereof, in case it should not be restrained, and
the offenders punished.

For restraining of the like outrages for the future, and for preservation of
the peace of the Country; It is Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled:
That the Sheriff of the said County of Lincoln, and Justices of Peace there,
shall upon complaint made to them by the Participants of the said Level, or
their Agents, punctually pursue the Statutes made in the 13th year of King
Henry the 4th, for suppressing of Ryots and routs, and shall call to their
assistance, if need require, the trained Bands of the said County, and the
Parliaments forces next adjoining, to be ayding and assisting unto the
Participants, in guarding and keeping the Sluices and Sewers, reedifying and
repairing what has been so demolished, and levying the Taxes legally imposed,
tending to the preservation of so good and beneficial a work to the
Commonwealth, and for the settling of this business; It is further ordered,
That the Sheriff of the County of Lincoln for the time being, shall upon
request to him made by the Participants, appoint such a Deputy within the
limits of the said Level, for sudden ayding and assisting them (if need
shall require) as they from time to time shall desire. And it is likewise
ordered by their Lordships, That as well the Ministers in the adjacent
Parishes, shall upon the next Sunday after receipt of this Order, as the
Undersheriff of the County of Lincoln in the several adjacent Market-Townes
on the Market day, make publication of this Order; that the Inhabitants may
take notice hereof, and conform accordingly.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.


Die Sabbathi vicessimo primo Martii 1645.
WHereas the Participants in the draining of Hatfield Chase and parts adjacent,
in the Counties of York, Lincoln and Nottingham, have petitioned this House,
insomuch that by Order of the Committee of Lincoln, the Tenants and
Inhabitants of those drained Lands within the Manor of Epworth, have entered
Bonds for payment to the Committee of their Rents due to their Landlords at our
Lady day now next coming, and at Michaelmas next coming, to be deposited in
their hands till the trial of a Title; and likewise that the said Level is
become totally drowned, by the malicious pulling up of a navigable Sluice, which
kept the River of Trent from flowing into Vickersdicke, whereby very great
damage is happened, not only to the Participants and Tenants in particular, but
to the Commonwealth in general: For reedifying of which, and other Sluices,
Banks, Draines and Enclosures demolished; this House did on the 10th of December.
last settle by Order, which Order the Lords in Parliament assembled do hereby
confirm; And do further Order, That those Bonds so taken from the Tenants, be
(upon notice of this Order) brought into this House, to be disposed of as to
Justice shall appertain: And do likewise require and authorize the
Commissioners of Sewers for the said Level, that they be ayding and assisting
to the Participants with all their legal authority, in reedifying the things
so demolished, and preserving the said Level from future inundation and
destruction by the pretended Commoners; in which they are hereby authorized and
required, to call to their assistance the Sheriffs of the County, and the
Justices of the Peace next adjoining to the said Works, to be ayding and
assisting in the establishing and preservation of so good and beneficial a
wo^k to the C^mmonwealth.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.


Upon the Bill in the Exchequer Chamber for establishing the possession against
those seven who brought their Actions at Law: the Court upon several debates
and search of the presidents, they made this Order following.

Mercurii decimo die Februarii 1646.
WHereas in the Cause here depending, by English Bill exhibited by Sir Thomas
Abdy Knight and others, Plaintiffs against James Mawe, Gregory Tore, William
Bire, Richard Mawe, Robert Barnard, William Tongue, Thomas Medley, and others,
the Tenants and Inhabitants of Epworth in the County of Lincoln Defendants,
upon hearing of his Majesty's Solicitor general on the said Plaintiffs
behalf, concerning the stay of Suits by Action at Law brougbt by the said
Defendants, against Anthony Massingarb and others Plaintiffs in this Court,
claiming under his Majesty's Title; It was ordered by this Court the Eight day
of this instant February, That the Council on either part should attend this
Court this day, concerning the stay of the said Suits, and that in the mean
time the said Defendants were ordered not to proceed therein, as by the said
Order at large appears. Now upon hearing of Mr Solicitor General, Mr Thorpe
and others on the behalf of the said Plaintiffs, and of Mr Gates, Mr Ellis and
others on the behalf of the said Defendants, endeavoring to show cause for the
further proceedings in the said Suits at Law; and upon producing of an
Exemplification of a Decree of this Court, for the settling of the quiet
possession of the Lands in question, and of the interest of his Majesty
therein; It is this day ordered by this Court, That his Majesty's Solicitor
general shall proceed upon the said Bill in this Court with all convenient
speed: and in the mean time the possession of the Lands in question, to be held
in quiet by the said Plaintiffs, as it has been formerly settled by this Court,
and enjoyed at any time since the said Decree made. And that the said Suits at
Law shall be stayed by the Injunction of this Court, until the hearing of the
Cause, or that this Court give further order.


Upon which Injunction, the Sheriff having a Writ of Assistance, came with near
100 persons to quiet the possession, and set up the fences of the 4000 Acres
first laid waste; but then Daniell Noddell came with 400 men, and forced the
Sheriff with all his assistants to fly, and then demolished what the Sheriff
had before caused to be set up: Then the Participants brought their Bill to
hearing, and during that time, the said Inhabitants rise in tumults, and laid
waste the remaining 3400 Acres, as in the Report.

The Council of State being informed of the continual Ryots committed by the
said Inhabitants, writ the ensuing Letter to the Sheriff of Lincolneshire.
SIR
WE are informed that there has been several Ryotous and tumultuous
gatherings together of people in that County of Lincoln, under some pretense
about the Commons of Epworth; which kind of meetings ought not at any time to
be suffered, but effectually proceeded against as the Laws have directed, that
by the punishment of some, others may be deterred from such like attempts: but
especially in such times as these, a more diligent care ought to be taken to
prevent such meetings of the multitude, that may make use of other pretenses to
begin Insurrections and carry on designs, to the interruption of the public
peace and danger of the Commonwealth. You are therefore to keep a watchful eye
upon the confluence of people upon any feigned pretenses whereby danger may
probably arise, and to make use of the power the Law has put into your hand,
and entrusted you with to preserve the peace of the County: And if you find
that power not sufficient for that purpose, you may desire assistance from such
forces of the Commonwealth as shall be nearest you; who are hereby ordered, and
shall have directions, to give you such assistance as shall be necessary for
your effecting that work, whereby dangerous consequences may be prevented, and
delinquents against the public peace may be brought to condign punishment;
the people nevertheless for such wrongs as they may have cause to complain of,
being left to prosecute their pretenses in a peaceable and quiet manner in due
course of Law, where they may have right witeout making themselves Judges in
their own Cases, by such exorbitant and irregular courses.

Whitehall the 12th July 1651. Signed, etc.
To the High Sheriff of the County of Lincoln, These




After these Orders and Letter before mentioned were made herein, yet the
Inhabitants aforesaid, ceased not to Riot, etc. whereupon the said Participants
petitioned the Parliament in the year 1651. which was referred to a Committee
of the then Parliament the 10th of January following: who upon full examination
of the whole matter, and Witnesses upon Oath on both sides, made the Report
following, viz.

THE REPORT OF THE Committee OF PARLIAMENT.
BY virtue of an Order of Parliament of the 10th of January 1651. we have taken
into Consideration the Petition of the Participants in the Drainage of the
Level of Hatfield Chase, and upon Examination of several Witnesses upon Oath,
We find

That the Petitioners at the Expense of 175046lb or thereabouts, did Drain and
lay Dry about 60000 Acres of Land, lying contiuguous within the Counties of
York Lincoln and Nottingham, which Land was not worth before 3 shillings 4
pence per Acre, and made the same worth 10 shillings, 12 shillings, 16
shillings, and some 20 shillings per Acre.

That in June 1642. the Petitioners had been in a quiet possession by the space
of 10 years, of about 7400 Acres of that Land lying within the Manor of
Epworth.

That in 1642. John Allen, John Cross, Leonard Cowling, William Spaven, Thomas
Noble, James Stokeham, Edward Baffendale, Thomas Meggot, Edward Wyldbore,
Edward Earl and William Wake, Robert Hawksworth, Thomas Thomkinson, John
Wilson, William Carryer, Robert Snell, John Garland and diverse others, in a
Tumultuous manner came into the Level within the Manor of Epworth, and there
brake down the Fences, and put in their Cattle, and destroyed about 160 Acres
of growing Corn and Rapes, and then diverse of the Inhabitants of Haxey came in
amongst them and continued Rioting from day to day till they had laid wast
about 4000 Acres of the Drained Land, and pulled down several Houses thereon
standing.

That about that time Captain Kingman (since dead) with diverse others of the
Manor of Epworth, pulled up a Navigable Sass planted in Vickerdicke, which
cost the replanting 1500lb at the least.

That shortly after Thomas Peacocke, Thomas Burton and diverse others, several
days during the flowing of the Spring Tides, forced open a Sewer called Snow
Sewer, planted upon the River of Trent for venting the waters out of the
Level, and during the ebb shut down the inner doors whereby the waters could
not get out; this course they used till they had drowned about 8000 Acres of
Corn and Rapes then growing, and the Corn stacks generally half way, with most
of the Habitations by the space of Ten weeks.

That the Tenants thus expulsed from their Habitations complained to the
Committee of Lincoln, who gave them an Order to open the Sluice and let out the
waters, which Order being brought, the said Peacocke, Burton and others, with
Muskets defended the Sluice and refused to give obedience

That in the year 1647. upon the Bill depending in the Exchequer, exhibited by
the Petitioners against the Inhabitants, several Orders were made for the
establishing the possession with the Petitioners, and Order given to the
Sheriff to assist them, and then Daniel Noddel an Attorney at Law, Thomas
Taukersby, Robert Brown, Thomas Hill of Epworth, and Richard Jarvis of Owston,
with diverse others, to the number of 400 persons, came upon the place Armed
with Swords and Muskets to resist, whereby those Orders were fruitless.

That the Petitioners being still kept out of their Possession, brought their
Bill to hearing; then the said Daniel Noddel the Soliciter for these
Inhabitants, got in to his assistance Lieutenant Col. John Lilburn and Major
John Wildman, and while the Cause was hearing, the Inhabitants began to Riot on
3400 Acres which was yet kept up.

That upon Complaint thereof to the Court of Exchequer, they sent an Injunction
and a Writ of Assistance to the Sheriff, to quiet the possession till the
hearing of the Cause, but in his presence the Fences are thrown down by
multitudes, and the Riotors by force fetch away the Tenants Cattle and Impound
them, and refuse to admit Replevins, and force them to Redeem them at what Rate
they please.

That the persons Acting in these last Ryots on the 3400 Acres, were Thomas
Hill of Epworth, Robert Johnson, Alexander Fox, John Watson junior, Thomas
Glue, John Johnson, Richard Mane Constable, Richard Procter, Thomas Hallifax,
William Elmer, John Artus, Jehosaphat Tailor, John Granger, Peter Clerk of
Belton, William Robinson, Thomas Bernard, George Peacocke, Jeffery Whitaker of
Epworth, William Whash of Belton, John Brocke, Samuel Clayton, William
Pepplewell junior, Ralph Wray, Alexander Fletcher, Charles Laund, Robert Young,
Robert Pycocke, William Pycocke, Robert Chesman, Alexander Pitts, John Foster,
John Pettyner, Matthew Dale, John Robson, William Parkinson, Thomas Granger,
John Hallifax, Charles Tea^e, Edward Hallifax, William Swindall, Henry Cleire,
Richard Rose, William Thomson, Robert Teale, Richard Bernard, Thomas Clearke,
Thomas Tailor, Matthew Hallifax, Thomas Davis senior, John Davis junior, Peter
Bernard High-Constable, John Bernard, all of Belton: William Whiteacre senior,
William Whiteacre junior, Thomas Brown, Alexander Mawe son of John Mawe,
John Clearke, Alexander Clearke senior, John Loughton, Thomas Coggan son of
George, George Chapman, Alexander Clearke junior, John West, George Cutforth,
Alexander Cutforth, Alexander Chapman, Thomas Loughton, William Crashawe,
Robert Foster, Thomas Stutting, Richard Bernard, Frances Isle, Robert Willson,
George Wells, Peter Chesman, Richard Cocks and John Hall, all of Epworth:
Simon Wright, William Moody, John Moody and Robert Moody of Belton: Richard
Tailor, William Goldsmith, Charles Kelsey, Robert Barrow, John Wells, Gregory
Johnson, Thomas Travers, Samuel Maggott, Roger Philipson, Robert Dawson, Thomas
Cooper, Henry ^ayler, William Barker, Thomas Coggan and James Moody, all of
Haxey.

That the Tenants being thus Treated, repair several times to Michaell
Mouckton a Justice of the Peace, he refuses to grant any Warrants, or Pursue
any Legal course for their preservation, but on the contrary gives several
Encouragements to the Riotors; and some of them being indicted at a Session for
a notorious Riot, and found Guilty; it was moved by some of the Justices, that
they should be fined 4 or 5 Marks apiece; the said Mouckton moved openly, that
they should be fined but 6 pence, and it was carried, that it should be but 12
pence apiece.

That in February 1650. upon full hearing in the Exchequer, a Decree was made
for establishing the Possession with the Petitioners, which was published upon
the place in the presence of diverse of the Inhabitants, who having now gotten
the influence of Lilburn, Wildman and Noddel, declared that they would not give
any Obedience thereunto, nor to any Order of the Exchequer or Parliament, and
said they could make as good a Parliament themselves; some said it was a
Parliament of clouts, and that if they sent any Forces, they would raise Forces
to resist them, and proceed to the defacing of the Church, and within ten days
time the total demolishing the whole Town of Santoft, and other Houses
thereabout to the number of 82 Habitations, besides Barns, Stables and other
Outhouses, pull down and break in pieces a Windmill, and destroy all the Corn
and Rapes on the 3400 Acres.

That the Damages by several testimonies appear to be 80000lb and upward.

That the Land being thus laid wast, the Church defaced, the Town with all the
Houses, Mill and Outhouses depopulated, and Corn destroyed ( Lilburn, Wildman,
Mouckton, Noddel Confederating) an agreement is made with several men of the
Manor of Epworth, that in Consideration of 2000 Acres of the Land so laid wast
to be given to Lilburn and Wildman, and 200 Acres to Noddel, they should defend
them from all those Ryots past, and to that purpose were to maintain the said
Inhabitants in possession of all the rest of the 7400 Acres before laid wast,
and keep them dry, and Deeds Sealed accordingly.

That then Lilburn and Noddel, Jasper Margrave and George Stovin of Crowle with
others, come to Stantoft Church on the Lords Day, where the French Congregation
of Protestants were gathered, and forced them from thence, and Lilburn told
them they should not come thither unless stronger than they.

That then Lilburn and Noddel go to another Manor called Crowle, and there
they agree with some of that Manor to assist them to get their Commons again,
as Epworth had done, where they advise them that they should Impound the
Tenants Cattle, and if they Replevied, to Impound them again and break their
Fences, and eat up their Crops, and so tire them out until they attorned
Tenants to them, which they did accordingly.

That the Tenants being thus terrified, and seeing their condition was to be
like their Neighbors, they take Leases from Jasper Margrave, and George
Stovin, who gave bonds to save them harmeless, and so the Petitioners by the
former force and this practice, were outed of their possession of both those
Manors.

That at the making of those Leases, Noddel declares openly in the presence of
20 persons, that he would lay 20 shillings with any man, that as soon as
Lilburn came to London, there should be a new Parliament, Lilburn should be
one, and call this Parliament to an account; further adding, that they had now
finished this of Lincolnshire (meaning gotten the Land from the Petitioners)
they would go into Yorkshire (meaning the rest of the Level) and do the like
there, and then they would give the Attorney General work enough to do.

That Noddel said at another time, that now they had drawn their Case, they
would Print it, and nail it at the Parliament door, and if they would not do
them Justice, they would come up, make an Outcry, and pull them out by the ears.

That when they had made the Agreement before mentioned for the 2200 Acres to
be divided as aforesaid, then Lilburn, Wildman and Noddel cause to be measured,
and take into their Possessions the proportions above mentioned, and agree with
several persons to Let proportions thereof, Lilburn repairs the House that was
built for the Minister, and partly pulled down by the Riotors, and puts his
servants into it to keep the possession thus attained, and having forced away
the Minister and Congregation, imployes the Church to the use of a Stable, Cow
house and Slaughterhouse, to lay hay and straw in.

That Wildman being present at the Examination of several Witnesses produced
by the Petitioners, who proved that Wildman was present when Lilburn made the
bargain, that they two in Consideration of 2000 Acres to them, and 200 to
Noddel, of the Land so laid wast, should defend the Inhabitants from all Ryots
past and to come, and at their charge maintain them in the Possession of the
remaining 5200 Acres, all but the Charge of a trial that was to be in
Michaelmas Term following; and that he was present when the Deeds were Sealed
to Lilburn and himself of the 2000 Acres, both which he denied with great
Imprecations and invocations of Judgments to fall on him, if he were either
Party or Privy, or was to have had any advantage thereby, till a Deed was
produced; which being showed him, he confessed to be his own Hand and Seal, in
which he did Covenant as in that Deed is expressed.

The Inhabitants say in their Defense, that the Lands before the Draining fed
Cattle fit for the Butchers, but the Witnesses being cross Interrogated say,
that it was overflown with water in Summer before the Draining, and that in
May, June and July, and all the Summer long, they took Fish in several places,
unless in a very dry Summer, and that they went in Boats Swan-hopping in
Summer.

They also say, that Snow Sewer was pulled up to defend the Isle from the
coming of Sr Ralph Hausby then of the Kings party.

They also say, that the Sass was pulled up by the Command of one whom they
knew not, but he told the Inhabitants that he was a Captain of Sr John
Meldrums: Noddel in defense of his coming with 400 men to oppose the Sheriff,
produces Witnesses, who Depose they heard one say, Mr Gibbon sent to invite
him to come, And in his Examination in the Exchequer, he says, he came to
apprehend Mr Gibbon upon a Warrant.

Noddel also produces Witnesses, who say he has been accounted well-affected
to the Parliament.

But as to the Charges of Draining, the quiet possession of the Petitioners for
ten years, the matter of Force and Riot, in destroying Corn, in opposing the
Sheriff, and throwing down the Fences, pulling down the Houses and Windmill,
and fetching away the Tenants Cattle by force, denying Replevins, depopulating
the Town of Santoft, defacing the Church, forcing away the Minister and
Congregation on the Lords Day, the Contract of Lilburn and Wildman for 2000
Acres to them, and 200 to Noddel, the practice with the Tenants of the Manor
of Crowle, the language spoken against the Parliament, and the Damage done to
the Petitioners and their Tenants, no Defense is made.

The Parliament being Dissolved before this Report was made to the House: the
Council of State send for that Report, and made Reference thereof to a select
Committee of the Council and joined Mr Scabell, and upon several Examinations
of Depositions taken in the Court, and hearing of both sides, this ensuing
Order was made.

THE ORDER OF THE Council of STATE.
THe Council of State having heretofore upon the Petition of the Participants,
in the Draining of the Level of Hatfield Chase, in the Counties of York,
Lincoln and Nottingham, preferred unto them the 14th of June last, relating
unto a Report drawn up upon full hearing by a Committee of the late Parliament,
concerning diverse Ryots and Outrages, and other unlawful Actions committed
within the Isle of Axholm, by the Inhabitants and Tenants of the Manor of
Epworth in the said County of Lincoln, and Misterton in the County of
Nottingham, against the Participants in the said Draynage and the Improvement
thereof; did thereupon refer the said Report unto a select number of Persons
to be considered of, and they to report their Opinions concerning the same to
the Council, who having compared the said Reports with the Depositions of
Witnesses examined on both sides before the said Committee of Parliament, and
also again heard what could be alleged on either side touching the said
Report; have certified unto the Council, that they do find the substance of
the said Report warranted by the said Depositions, and nothing materially
objected by the said Inhabitants and Tenants against the same; and upon
consideration of the whole matter, have certified their opinions, that the 7^00
Acres of Land in the said Report mentioned, ought to be settled in the
possession of the Participants, and the same quieted with them; and that a
special Commission issue to try the Ryoters, that as well the Offenders may be
punished, as the Sufferers repaired in a Legal way according to Justice, as by
their said Certificate Registered, together with the said Report amongst the
Acts and Orders of the Council more at large appears: Of all which the
Council having taken mature consideration, and approving the said Certificates,
and the Opinions therein delivered; and finding by the said Report, that the
said Participants have been by the Ryotous tumultuary proceedings and evil
practices of diverse persons in the said Report particularly named, violently
thrown out of the possession thereof, the Corn and Rapes there growing to a
great value wholly destroyed, the Houses there built by them for habitation in
a great number, and even the whole Town of Santoft ruinated and demolished, and
the Church defaced, the Sasses pulled up, and all the said Improvement
endeavored to be again laid waste, and the Participants kept from their
possession thereof by force, notwithstanding a Decree made in the Court of
Exchequer upon the said Improvement, and diverse Orders and Injunctions since
there issued for the preservation of the Participants possession, and
prevention from those Ryots and disturbances; which although seconded with
Writs of Assistance to the Sheriffs, have been from time to time contemned and
disobeyed, to the great affront of Justice, damage to the Commonwealth in
general, and the prejudice of the Interest of the State in the Feefarm Rent of
1228lb by the year reserved out of the said Improved Lands; all which has been
of late promoted by the countenance and encouragement of Lieutenant Colonel
John Lilburn, Major John Wildman, and one Daniell Noddell a Solicitor; which
three by compact and agreement with diverse of the said Inhabitants, were to
have and measured out to themselves 2200 Acres of the said Participants Lands
for their reward in undertaking to defend the said Inhabitants from their Ryots
past, and to maintain them in possession of the rest of the said 7400 Acres
against the said Participants for the time to come, as by the Report amongst
other foul miscarriages and misdemeanors committed and done by the said persons
and diverse others therein particularly mentioned appears. The Council
thereupon finding it necessary in this case, where the Decrees and Orders of
the Courts of Justice have been with a high hand disobeyed and resisted, to the
endangering of the Peace of the Commonwealth, through the opposition of
turbulent and seditious spirits, to apply the Military Power in Aid and
Assistance of the Civil Government and Execution of Justice; Do hereby Order,
Require and Authorize the Forces of the Army quartering in the said Level of
Hatfield Chase, or within the said Counties of York, Lincoln and Nottingham,
or any of them, or any others that are or shall be in those parts, to be aiding
and assisting to the Officers of Justice and the said Participants in Draining
of the said Level, for settling, establishing and keeping the possession of the
said 7400 Acres of the late improved Lands within the Manor of Epworth in the
said Report mentioned with the said Participants, and also for executing the
Decrees and Orders of the said Court of Exchequer, or any other Courts of
Justice touching their possession therein, and for preventing such Ryots and
Outrages for the future, and in respect of the great Damage suffered by the
Participants and their Tenants, it is further Ordered, That the Commissioners
of the Great Seal for the time being, do Award a special Commission of Oyer
and Terminer to the Judges of Assize for the said respective Counties, to try
the Ryoters, and to punish them according to Law and Justice; and to enquire of
the Damages suffered as aforesaid by the Participants and their Tenants, to
the end they may have just Reparations for the same. Given at the Council of
State at Whitehall the 31 day of August 1613.

Signed in the Name, and by Order of the Council of State. Anth. Ashly Cooper.
John Thurloe Secretary.



Wednesday 31. August 1653. At the Council of State at Whitehall.
Ordered,
THat the Report made to the Council concerning the business of Hatfield Chase
in Lincolnshire be humbly presented to the Parliament, and Colonel Thomlinson
is desired to present the same accordingly.


But notwithstanding this and the former Orders and Letters of the Parliament
and Council, the said Inhabitants still continued in their ryotous and
rebellious posture, not giving any obedience unto them, not the Decrees and
Orders of the Court of Exchequer, nor Precepts of the Court of Sewers, standing
in defiance and opposition to all Authority. Upon the Petition of the said
Participants, and their Tennants, and Remonstrance of the Commissioners of
Sewers to His Highness and Council; An Order of reference was made the 15th of
April 1656. to the Lord Commissioner Fines, Lord Lambert, Major General
Desbrough, Lord Lisle, Lord Strickland, or any three of them, to consider of
the said Petition, and report there opinion therein to the Council; whereupon
the said Lords request Major General Whalley to call both Parties before him,
and to examine the whole matter in the said Petition set forth, and make report
thereof unto the said Committee: which accordingly he did.

The Remonstrance of the Commissioners of Sewers.
May it please your Highness:
IN pursuance of your Highness Letters Pattents bearing date the sixth of July
last, Impowring us amongst others, to provide for the safety and preservation
of the Westriding of the County of York, as also of the Improved Lands within
the Level of Hatfield Chase and parts adjacent, within the Counties of York,
Lincoln and Nottingham; as also by virtue of several former Commissions,
several Rates or Scots have been imposed by several Decrees and Laws of
Sewers, according to the tenor of the Statute. But when the Officers appointed
thereunto, endeavored the collecting and distraining for those Rates assessed
upon the Improved Lands within the Manner of Epworth in the Isle of Axholme and
County of Lincoln aforesaid, several the Inhabitants of the said Isle have
evilly entreated, menaced and wounded the said Officers and their Assistants,
and riotously rescued their distresses from them: And being not contented with
their having in a forcible manner dispossessed the Participants of the said
Improvement of 7400 Acres (or thereabouts) of their Lands, as we are credibly
informed; for which, and diverse other offenses, they are excepted out of the
general Act of Pardon; they have necessitated the said Participants, with
their remainder of their Improvement in the other Counties, to maintain the
banks for preservation of those Lands so taken from them: And notwithstanding
their former misdemeanors did too sadly presage their future disobedience; yet
hoping, what with earnestness we desired, a change of spirit in them; we
requested our worthy friend Nathaniel Reading Esquire; (being both a Commissioner
and Participant,) to see to the getting in of the Assessements charged upon the
Lands aforesaid; and upon his acceptance, empowered him accordingly; requiring
the Sheriffs of the County to be assistant to him therein: But when the said Mr
Reading had distrayned several of their Goods, some of the Inhabitants of the
said Isle, to the number of One hundred or thereabouts, with Swords, Pistols,
Carbines, Halberts and other Arms, at Hatfield in the County of York, on the
2^th day of October. last, about the hours of Twelve or One in the night, did
assault or set upon the persons appointed to keep the Cattle, and having
dangerously wounded several of them, and amongst others the Constable of the
said down, who in your Highness Name charged them to keep your peace, with many
other heinous circumstances of the Riot, carried away the goods. And when on
the 19 instant, the Sheriff of the said County of Lincoln, in pursuance of our
Precept, assisted the said Mr Reading in the taking of another distress,
several of the Inhabitants aforesaid, to the number of 40 or 50, being armed
as aforesaid, came in a riotous manner, and being charged by the Sheriff in
your Higness Name, to lay down their Arms and repair to their several
dwellings, they not only refused to give obedience thereunto, but some of them
with scandalous and opprobrious language of the person of your Highness, and
with diverse affronts and menaces, caused the Sheriff and his company to depart
away for fear of their lives, and rescued that distress likewise; insomuch that
several persons, as well Officers as others, have upon their Oaths in open
Court declared, that they dare not go into the Isle aforesaid, upon execution
of certain Orders to them directed, without manifest danger of their lives.

In our reflection upon these miscarriages, our (...) ^avours to vindicate the
Authority of your Highness Commission, a^^^^ing to the power we derived thence,
have not been less then our te^^^^ess of giving your Highness the trouble of
their cognizance; nor is (...) regret to find so absolute a necessity thereof
less than either. But not being able to accomplish all those ends for which by
the said Commission we are entrusted, without getting in the arrears aforesaid,
and making the said Lands contributary for the future to the public Works, as
the rest of the Improvement is; nor being able to do either without some
extraordinary Assistance to the Civil Power. And fearing least their violence
should aim at the further discomposure of the public peace, as by some of
their scandalous and rebellious speeches against your Highness too evidently
appears: The duty we always shall have for your Highness and the tranquillity
of this Commonwealth, commanded us this Account with the Particulars annexed,
in detestation of such evil practices, and apprehension of their evil
consequences,

Doncaster the 25th of January 1655. Darcy Wentworth. Sam: Bolles. Will:
Addams. Sam: Lister. Hen: Perkins. Mar: v: Walkenbroughe. Richard Burdet.
Edward Neville. Rob: Lee. Jo: Vincent. Joseph Thoresby. John Cross.



The Report of Commissary General Whalley.
IN pursuance of your Order of the 15th of April 1656, requiring me to enquire
into the business of the poor Protestant strangers French and Dutch,
Inhabitants within the Level of Hatfield Chase and parts adjacent within the
Counties of York, Lincoln and Nottingham, and to certify the state thereof
to your Lordships; I have summoned diverse Persons, as well on the behalf of the
Defendants as Complainants, before and upon the hearing of the matters on both
sides, do find and humbly certify; That in October 1650. the Inhabitants of
Belton and Epworth in the Isle of Axholme (among whom were Richard Mawe, Thomas
Barnard, and William Robinson of Belton,) did put in great numbers of Cattle
into the Frenchmens Corn, viz. Wheat, Rye and Rapes, to the quantity of 800 or
900 Acres or thereabouts, and kept the Cattle in the said Corn till June
following. I likewise further find, that the Inhabitants of the Isle (amongst
whom were Robert Barnard and Jeffery Whitacre of Belton,) did pull down a
Windmill of John Amery a French man's near Sandtoft, worth as is conceived
150lb; as also that diverse came from Belton and Epworth, and betwixt the 11th
day of June 1651. and the end of that month, pulled down 84 dwelling Houses,
besides Outhouses. And the said Robert Barnard, did with an iron maule, break
down the planks of a Chamber, and told the rest of his company, (being about 50
in number,) that they might do so. And I do further find, that a very great
Riot was committed at Santoft in the said Isle on the 19th of October, being
the Lords Day, in the year 1651. diverse of the Inhabitants of the Isle, with
Lieutenant Collonell John Lilburn, and Mr Noddel coming thither, who placed two
men with their Swords by their sides at the Church door; the said Lieutenant
Colonel Lilburn saying, that he was a (...) House-holder in the Isle as well
as the rest, and that they came to take possession (...) the Church, and that
the Minister should not preach there, nor the people hear, (...) ^ot they were
stronger they; upon which the people and Minister went away (...) ^d lastly, I
do find, that on the 21th of Janury 1655. diverse of the Inhabita^^ (...) the
Isle, purll'd down and break in pieces, the windows, doors, seats, and Pu^
(...) that Church; and that some of those men discharged two Gunnes at Mr
Readings man, Mr Walkenburghs man, and Peter de Rat a Dutchman; and so
followed them with their Gunnes cocked half a mile together, crying, Shoot
again: and afterward returned to the Church, and gathered the broken pieces of
the doors, windows, Pulpit, etc. and laid them on heaps in the middle of the
Church, and set them on fire. These Particulars have at large been made out to
me by several Witnesses, on the behalf of the Complainants, as also by the
confession of some persons against whom the Accusation was brought, and not
denied by any: all which I humbly submit to Your Lordships, etc.

June the 12th 1656. Edward Whalley.


And upon all former Proceedings, His Highness Council proceeded and made this
Letter following to the said Commissay General.
SIR,
THe poor Protestant Strangers, French and Duch, inhabiting within the Level
of Hatfield Chase, and Parts adjacent in the Counties of York, Lincoln and
Nottingham, have addressed themselves by Petition to His Highness, complaining of
the great interruptions received by them from the Inhabitants of the Isle of
Axholme: both in reference to the free Exercise of their Religion, and
enjoyment of their Estates; upon Consideration whereof, and of a Certificate
from Your self; mentioning the great Disorders and ryotous Proceedings of the
said Inhabitants; as also of several accounts from the Commissioners of
Sewers, and the Sheriff, intimating the violences and opposition which has
been offered by the said armed Inhabitants, to the Officers of the Courts of
Justice; and requesting some Military Assistance, to the Civil Powers; His
Highness and Council, seriously resenting the evil consequences of such
miscarriages, have thought fit in a special manner, to recommend it to You, to
improve Your Endeavor upon all occasions to prevent all such further Ryots and
Disorders in those places; and in order thereunto, to punish such scandalous
disobedience according to Your instructions, and not to suffer the said
Inhabitants to keep by them any Arms or other Instruments, for the further
acting of such Disorders; as also to give order to some of Your Regiment to be
effectually aiding and assisting, to the Sheriffs of the respective Counties
within Your association: or the Deputies and Collectors of the Court of Sewers,
for the putting in Execution from time to time the Decrees, Precess, and Orders
of any His Highness Courts at Westminster, or of the Commissioners of Sewers;
to the end, the Improvers Just Rites may be restored according to Law: and
likew^se, that the said Strangers may have the peaceable Exercise of their
Religious Worship in, the place designed for the public Exercise thereof.

Whitehall the 21th Aug. 1656. Signed, etc.
To Commissary General Whalley, Major General of the Counties of Nottingham
and Lincoln.




Page 1. line 17. for 600000 read 60000. line 22. for Commissioners read
Commoners line 31. for washes read wastes.

FINIS.

