This is An ANSWER TO John Wiggans BOOK, Spread up and down in Lancashire,
Cheshire and Wales, who is a Baptist and a Monarchy-man. Wherein may be seen
how he exalts Himself, against Christ the Light, that does enlighten every Man.
And also some of his, and his Peoples erroneous Principles, and assertions,
which he and his People held in a Dispute, with some of the Quakers. And also
an Answer to his Queries in his Book. And also some Queries which was
propounded to him, which he would never Answer to this day, and also some of
his assertious, which he could never make good, and likewise an Answer to a
second Challenge, which Book we would have all in patience, and meekness read
over, with a single eye, wherein you may see the wicked, (according to
Scripture) is grown worse and worse, who with fair words and fained speeches
deceives the hearts of the simple; who are wise discernes these things. From
the Prisoners at Lancaster, whom he then opposed being then a Prisoner, Thomas
Curwen, William Houlden, Henery Wood, William Wilson.

Also here is an Answer to his Appendix annexed to the Book by Margaret Fell.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1665.

To the Reader.
READER,
HEre is something in Answer to John Wiggan's assertions, and also to his Book,
which thou art desired patiently to read over, and to read the Scriptures which
we have quoted, and also his, and also his words, and our Answers, for simple
peoples sakes was it answered, that they might be no longer deceived, for we
were all satisfied before with Christ who is the light of the World, the way,
the truth, the life, and he is our satisfaction; Never-the-less John Wiggan
has taken some of our papers, and private letters writ to him, but left out
the occasion, wherefore they were written, and so in this he has not done
honestly, neither as he would have been done by, and as for all his bad
letters, he has writ to us, we shall not set them down all, nor part, for some
of them are out of the bounds of Christianity. Our Book is somewhat large, the
most of the heads and strength of his Book being spoken too particularly, but
take it throughout, and I believe, thou will find such a pack of confusion as
thou have not heard, and malicious spiteful words, against God, and Christ the
light, which may be found in his Book, we have not wronged it, but he has not
paged his Book, therefore we could not quote it here.

And these things which he has asserted and laid down, he is to make good by
Scripture, without ading or diminishing, for we will have plain Scripture, also
an Answer to his Challenge, for him to make good all his assertions by
Scripture without ading to it, and also some Queries here is for him to Answer,
and to clear himself if that he can by Scripture, which we believe it will not
clear him, and so farewell.

From them that loves truth and peace to all Mankind.

For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior who will that
all Men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2. 34.
and this is contrary to John Wiggan, who says, God denies faith to some Men.

You might have had an Answer sooner, but it was long before we had his Book,
and when we had it, was fain to take it in pieces, and many particular Persons
were concerned in it, who some of them lives 60. miles one from another, and
the Book being called for so hastily again; he boasted, that we could not
Answer it, but that was but little to us, for it was truth that we mind.

The 2d. of the 5th. Month, 1664.
This is An ANSWER To JOHN VVIGGANS Book, etc.
WE hearing of a Book that John VViggan had given forth against us, in which
are many lies and scandals, and he the said John Wiggan, directing one of them
to Randal Hunter and Thomas Hardy Deputy-Goalers, as he calls them, but he
might have said to the Head-Keeper and Under-Keeper.

And also this Book being disperced abroad in the Country through him, it was
hard for us to get a sight of it; but at last it was given to us by the
Under-Keeper, and after a while fetched it away, it concerns many Friends, some
that are 60. miles of, and some above 20. yet this John VViggan, nor none of
his Company, (who says he give it forth to convince us of some of our errors,
and also a Challenge in it) were not so civil, as to give us ever a Copy of it,
or the thing it self, and when that friends asked him for the Book, he replied,
if we would pay for writeing it over, we might have a Copy of it, who has not
forgot his old Priest tricks, to make people to pay him for his lies, and by
this all sober people, whose minds stands without partiality, may judge of this
Man's works, who pretended to convince us of our errors, (as he says) and gives
forth a Challenge, and publishes part of a private letter, and what he
pleases, and never directs it, nor his Book, to the Authors, and whom it does
concern.

And now whether or no this man, has not lost the very common civility, and
understanding that is amongst Men, and boasts of his works, which he kept hid
from us, though through great difficulty we have gotten a Copy for a little
time, wherein all Men may judge by this carriage, and practice of his, in
boasting of his works abroad, and keeping them from them they do concern, they
may see it is the work of darkness, and of error, and one that is afraid of the
light, and a great part of his Book (as the Reader may read and see) is against
the common salvation to all Men contrary to Jude; and to be one that denies the
Lord that bought them, as in Peter; and all his force and strength is to the
denying of John's Doctrine and Testimony, and that which he came to be a
witness of, the true light which enlighteneth every Man that comes into the
World, John the first.

And also the force of his matter is, to throw away the prophecy of the
Prophets concerning Christ the salvation to the ends of the Earth, to Mankind,
to poor lost Man, and also to deny the promise of God to poor Creatures, which
says God will give him for a Covenant of light to the Gentiles, (speaking of
Christ) who shall be his salvation to the ends of the Earth, and a New Covenant
to the House of Israel, and the House of Judah; and this was to all people,
both Jews and Gentiles, and this light and Covenant, is by him denied; but to
some as he says, and so he is one that makes Sects amongst the Creatures of
God, and divides, being in the error and darkness himself; being void of the
mind of God, his Prophets and Apostles, and also denying the love of God to the
World; who so loved the World, mark, take notice poor people, that God gave his
only begotten Son into the World, to save the World, and not to condemn the
World, (as he does, who says they have not a light to save them, and they have
not the spirit of God) but that the World through him might be saved; and
moreover Christ says, I am the light of the World, now he does not say, I am
the light of the Saints only, (as John Wiggan says) but of the World which be
in darkness.

And Christ says believe in the light, whilst ye have the light, showing that
they have the light before they are believers, that they may be children of the
light, John 12. and also he John Wiggan makes void the grace of God (as may be
seen in his Book) which has appeared to all men, as the Apostle speaks to
Titus, which brings salvation, and this grace is sufficient, and so his work is
to prove, that the World and wicked Men have not a saving-light, nor have not
the Spirit of God, contrary to the Scriptures of Truth, as will be proved
hereafter; and so ^^ makes people believe through this, that Christ did not
come to save the World; so is of that race that would frustrate the grace of
God, and of them that forbid the Apostles to speak to the Gentiles; but has
not John Wiggan had one Hundred pound a year of the States, and taken
Collections of such as he looked upon to be wicked people, and had not the
Spirit, nor a saving Light; yea, and preached the Scriptures to them, which are
the things of God, and all people you know, that no man can know the things of
God, without the Spirit of God, you know the Scriptures says so.

And whether all men will not judge, whether this man is not grown senseless, or
he has cracked his Brain through his foolishness: Nay, would not this John
Wiggan preach, if the Powers would give him two or three Hundred pounds a year,
to preach the Scriptures, which are the things of God to the World, which he
says has not the Spirit of Christ, nor a saving Light, has he not the
conscience to take this, and bless them though the World did not understand the
things of God, and what do you think of all the Independants that he preached
too, and has left, and now turned Baptist, it may be he thinks that is a
better Commons and Pasture, to maintain him in; for has John Wiggan restored
that which he had of them at Manchester, and other places? for we say that it
is but just, that he should do so.

For to preach to a people that has not a saving light, nor the Spirit, the
things of God, they that cannot understand them, without the Spirit, and to
take money of them, is it not a robing of them, and a cheating of them; and
ought he not in justice to make restitution, for we do not know a greater enemy
to Christ and his Apostles, and plain Scriptures, this day in England then he
is, as his practice has made it manifest; and as for all his slanderous
expressions in his private papers, we shall not send abroad, but let them lie
upon him together with his lies, nor lay open his nakedness, we need not, for
he has laid it open in his own Book sufficiently, as will be manifest to every
impartial Reader.

First, That Paper which was sent unto Thomas Hardy by Thomas Curwen, it was
not sent up and down in the Country as his was, but if he had sent for a Copy
of it, he might have had one; so we did not serve him, as he has done us; and
if there had been any errors, they should have been made manifest, (but he has
not) that the Reader might have read them, for we are not afraid of our deeds
coming to the Light.

And our Paper was neither partial nor confused, as it will manifest it self,
and it is to the honor of truth.

And its he that swallows up the simple in errors, (as he speaks of,) and has
vomited out the same again; how many has he vomited out about Manchester, but
swallowed them up but for gain, and that which he has vindicated is error.

And whereas he says, he was provoked to this debate with the Quakers; that is
false, for it was his own Challenge; for friends would have discoursed with him
in a Christian way, in his own Chamber, which he denied, and bid them depart
his Chamber; and when Friends have come up in a Christian way to him, he has
threatened them by calling for the Jailer; and another time when Thomas Curwen
came up in a Christian way, he shaked him by his Coat, as though he would have
tore it from off his back, to thrust him out of his Chamber, though often he
came into our Chamber, and we never served him so, but discoursed as long as he
would. But this is the thing, Major Wiggan in calling the Jailer he wanted his
Magestrates Sword, like a persecuting Jew, Help men of Israel against the
Apostles, for these are the men that turns the World upside down. And this is
John Wiggans patience and Christian spirit, as he calls it; and he being a
Prisoner we would never have brought him to public shame, but he himself has
brought it, therefore he may blame himself.

And whereas he speaks of being provoked, to the debate in defense of truth.
Nay John, thou art out of love, that art so soon provoked; and its truth that
torments thee, because thou can not defend thy errors, thou can not chop
and change with truth, as thou did with the people at Manchester.

And what thou have set down afterward will appear. And the contention of the
Meeting was through thy self, for thou wast the first man that brake the order,
(which was that all might speak one by one) and burst out into a laughter,
(when others were speeking of the things of God) in an uncivil and immodest
way, which begot thy own people into the same, and so raised up the rude and
uncivil spirit in thy own people, that some was fain to rebuke thee, who were
speaking of the things of God; for the things of God are weighty, and (as the
Scriptures says) the fools heart is filled full of Laughter, and that is the
mark of a fool; and thou wast too hot and passionate to talk soberly: And do
thou not remember what a passion thou was in, when thou discoursed with Richard
Hubberthorn at Manchester, when one of thy own people did reprove thee; and
do thou not remember what violent hands thou laid upon John Abrams, when he
and James Harrison came to discourse with thee of the things of God in a
Christian way, and what a rage, fury and passion thou wast in, is not this a
mark of a Novice, soon angry, and are not these unclean hands lifted up to God,
will God accept them?

And whereas thou speaks of Boasting, that is thy own, and the Principle that
thou would discourse upon was thy own choosing, though nothing thou have cleared
to this day by the Scriptures of Truth, but manifested thy self further in
error; and as for detecting our persons and carriages thou can not, but thy
own carriage is detected; and so thou may take shame that pleads against
Truth, but God will honor his Truth, and them that stands for it, and happy
would it be for thee if a place of repentance were found for thee, though thou
may have had many Esaus Tears proceeded from thee through thy Agonies. And
the unsavory fruits thou speaks of, is thy own, by which thou deceives the
Ignorant, and the least that is simple in the truth discernes thee, thy spirit
and principle, and are reclaimed from the error of thy way, and that makes thee
so rage against them.

And as for thy additional account thou have given forth, by discourse
concerning the Light in every man, and thy interpreting the Scriptures, which
indeed is perverting the Scriptures by thy addition, as will be further
manifested and proved. And as for thy saying, if any of them shall yet persist
to maintain their error, here you will find an offer further to debate the
difference betwixt us before any person in Authority.

Answ. It Is Truth we maintain, against thy errors, as we have done to all thy
Brethren before thee till this day, who are all come to naught, who have made
such havoc upon us and our Goods; we have maintained it, and shall maintain it
with our Lives to Death, against thy errors before what Magestrate thou will,
as after will be manifest, or when thou will, or where thou will, for its truth
we stand for, and suffer for. And as for the perticulars, that thou will suffer
for as well as we, and art not in the same Principle, Bower and spirit, as the
Saints be in, in that thou suffers but as an evil doer.

And whereas thou talkest of a measure of the Spirit of God given unto thee,
this is but to cover thy lies and errors, and to deceive withal; for if thou
were in the measure of the Spirit of God thy self, thou would not deny it in
others; and so in this thou art an enemy in thy Spirit to every thing that we
stand for, because thou art not in the Spirit.

And whereas thou say, This is a relation of the occasion and manner of a
debate had in the Castle at Lancaster the 17. day of the 1. Month, (^^^monly
called March) 1664. between me John Wiggan, and George Fox, John Stubbs, and
many other of the people called Quakers, about the Light within.

Answ. The dispute was not George Foxes, nor John Stubbs, but Thomas Curwens,
and William Wilsons, but George Fox, and John Stubbs, liberty being granted,
George Fox hearing such gross errors laid down by John Wiggan, he spoke
something to contradict them by Scriptures, they being so gross and manifest;
and so this Book of Wiggans is not only a relation of that, but of many other
things of his own addition, and private things sent-abroad by him, and the
truth of it all may be seen in the following answer.

And what I Tho. Curwen said to thee as thou passed through the great Hall,
thou being a deceiver of the people, I bid thee leave of thy deceiving; as yet
thou could never clear thy self of being a deceiver, nor have not done in
thy Book: And whereas thou say, thy answer was mild, to this purpose said
thou so, Consider well what thou have said, and whether thou can make good
thy words, and tell me as I come back whom I have deceived, and wherewith I
have deceived any, or how thou can prove me a deceiver?

Answ. Here thou praises thy self of thy mildness, if another had done it, it
had been better for thee; what was thy mildness to me in thy Chamber, when I
came to discourse with thee of the things of God, thou laid violent hands upon
me, and like to have torn my Coat off my back, to hail me out of thy Chamber,
and this was not Christian like; and whereas thou (liar) bid me tell thee as
thou came back that is a lie, and thy voice I knew to be the voice of a
stranger, and now thou have made it manifest who denies Christ the Light to be
saving; and whereas thou would know whom thou have deceived, there came a
Woman from London to thee, to declare against thee, whom thou have long
deceived.

And there came a Man from Stopphed, whom thou had deceived, to cry against
thee, and there came James Park to cry against thee and to discourse with thee
of thy deceivableness, who saw thy deceit, and turned away from thee, when they
came to the light of Christ Jesus which manifested thee, and saw thee to be a
Preacher against Christ the light; and all may see herein what is the end of
thy Preaching, when thy work is to bring people from the Heavenly light of
Christ Jesus within them; and lead them into imaginations and whimsies, and
fancies of thy own brain, and many others about Manchester which might be
instanced, which some of them has been with thee here, which thou long kept
from the light of Christ Jesus within them, who now praise the Lord that they
are come from under the bondage, and have found Christ their Savior and Leader
and Light which thou denyest.

And whereas thou say that I was rash, and my censures groundless in saying
thou taught the way, and know it not thy self.

Answ. Thou have manifested thou do not know the way, for there is but one
way to God, who is Christ, the Light that does enlighten everyman, who does
enlighten the Gentiles, and is the glory of Israel, and the Salvation to the
ends of the Earth; and Christ says, I am the Light, and I am the way to the
Father, and no man comes to the Father but by me. And this Light in every man
thou denies to be saving, which we say it is saving or condemning; to them that
love it, it is saving, and to them that hate it, it is condemning: and so it is
manifest that thou art a confesser of him, and a teacher of him in words as
other Sects are; and the Devil could preach Christ in words without him, (and
said thou art the Son of God) as thou do who denies him to be a Light in all
men savingly, and so does all the Sects in Christendom that preaches Christ in
words for an end, and their gain, as thou did at Manchester at thy Chapels, and
preached up thy Independent way; and thou left the people in delusion; did
thou know Christ then, though thou preached him in words, and so does all these
before mentioned know Christ the way, and such as held forth the Doctrine of
Devils; Commanding to abstain from Meats, and forbiding to Marry, who went
about to deceive (the Christians and people of Christ the way,) in words for
some end, but not in truth; and Antichrists are not they, such as pretend to
preach Christ in words, and yet knows him not, who is a mystery. Answer me
plainly, did thou ever hear Christ's voice at any time, or have thou seen his
shape? for if thou had known him the way, thou would not have denied his
Light to be saving to the World. And have thou not read Collos. of some that
intruded into these things they never saw, which neglected Christ the body and
head, who is the way and Light, etc. And whereas thou says it is not possible
to teach the way, and know it not, Mat. 2. 4, 5. 27, 28. 12. the Pharisees and
the Priests preached Christ to come to Herod; and told when he should be born,
by the Scriptures, and yet knew him not to be the way when he came, but
persecuted him when he came, as thou may know by the Scriptures when Christ
rose, and yet thou know him not to be the Way, the Truth and the Life, but
denies him to be the saving Light spoken of in Joh. 1. And my words was not
harsh nor rash censure, but in plainness and truth, as thou have made it appear.

And as for me William Wilson, I know nothing else thou live in but beggarly
Rudiments, who denies Christ to be a saving Light, who enlightens every man;
who shuts up the Gates of Heaven against men, and will neither go in thy self,
nor suffer others to go in. And show me by plain Scripture where Christ calls
taking of Bread and Wine an Ordinance? for we do drink of the Vine, and and eat
of the Bread that comes down from Heaven: And my words were neither harsh nor
rash, therefore thou do us wrong to say so, and to blame us, and exclaim
against us

These Queries as follows were sent to John Wiggan to answer by me Thomas
Curwen, and are unanswered to this day; and he complains he wanted time, and
has had them above half a year, when such a man as he is looked upon, might
have answered them in half a day.

1 Query. Whether thy way never fell?

2 Where be all the daubers?

3 Whether all the Ministers of Adam's house in the fall, daubed not with
untempered mortar?

4 Whether a man while he is upon the Earth, shall be made free from the body
of Death and sin while he is on this side the Grave?

5. And whether Christ does not enlighten every one that comes into the World
with a saving Light?

6. Whether is Bread and Wine Christ the substance, yea, or nay?

7. And how long have thou taken Bread and Wine in Remembrance of Christ's Death
till he come?

8. And whether or no when he is come thou will take it in Remembrance of him.

9 And which is the nearest, to take a thing in Remembrance of his Death, or to
come into his Death?

10 And whether or no thou think to come any nearer to Christ's death, then
taking Bread and Wine in Remembrance of him?

11 And whether or no does thou think to come any nearer to Christ's death then
to take Bread and Wine in Remembrance of his death, and so keep alive in the
old nature; and is not this the deceiver?

12 Have thou known the death, the pangs, and the sorrow, and art thou become a
fool for Christ's sake, and is the wisdom of the world become foolishness to
thee, and in what place boundest thou thy own?

13 And how come thou to receive that which is foolishness to the world, and
how was thou awakened out of sleep, and when did the Grave open, and when did
the Prisoner show himself forth?

14 And when did the tongue of the Dumb sing?

15 And when was the tongue of the first birth silent?

16 And when was thou come to thy wits end?

17 And how have thou watered thy Couch?

18 And what is the tongue of the Learned?

19 And what is the Gray Hairs?

20 And what is it that Antichrist and the false Prophets ravened from, and
where was it?

21 And when did the Keepers of the House tremble, and the strong man bow
himself?

22. And have thou the same power and spirit to baptize, and give Bread and
Wine as the Apostles had, and have thou heard the voice of Christ as they did?

23 And seeing thou took offense at me for calling thee a deceiver; what is the
true way, and where is it, and whether all Mankind be enlightened by it, and
whether it be within man, or without?

24 And whether or no thou have seen it, or hear it, or heard the voice of God
at any time, or seen his shape?

Answer these Queries in a Scripture way in writing, and bring forth thy deeds
to the Light, or else I do intend to stick a Copy of them on thy Door
tomorrow. From thy friend Thomas Curwen the fifth day of the first Month 1664.
directed for John Wiggan these.

And these Queries were sent to John Wiggan to be answered by him; and because
I said if he would not answer them I would stick them on the door tomorrow, he
says he has but a short time and yet in this half year he has not answered
them, but he has published them in his Book to his shame, without an answer,
manifesting his insufficiency to resolve doubts and Questions in weighty
matters to shuffle them off to the Reader; he calls them frivilous, and they
stand still unanswered by him, for if he had told us that he had been incapable
or unable of answering them, we would so have taken it; but he being a man so
much looked upon, and professing such high things he was able to resolve doubts
and questions, which if he had been a man as he is looked upon, he would have
been ashamed to have published them to the Reader unanswered; and we did not
boastingly send the Queries to thee, nor sought advantage against thee, but
that the plain truth might have been manifested by thee if thou had had it,
but its manifest to the contrary; and the Queries are pythy and full, and some
of them Queries about man's Salvation; but thou scorns and scoffs at them, and
calls them frivilous, and say thou had some weighty matter which we do not
know any thou had, without it was to study something against the saving
Light, to preach to thy people, which was not a thing of so great weight, who
runs one while to thee, and another while to other Priests, who are
unestablisht like thy self.

And in thy Letter to my first paper thou seems to be offended, because that I
said that thou was offended for calling thee a Deceiver of the people, etc. it
manifests thou art offended by thy speaking of it so much abroad. And as
concerning my saying thou taught the way to others, and knew it not thy self,
that is answered before, and I did speak forth the words of truth and soberness
to thee, as being often burdened with hearing thy strange voice, and savouring
thee to be out of the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures.

And for making it appear whom thou have deceived that I have done before, and
whom thou have deceived, and how, in drawing them from the pure Light of
Christ, which is saving, which enlightens every man; and for thy saying there
will be but little truth found in saying thou taught thy way to others, and it
will be hard for me to prove or any of my friends, thou have proved it thy
self, and I have proved it sufficiently here before, and also it was proved in
the dispute, but that thou art more minded to cavil then obey the truth, and
its no matter of thee saying my words are improper, when thou will not believe
plain Scripture, when as thou bids me tell thee where the Apostle said some
preached the way, the truth, and the life, and yet knew him not, such as
professed him in words, and denied him in life, such as the Apostle calls evil
doers, evil beasts, and slow bellies, and teaches for filthy lukre, as thou
have done who is a sayer and not a doer, and such as preached Christ of envy as
thou do, and added afflictions to the Apostles bonds, those knew not Christ
the way and the life, neither was in it, for they were in the envy and strife,
as thou art; and those are unlike to know him (though they may preach him in
words, for envy blinded them as it has done thee, Philip. 1. 15. but did not
those false Apostles, deceitful workers transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ, preach Christ in words as thou do; how could they have
gone about to deceive the Saints which believed in Christ, and were they not
despisers of the Apostles and Ministers of Christ as thou art; nay, did they
not boast that they were Ministers of Christ, as thou do, and denied his
life as thou do, 2 Corinthians. 11. from the 13. to the 23. and did not Christ
speak of such who preached in his name, and in his name cast out Devils, and I
do not believe that ever thou came to see so far as these did; and yet he said
depart from me ye workers of iniquity, and the false Prophets in the 24. of
Matthew, who said lo here is Christ, and lo there, these was Preachers of
Christ in words, under a pretense to bring them to a false Christ, and Christ
said go not forth after them, for he would come and dwell in them, and this
thou cannot abide to hear spoken on, of Christ being in men a saving Light, and
do thou not know that many has a form of Godliness, Tit. 3. 4. and what form
is that, is it not the Scriptures that speaks of God and Christ, and denies the
power, wherein I feel thee to be one, who are to be turned away from, who
withstand the truth, and many of thy Hearers turned away from thee, whom thou
led away Captive: And what wise man cansay I have wronged the Apostles words in
this, for I have not wronged the Apostles words, but thou wrongest me, and thou
do not preach the Love of Christ, who denies the Light, Christ, to be saving
that enlightens all men, and Christ is the way, the Truth, and the Life, who
ever preach him, or for what ever end they preach him for, and we set up the
Christ Jesus the Apostles preached, and set up, the Light of the World which
the Prophets prophesied of, but thou preachest another as was said before, who
denies his Light to be a saving Light in all men; though some men neglect their
Salvation, as thou may read in the Scriptures, and we have the same Gospel the
Apostles had, and preached (to wit) the power of God which I do believe thou
was never yet in, for if thou had thou would not have changed so, and have left
thy people for what have thou left that Christ thou preached to the
Independants, or have thou restored the Money which thou got amongst them, so
confess the truth? for I never changed since I knew the Truth, the same Christ
the Apostles preached; and the true Religion I believe thou has to seek it, who
denies the Light, and so in meekness and fear I declare to thee, we own no
other Christ Jesus, then the Apostles preached, and set up, and this Christ
Jesus I am not ashamed to confess before all, who is the Light that enlightens
all men that comes into the World, who is the Salvation to the ends of the
Earth, who tasted death for every man and this is Gods Love to Mankind.

And whereas thou say, thou will not answer my Queries, nor satisfy me, nor
any Querist; in this thou have manifested thy self and spirit what it is; and
have denied a Christian Spirit, who should be ready to give an answet to any
that asked them a reason of the hope that was in them, and my questions tends
to edification and not to strife, and confessing the working of God in their
hearts and what they past through, and the acquaintance with God, hearing and
seeing of him and things concerning Salvation, and Scripture words that
declares of the same; and this is not edification to thee, and yet thou
contradicts thy self, and say thou would give a reason of the hope that is
in thee, and yet does not answer my Queries concerning-Christ the hope, and
other workings of the Spirit of God: Truly John this manifests thy emptyness
and shallowness of the things of God and that which concerns man's Salvation.

And thou say thou have in readiness to answer in love; those Queries was in
Love sent to thee, but this is but a shift and a boast; for if thou had not
answered them in love to us, who thou accounts thy enemies, though thou have
called us thy friends, thou might have answered them for their sakes thou sent
thy Book too, if thou had no love to enemies.

John Wiggan thou say that the Light wherewith every man is lighted that
comes into the World, is not a saving Light; and this thou say thou shall
thorough the strength of Christ be ready to maintain against me, or any of my
friends who hold the contrary, when and where a meeting may be had in a
peaceable and quiet way before competent Witnesses.

Answ. Thee and all thy Witnesses at the meeting by all your opposing the
Scriptures and us, that stood for them; could not make good that Christ was not
the saving Light that enlightens every man that comes into the World, though
ye broke out into a rage and broke your own order, (which was) that none
should speak while another was speaking, and thou was the first man that brake
it, both when G. F. and W. W. was speaking, and neither love or humility
proceeded from thee but abundance of pride, rage and envy, when thou was
plunged and could not make good what thou had asserted, which was contrary to
Christ and the Prophets, as in Esaiah and John the 1. 8, 12. And that which
moved me to stick the Paper on the Door proceeded from the Holy Spirit; which
has caused thee to vent forth so much against the Light of Christ, and has
brought that forth which has been so long hid in thy heart under a feigned
humility, and now is brought to light, (Praises to the Lord God for ever;) for
thy disputing is against Christ the Light, etc. to be saving; so thou art not
like to be a true Preacher of Christ.

And Thomas Curwens second Paper, wherein he shows John Wiggan he has not
answered his Queries, and how that he would come into his Chamber to discourse
about one Query, which John Wiggan had chosen out, that Query which speaks of
Christ being the saving Light that does enlighten every man that comes into the
World, and this Christian way of discourse John Wiggan denied, though before he
had spoken of a meeting betwixt him and our Friends, when and where a meeting
might be had in a quiet way; and when we came into his Chamber (he having put
it to us before when and where, which we looked upon his own Chamber to be the
best and civil'st) he contradicts his own words, and again challenges us down
into the Shire-Hall; and thou disputing about this Query, did not satisfy me,
concerning all the other I stuck the Paper on the Door according to my word,
which thou have neither answered in Writing nor word to this day, and my word
is made good to thee or any rational man. Concerning such as get the form of
Godliness, and preaches Him, and knows him not, and thou geting the Apostles
words, and out of their life and power, thou art he that wrongest the Apostles;
and whereas thou say the Apostles uses no such words; that is cleared
before.

And my second Paper which was brought to thee was not with that purpose to
disturb thee, but that thou might have seen thy self, if thou would not have
shut thine eyes, and here I clear things over again to thee, if thou will not
hide thy self from the Light thou may see, and that I neither wrong the
Apostles nor thee, but am one with the Apostles against such as thou art.

And whereas thou faith thou art not inclined to multiply words to occasion
strife, and yet thou contradicts thy self, and multiplys many words to no
purpose against the saving Light of Christ, and which is saving, who said he
would give for a Covenant of Light, and is the peace between God and man; and
that which thou multiplys is against him, which occasions nothing but strife
and confusion, and not peace, for the Peace is in Christ, the Light which thou
can not abide to hear on, that every man has a saving Light; because it marrs
thy trade, and thy great Diana would be taken away (to wit) thy Gain; for
preaching Christ the Light, marred the great Diana and all the Workmens Gain, as
thou may read in the Acts: And thou said thou would meet us in a spirit of Love
and meekness, but it proved otherwise, when thou appeared at the dispute. And
whereas thou say in thy Answer to Thomas second Letter, that thou would
treat with Thomas about the Light, and any other point, and says I was over
confident in saying I was mistaken, if thou think I should leave it to thee
to appoint time and place, and had left it to me before, both when and where,
as may be seen in thy Letter, and here is thy contradiction; and when I had
appointed the Meeting when and where according to thy own Challenge, when now
thou say after thou had left it to me, when and where; and we appointed thy
own Chamber, then thou deny'st us coming there except thou had invited us,
thou came often into our Chamber without inviting, and thou denied us for
appointing the place, and said we were over confident, and so forsook thy own
proposition, and appointed another place; and so this is no honor for to
publish abroad such things: and this is thy seeking after truth, which was but
a pretense, and not in reality, and friends did meet with thee, and did
discourse with thee, and when the day came thou stood not to that neither, but
found some excuse, and when thou did come, Friends spoke to thee concerning
thy own words and promises, and how thou did not stand to thy words, promises
and time, in thy Challenge, but shuffled and altered, and as thou say falsely
that thee was challenged by us first, that is false, for the Queries was sent
to thee to answer in Writing, or else we would stick them on the Door, and thou
vapoured and challenged, and left it to us, and then denied it again, said this
day and the other day, and brake thy own word and promise, which caused many to
come out of the Country to see thy own folly, and thou was the occasion of the
Dispute, for we would have discoursed with thee in a Christian way, which thou
denyedst it in thy Chamber, which we would have granted thee to have come into
Ours, if thou had desired it; and all thy days work was to stand in
opposition against Truth, Christ the Light that enlightens every man; and
instead of bringing people to the Light thou turns them to darkness from the
Light: And whereas thou say because I did not set thy Letter by mine upon
the Door, therefore I savor of a fleshly spirit in diverse Circumstances.

That which thou has particularized I answer, for not setting it upon the Door,
because it was not an Answer to my Queries, therefore thou savours more of a
fleshly spirit, who did not answer them, nor convinced me wherein I had done
wrong.

And whereas thou say, Thomas Curwen and William Wilson when we came to
conferr with thee about the Meeting according to thy former Challenge, which
thou villifies us, and says we came to provoke thee, and with many heavy
censures, as John Cowert can witness; now ye people of Lancaster may see what a
sufficient witness he has brought to be a witness for him, who is a common
Drunkard; this you may judge what spirit his Book came from, for thou at that
time in thy Chamber did lay down for Doctrine and Principles, that the
Scriptures was the Author of thy faith; who art ignorant of the Scriptures, and
of the Ministers who taught the Christians that Christ Jesus was the Author and
finisher of their faith, and as for hard or heavy censures we deny them, for we
speak the truth in plainness, and thou would not meet according to thy own
Challenge, but putting us off from time to time, that was the occasion of our
coming unto thee, to thy Chamber; but thou should have set down thy own
carriage and behavior in envy and malice toward us in thy Chamber, who sweld,
and puffed, and bid us go out of thy Chamber, why did we come there, after thou
had challenged us, for we came to thee about thy Challenge, and the Meeting,
and thou in a fury cried get you out, get you out of my Chamber, what do you do
here? As though we could not be admitted into thy presence thou was so high,
and scornful, and for thy saying thou was forced to entreat us to go out of thy
Chamber, thou was past entreating, thou had like to have laid violent hands
upon me, as thou did afterward; and if thou had not given us a meeting
being thine own Challenge, how could we judge otherwise, but that-thou dare
not stand to thy word, and it is a lie in saying we provoked thee to it, it was
thy own Challenge, and then thou speaking with R. C. and R. J. about the
Meeting, and appointed when the day and hour should be, and that thou was
willing to give Thomas Curwen and others a meeting according to thy former
Challenge and thou would dispute about Christ the Light, that enlightens every
man that comes into the World, by the Lords assistance; but this Lord failed
thee, for poor old Henry Wood a laboring man that cannot read a word on a
Book, gravelled thee so, that thou was not able to answer him; and as for R. C.
and R. J. what language do thou give them now, who accounted them sober men
before; thy mind is soon altered and changed; John Wiggan disprove that Christ
does not enlighten every man that comes into the World with a saving Light, or
that the Light where with every man is enlightened is not saving; Mark people,
the Light in it self is not saving, and then the insufficiency is in the Light
according to his judgment; but we say there is sufficiency in the Light, for
God says my Grace is sufficient, which none can deny but that the Grace is
this Light; and secondly that Christ the Light which does enlighten all, etc.
that, that is not saving is contrary to the Scriptures, which says Christ is
the Salvation to the ends of the Earth; Christ says I am the Light, John 1. 8.
12. and this Light Christ is sufficient to save and to give the knowledge of
God, Cor. 2. 4. but as Christ says in John 3. 20. Some hates the Light, and as
Job says, some rebel against it, in whose steps John Wiggan thou art found.

And whereas thou say first, that nothing be asserted but what may be proved
by Scripture, and that nothing be determined but according to the Scriptures;
and in thy Answer thou could make nothing good that thou did assert against
the Light of Christ which thou opposes; for that which thou did assert was
against the plain Scripture and the words of Christ in which thou confutes thy
self, whose determination if it had been possible was to oppose the Scripture,
instead of asserting by Scripture, what thou did assert.

Secondly, Whereas thou say, that the Meeting may be peaceable and quiet,
without railing or reproachful speeches, and that the whole dehate may be
carried on with a spirit Love and meekness.

Answ. John thou and thy people quickly broke this order, do thou not
remember what a heat and passion thou was in, cocking up thy Hat like a Ranter,
and thy people of such a heat, that John Berley was fain to stand up and
reprove one of them, and G. F. often bid you be sober, for the things of God
was weighty, and should be spoken of in the fear of God, and that he should not
be so rash and hasty.

Thirdly, The Meeting may be orderly and without confusion, that is that one
may have as much time allowed to speak as another, and that but one speak at
once, and that none disturb him that is speaking.

Answ. I wonder John Wiggan that thou should not be ashamed to publish such
things in the sight of men! for thou was the first man that made a disturbance,
that spoke when another was speaking, (to wit) William Wilson, and afterward
when George Fox was speaking, and afterward thy people ran into the same, and
so broke your own order, and run into confusion, and when thou should have
answered to the people to the matter, thou fell a preaching to the people, and
when I Thomas Curwen would have stood up and have spoken, thou would not let
me; so that I see thou art nothing but a man of fair words, so thou did not
give time but thou brakest the time, and therefore was we forced to cry for
order so often amongst you.

4ly. And whereas thou say, that the Meeting may continue three hours, and
at the most not exceed four, because of the occasions of friends afterward, if
these be concented unto, let him that is appointed to treat with me, subscribe
his name, etc. and what we could not agreed to R. C. R. J. let him know.

Answ. Most of this was done according to his desire, and let him take what
time he would to oppose Christ the light which lightens every Man that comes
into the World, and though he had his will granted, all he did was to no
purpose.

And all people may see whether this was a rational Letter or no, and how that
we would not limit the truth to an hour, (as he did before) for the Spirit of
truth is not to be limited, though that we let him take his own proffer, and go
away when he would, and thou should not have spoken of points wherein this
paper differed from thine, but thou should have perticularized them, that the
Reader might have seen them and whereas thou said, we said that thou durst
not meet us, therefore thou sentest another paper; why if thou had said thou
would not have met us, thou might have said so, for it was thy own Challenge at
first, and not ours, and thou should have named them that said so, for no Man
put thee upon it at first to speak against the light of Christ, but thy own
mind, and thou say in thy next Letter, about the third hour, in the
forepart of the Day, which I call the ninth hour; and Jo. Wiggan, was it but
three hours since it was Day to the ninth hour, I pray thee answer me these
natural things, for thou have not answered me the spiritual.

And so, afterward when thou had denied thy first Proposition to us, that we
should appoint time and place, we left it to thee to appoint time and place,
and so took thy own, who had contradicted thy former, who would not grant to us
that which we granted to thee; and whereas thou say, my friend, and I urged
thee to dispute against the Light of Christ, thou say not true, for it was
thy own Challenge, for we but bid thee make good thy Challenge, and that which
thou had so boldly asserted against Christ the Light.

And as for thy saying, thou would maintain in the strength of the Lord thy
assertion (to wit) that Christ did not enlighten every Man that comes into the
World, with a saving light, neither that the Light wherewith all Men is
enlightened, is saving; and this neither thee nor all thy people, with all the
strength you had could do, but that which thou did maintain, was to your own
shame.

And whereas thou say thou would do it through the strength of the Lord,
that was false, for all thy strength was to fight against the Lord, who is the
Savior of all men, especially of them that believe; so says ahe Apostle.

1. And whereas thou say over and over again, that all things should be
proved by the Scripture; and thou proves nothing to the matter. 2. And whereas
thou say again and again, that the Meeting may be peaceable and quiet; and
thou was the first man that disturbed it.
And whereas thou say, the words were left out as railing and reproachful
speeches; (we thought thou would call the plain truth railing) and thou hoping
that the thing would be so carried on; it was so on our part, but thou and thy
people brake out into disorder, and scornful speeches, that thou was often
reproved for thy immodesty; and as I said before thou was the first man that
was disorderly as thou speaks on over again; as also thou was the first man
that very uncivilly brake the order of one speaking at once, neither did thou
observe it; and as for limiting time and hour, that is answered before, and
seeing the Meeting was put off with a pretense by the Jailer as thou say, we
met with thee another day according to thy appointment, and we know thou did
make an Oration before the meeting, and then propounded that which thou could
not maintain, That Christ does not enlighten every man with a saving Light,
that comes into the World, etc. And I John Stubbs stood up and told thee, that
Christ did enlighten every man that comes into the World with a saving Light;
and Richard Cubban did not alter what thou had spoken and written, as the
Reader may see in thy Book; and why do thou say that I Richard Cubban was
persuaded with much ado, for when thou would not stand to what thou had written
and spoken, then I stood to what thou would agree to, and this was but a shift
from thy own words, we looked thou should have made every word good, thou had
written and spoken, but thou shifts from thy own words, and therefore we let
thee have what words thou would stand to.

And whereas thou say, I (John Wiggan) proceeded to prove, premising first
that the Question was not, whethere there be some Light that comes into the
World, nor whether Christ do not enlighten true Believers with a saving Light,
forasmuch as I denied not but did affirm there was some Light in every man
that comes into the World, and true Believers was enlightened with a saving
Light.

Answ. In thy assertion there was no mention of unbelievers as all may see in
thy Book, but thy assertion is, Christ does not enlighten every man that comes
into the World with a saving Light; then Believers are not according to thy
words, for thou say, the Light wherewith every man is enlightened withal
(which we say is the Light of Christ) is not saving; and yet again thou
contradicts thy self, and says Believers are lightened with a saving Light;
but and if Believers be enlightened with a saving Light, and unbelievers be
not, how are they then condemned for their unbelief; this Question neither
thee nor thy people could answer.

For thy proof that Christ does not enlighten every man that comes into the
World with a saving Light, thou say, that Christ does not enlighten no man
but by his Spirit; but Christ does not give his Spirit to every man that comes
into the World, therefore he does not enlighten every Man that comes into the
World with a saving Light. These words proves nothing at all but thy own
ignorance of the Scriptures; for God says by his Prophet, that he would pour
out his Spirit upon all Flesh in the latter days: And the Apostles saw those
days come in their time, as in Acts 2. and so this being proved that God pours
out his Spirit upon all Flesh, then he enlightens every man that comes into the
World with a saving Light according to thy own assertion; and so this
overthrows thy opposing assertion; And the manifestation of the Spirit is given
to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. Now thou contradicts the Apostle
here, the true Minister he says every man, but thou gives him the lie, and
says, not every man, God gives his Spirit unto; but we say with the Apostles
and the Prophets that God has given his Spirit to all, as in Joel 2. Acts 2.
1. Cor. 12. and they that do not profit in the Spirit, are such as grieves it
and quenches it, and rebels against it; as in Nehem. 9. and many other
Scriptures which might be mentioned: and as for the many Scriptures thou have
quoted they are to no purpose.

And thou say, that thy first Proposition is clear, from Isai. 59. 12. this
contradicts thy Proposition, this speaks of the New Covenant Christ; and in the
60. Chap. ver. 3. and the 11. 12. how that the Gentiles that wicked people
should come to the Light, speaking of Christ; and this quite makes against
thee; that says Christ, does not enlighten every man with a saving Light; and
John 4. 16, 17. but thou should have read the 16. of John as well as that,
where thou may read they have the same Comforter, the spirit of truth, which
leads the Saints into all Truth; and how can thou or the World receive this
Spirit, which will not believe in the Light but hates it? so this proves that
all men have the Spirit, and overthrowes thy assertion, and Christ the
Cornerstone breaks thee to pieces, who opposes him and the plain Scripture,
which all people may read; and leaves out that which makes against thee, and
Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. because the Saints had the spirit of Wisdom, and the eyes of
their understandings was enlightened; this thou brings to oppose Christ the
Light, and the Apostles Doctrine and Testimony, that Christ did not enlighten
every man that comes into the World, and his Light is not saving; which thou
might as well deny Christ and say he is not saving, who is the Light; for none
of these Scriptures does say that Christ does not enlighten every man that
comes into the World with a saving Light; and John 16. 13. makes nothing for
thy purpose; and whereas thou say, Neither is there any other way by which
Christ does infuse a saving Light into any man but by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 10,
11, and 12. verse.

Answ. I pray you all people read this Scripture over, and see whether there be
any such word as Infusing a saving Light into any man, but by his spirit; you
may see how he wrongs the Apostles words, with his own words, and wrongs John's
words also; for we know that the natural man knows not the things of God, but
by the Spirit they are understood; for the Natural man quenches and grieves the
spirit of God, and so walks despitefully against the spirit of Grace, therefore
this is no proof that he has it not, because he cannot discern the things of
God, for the things of God are opened to him as he obeyes the Spirit of God.

And thou says, the assumtion is proved by Jude, that some are natural, not
having the spirit: this of Jude proves that they had it, and went in the error
of Ballaam from the Spirit; and these could speak the high words, but it was in
hypocrisy; and so this Scripture clearly overthrowes thy argument, which thou
takes for a proof against John's Doctrine, who says, Christ does enlighten
every man that comes into the World; And John the 14. 17. which thou brings to
prove that Christ does not enlighten every man that comes into the world with a
saving Light; which says no such thing, but proves thy own weakness and
ignorance; for how should the world know Christ, or see him; when they hate his
Light that comes from him, and will not come to it because it does reprove
them, and there Christ the Light testifies against the World, because their
deeds be evil; read John the third, and other places. Again, thou bring
Romans the 8. 9. to prove thy assertion, and says, some men have not the
Spirit of Christ: Now people, see if this Scripture does say in plain words
that some men have not the spirit of Christ, and see how he has wronged the
Apostle, and perverted his words; and whether the Apostle did not tell them (in
the first of the Romans) who were wicked people, That, that which might be
known of God was manifested in them: yet they Reprobated from it, and so their
hearts were darkened, and so was not led by the Spirit as the Saints was, and
so they that quench the Spirit, and will not have it to lead them, how are they
Christ's? and so mark, the same Chapter in the following words, They that are
led by the Spirit of God they are the Sons of God. And so thou may see how thou
goes about to overthrow the Apostles words and Christ's Doctrine; thou has a
strange Doctrine and Preaching of thine, to preach to the world, and tell them
they have not the spirit, nor a saving Light. And so all thy Testimonies thou
have brought does not prove thy Proposition to be true, that Christ does not
give his Spirit to every man that comes into the World, which the 16. of John
overthrowes thee.

And I disliking thy assumption, (as thou call it, but many ignorant people
does not know what thou meanest, but thou would cover thy self by thy dark
words;) for no proof that thou brought was to purpose; for that of Jude which
speaks of such as went in the way of Cain; I say Cain had talked with God, and
heard his voice though he was a wicked man; and this thou brings to prove, that
wicked men have not the Spirit, and does not know the things of God, but Cain
knew God, for he talked with him, and that must be by the Spirit; and those
that Jude speaks of were such as had been with them, and went from them into
the way of Cain; or how could it have been said they had erred, and had not the
spirit and the way.

And here people may see thou neither knows the Scriptures, nor the power of
God, as wise as thou thinks thou art, for my words were not, that they lost it,
but that they erred from it, according to the Scripture; and why could thou not
put in all my words I spoke, but perused my words, and so left out that which
pinched thee; for I have borne my Testimony amongst many of your people, both
in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and other places, which many is come from
you, and sees your deceitful ways of darkeness opposing the Light; for I my
self was one of you, and now walks in the light of the Lamb, Glory for ever to
the Highest; And why does thou wrong me, for I denied thy Proposition, and held
forth Christ the Saving Light.

And whereas thou say by the way, If a Scripture pinch us, we will not stick
to give a meaning to it, and such an one as may best suite our purpose.

Answ. This is false, for I gave no meanings to the Scriptures but as they are,
and there is no Scripture that thou brought which pinched any of us, but they
nipt and pinched thee as thou call it: And thou say, thou replied, that
it could not be that those in Jude ever had the Spirit, because they were
sensual and natural, and went in Cains way: and here all may see, thou left out
the word how they went in the way of Cain, and error of Ballaam; and Cain
talked with God, and that must be by the Spirit, as I said before; and God
said, should he not be accepted if he did well, etc. therefore Cain had the
spirit of God; and they that went in his way from the Christians erred from the
spirit, the righteous way, and so became natural, and sensual, in the self
separation from the spirit where thou art; and that in the second of Corinthi.
is answered before; and now people see if Jude and the first of Cor. 2. c. does
say that natural and sensual Men had never the spirit, and you may see how this
man perverts the Scriptures and wrongs them for his own ends; for these
Scriptures speaks no such things as he does; and how can the natural man
discern the things of the Spirit of God when that he grieves the spirit of God,
by which he should receive them, and errs from it, as in Jude, and is not led
by it, Cor. 2. and Romans 8. and they that quench the spirit of God in
themselves, will oppose it in others, as thou do; and those that are led by
the spirit of God, they are they that discern spiritual thing and they that
quench it does not; and thou repeats the 2. of Cor. 2. to no purpose for thee,
and they cannot decern the things of God that quenches the spirit, and errs
from it, but they can decern the things of God that are led by the spirit of
God, as in the 1 Cor. 2. and this does not say, he has not the spirit of God,
thou wrongs the Scriptures in that, and adds to the Apostles words, for all
people may see that reads thy words and the Scriptures, what a pitiful meaning
thou gives to the Scriptures here, and speaks thy own words, and would make
people believe they are the Apostles words, and so wrongs and belies the
Apostles.

And as for thy charging us with disorder as I said before, thou was the first
man that was disorderly, and thou spoke when another was speaking, and thy
people many of them spoke together; and why do thou complain and say some of
us spoke, one after another, for this was the agreement that one should speak
after another; and that thou could not have time to answer, and thou had more
time then any, but its thou that did not speak to the matter in hand, but fell
to preaching to the people; and thou wrongest us, for we spoke orderly one
after another, except we spoke when you were speaking disorderly, and of your
speaking unreverently of the things of God, and our asking the questions was to
have thee make good the thing in hand, which thou could not do; and this is thy
shift, to say, thou was obstructed; but tell me who obstructed thee, for not
answering T. C. and old H. W. their Queries this half years time, but thou
would have had all the talk to have held what errors thou would, and none to
oppose thee; and it seems M. F. and G. F. the truth that they spoke there
tormented thee; and where thou say G. F. coming in about that time thou was
replying to J. S. this is false, for thou was speaking to M. F. and held the
debate (a good while after G. F. came in) with her, and then G. F. (many people
standing upon the Forms) upon which he stood up upon, and set one foot upon
the edge of the Table, for thou was gotten to the uppermost end of the Table,
in the highest place, Priest like, and what a great advantage have thou taken
here, because G. F. stood up upon the Form, did not thou and the other Priest
stand upon the Table before George Fox, and was so unruly not to be gotten off
the Table, and thy own people stood upon the Forms scoffing and revileing, and
because that G. F. stood but the one foot upon the Form, and the other upon
the Table leaning upon his Knee; this thou could publish in thy Book as a great
transgression.

And whereas thou say thou was standing; that is false, for thou was siting;
and when G. F. spoke to thee thou cockt up thy Hat, more like a Ranter, and a
Player in a Tavern, then one employed in the service of God, and G. F. reproved
thee, and told thee the things of God was weighty, and that thou must not be
leght; and all the serious people beheld thy vanity and weakness, and
perverting the Scriptures.

And whereas thou say, where thou and others were standing on the ground;
that is false too, for many of you were siting, we did not see you so reverend,
though some its true were standing, and stood there where thou should not have
stood, and G. F. did take off the strength of the Scriptures alleged by thee,
and made it to appear contrary to that end thou brought it, and made it to
appear that thou confounded thy own assertion, and did prove that every one
that came into the World had the spirit of Christ according to their measure;
and thou falsely belies G. F. for he neither used undervaluing, or taunting
expressions, and I believe that none will say so but thy self, except it be
some scoffers, or scorners like thy self; and G. F. needed not undervalue thee,
for thou under valued thy self in speaking against truth, and against the plain
Scriptures of truth.

And as for G. F. as thou said, went several times from the Table and said,
the least Babe there, was able to answer thee, the dispute being not his;
liberty being granted, upon which occasion he spoke something to thee, who
spoke that thou could not make good by the Scriptures, as after will be
manifest; and it did appear there that one of the least babes in the truth thou
could not answer, (to wit) H. W. and G. F's. presence who is in the truth, was
not so needful, whom thou scoffingly terms their Leader, or rather their
misleader; but the weakest amongst us saw, and does see thee that thou was,
art, and has been a misleader to many of our Friends, who now see thee, who
has Christ now to be their Leader, Praises to the Lord God for ever; and G. F.
did not miserably wrest nor abuse the Scriptures as thou say, but spoke them
as they were, but thou makes no conscience of lying, who says he miserably
wrested them, but that which he spoke was in defense of the Truth, against thy
error; and he would have the people to understand the Scripture thou brought to
oppose thy self, and the meeting was to that end that truth might be manifest
to them, for we were satisfied before, and we are very well acquainted with
these Scriptures that thou brought to pervert the Truth; And thou was seen long
ago for what end thy Preaching was.

And whereas thou say, that which G. F. spoke was not to the purpose then
the Scripture thou brought was not to the purpose, and herein thou have
confuted thy self, for that which he spoke was to the Scriptures thou brought
to oppose the Truth; but it seems thou art offended because G. F. spoke to the
people, and opened the thing to them, which makes thee complain, manifesting
that thou would keep and lead them in blindness and darkness, that thou might
make a prey upon them still.

And the thing that thou laid down before the people was, that some men that
comes into the World has not the Spirit; and thou would prove it out of Jude;
and when the Scripture was read, there was no such words, and yet he affirmed
the same thing, though he could not prove it, perverting many Scriptures, and
yet could not make any to suite his purpose, and when G. F. let him see the
same, he broke out into a rage, and fury, and spoke when he was speaking, and
so brake the civil order of speaking one by one; and whereas he says, that in
the Corinthians the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit
withal, was spoken to the Saints, or Church of God at Corinth, and not to the
wicked.

The Apostle does not say it was to the Saints only, but to every man, and
Christ says, what I say unto you, I say unto all men, watch and pray, and how
can they pray without the spirit? and people, you know it was the false
Prophets that limited the Holy one; and if the Corinthians, every one, had a
manifestation of the spirit, here is an [If] it seems thou questions this,
whether they had or no; and say thou, Every man that comes into the World
has not a manifestation of the Spirit, as before its proved out of Acts 2. and
John 16. and the Apostles words was every man, and not every Saint; do thou
not pervert the Apostles words here, and also them that were Baptized by one
Spirit, into one body; which were Saints; and this thou brings to prove, that
the world that quenches, and grieveth, and rebelleth against, and errs from the
Spirit of God, has it not to reprove them; which any that reads, but
Scriptures may see thy ignorance and darkness; and whereas thou gain-sayest,
that the Apostle speaks only that the manifestation of the spirit of every man
that was Baptized by one spirit, into one body; and made to drink into one
spirit and not to every man that comes into the world.

Now people look this Chapter through, 1 Corinthians 12. whether ye do find
these words of John Wiggan's in it or no, that it is only to them that believe
and are Baptized, and whether the Apostle has these Limits, as he has, and
whether his words be only to them that are baptized, and made to drink into
the one spirit, and does the Apostle say to every Saint, and every one that is
baptized into the spirit, and not to every man that comes into the World, does
the Apostle say these words, but are not his words every man, and not every
Saint? and for the same words used in the 11. of Corinthians, makes nothing for
thy purpose, that all men have not the spirit, for that is spoken to them that
came together into one place, there the Apostle distinguishes his own words;
what shifts art thou put too for to pervert the Truth.

And whereas thou say, this is said to every man of them and not every man
that comes into the World; and now people see whether the Apostle says, the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one of you only, and see how he
contradicts himself with the Scriptures he brings, and would pervert it; for
the Apostle says, the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man; and
not to every one of you, 1 Cor. 12. 7. and its given to them to profit withal,
whether they do or not, and Gods spirit is poured upon all flesh, and so this
Scripture makes nothing for thy purpose.

And as for Exodus 19. 5. this does not oppose Gods pouring out of his Spirit
upon all Flesh Acts 2. and Nehem. 9. was brought, how that God gave his good
spirit to such as rebelled against him; which thou affirmed that wicked men had
not the Spirit of God; and we know that the Jews was called the Church and
people of God, though many of them fell, for their wickedness; but these that
rebelled against it, had it, that were wicked people, which thou denied, and
said, that no wicked people had the Spirit of God, which after thou confessed,
and so have overthrown thy Assertion; and so thou says and unsaith.

Secondly, Thou says, though it be said he gave them his good Spirit, it will
not follow that every particular or individual Israelite had this good Spirit,
but such as were Israelites indeed.

Ans. Thou have confessed that the Righteous has the Spirit of God, so thou
art to prove that the wicked has it not, and in Joshuah the first, there is
nothing spoken in that Chapter, that God does not pour out his Spirit upon all
Flesh, and that wicked men has not the spirit; there is nothing at all for his
purpose; all that reads it may see: And as for Romans 2. 28, 29. this confounds
thee; all that reads it may see, for this brings people to the spirit of God in
them, that they may be Jews in the spirit; and the Romans its known, they had
been Heathens and wicked people, yet they had the Spirit; and all being not
Israel that be of Israel, Romans 9. 6. we know that neither are all true
Christians that says they are Christians; but are such Israelites and
Christians that quench the spirit as thou do; but thou denies that all men
have it, and so opposes the very Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets.

And whereas thou say, that saying in the 9. of Nehem. must be reserved
thus, Moses had that good Spirit, and God promised to take off that good spirit
that was upon him, and put upon the seventy Elders, Numb. 11. 17. thus Joshuah
was a man in whom was the Spirit, Number. 27. 18. and had another spirit than many
others had, and was fitted thereby for the conduct of the Congregation, Numb.
27. 16. but it cannot hence be inserted, that all or any of the fleshly seed of
Abraham, or such as were born after the flesh had the spirit, but such only as
were born after the Spirit, Gall. 4. 23, 29.

Ans. This is John Wiggan's conclusion, and meaning upon these Scriptures which
he has brought to prove, that every man that comes into the world has not the
Spirit; which are not to that purpose at all, and does the 9. of Nehem. speak
that Joshuah had the spirit, and Moses, and that it was put upon the Elders,
and was these them that Rebelled and slew the Lords Prophets, and turned
against him; what Prophets of the Lord did they slay because thou say that
in Nehem. must be reserved that Moses had the good Spirit, etc. and they after
the flesh, or any of the fleshly seed of Abraham, or such as were born after
the flesh had not the spirit, but such as were born after the spirit, etc. and
Nehemiah said generally he gave his good spirit unto them, not only to Moses
and Joshuah, but such as turned their backs on the Lord; which thou cannot
prove that ever Moses or Joshuah slew the Lords Prophets, etc. and that God
delivered them into the hands of their enemy, to be vexed and troubled; and as
for Numb. 11. and 17. does not prove that the Children of Israel had not the
spirit of God; nor Numb. 27. 16, 18. for that says, God is the spirit of all
flesh; that proves against thee; for the Children of Israel had heard the voice
of God, and knew the power of God when thy came out of Egypt, and knew his Law,
and so he was called their God; and so they knew the things of God, which they
could not have done but by the spirit of God; and Moses said they were the
Children of God, and were a holy people, Deuteronomy. 14. and they were to hearken
diligently to the voice of God, etc. and he had set his people the Jews the
seed of Abraham after the flesh above all Nations of the Earth, Deuteronomy. 28. and
yet thou fayest, all Israel, nor any after the flesh, had not the Spirit; and
Gall. 4. 23, 29. does not prove that Israel after the flesh had not the Spirit,
because, they were not born after it; for those that persecutes them that are
born after the spirit, grieves the spirit of God in themselves; as Christ said,
the Kingdom of Heaven was in the Pharisees that persecuted, and the Jews that
stopped their Ears, and shut their Eyes, and would not hear, nor see, least they
should have been converted and healed; and that which they stopped their Ears,
and shut their eyes too, plainly appears it was the Spirit, else what did they
backslide and err from, and quench, and grieve; so it is evident that all
these Scriptures thou have brought, is to no purpose to prove that all men has
not the spirit: And whereas, thou brings Gall. 4. 6. of such as were Sons of
God, they may, and often do grieve the spirit of God, it does not say they may,
and often do grieve the Spirit, in the Ephesians. 4. 30. but this thou brings that
the Sons of God grieves the Spirit of God, and quenches it, and not the wicked;
was there ever the like heard, for we say, and the Scriptures says, it is the
wicked that grieves the Spirit of God, and thou say, it is the Sons of God;
and as for Acts the 7. 5. which we allege, which speak of their rebelling,
vexing, and resisting of the Holy Spirit; and by this it is manifest that they
had the holy Spirit, agreeable to that in the 16. of John, and these were they
that oppressed Christ, as a Cart under Sheaves, and such vexed the Spirit, as in
Eccles.

And whereas, thou say, all that do grieve, vex, and resist the Spirit of
God, have it not; but they resist the Spirit of God in the Prophets: This is
thy meaning, we know they resist the Spirit of God in the Prophets, when they
first grieve it in themselves, as thou do; and as in the fourth of John the
World receives him not; how should they; when they hate the Light, and resist
it, as thou do; but the Spirit reproves them, therefore, they have it, though
they cannot receiveit, nor receive Christ, but hate him, and so it is thou that
grieves Gods spirit in his Servants.

And whereas, thou say, when Steven said they do resist the holy Ghost, it
was the Spirit in him, by which he spoke, as in Acts 6. 10. as in like manner
they resisted the spirit in the Prophets, as Acts 7. 52. which of the Prophets
have not your Fathers persecuted, etc. This again is thy meaning, but the
Scriptures does not say as thou says, for those that resisted the Holy Ghost
in Stephen had received the Law of God by the disposition of Angels, etc. Acts
7. 53. now the Law of God was the things of God, and the Angels ministering
Spirits; so these that had the things of God had the spirit of God, and when
they kept not the Law of God they quenched and resisted the spirit of God, both
in themselves and others.

And whereas thou say, when the mighty power of God was put forth in signs
and wonders in Egypt, and the Wilderness, Numb. 14. 11. 22. and they believing
not his Spirit not in them, but put forth those mighty works; and speaking in
Joshuah and other faithful Witnesses for God in that day; thus the spirit of
God was vexed in Noah and Lot, by the wickedness of the Old World, and not in
the wicked, who being strangers, and without God in the world.

Answ. None of these Scriptures does say as thou say, that the wicked had
not the Spirit of God to grieve, but that it was only grieved in Joshuah, Noah,
and such like; as for Numb. 14. such as had seen the wonders of God ten times,
and yet did not hearken to the voice of God, and therefore they erred in their
belief, as verse. 11. now how can these hear the voice of God and have not the
spirit of God.

And the Apostle said, they did all drink of the spiritual Rock, and all eat of
the spiritual Meat, and the Rock that followed them was Christ; and yet thou
say, they had not the Spirit of God to grieve in them, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5.
and when they lusted and tempted God, and murmured against God and fell, then
they grieved Gods spirit; and yet thou say, they had it not to grieve, but
it was only grieved in others; and had it been Righteous with the Lord in one
day to cause 23000. to fall, if they had not grieved his Spirit which he gave
them, and so they grieved him: and do thou not believe that the Apostle and
those Corinthians had the spirit of God, who says, let not us tempt God, as
they tempted him, nor murmur as they murmured; and Heb. 3. the Apostle says to
day if you will hear [his voice] harden not your hearts as in the provocation
in the day of temptation in the Wilderness, when your fathers saw my works, I
was grieved with that generation they do always err in their hearts, and what
did they err from in their hearts, if it was not from the spirit, for when
they had heard God, they did provoke him, though all that came out of Egypt did
not provoke him, for as the Gospel being preached to all Nations, the word was
preached to them, but the word did not profit them, not being mixed with faith
in them that heard it, Heb. 3. and Heb. 4. and in Romans 10. The word of faith
which they preached was in the mouth, and in the heart, which all had heard,
and can any hear the word, and have not the spirit, and is not the word
spiritual, for does not the Apostle say to the Romans, which had been Heathens,
and Moses to the Jews, Deuteronomy. 30. from the 10. to 15. verse. which says, It was
not far off, nor hidden from them, which says, they need not say, Who shall
ascend up into Heaven, or beyond the Sea to bring it, but the word is very
nigh, even in thy heart, and in thy mouth, that thou may do it, so good, and
evil, life, and death, was set before them, and this was spoken as well to
those that did disobey God, and for their wickedness, should be scattered
among the Nations; if hap'ly thence they should turn from their wickedness, and
turn unto the Lord, and then they need not say, who shall go up to Heaven, or
to beyond the Sea to bring the word, for it was very nigh them, in their
hearts, and in their mouths, that they might obey and do it, and the Scripture
witnesses the fulfiling of this upon many of them.

And whereas thou say, That the spirit was vexed in Noah, and not in the old
World, this is contrary to the Scriptures, for the Lord said, My spirit shall
not always strive with man, and how that the Sons of God saw the Daughters of
Men, and took of them Wifes of all that they chose, and how that all flesh had
corrupted its way, which shows they had a way before they corrupted it; but
thou say they had not the spirit, does not the Apostle say, 1 Pet. 3. 18,
19, 20. verse. That Christ preached to the spirits in Prison, which sometimes
were disobedient, when the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah;
and what Prison is this, and what Prison is it that the Prisoners of hope must
show themselves forth, and as it is written, Sodom gave its self over to
fornication, etc. wherefore God brought his vengeance upon them, who judges the
World in righteousness; this shows a transgression, that they went from the
good, and gave themselves up to wickedness, as spiritual Sodom does now, and if
wicked Men have not the spirit, (as thou say) how then can God, who is a
spirit, judge the World in righteousness, and does not the Apostle justify the
Heathen Philosophers for saying, We all live and move in God, Acts 17. 27, 28.
that if hap'ly they might feel after God, and find him, though he be not far
from every one of us; and how can they feel after him and have not his spirit,
which thou ignorantly with thy mind puffed up, says, they have it not; and
because the Saints was a habitation of God through the Spirit, therefore, thou
asserts wicked men have not the spirit to vex and grieve it; but this proves it
not, that such as be without God in the World, and strangers have not the
spirit of God in themselves to grieve and vex, thou says; for that which may
be known of God, was manifest in them, and when they knew God, they did not
glorify him as God, but became vain in their imaginations, and changed the
truth of God into a lie, such becomes strangers to the life of God, Romans 1. so
these Scriptures overthrowes thy assertions, and proves that wicked men grieves
the spirit of God in themselves, as well as in others.

And whereas thou say, Joh. 16. 7, 8. if I depart, I will send the Comforter,
etc. thou say by this promise Christ makes, is to send the holy Ghost after
his departure; it is evident enough that this Scripture can be no proof of thy
assertion, (to wit) that every man that comes into the world has not the holy
Ghost; for if every man had him when he came into the world, what need was
there he should be sent to them, after Christ's Ascension? nay rather, this
shows they had him not before he was sent, and so not till after Christ's
departure, which destroys thy opinion; yet thou grants the holy Ghost is come
after Christ ascended, to the Apostles, and to reprove the World; so by this
thou have overthrown thy own opinion and assertion; and we say that Christ does
enlighten every man that comes into the World, and is a Savior, and the Light
is saving; and the holy Ghost is given to reprove the World, and lead the
Saints; and its proved before that the wicked resisted the holy Ghost, before
Christ came in the flesh, and the holy Ghost was given to the Disciples after
Christ was ascended, and he should reprove the World; but thou denies it, and
says, they have it not; and so demes plain Scripture, and perverts our Words;
for our Words is, That Christ does enlighten every Man that comes into the
World; and says, believe in the Light, and the holy Ghost reproves the World
for their unbelief in the Light which leads the Saints unto all Truth.

Secondly, Thou says, this promise is made particularly to the Disciples of
Christ, I will send him to you, and not unto the World.

Answ. Why do thou wrong the Scriptures, does it not say, when he comes, He
shall reprove the World of Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment; of Sin, because
they believe not in him; was he sent then only to the Disciples, and not to the
World? read John 26. 7, 8, 9, 10. over again, and see thy own ignorance and
darkness; and its sufficiently proved that the wicked resisted the holy Ghost
before Christ came; as also they that killed the Prophets, and also its proved
that Christ did send the Comforter to his Disciples after his Ascension, which
Spirit should reprove the World; and though the Disciples were led into all
truth by the Spirit, by which they was to preach the Gospel to all Nations,
that the name of Christ might be spread over all; this does not disprove the
spirit of reproving the World; which thou in thy ignorance brings to prove that
the World has not the spirit to reprove them; and in the 17. of John Christ
says, that they all may be one as thou Father art in me, and I in them, that
the World may believe that thou have sent me: Now how can the Worldbelieve, if
they have not the Light and the Spirit in them to believe in, seeing Believers
has the witness in themselves? and as for Christ's Miracles and signs which
some believed, and some gainsaid; for some said, he did Miracles by the Prince
of Devils, such stop their ears and closed their eyes, least they should be
converted; as Acts 27.

And thou say, the holy Ghost was poured upon none but who repented and
believed; this is thy saying, who art ignorant of the Scriptures, which says,
God would pour out his Spirit upon all Flesh, Acts 2. Joel 2, Joh. 16. and such
as repented and believed received the holy Ghost, and others resisted it, and
quenched it, so that here is a difference betwixt the Believers and
Unbelievers, for the one receives it, the other rejects it, though it be powered
out upon all, as Christ says, The Word was sown in the Field (which is the
World) it was sown upon all Grounds, upon the Thorney, the Bryrie, the
Highway, and the stony Ground; but who brought forth fruit, but the good
Ground, Mat. 13. and this sufficiently proves that the spirit is powered upon
all flesh, and Heb. 6. which speaks of such as were once enlightened, and had
tasted of the Heavenly gift, and was made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and
tasted of the good Word of God, and if they shall fall away, it were impossible
to renew them again to repentance, seeing they crucify (the Lord of Glory) the
Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame; and now Priest Wiggan says,
these wicked men had not the spirit, nor was not enlightened, yet they
crucified Christ afresh, and put him to open shame; and thus with his wisdom
he abuses the Scriptures, though he has long made a Trade of them.

And whereas thou makes a preamble upon our words, wherein we replied to thy
assertion (to wit) that no wicked man had the spirit of God, but only the
Saints, and thou did affirm that Balaam had not the spirit of God; and we
proved that Balaam had the spirit of God, and heard the word and voice of God,
as Numh. 24. and now thou have overthrown thy own assertion, and confesses that
Balaam and Saul had the spirit of God, which thou confesses was wicked men, and
thus thou have split thy self upon the Rock, and overthrown thy Foundation, for
before thou affirmed none had the spirit of God but believers; and Balaam
prophesied of great things to the Jews, and God spoke to him, and we know
there is a difference betwixt those that grieves the spirit, and those that
walks in it; and before thou was ignorant of these Scriptures, as Balaam and
Saul having the spirit of God, and now thou confesses that wicked men may have
it upon some occasions, but says all wicked men has it not, read over again
Joh. 16. Acts the 2d. That the Holy Ghost should reprove the World; and God
would power out his spirit upon all flesh, which before thou would limit only
to John Wiggan ove throws his assertions.
Believers, with thy dark imaginations; and how dare thou preach the
Scriptures, which are the things of God to wicked people; who says they have
not the spirit of God, and here again thou overthrowes thy assertion, and thou
says it is the spirit of God in the Ministers of Christ that must convince the
World; and when as we bid thee, (who looks upon thyself to be a Minister of
Christ) convince us of any evil we have done, thou shufled it off, and said
God must convince us, and so confuted thy Assertion; and whereas thou wrests
and perverts the Scriptures, and says, Balaam did not see the Starr of Jacob,
which it is said at a full stop, by Balaam, there shall come a Starr out of
Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel: Now how could he prophecy of
it, if he did not see it? and this overthrowes thee and thy Assertion, who
never saw so far as Balaam did.

And whereas thou say, they shall see him when every eye sees him; by this
thou confounds thy own assertion, for none can see God or Christ without the
Light of the Spirit; and thou confesses every eye shall see him; and we may
help thee a little further, for every tongue shall confess, and every Knee
shall bow, at the name of Jesus; if thou knew what his Name is, then thou
might know that the Light of the body is the Eye, which sees God.

And whereas thou brings Job, who said, when I see for my self, and with my
eyes, and this thou brings to prove that Israel and Balaam should not see till
the latter day; and thou may read Job, and confute thy self, Job 42. who
says, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now my eye sees
thee, here Job was a true Prophet, for before he said he should see him, now he
says he did see him, and thus thy ignorance (knows not Scriptures) appears,
and we know what the Believers saw, and are satisfied, and we believe thou have
not come so far as Balaams Ass, nor heard the voice of God as he did, though
thou would sit as a Judge of the World, and in the Saints conditions.

And whereas thou say, that the Spirit of God dwelt no more in Balaam, then
the Angel of the Lord dwelt in the Ass; and one of thy people said, (which
thou say is no Baptist) that Balaam had no more spirit then his Horse; he
was one of thy followers, and took thy part, and thou did not gainsay him
then; and now thou say in effect the same that he did.

And that the spirit of God dwelt no more in Balaam then the Angel did in the
Ass; then let all people read Numb. 22. Numb. 23. Numb. 24. did Balaam's Ass
praise the Tents of Jacob, and bless Israel, and prophecy to many people; and
will God bring Balaam's Ass to Judgment as he does Balaam; for Balaam erred
from the Spirit, (but thou cannot say his Ass did so) and loved the wages of
unrighteousness, and have not thou been there, to run greedily after the error
of Balaam for gifts and rewards; does not thou remember a difference bewixt 40
l. and 100 l. for preaching about Manchester, and who should have had this,
John; and God testified against the error of Balaam, but not against the Ass,
as in Jude; and here its proved Balaam had more spirit then his Horse, (as you
called him) which overthrowes the assertion of thee and thy fellows: And
whereas thou makes a great transgression, because, we said he was a Baptist, if
thou be a Baptist he maintained thy Principle, and was one with thee, and why
do thou deny him now.

And whereas thou say, there is a Light or Law in every man, which
convinces and reproves of sin, and this made Judas bring the money back again,
and this (thou say) does not reprove of unbeliefs Judas was made a partaker
of the Ministry, and had he no more then a natural man, is this according to
thy knowledge of the Scripture? did this which convinced Judas not reprove him
of his unbelief? did it not make him confess he had sinned in betraying the
Innocent blood? did he not see his unbelief and wickedness here, Mat. 27. and
to prove thy assertion thou brings Romans 2. 14, 15. which says the Gentiles
that have not the Law, do the things contained in the Law, shows the work of
the Law written in their hearts, their consciences bearing witness, etc. and if
thou read the 16. verse. thou may see that this witness speaks, in the day that
God shall judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ; hereby it plainly appears
that in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, this
spirit which lead the Gentiles to do those things contained in the Law, will
justify them; and this uncircumcision the Apostle says, shall be counted
Circumcision, as verse. 26. and does not this Light which judges the secrets of
all hearts by Jesus, convince of unbelief; so here thou have belyed the
Apostle, and whereas thou say, this was before that promise in the 16. of
John, we know that -- and whereas thou say, that this spirit of truth was to
convince the World of Sin, as in the 16. of John, and unbelief; here thou have
overthrown that which thou asserted in the public meeting, for therein thou
asserted that none had the spirit but Believers, and this Scripture was to
convince thee, for that which convinced the Gentiles was within, by which they
knew God, and was not that by the Spirit? else how came they to be baptized in
the spirit, and circumcision in the spirit, and thus one while thou confesses,
and another while denies, and so is in confusion; and goes about to bring one
Scripture to overthrow another, to thy own destruction; for when the Holy Ghost
was come, when the Apostle preached to the Romans and the Gentiles, which he
spoke of, and preached to, was become the true Circumcision in the spirit, and
the Holy Ghost was come then which was promised.

And in all thy Answers, it does not disprove the Scripture, which says, the
World has the Holy Ghost to reprove them; but Christ's words which is our
assertion stands, and thou and thy assertion by thy former arguments is shaken,
and so it is proved that the wicked and unregenerate has the Holy Ghost, which
thou confesses is the spirit of Christ, though they grieve it, and all the
Scriptures thou brought proves nothing to the contrary, but overthrowes thy
assertion, and John 14. 17. is answered before, for the World and thou art
unlike to receive the spirit of truth, when you reject and oppose the Light,
and will not receive it, which you should believe in; for if you received it,
it would not reprove you, but you would have fellowship in it; and why do
thou judge the World has it not, when thou confesses thou has it, and is in
the same nature of the world, in envy, malice, and revenge; and Romans 8. 9.
proves nothing to thy assertion, but says, the Saints was not in the flesh,
and they that quench and grieve the spirit of God, and will not have the spirit
of God, but it reproves them for their sin, etc. how can they be said to be
Christ's, when they will not have the spirit of Christ to lead them; and Jude
19. is clear against thy assertion, which speaks of such as had the spirit, and
erred from it, and so became like Sodons, and Cain, and Core, and Balaam, these
thou brings to prove that wicked men has not the spirit of God over and over,
Balaam had the spirit of God, that is proved in Numbers; and in Genesis it is
proved that Cain talked with God, and heard his voice, and he could not do that
without the spirit; and Core knew the power of God that brought him forth of
Egypt, and was not he of the tribe of Levy that ministered in the Priests
office, and was he like to meddle in the things of God without the spirit;
though these erred from the spirit, as in Jude, and so became sensual. And thou
had more liberty to hold forth thy errors, then others had to hold forth Truth;
and as the Serpent led Adam and Evah from Righteousness and Holiness to the
Tree, by which they fell, so thou his Messenger leads people from the spirit of
God within them, to something without them.

Whereas thou say in thy second Argument, whom Christ lights with a saving
Light into their hearts, he causes the Glorious light of the Gospel to shine,
2 Cor. 4. 4, 6. but he causes not the Glorious light of the Gospel to shine
into the hearts of every one that comes into the World, for the Gospel is hid
to some, to whom the God of this world, has blinded the mind of them that
believe not, etc.

Ans. This does not follow nor prove that all are not enlightened with a saving
light, because, the God of this World has blinded the minds of them that does
not believe; nor it does not overthrow the promise of God, who said he would
give Him for a Light to the Gentiles to enlighten them, who was the Glory of
Israel, Luke 2. 32. and he should be Gods Salvation to the ends of the Earth,
Isa. 42. 49. 6. and Isa. 52. 10. where the Lord said, Is it a light thing that
he should be his servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and restore the
preserved of Israel; but says the Lord, I will give thee for a Light to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the ends of the Earth: and when
Christ came, he said, I am the Light of the World; and he that follows me
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of Life, Joh. 8. 12. and
John which came to bear witness of the true Light, says, That, that was the
true Light which lights every man that comes into the World, (and he says)
that all men through him might believe: and Christ says in the 12. of John,
Believe in the Light; and he that believed is saved; so this proves that the
Light is saving; and though some be darkness, and the God of the World has
blinded their eyes, because, they do not believe; yet this Light shines in
darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not, Joh. 1. 5. so this clearly
overthrowes thee and thy assertion, to be in the darkness, and not to
comprehend the Light which shines in thy darkness, for he that believes in the
light is saved by it, and he that does not, is condemned; and Christ who is the
Light, is the Savior; so this proves that the World is lightened with a saving
Light; though they neglect their Salvation and God is just, in judging of them;
and the Saints that believe i^ the Light, and becomes Children of the Light, it
shines in their hearts, and gives them the knowledge of the Glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. but them that hate the light, John 3. comes to
be darkened, and does not know the Father and the Son as the Saints do, for
they become haters of their Salvation; and as thou and the Pharisees hating the
true Light, and seting up your own wisdom, instead of the Light, then if the
Light which be in you is darkness, how great is that darkness, when you stop
your ears from the true Light of Christ in your selves, and set up your own
way, and denies Christ Jesus the Light to be the way; and Ephesians. 4. 18. nor
Math. 6. neither of these places says that the Light in them was darkness; but
says, Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are you light in the Lord, etc. and
Christ says, If the eye be single, the body is full of light, but if it was
double or evil, it was full of darkness; and to the double or evil eye he
questions, if that light that is in them be darkness, how great was that
darkness; and this shows there was two eyes, and the double went from the
single eye which would fill the body full of light; but the double fills it
full of darkness, and then calls darkness light, and denies the Light of Christ
as thou do, Isai. 5. 20. so all the Scripture thou brings and perverts is to
no purpose, for they do not disprove the light to be saving.

And whereas thou says again, Such as are lightened with a saving light are
new Creatures, and are Regenerated, and such as the light is, such is the life,
and it is implanted in them, and they have eternal Life; but Christ does not
quicken, Regenerate, make new Creatures, and give life to every man that comes
into the world, but some are in the flesh, born and are created in sin, have
not life, yea die in their sin.

Ans. Here thou goes about to lay the fault upon Christ, that men are not
regenerate, and has not life, etc. when the Scripture plainly tells thee that
it is because they do not believe, and they that do believe are regenerated,
born again, and have Eternal Life, and do know the effects of the Light, and
such as the light is, such is their Life; but they that does not believe in the
light, does not become Children of the Light, but remains in the flesh, and
the birth of it, in an unregenerated state without life, hating the Light, so
hating the life, not because they have not a saving light, but Christ says,
Believe in the light while you have it; showing they have it, before they are
children, Joh. 12. Heb. 3. and they that dyed in their sins, (poor man were in
thy condition) they did not believe that Christ the light was he to believe in;
and all the Scripture thou brings is nothing to oppose the light of Christ to
unbelievers, which was spoken to the Saints, which thou perverts, for we know
what was spoken to Believers, and what to unbelievers; and Joh 8. 24. where
it is said, if they did not believe that he was the Christ they should die in
their sins: and the Apostle said, all was gone astray, both Jews and Gentiles,
that God might have mercy upon all, Romans 11. 32. and so this mercy of God to
the World thou denies, and God respects no man's person, as in the Acts, etc.

And whereas, thou brings many Scriptures to prove, that the Saints by the
Light had faith, had gift to trust in him; had power to become Sons of God, and
had Christ dwelling in them by his Spirit, and by Faith, etc.

Ans. All these is nothing to the matter in hand, for the Dispute was not about
the Saints having the Light, for because Believers had it, and was grown to
such conditions, this does not make out that the Unbelievers had it not; for
God sends Rain both upon the just and unjust; and God so loved the World that
he gave his only begotten Son into the World to enlighten the World; that
whosoever believed in him should not perish; and such as do believe in him have
faith, and comes to be Sons, and comes to receive Christ to dwell in them, and
rule in them; but those that hate Light, will not have this man to rule over
them; and has not God dealt to every man a measure of faith through the Grace
that is given; and does not the Grace of God which appears to all men, bring
Salvation? which is sufficient and justifies? read Timothy, Tit. 2. Romans 12.
and had not the unprofitable servant a Talent to improve, and was not that
Talent, saving as well as the talent of the other two, that did improve them,
if he had improved it, and does not some that is wicked, make shipwreck of
Faith, and of a good conscience, and turn the Grace of God into wantonness, 1 Timothy 1. 19. these departed from the faith, and erred from the faith, and cast
off their faith, and Tim. 5. 8. and the 16. 10. now by thy assertion thou
says, these had not faith, etc.

And whereas thou says, We brought nothing to weaken thy arguments but that
Scripture in the first of John 9. which says, That is the true Light that
enlightens every man that comes into the World; which we say is saving: but
many other proofs we brought (but thou regarded none) out of John and Esaiah,
to prove that Christ was the Light and Salvation to the ends of the Earth; and
so thou are not only ignorant of Scripture, but darker then the Common Prayer
Book, for it says, Almighty God which shows unto all men that be in error
the light of thy Truth, to the intent they may return into the way of
Salvation, etc. and as for thy accusing us for wresting the Scriptures and hard
censures, we speak them as they were, but it was thou that wrested Scriptures
to maintain thy assertions, but could not; and when thou manifested thy
ignorance, M. F. told thee of thy ignorance, and as it did, and yet does
appear, and by denying and opposing the light, thou manifested thy self to be a
miserable Creature, and an enemy of God, and denied the Lord that bought thee;
and Rich. Cubam proved thee out of 2 Peter 2. 2. and Jude, to be the man that
denied the Lord that bought thee, and to be that false Prophet that brought in
the damnable heresy, and through covetousness and feigned words made
merchandise of people, and by such as thee the way of truth was evil spoken of;
and then ye were all in a noise and disorder, and went away in a tempest; and
that which thou did assert in plain words, [that God denied faith to some
men,] which error thou have left out of thy Book, it is like thou was ashamed
of that, and when thou was put to prove it, and give us Scripture for it, thou
seems to bring many, perverting them, but would not make it good by any, which
yet it stands unmade good on thy head; and it is proved before that the
Righteous had the faith, and such as was wicked had made shipwreck of it, which
by the Scriptures overthrows thy assertion; and one of thy Brethren said in the
open Dispute, [that Christ did not shed his blood for all men;] which is
contrary to the Scripture, that says, He tasted death for every man; and is a
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole
World 1 Fpist. Joh. 2. and as in Adam all dyed, even so in Christ all shall be
made alive; which thou have denied, 1 Cor. 13. 22.

And thou manifested that thou was not a rational man, as George Fox could
thee, both in thy practice and carriage in the Meeting; who brake the Order
amongst us, which was, that all might speak one by one; and thy laying violent
hands upon Tho. Curwen; and what Margaret Fell spoke of, thou have made
manifest that to the full, and my words, Io. Berley, will stand over thee, for
Drunkards and Swearers will not deny the Light, as thou do; it was the
Pharisees, and the Chief Priests that were most against Christ the Light, as
thou art, as thou may see in the Evangelists, and when it was put to thee to
make good that Christ did not shed his blood for all Men, thou did not then,
nor yet make good; but the Scriptures is against thee and thy Disciple, Heb. 2.
9. That he by the grace of God, should taste Death for every Man; The Love of
Christ constraines us, because we thus judge, that if Christ dyed for all, then
all were dead, and he did dye for all; that they that live should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for all, 2 Cor. 5. 15.
and here thy judgment is contrary to the Apostles, as thou may see, what error
thou and thy People are in, contrary to the Scriptures.

And whereas thou have Published some part of (I) James Parkes Letter, what was
thou ashamed to Publish it all, that the People might have seen the whole
Letter, but thou serves my Letter, as thou do the Scriptures, take part, and
leave out part, as thy Father the old Deceiver did, Mat. the 4. and my Letter
is true to thee, for thou long deceived me, and led me Captive in Error and
blindness, where thou art thy self, and also many others, from the Light of
Christ Jesus; and I told thee, and writ this to thee in private, which thou
have made public; and it is well thou have, that others may see thy folly and
madness, who keep people from the light and salvation, but praised be the
Lord I have escaped thy error. And it seems thou art offended, because I Henry
Wood called thee Priest Wiggan, was thou not Chapel Priest about Manchester,
does not the Country know it, I must not call thee Captain, nor Major, for thou
have not thy Belt, and I cannot Master and Sir thee as thy hearers does, and it
is like thou will be offended if I call thee John Wiggan, and art not thou a
Priest still, have thou not many Collections about Manchester, do thou not
live better now than thou could do out of Prison; for many of your Priests have
but bad Tradeing, and are broken Merchants, and whereas thou says thou art
taught not to strive, nor to render railing for raileing, 2 Timothy 2. 24. but to
be gentle to all men, how was thou gentle when thou laid violent hands on John
Abrams, and was ready to tear Tho. Curwen's Coat off his back, so that he cried
out to thee, what, a Minister of Christ, and will thou fight, and yet thou
praises thy self, thou art gentle and will not strive, when thy actions
testifies against thee, that thou hates the light, and when thou said, the
Plagues of God was upon Thomas Curwen; this is not railing with thee; and said,
the spirit of the Devil spoke in him, when he spoke truth to thee, and this was
thy fury and madness, who art not fit to talk of the Saints conditions; and so
it is manifest thou knows not what spirit thou art of, who do not know the
light of Christ to be saving, neither have thou showed forth the fruits of the
spirit of Christ, with its workings: And whereas, thou would know, where any of
the Ministers of Christ, or Christ called any strange birth of the flesh, etc.
it seems thou art ignorant of the Scriptures as well as others, as long as thou
have been a Merchant, for did not Christ tell the Pharisees, they were of their
Father the Devil, John 8. and the Apostle said to Elimas the Sorcerer, thou
full of all subtilty, who perverts the right way of God: as thou do,
hindering people from believing in the light, Ioh. 12. Acts 13. and so we speak
truth to thee, as thou art, we do not falsely accuse thee; and now see thee
where thou art, who long deceived us, but praised be the Lord we are come to
Christ the saving Light, which thou denies, and its manifest what thou art, and
what thy suffering is, in the darkness against the light; and thou proves thy
self a Thief and a Robber, who enters not in by the door Christ, the Light, but
climbes up another way; and therefore, the sheep knows thy voice to be the
stranger, John 10. and we know what thy compassion is; but thou wants power:
thou have manifested in this Book, and the Letters thou have sent up and down
to Manchester and Stopperd; and thy deeds are manifest in the light which thou
hates so much; and the Lord is rebuking the evil spirit, and judging it, and
thou will feel the weight of his hand for thy maliciousness to his people; and
it is thou that has mislead and misguided the simple, who brings forth
arguments to no purpose, to strike at the Cornerstone Christ the Light, it
being fallen upon thee; therefore, thy Arguments is manifest to be to no
purpose; and therefore, thou art thus tormented; and whereas thou savest, our
Cornerstone being struck at, then the building must needs fall to the ground:
but I say, our foundation is Christ the Light, Ioh. 8. which we know that thou,
and all the Generation of Priests have struck at, till you are all tumbled down
your selves; but Christ our Corner stone, and Foundation, and Light, never
fell; but thine is fallen, and therefore thou ragest: And we do affirm in our
words and printed Books, that Christ, who says he is the Light, in Joh. 8, he
is the Door, Joh. 10. he is the quickening Spirit, and he is the Corner stone
which God has laid in Sion, he is the Truth, and he is the All, and in all and
above all, according to Scripture; and to be believed in, And has enlightened
every man that comes into the world; and he is the Redeemer and the word; and
this thou denyest, Christ the Light, the Quickening Spirit, the Way, the Truth,
the Corner stone, the Word, the Foundation, the Redeemer and the All; And here
indeed, thou have denied the Corner stone, and Christ Jesus, which the
Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles testified of; so thou have manifested thy
self against them: So never take their words to make a Trade of any more.

And thou can not call Christ the Light, a Quickening Spirit, the Way, the
Truth, the Word, the Foundation, the Corner stone, the Redeemer, this thou
can not call the True Jesus thou say, We do believe thee, and that thou art
an Enemy to him, and them that walk in his light are manifest: and therefore
have I Richard Gubbam proved thee a false Prophet and Antichrist, according to
thy own-words, and we are come to Repentance, and the knowledge of the Truth,
and thy ways be detected, whereby many simple hearts be turned from them, and
so now we are many of us undeceived from such deceivers as thee, who calls
Christ the Light, the Word, the Way, the Truth, deceiving, but the Lord rebuke
thee who strives to keep Ignorant simple people from the Light, and in darkness
thou would aspire up as a Judge of all conditions, and knows not thy own to
be miserable, blind and naked, Rev. 1. yet thou tell the Reader what the
Light is, and what it can do, and what it cannot do; and of what use it is,
when thou in the darkness cannot comprehend it.

And whereas thou tellest us of the Light of the first Adam, and the Spirit of
man is the Candle of the Lord, Proverbs 20. and Genesis 2. Adam was made a
living soul, 1. Cor. 15. and thou say, this Candle of the Lord, or Light in
every man, is inferior to other Lights, and is lower than the Angels, and is
limited and bounded, etc. And now would not this Light have justified the Jews,
and Adam; and the Candle of the Lord, would not that have directed them in his
way; and did not David call the word of God A Lanthorn to his feet, and a Light
unto his path: And is this thy Spirit which is under the Bonds and Limits; for
where the Spirit of God is joined to, there is liberty; and we do not tell thee
of the Light of Adam, thou art gone from the matter; but we speak of the Light
of Christ Jesus, the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven: For our dispute was not
about the earthly Adam, the Spirit of a man; but our discourse was about Christ
the Light of the world, the Savior; and thou tel'st us of the Light of Adam;
this is thy dark Wisdom, and like thy knowledge and experience of Christ.

And whereas thou say, the Spirit of a man, or Light in every man is
understood to be the Reason, or the understanding of a man, whereby he is
adopted to know his Creator (viz. who made him according to David, Psalms 59. 6.

Answ. Here thou have confuted thy self; for can man be adopted to know his
Creator with his own Spirit and Reason, and his own Light which thou call'st
Natural; For the Natural man knows not the things of God, and the Spirit of man
knows the things that be of a man; even so the Spirit of God knows the things
that be of God; and if all Nations must know the Lord God that made them, and
serve him, and they are his people, and the sheep of his Pasture, and they must
worship and kneel before the Lord their maker, and keep his Laws, then they
should have the Spirit of God; for natural men cannot discern the things of
God, nor hear his voyee, nor worship him, as thou said before, so these
Scriptures over throws thy assertion, Psalm. 95. 6. And whereas thou say of
this Light, we may understand Christ to speak. Mat. 6. 23. Therefore if the
Light in thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? Together with this Light
set up in every man, which shows him his Creator; that he is to be served, and
how he is to be served; of necessity there must be a Law Implanted in him
(which Law is called Light, Prove. 6. 23. whereby the will and mind of his
Creator, which is impressed upon him, and made known unto him; so that he by the
Spirit or Light set up in him, could reflect this Law, and understand the
reason and reasonableness of it; this was the fullest Light in man before the
fall; he could look his God in the face, and come to his presence with the
Light, and serve him with Gladness.

Answ. What error and confusion is this, if the Light, which is Darkness,
showed Adam the face of God, and is that which shows the Creator, and is the
Law in the heart which reflects upon people; for that which is spoken of in the
6 of Math. where Christ says, if that light that be in you be darkness, how
great is that darkness? which he spoke to the double Eyed State, which if the
Eye be single, the whole body is full of light.

And Adam before he fell, had no darkness in him, and if the Law in the 6 of
the Prove. be darkness in men, with Mat. 6. as thou comparest it, in thy blind
and erroneous meaning, and so perverts the Scriptures to thy own destruction,
for the Law is light, and the Reproofs of Instruction is the way to life; and
this we affirm to be saving, and not the Light which is called Darkness; And
the Law of God which is placed in the heart, whereby the will and mind of God
is known Spiritually, and the things of God are known only by the Spirit of
God, and this is above man's Reason, or Spirit, or darkness, and keeps men in
Reason, out of darkness, and orders men's Spirits to know the Lord; and herein
thou have manifested thy error and Ignorance; for men in the light which is
called darkness, knows not God, nor in their natural estate as they are erred
from the Spirit of God; and Adam was above that state before he fell, of men in
the Natural estate in the fall, whose light is darkness, and this is thy
darkness and ignorance, in paralleling them together.

And whereas thou say, since the fall this Candle of the Lord in man, is
become exceeding dim to what it was, so that his understanding was darkened with
blindness and Ignorance, Ephesians. 4. 18. yet it is not wholly Extinct, for then
he could not Exist, but would cease to be; and the Law which was written in
man's heart, now is not so plainly to be read; yet there is sufficient left to
render God Righteous in his proceeding against man, who hold the measure of
knowledge left in them (that is to say, of his eternal power and Godhead) etc.

Answ. By this thou have contradicted thy self, and granted that every man has
the Spirit; for can any know the eternal power of God and his Godhead, without
his Spirit.

Then do they not know Christ, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells in;
and before thou calls it natural, and Darkness, and Reason, and man's Spirit,
who art ignorant of the new Covenant, Christ Jesus the Light, which is given to
all mankind, who is beyond the first, which thou art groping in, and making
nothing of, in thy dark understanding; and yet thou compares it [this Candle]
to the light before the fall, and with darkness, one while is the Spirit of a
man, and another while is the Spirit of a man, and another while is Reason; and
where there is Reason, there is the Spirit of Faith; and thus intrudes into
those things thou never saw, which puffs up thy fleshly mind.

2. Thou say What use is this light of, or what can this Light in every man
do since the fall.

And again thou say, this Light or Spirit of a man, searches all the parts
of the belly, Prove. 20. 27. or as the Apostle says, it medleth with the things
of a man, 1 Cor. 2. 11. For what man knows the things of a man, save the
Spirit of man which is in him, that manifests every action of man, it looks
upon every thing done, or to be done, with a direct Act of the understanding;
and this singly considered, makes not any thing that is done to be good or evil.

Answ. All may see how thou have contradicted thy former words, which thou
said, it manifests his eternal power and Godhead, and it was the Law in the
heart? And now it makes nothing to be good or evil [thy light does not] and in
this thou have contradicted thy former sayings; And how can God judge the world
in Righteousness, if the light that is in man shows him neither good nor evil.
And this is contrary to Romans 2. 20. For that which may be known of God, is
manifested in them, for God has showed it unto them; by which they know Good
and Evil, and does the Candle of the Lord search all the inward parts of the
belly, and manifests every action of man, and looks upon every thing done, or
to be done, with a direct act of the understanding; and yet the evil that a man
does, manifested to his understanding; what contradictions and blindness is
this, for if every action that a man does is manifested, then sin is
manifested, or else every action is not manifested; and if this light manifests
in man what is done, and what is to be done, this makes him a Prophet,
According to thy words, who has manifested thy self to beignorant both of the
old Covenant and the new: And that which is spoken of 1 Cor. 2. the which thou
brings to oppose the Light in every man.

And whereas thou say, when this light, or man's spirit reflects upon the Law
written within, according to which it is done, or not done, the evidness of the
actions discovered, these reflects are of the Soul, and is called Conscience;
that is a knowing together with some else; thus the Law discovers the quality
of the action, according to Romans 3. 20. by the Law is the knowledge of Sin; now
according to the conformity, or nonconformity that a man's actions bears to
the Law, such will its sentence be, and answerable to the sentence the Law
pronounces, will be the excusations, or accusations of the person; according
to Romans 2. 15. which shows the work of the Law written in their hearts; their
Consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while excusing or
accusing one another: this is that witness which the Lord has left for himself
in men, that he may be just when he judges the World, and every mouth stopped
at the great day, Romans 2. 5, 6. this manifested to Adam his transgression,
which made him hide himself, Genesis 3. 13. this manifested to Judas his sin, and
caused him to bring back the money, and confess he had sined; this may answer
Henry Wood's Query; neither is this light only exercised in manifesting the
things of man, even the secret and hidden things of the belly; but it is also
able to feel and seek after God his Creator, Acts 17. 27, 28. and is in a
capacity of knowing much of him as a Creator at least, his eternal power and
Godhead, by the things that are seen, Romans 1. 19, 20. thus far the light and
Law within every man may go.

Ans. What jumbled stuff is this, and confusion, and contradictions; can the
light the spirit of man as thou call it, know his Creator at least, his
eternal power and Godhead, and to feel and seek after God; when thou said
before, the natural man knew not the things of God, nor the spirit of a man
knew but the things of man; now if all those knew the Creator and the eternal
power and Godhead, and to feel and seek after God; thou have proved then that
all have the spirit of God; and by this, overthrown thy own assertion, as thou
have done often before; and if they know the Law of God, which soul and
conscience effects upon, as thou faist, then they knew the things of God; for
the Law of God is the things of God, and they are known by the spirit, and so
thou brings the spirit of Man, and the old Covenant which thou calls light; to
oppose the new Christ Jesus, with thy dark wisdom; and that in the Romans which
says, That which may be known of God was manifest in them, by which they did
the things contained in the Law, which was spiritually; showing the work of the
Law written in their hearts, which was spiritual; and this was beyond the
spirit of a natural man; and when they transgressed this; God did judge them in
righteousness, by which every mouth was stopped, they were guilty before the
Lord, for that which God had manifested in them, witnessed against their
actions and made them to confess Gods judgments to be just; and that which made
Adam to confess and hide himself, was beyond a natural Man's spirit, for he knew
God, and so he had the spirit of God to discern him; and after he knew the
promise of God concerning Christ, which the faithful and his posterity trusted
in it; Christ the Covenant of Light to the Gentiles, which thou fights so
against. And Judas was made partaker of the Ministry of Christ, and confessed he
had betrayed the innocent blood; and so he had knowledge of the Covenant, who
is the end of the first Law and Covenant, and this knowledge of his, was beyond
the Light, which thou calls the spirit of a Man, and beyond thy ignorance; for
David says Let another take his Bishopric; mark that, and this is no Answer
to my Queries H. W. as thou say it is, neither have thou done honestly in not
putting my Querie down, nor all my Queries, that people might have seen them;
its like thou was ashamed, and afraid of that; and therefore here are my
Queries, that all people may see them, and the Paper I stuck upon the Door when
thou would not answer them.

John Wiggan, For the Seed sake I cannot be silent, Therefore as touching the
Queries which I spoke to thee of, face to face, and was not satisfied from
thee, but thou slighted my Query; therefore I call upon thee to Answer me,
either face to face, or by writing, for thou may remember, that thou yielded
unto me, that he that did believe had the witness in himself; but thou did not
satisfy me where the witness was that did condemn, that is the thing I would
know from thee, and in thy discourse that day, thou said all had not the
spirit, and thou instanced Judas; now I would have thee tell me what that was,
that caused Judas to bring back again the silver, and confessed that he had
sinned in that he had betrayed the Innocent blood, I would have thee to write a
distinction, that so I may know a difference between that which caused Judas to
confess, and the spirit; and thou seemed to prove out of Jude, that some had
not the spirit; but Jude said, those were such as separated themselves, and
seeing thou holds separation, and do gather a people after thee; therefore,
clear thy self that thou be not one of those; and further, one of thy hearers
spoke with a loud voice, and said, That Balaam had no more spirit then his
Horse. Therefore consider, how thou and thy Hearers perverts the Scripture,
read the 24. Numb. and the 2, 3. v. and when thou have read them, then tell me
when the spirit of the Lord came on Balaam's Horse? And thou John Wiggan said,
That faith was denied to some; and Christ sent forth his Disciples to teach all
Nations; Now, if they must teach All, then none was exempted; but the Pharisees
said, Have any of the Rulers believed on him; but these people that know not
the Law are cursed. So thou and thy Hearers it seems does not much let to
oppose the Apostles Doctrine, which says, the Grace of God which brings
Salvation has appeared to all men. Therefore, I would know of thee whether
this Grace be a Teacher, yea or nay? and if any refuse to be taught by it,
whether the cause be his own, or in the Grace which has appeared to all, as
aforesaid: And thou or some of thy Hearers said, That Christ did not shed his
blood for all, and that Christ dyed not for all: Clear thy self of these
things, and see how thou can make them good, and answer them in Writing; and
then if thou present any Queries to me, I shall not refuse to answer, so far as
the Lord opens it in me, Henry Wood.

These Queries have been unanswered at least a quarter of a Year.

And whereas thou say it is a great Light, and yet but a Candle Light, a
created Light, springing up with Man in his natural birth, leading him to know
something of his Creator, and of his duty to him; also discovering
transgressions against the Law of works, which he was under; the Tenor whereof
is this; do this and live, Romans 9. And this it may do, where Christ the way,
the truth, and the life, is not so much as heard of; thus it was in Adam when
he had sinned, as before the promise of grace was held forth in the seed of the
Woman, Genesis 3. 15. the Light and Law within him discovered sin unto him, but
mark the effect, horror and amazement seized upon him; I was afraid and hid my
self, Genesis 3. 10. for this Law speaks nothing but wrath to all, that are in
the fall, Romans 4. 15. notwithstanding amendment, and the most exact future
obedience they can yield to it.

Answ. Where, Do thou read in the Scriptures of a created Light, God created
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and was this the created Light that made Adam to
hide himself; and did this created Light springing up with man in his natural
birth, which thou calls the candle and spirit of the Natural man, which knows
not the things of God, Cor. 12. and this thou brought before, and is this
created light the Law of works; do this and live; and is this created light the
spirit of man, that leads him to horror and amazement: Nay, it is a divine
Light that lets a man see himself; and all those Scriptures does not speak of a
created light, or a Candle light, which is the spirit of a Natural man, leading
him to know something of his Creator, and of his duty to him: when the
Scripture says, the Natural man knows not the things of Gods how ignorant and
carnal art thou, was the Law of works the created Light springing up, with the
Natural man; for that was the Law of God which is spiritual, which says, do
this and live; as in the Romans. And how was the Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world; if Adam had no more but a natural light springing up with man,
and is the Image of God, Righteousness and Holiness, which he was made in, a
Created light, and the Candle and Spirit of the Natural man, as thou say
formerly; in this thou manifests both thy ignorance and contradictions: For,
that of God in all men, by which they knew their Creator, and the things of
him; it is by his spirit by which thou have said, they may know their Creator
by a Created Light, and by a Candle, which is the Spirit of a Natural man. And
thus, thou have overthrown thy own Assertion, and opposes the Covenant of
Light, Christ Jesus, and art contrary to the Scriptures, Cor. 2. 11. and what
is this to the purpose, as all being concluded under sin, we know that, and we
know that the Law is spiritual, and what it can do; but we own Christ the end
of the Law, for it served, till Christ the seed came, who gives Life.

And whereas thou say, the Light which thou called natural, and making no
distinction in this place betwixt that which is natural, and that which is
spiritual, but says the Light flows from the principles of Nature, rightly
called natural, and not spiritual; and this thou would set up in opposition
against Christ the Light, for the Apostle spoke to the Romans, how they were
from the Light, and from the Law, and while men be in that which flows from
the Natural Man, they know not, neither the Law that is Spiritual, nor the
Light of Christ; and Men obeying the Light of Christ, or the Law of God; it is
not by that which flows from nature, but from that which gives them a
spiritual understanding; for the natural man does not know the things of God,
and all those Scriptures in the Romans, Galatians, and Corinthians, is nothing
to the matter of thy purpose, concerning the Light of Christ that does
enlighten every man.

And whereas thou say, This Light knows nothing of the precious Gospel
ministry, hid in God, nothing of Redemption by Christ, nothing of Gods good
pleasure, and purpose of Grace; nothing of the Law of faith, the tenor whereof
is this, etc.

This all may see how thou have contradicted thy self, by thy former words, for
thou says, that this Light is able to seek or feel after God his Creator, and
is in a capacity of knowing much of Him, as a Creator, at least his Eternal
power, and Godhead; and can this Light let them know the Eternal Power and
Godhead, and nothing of Christ, who is the power of God; and nothing of the
Gospel which is the power of God; and can a man know something of the Creator,
and nothing of his Favor; for is not his grace his favor; and they that lived
in the Law was justified; and they that were obedient saw Christ the end of the
Law, and came to him who is the end of the Law; and beyond the Natural man's
spirit which thou talks of, so fast to no purpose, but manifests thy confusion,
For to know God is Eternal Life, Joh. 17. 3. and that is beyond thy Natural
Man's Light; and we do know that they that believe in Christ Jesus the Light
(which thou opposest) shall have Eternal Life; and we know that the Law of
Faith is not natural, nor the Light of Christ that does enlighten every man,
nor the Law of God, nor the promise of God with all the rights held in the
Faith; and the seed Christ shall bruise the Serpents head; and he is come a
Light and Salvation to the ends of the Earth, that enlightens every man; and we
know the Law of Faith is Spiritual; and whereas thou say, the Law of Works
springs up with Man's Nature; and the Law is Spiritual, and then this Natural
springs up with the Spiritural: Why how now John, where finds thou this in the
Scripture, the Law is received from God, and not springing up with man; what
nonsense and confusion is this, what a Mechanic man art thou.

And thou say, the Law of Faith was added because of Transgression, and out
of mere grace was founded on Christ in the gracious promise. Genesis 3. etc.

Answ. We say, neither the Law of Faith, nor the Law of God, sprung out of man's
nature, And the Law which was added because of transgression, was not called
the Law of Faith; so thou errs, and art as wide in this as thou art about the
Light of Christ; I believe thy brother Price would not say, that the Law which
was added because of Transgression, was the Law of Faith; and so thou art the
vain man that would be wise, as thou say; which is born like a wild Asses
Colt, Job 11. and Gods thoughts are not as thine, but are as far different as
the Heaven is from the Earth. And whereas thou say, Man is not able by all
his Candlelight to know Christ; and yet thou said, before he could know the
Eternal power and Godhead by this Candle light; and now thou says, the Natural
man cannot deser^e the things of God, because, they are spiritually discerned;
and before thou said, he might know much of his Creator, and of the Eternal
power; How now John, do thou not think the least babe sees thee here, thou
needs not an Aoster to discern thee. And whereas thou say, that this Light
is not able to discover or convince man of unbelief in Christ, and yet thou
says, this light will show the Eternal Power and Godhead, which fullness of the
Godhead dwells in Christ; and we know that the spirit of truth does convince the
World, which thou opposes, the Comforter and he is come, and why do thou
tell us of a natural Light, or Created Light, or Man's Spirit, which it
manifests thou knows no more, but Heathen like or Athist like; for it is the
Light of Christ Jesus the new Covenant, which far exceeds thy natural Lights,
and created Lights, and Man's Spirit, and thy meanings; and Acts 13. 47. I have
set thee to be a Light to the Gentiles, that thou should be my salvation to the
ends of the Earth; And this overthrowes thy Principles, for he the Light is the
salvation to the ends of the Earth, who lightens every man, which is saving;
and Galla. 3. 19, 20. and 1 Timothy 2. 5. This proves that Christ the Light is a
Mediator, which thou before denied, and Christ the Light has manifested the
love of the Father to Mankind, and they that walk in the Light sees it; but
thou that hates it, and talks so much of thy natural light, and spirit of man;
knows it not, nor cannot comprehend it in thy darkness, though it shine in it;
and do thou own that in Mat. 11. Revelation of the Son, (thy Generation used
to deny Revelation) For no man knows the Father but the Son, etc. and yet thou
say man may know by the natural and created Light, and natural man's spirit,
the mind of his Creator, and much of the Eternal Power and Godhead, and so
thou contradicts thy self and contradicts Christ, and the Apostles words, For
the natural Man perceives not the things of God, and that which may be known of
God, is manifested in them, by which they know God, and No Man knows the Father
but the Son (and is not the Father the Creator) and he to whom the Son will
reveal him, Ephesians. 1. 17. Joh. 3. 5, 6. Titus 3. 5. Jo. 1. 12, 13. Gal. 4. 6.
1 Cor. 6. 17. Ephesians. 2. 15. 1 Cor. 15, etc. These Scriptures are spoken to such
as received Christ the Light, through which they came to be the Sons of God
regenerated and born again, Jo. 1. 7, 8, 9. and by this Light manifest in them,
they came to have the new mind, by which they were joined to the Lord, and Ephesians.
5. And thou speaks of a new Light, here thon perverts the Scripture, and
whereas thou says, 2 Cor. 4. which says God commanded light to shine out of
darkness, which shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not, Jo.
1. which shines into the Saints hearts, (and this light thou seems to have
denied before) which shines in our hearts, and gives us the knowledge to see
thy confusion, the least Babe of us, for this light gives us the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, and this thou strikes at, with
thy Candlelight, and Created light, and Natural light, which thou calls the
spirit of a man; but to no purpose is thy tempest risen, against the Lord, and
against his Anointed, for it is the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Councellor
and Leader of the people, whom we follow; and such as follows him receives the
spirit of Adoption in their hearts, and can call God Father: But what is this
to thee, who denies his Light, and calls it Natural and Created; and is not
that Light saving according to thy own judgment, and will bring a man to know
the Creator, and the Eternal Power and Godhead; thou calls it natural man's
spirit, which knows not the things of God; and thou thus art confused; but we
tell thee Christ Jesus is the Savior of all men, who is the light of the
World, and did not come to condemn the World as thou do; but that the World
through him might have Life, and to save the World; and is the Savior of all
men, especially, them that believe: And all these Scriptures was spoken to the
Saints condition, (and not to thine) such who walked in the Light which thou
fights against.

And whereas thou say It may appear by what thou have said, how gross their
mistake is, who call the Light in every man, Christ, and worship this as the
Redeemer, and the Lord that bought them.

Ans. All that thou have spoken has been against Christ, and it is to no
purpose, and clears nothing, but has made thy self darker, concerning Christ
the Light: Joh. 8. and Joh. 1. which says, That was the true Light that
lights every man that comes into the world; and as many as receives him [the
Light] he gives them power to become the Sons of God. And this Light thou calls
(maliciously) Created and Natural; when did thou ever hear any of us say, we
worship a Light within us? this is thy gross mistake, we Worship God in the
spirit and truth, and Christ is the Truth; and the Apostle who was a Minister,
preached Christ in people; and was not he the Lord that bought them, Col. 1.
27. and this thou scoffest at, because, we confess it, and enviously calls it a
Natural light.

And whereas thou say, It has been cleared, that this Light in every man is
but the spirit of man, and the Law written in the heart.

Ans. How dare thou say, that Christ the Light, that does enlighten every man
that comes into the World, which John came to bear witness of, is a Natural
light, then John came to bear witness to a Natural light; and the spirit of a
Natural man which knows not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. and this Natural
light and spirit of man is the Law, written in the heart, this is contradiction
to the Scripture, which says, the Law is Spiritual.

And whereas thou say, Christ came to deliver from the terror and
condemnation of this Law written in the heart; which thou calls natural light,
and spirit of man.

Ans. Does Nature terrify, and condemn Nature? The Jews Law was written in
Tables of Stone; the new Law or Covenant is written in the hearts, and Christ
did not come to redeem from the latter, but from under the Jews Law; and we
never called the Natural Light, the Created light, the Natural man, Christ, nor
worshipped it, but thou must write to them that does so; yet thou art slack
enough to do that I believe; but it is Christ the light that does enlighten
every man that comes into the World; that is it thou calls, a fictious Christ,
and an Idol, if thou would speak plainly; who is given for a Covenant, a light
to the Gentiles, and the Glory of Israel; whom we witness, and have the
Testimony of, Luke 2. 32,

And whereas thou speaks, of denying the true Jesus Emanuel, God and man in
union, whom his own person without us, not ours, has by one offering once for
ever wrought eternal Redemption for us, and is the alone object of Faith.

Ans. Thou who have denied Christ the light, that does enlighten every man,
that through him all might believe, Joh. 1. 8. 12. thou have denied the true
Jesus, God and Man in Union, the Emanuel, and the one offering which perfecteth
for ever, them that are Sanctified, Hob. 10. So thou have denied thy Salvation,
and the object of Faith, and Christ's Doctrine, which says, we must believe in
the Light, etc.

And whereas thou say, It will follow that whosoever affirms and teaches
that the Light in every man is Christ, is a Deceiver and an Antichrist, 2 John
7.

Ans. Here thou have perverted, wronged and wrested the Scripture to thy own
destruction; for the Scripture says, Whosoever confesses not, but denies
Christ come in the flesh, that is the Antichrist, the Deceiver: and does not
say, that Christ the Light that does enlighten every man that comes into the
World, is an Antichrist and Deceiver; but here Priest Wiggan has called John
an Antichrist and Deceiver, who came for a witness, to bear witness of the true
Light that lightens every man that comes into the world; and I am the Light,
said Christ, believe in the Light, I am come a light into the world, Joh. 8.
12. and they that did believe in the light had fellowship in it, and the light
that shone in their hearts, gave them the knowledge of the Glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 1 Ioh. 1. and so thou have proved thy self to
be an Antichrist, and does deny Christ come in the flesh; who enlightens every
man that comes into the world; and thou calls the true light of Christ, which
the Saints and we walk in, the Natural man's spirit, and a Created light, and a
Natural light.

As to thy Objection which is against John, who says, this is the true light
that enlightens every man that comes into the World: Would John have bid them
believe in it, except it had been Christ, Joh. 1. 7, 8, 9. and this is an
invincible proof against thy assertion, and all the people thou do deceive;
and John was a true Witness, but thou art a false; and John bore a true witness
to the Light, but thou bears false witness against the light; and so thou turns
people from light to darkness; and the true Apostle turned them from darkness
to the light, Acts 2. 6.

And whereas thou say, We write in several Books, as may be seen, this light
Christ is God, the Lord God, and the Lamb, the Object of Faith; and this true
Light which is Christ, enlightens not some, but every man coming into the
World; and therefore, it must needs be saving, and that this light can be meant
for no other then of Christ, they further allege John 3. 12. and 12. 35, 36.
where it is plainly expressed that Christ is the Light.

Answ. In this thou have manifested thy ignorance of the Scriptures, and of the
Saints Testimony; and thou scoffs, because we say, Christ has not enlightened
some, but all, and so thou art he that makes Sects amongst the people, in
saying, he does not enlighten them all; thou may as well say, his love was not
to all, in giving his Son for all; and we say, Christ the light is the object
of Faith, the true light that enlightens every man that comes into the world,
by whom the world was made; and this is our Testimony to all men, for the Lord;
and Christ is the light, and the Lamb, and God is light: And this is our
Message which we have heard of him, that God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all; and Christ and God will dwell in man; whom we witness, Glory
to him for ever, through which we see over thee, who has long deceived some of
us.

Whereas thou say, We have perverted many Scriptures; That is false, for we
speak them as they are, but it is manifest thou have per verted many, and
quoted many false; and many people that does not know thy subtle devices, but
takes all things for granted, without any trial, such thou may deceive; for thy
Book manifests it self sufficiently, if it had not been answered; but only for
the sake of the simple, which thou keeps under thee in thy error and delusion,
that they might see thee, and come from under thy snare; for we are satisfied
as to our selves; for thy work is only to keep people in darkness from the
light; and we are come from under thy Captivity, and see thy subtlety and
snares, and know what thou can say, and long enough since saw thy confusion.

And thou say, when it is said, that was the true light which enlighteneth
every man that comes into the World, It must be considered, first, who this
true Light is; secondly, how he does enlighten every man that comes into the
World: for first, the Scriptures do witness that this true Light is the word
God, by whom the World was made; thus it is said, Joh. 11. In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was God; all things was made by him, that is, by the
Word God: John was sent to bear witness of the Light, that is, of the word God,
that was the true Light, that is, the word God; even he by whom the World was
made, he was in the World, and the World knew him not, which was the Creator
and former of all things.

Ans. In this you may see how he has perverted the Scriptures, and overthrown
his Assertion, and his former Writings in his Books; for he says, that the
light which lighteneth every man that comes into the World, which John bore
Testimony of, is the word God, by which all things was made and created, which
men was to believe in, this was not a saving light says he, though it be
Divine; and does he not call it a Created light, a Natural light, and the
spirit of a Natural Man, and now it is God, and not saving; for the Scripture
says, the Word was with God, Joh. 1. and this speaks of Christ, and Christ's
Name is called, the Word of God, Rev. 19 and 13. and the Word was with God;
(that thou have left out,) and this Word became Flesh. So he goes about to
prove that Christ was not the Word with the Father before the World began,
which is contrary to the Scripture, which says, I was with him in the
beginning, as Solomon says; and Christ says, Glorify thou me with the same
Glory which I had with thee before the World was, Joh. 17.

And again thou say, The Word God thus considered, is the true light, the
fountain, and original of all lights, according to the Scripture, 1 John 1. 5.
God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; this is he in whom was life,
and the life was the light of men, in whom we live, move, and have our being,
we are his offspring, and he is the fountain both of light and life, to all
beings according to their capacities, as their Creator; and thus we may see
what this true light is, the word God.

Answ. And yet thou say before, this was not saving, this true Light, this
word God, how dark art thou, is not Christ called God, and his Name the Word of
God, Emanual God with us, and 2 Pet. 3. 7. the Heavens and the Earth, which are
now by the same Word, are kept in store, etc. And Heb. 11. 3. Through faith we
understand, that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God, etc. And Christ is
the Light and Life of Men, and not saving, and is not he saving, and is not he
spiritual and saving, whom all has a being in, and moving in; did thou not
call him before a natural Light and a created Light, and a natural Man's spirit,
and would prove it out of Cor. 2. and now it is God, and Creator, and not
Christ, contrary to the Scripture, which says, he is the light of the World,
and in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and his name is
called the Word of God; and so people may see how thou would divide God and
Christ with thy dark wisdom.

And thou say 2ly. How does he enlighten every man that comes into the world;
and say in another place, the word God, or God the word, as Creator of all
things does enlighten every man that comes into the World, by setting up in
every man a spirit and Law in his heart, by which he lives, which is called the
Candle of the Lord, Prove. 20. 27 of which Spirit and law I have spoken before.

Ans. This light which thou call the Law and Spirit of a Natural Man, and a
Created light; this thou have not proved before, as thou say, but its
perverted before; for by this thy proof John came to bear witness of a Natural
light, and of a Natural man's spirit, which knows not the things of God; and by
that John bid people believe in this; so this is thy dark wisdom, and like unto
thy Preaching, and it is no wonder people forsakes thee, and that thou should
be unestablished, thou needst not be offended for babes seeing thee, for thou
caust not be hid; for John came to bear witness of the true light Christ, and
not of a natural Created light, as thou imagines; but of him the Prophets
testified of, he that was preferred before John, Joh. 1. 3. the light of the
Gentiles, and the Glory of his people Israel; and thou may see in the 15. verse.
which proves, and 16, 17. that was the Christ; John bore witness of him, and
cried saying, this was he of whom I speak, He that comes after me, is
preferred before me; and called Christ, the Lamb of God that took away the sins
of the World; and this Light by which all things was made and Created, He came
unto his own, and they received him not; some hated the Light, and stopped their
ears, and shut their eyes, and would not see, lest they should be converted;
(as thou do) But to as many as received him, he gave power to become the Sons
of God; them that believed in his Name, and his name is the Word of God, Rev.
19. And John saw, and bore Record that this Light was the Son of God, Joh. 1.
12, 15, 34. So, this is an unfaithful and untrue account of the Light which
thou have given of the true Light, Christ, that does enlighten every man, John
1. 9.

And whereas thou say, It may be further observed that Christ is not once
named in all, or any of the first nine Verses of the first of John, but only
the Word.

Answ. See how ignorant this man is of the Scriptures, for it says, the Word
was with God; Mark that; and does thou deny this to be Christ, whose Name is
called, the Word of God, Rev. 19. Heb. 1. how God has spoken in these last
days unto us, by his Son, by whom the World was made: And so here again, he
would make a difference betwixt Christ and God, and because the word Christ is
not there, see how he shuffles, and how ignorant he is; for, Christ is called,
the Light, Life, Truth, and Word, etc. and Christ is called, the Lamb of God,
Joh. 1. and John does expressly say, That he is the Light of the World, Joh. 8.
and does enlighten every man that comes into the World, which true Light John
bore witness of, that all through him might believe: And thou has denied Christ
to be the Word, who is the Light of the World, and does enlighten every man
that comes into the World: There is three that bears Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; so thou have denied this Record in
Heaven, who say, the Word is not Christ, who was with the Father; spoken of
in John, the Word was with God; and 1. John 552. We are in him that is true,
in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God, and Eternal Life.

And so thou goes about to make people believe Christ is not God; and we know
the Word was made Flesh, and dwells in Men; which thou say, he Tabernacled
amongst Men, as though he did not now; which we must tell thee he does now, by
the light which shines in their hearts, Cor. 2. 4.

And whereas thou say, Christ the word being imbodied in Flesh, he is
thenceforth called Christ the Lord, or the Lords Christ, and no otherwise does
he bear that Name, but as he is the word made Flesh, to be seen and believed
on, it is not the word alone, nor the flesh alone, but the word and flesh in
union, that is called Christ; and is a Light to lighten the Gentiles, till then
there was no such thing as a Christ, or a Light to the Gentiles, but only in a
promise.

Ans. Whereas thou say, there was no such thing as a Christ, till he was
imbodied in flesh, nor light to the Gentiles, but only in a promise. Then what
was that Light which let Nebuchadnezzar see the Stone cut out of the Mountain
without hands; and let Job see his Redeemer? and does not Stephen say that was
Christ they thrust from them, and turned back again in their hearts into Egypt?
Acts 7. And was not that Christ the Word which Moses spoke of to the Children
of Israel, that they should hear, and need not say, who shall ascend, or who
shall descend? and did not the Apostle say, that was Christ, in Romans 10. And
this the Righteousness of Faith that Moses spoke of to the Children, Deuteronomy. 30.
12. the Word was in their hearts and mouths; and does not David call him the
Anointed? as in Psalm. 2. 2. and is not the Anointed Christ? And Daniel calls
him Messiah, which is Christ, Dan. 9. and saw him before he came, and is not
the Word, Christ; which is according to the Law and Testimony, Isa. 8. And how
was he a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World? and is it not said in
Genesis 3. 15. the seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents heads; and is not
the Seed Christ, Gal. 3. 16. and Christ said, Before Abraham was I am; and thus
says the Lord to his Anointed to Cyrus whose right hand I have upholden to
subdue Nations before him. And what thinks thou by this, what is Anointed? is
Christ no where spoken of before he was imbodied in Flesh? and we believe he
was made flesh, and know it, and are of his flesh according to the Scripture;
and we do know the Union of Christ, and the Word that was made flesh; but thou
believes not in this Christ, the Word which was made flesh, who is the Light of
the Gentiles, and the Glory of Israel; and he could not be Christ without God,
who is manifest in the Flesh, which is a mystery to thee; and we know that
Christ through the Gospel has brought life, and immortality to light, And the
Son of God is come. And what do thou talk of Grace, and denies his Light? And
what do thou talk of the love which was in the Fathers bosom? for thou who
denies him, who is the Light of the world, and that do not believe in him
[the light] how should thou have Everlasting life, but perish in thy
gainsaying?

And thou say, That Christ did not come to enlighten every man that comes
into the world, but only those that believe on him, and brings Ioh. 3. and 19.
and 8. 12.

Ans. This is thy saying, and not John's, thou have wronged those Scriptures,
for none of them does say that Christ did not come to enlighten every man that
comes into the world, but only those that believe, thou have not proved this by
the Scriptures, though thou have perverted many: for John 1. said he was the
true light that lights every man that comes into the world; And thou say,
but only those that believe: And Christ says, I am the light of the World, and
believe in the light, And Ioh. 3. 19. 8. 12. does not say there, he has only
enlightened some, but all good and bad, such as hate the light and would not
come to it, lest the light should reprove them whose deeds be evil, this is thy
condition; And the Condemnation is because that light is come into the world,
and men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds be evil, but he
that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be manifest, that they
are wrought in God; but thou art not come to the light, whose deeds be evil,
and so manifests that they are not wrought in God, but fights against it.

And whereas thou speaks, The word made flesh is he that was promised to be a
Covenant to the people, and a Light to the Gentiles, who brings into the world
a Life and Light far exceeding the Light that was set up in every man that
comes into the world, by the word Creator.

Answ. This word made flesh, and Covenant of Light, which the Prophets gave
testimony of, as in the 1 of John, thou denies, And in Joh. 8. and Luke 2. A
Light to lighten the Gentiles, And this was Christ, for John says, he was not
the Light, but came to bear witness of the Light, that was the true Light, that
lights every man that comes into the World. And this is above thy natural
Light, and created Light, and made Light) And does give life; And do thou not
mean the Scripture, when thou speaks of the word Creator? For we have good
reason to suspect thee, seeing thou said to me (Thomas Curwen, and to William
Wilson) in thy Chamber, That the Scriptures were the Author of thy Faith; for
the rest of thy Generation used to tell us, That the Scriptures was the word,
and the Light of the Creator, is a Natural and a created Light, and the Spirit
of a natural man (that knows the things of God) And this is the Light that John
came to bear witness of, say thou.

And this thy miserable darkness, in saying John came to bear witness of a
created and natural Light, and Spirit of a man, and a natural man's Conscience,
That he should be sent of God, to bear this witness; For as many as received
him, (this light which did enlighten them) became the Sons of God, but they
that hated this light, it became their Condemnation Joh. 3. Joh. 1. 12. And
thou, nor none will never receive Life nor Sonship, but as they receive the
Light which thou hates, and makes such outrage against, but that Light which
John bore witness of, which thou bears witness against, has ripped off thy
covering, and manifested thy deeds, and turned thy inside out: And the Light is
a stumbling block to thee, and a Rock of offense, for it seems, it has offended
thee, an thou that would not have the Light, will not have the Son, and so has
denied thy self of Life, yet thou will bow the knee, and spit in his face, and
say, is not this the Carpenters Son, the natural Light, like the Jews: And
where does the Scripture say (which thou have perverted) that John came to bear
witness of the Light, the Word, Creator, and not of Christ the Ligh the Word;
Make this good, by plain Scripture, without thy immaginations, and before they
be born again, they must believe in the Light, John the 12th.

And so men are in Death and Darkness, and hates the Light as thou do, and
remains in the Natural State, while they hate the Light, for that which makes
manifest is the Light, Ioh. 3. Ephesians. 5. 13.

And thou say, The neglect of this distinction of the word Creator, and the
Word made Flesh (which is so plainly laid down in the Scripture as has been
showed) is the ground of the great mistake of many, who not considering what is
testified of the word as Creator, do confound that light which is set up by
him, (as such) in every man, with that Light which he gives as he is the word
made flesh, and so call the light saving, which is but Natural, springing up
with him in his Creation; yea, hence they call that Light, Christ, which is but
the Law written in the heart, whereas Christ is the Lawgiver, and so cannot be
the Law.

Ans. Here thou holds forth two Words, and was it not the word that became
flesh? and does not John, Revel. 19. say, that he is the Alpha and Omega, and
his Name is called the Word of God? so here is one word, but thou has not
found another word, and so to make two words; and here thou goes about to
divide Christ, when the Scripture says, I and my Father are one, Joh. 17. And
there is three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, Word, and Holy Ghost,
and these Three are one; (he does not say two words,) Joh. 5. 7. And is not the
New Covenant Christ, the Law in the heart, Hob. 8. 9, 10, 11. And it is false,
for we do not call the Natural Light springing up with man in his Creation
saving; but we say, Christ is the Light and Salvation to the ends of the Earth.

And the light which is Natural, that comes from the word Creator, by which
they may know the Eternal power and Godhead, as thou say before, by which
they may seek and feel after God, and brings Cor. 2. which says, The Natural
man does not know nor perceive the things of God.

Was there ever such confusion as this? for they that had that which let them
see the Eternal Power and Godhead, was by that which might be known of God,
which was manifest in them; for that which brings people to know the Eternal
Power and Godhead, and to feel and seek after him, and to know much of the
Creator, is not a Natural light, as thou say does, but it is a Spiritual
Light; and it is thou that confounds thy self with thy own imaginations, and
distinctions, and wrongs and abuses the Scriptures, and is not fit to take them
into thy mouth; for thou have made a trade of them too long, and the Light
Christ Jesus, who ends the Law. And where does the Scripture speak of a Natural
light, and a Created Light, from the word Creator, springing up with people in
their Creation? for a Natural light makes him but a Natural man still, by which
he cannot know much of his Creator, who is Spiritual as thou say, nor seek
and feel after God, nor know his Eternal power and Godhead, For the natural man
perceives not the things of God, but they are foolishness to him, for they are
spiritually discerned; but it is Christ the true light which John came to bear
witness of (which thou calls natural) which men are to believe in, so thou
leads people from the true light Christ Jesus, and so to hate Christ; And so
thy self and them both into Condemnation, Ioh. 3. And the light will be thy
condemnation, fight against it as long as thou will, for it is the Saints
Armor; For, Put on the Armor of light, says the Apostle to the Saints.

And whereas thou writes to thy people to keep them from the Light Christ
Jesus, which light thou art afraid of coming to, but many is come to it: And
further thou tells thy people of trembling, nay they are far off that; thou and
thy people are rather in scorn against the Light of Christ, and calls it
natural: And whereas thou say, How destructive and pernicious will the light
of Christ which we speak of (and John bore testimony of) prove to precious
souls; And thou say, Admit this grand lie for the Corner stone, and the whole
superstructure will consist of lies.

Answ. This is thy Envy against Christ the Light, and foundation which destroys
the Liar and Lies, for there is no lie of the Truth; And thy foundation
consists of nothing but lies against the truth, for thou and thy Generation of
Priests, has long prophesied falsely against Christ our Rock and Foundation; and
that we should fall, until you be all tumbled down your selves: And many of
your Merchants are turned Bankrupts; Oh that thou were but in Authority, thou
would show other weapons against them that walks in the light of Christ! But
God has broken thy horn, and Truth remains the same as ever, and shines over
all your heads, Glory to the Lord God for ever.

And thou say, Open this as the first door of entrance (as they do) and it
leads into a Babell of Confusion and Errors, no sooner is a man entered in at
this deadly Gate, but he is in the City Tohn where first (if his eyes be
anointed with Eye Salve by the true Jesus) he may behold this Image of
Jealousy, viz. the light that is in every man that comes into the world.

Answ. Thou calls the Light of Christ, which John came to bear witness and
testimony of, an Image of Jealousy, that leads into the City Tohu, and into a
Babell of Confusion, etc. What does John come to bear testimony of such a light
as this is, that people was to believe in as he says? Does the Scripture speak
any such words in John 1. 9. What railing expressions is here against the true
Christ Jesus, who enlightens the Gentiles, and the Glory of Israel. This is
just the Jews, who said, He had a Devil: Might not Margaret Fell justly call
thee a Blasphemer? And what do thou talk of the true Jesus, and Eye salve,
when thou deniest him the true light who is the door Ioh. 10. But you are all
seen who deny the light to be gone into Tohu and confusion, and the least in
the light of Jesus, sees your Images of Jealousies fall down one after another.
And you are also fallen with them in darkness, who denies the light with the
earthly wisdom.

And whereas thou say, Set up and worshipped in prayers and praises, all the
Honor and Attributes due to the true Redeemer alone, being ascribed to it,
which is an Idolatry so much worse than that of Ieroboams and the Papists, by
how much it is the more Mysterious, and in show the more spiritual, and so less
diseernable, whence it comes to pass, that multitudes are ensnared by it,
according to that in 2 Pet. 2. 2 Many shall follow their pernicious ways; The
falling down to this Image, is that whereby every particular Person is
matriculated or Registered into their Society of Friends; for now, and not
before (as they say) he has received the truth, and notwithstanding many
defects, is accepted as a friend.

Ans. Here thou have manifested thy lies, Envy and Malice, not only against
us, but against Christ the light, and the Prophets and Apostles testimony, for
it is God we worship in the Spirit, and in the Truth; And God is well pleased
with us in him (Christ) And they that followed Christ the light, was his
Friends; And so we which believe in the light, and walk in the light, are
children of the light: And because many is come to walk in the light, and have
fellowship in it, this makes thee to rage against us and our fellowship in the
light, and in it one with another; And what are the defects thou slanders our
Friends withal? for we can call all people Friends, but they that be in the
truth are friends in the truth, [Christ] who is the Redeemer; And thus to pray
to Christ, thou say is an Idolatry, and worse than that of Ieroboams, and of
the Pepists. Mind the spite and envy, and malice of this man, and what
mischief he utters forth against the Light of Jesus, and them that pray in the
light, and in the spirit to Christ and God, as the Saints did; and this is
become an Idolatry with I. VV. worse then that of Ieroboams and the Papists;
and he says this leads people into pernicious ways, but that is false, and an
error; for Christ the Light leads none into pernicious ways, but thou art deep
in them; who causes the way of Truth to be evil spoken of; and speaks evil of
the right way, and makes lies thy Refuge; and art compassed with a Cloud of
Error, fighting against the Lord and the Lamb, but he will have the victory;
for we matter not what thou can speak against us, but when thou speaks against
the Lord we are bold, and valient, to declare against such, who art promoting
thy permitious ways against Christ the Light, the way, who is a mystery to
thee, and whom thou say is a pernicious way, because many goes in at it; was
there ever such error uttered? but it will fall upon thy self; and this makes
thee to rage because Babylon is fallen, and she is loosing some of her
Children: And because we praise God in the Truth, and will not follow the
Priests, but follows Christ the Light, and honors the Lamb; this thou calls
an Idol, and worse then that of Jeroboams, etc. And as for Papists, do thou
not know that two Baptist Preachers in Essex are turned Papists, who were
Railing against the Light of Christ as thou do, who art fallen in the dark,
that the very words in the Common Prayer may judge thee, who in thy pride looks
to be far above that.

Before thou say, that the Light would lead people to see much of their
Creator, and of his Eternal Power and Godhead, and bring people to seek and
feel after God. And now thou say, it is an Idol and an Image of jealousy,
and worse then that of Jeroboams and the Papists, and leads into pernicious
ways, and into the City Tohu, and into a Babel of confusion and errors: How
now John, thou have sure forgotten thy former words, was there ever the like
confusion heard? it could not be believed that ever such wickedness had ever
been in a man covered under a feigned Humility.

And whereas thou say, We Pray and Sing, and teach all, or many together,
with loud voices contrary to 1 Cor. 14. 33, 40.

Ans. Thou makes no shame of lying, and to publish them abroad to villifie the
Truth, for all people that knows us, knows thou art a liar; for neither thou
nor any has heard us speak, or pray, all together in words with loud voices;
neither has any of us in our Meetings been heard speak seldom, but one by one;
but if others have praised the Lord when they heard others speak, and sung
praises to the Lord God; (which thing torments thee,) and if others have lifted
up their voices to the Lord God when others have been praying together, showing
the lively power of the Lord God amongst us; which torments the deadness of thy
Assembly, and makes thee thus rage, for in the 1 Cor. 14. they might speak two
or three, and the rest might judge, and this is decent Order; but it is
disorder in thy dark Assembly; thou would say 24. Elders that fell down
together and praised the Lord was a confusion, Rev. 4. and make a joyful
noise, as David says often; but these Corinthians were in a confusion about
their Bread and Wine, as thou and thy Priests are; but thou art like to the
Jews at Pentecost that said, the Apostles were drunk. And Acts 24. in a
Meeting when they lifted up their voices with one accord, and said, Thou art
worthy Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who has made the Heavens and the Earth,
Sea, and all things that is in them: but this thou will sure say was confusion,

And whereas thou say, we call our selves a Meeting, not a Church, and the
particular Members, Friends, not Brethren and Sisters:

Ans. Here thou has manifested thy self to beignorant of the Scriptures, Isa.
1. 13. which calls the Assemblies of the Church, a Solemn Meeting; and the Lord
gives it the name of a Solemn Meeting; the Church was met together, and the
Brethren met with the Apostles, Acts and Amos 4. 12. prepare to meet thy God;
and they met with Jesus crying Hosanah, with Palm Trees and Branches in their
hands, Joh. 12. 13. and thou would say this was a confused Multitude. And
further, thy ignorance is manifested in the Scriptures, because we call one
another Friends, thou art troubled, Acts 29. 3. Paul had liberty to go see his
Friends, And Christ says, ye are my Friends, and I have called you Friends,
Joh. 3. Epist. ver. 14. our Friends salute, and greet the Friends; and so
because we say Friends, and Meeting; this is to set forth a new Jesus thou
maliciously says; but thou art a manifest liar, both by our words and
Writings; for, we call our Meetings, Churches, and our Friends, Brethren and
Sisters; and so here it will be seen, that we do not characterize our selves by
new Names, which thou have falsely, and maliciously charged upon us; But, thou
have given thy self up to forge lies, and work wickedness; for no other Jesus
but him, who is the same to day, yesterday, and for ever, do we own; who is the
Light of the World, and enlightens every man that comes into the World, which
has been proved before; whom John was sent of God to bear witness of, that all
through him might believe; and as many as receives him he gives power to become
the Sons of God; which thou blasphemously calls Christ the Light an Idol, and
Natural light.

And whereas thou say, We cannot find the Names or Offices of Pastor, Elder,
Deacon, Teacher, which Christ set in his Church.

Ans. Here the very common people will witness against thee that thou lie;
for the work shows it by the care and order that nothing is lacking; for we
have more in our Church then the Names of those Offices, we have the fruits of
them, for nothing is wanting amongst us; we have the Great Bishop, and are
taught of God, and do know the Lord from the greatest to the least, Heb. 8. But
what is become of your Teachers and Pastors, and Deacons, who made such a noise
against us a few years ago, who had the Name but out of the life and power.

And whereas thou say, We do not allege Scripture for our Doctrine for
proof, but Women speak in our Meetings.

Here again thou adds lies, to lies, and delights in lies, Psalm. 62. 4. and art
a deceitful witness speaking lies, Prove. 14. 25. and have bent thy tongue like
a Bow for lies, Jer. 6. and so speaking lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 14. for we
had never meeting nor discourse with people, but we proved our Doctrine by
Scripture; and at the last dispute thou had Scripture brought to prove the
truth against thee; and out of Peter and Jade, proved thee to be the man that
denied the Lord that bought thee.

And as for thy denying Women's speaking, thon has herein manifested thy
ignorance of the Scripture; for Christ seat Mary Magdalen first to declare his
Resurrection unto his Disciples, Mark 16. and that the Daughter of Phanitel
she declared of Christ to all that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem. Luke 2.
And. Phebe a Servant of the Church; which in some Translations is a Pastor; And
Priscilla and Aquilla Instructor's; and Philip had four Daughters Prophesied;
And women were Laborers with the Apostle in the Gospel, Read Acts and Romans
16. Women prophesied 1 Cor. 11. And Acts 2. and Joel 2. Sons and Daughters
prophecy.

And thus John Wiggan can make no distinction between those women that are
forbibden to speak, and those who are encouraged and commended; his envy has
so blinded him, but limits the holy one, that his folly might be manifest to
all men, for Christ in the male and female was not to be limited, nor prophesye
to be despised, 1 These. 5. but thou have manifested thy self to be contrary to
Christ and his Ministers, and so proved thy self to be a false Minister, and
one of the false Teachers, that puts no difference between the precious and the
vile, and a walker in lies, Jer. 23. And so it is thou that teach lies in
the name of the Lord; And was Mary Magdalen a Jezabel, and Priscilla, Phebe
Anna, the rest of the Women the Apostle forbids speaking as in Tim. etc. How
ignorantly do thou apply the scripture, and wickedly, but this Manifests thy
Judgment of them, but thou art more ignorant than some of the Baptists, for
some of the Baptists would allow women to speak, but thy envy has eaten out
thy sight, and the least of our Disciples sees thee to make lies thy refuge,
and who lives in the truth sees thee.

And whereas thou say, We say the Scriptures are not a rule of Faith and
Conversation to walk by, hence it is that Christ's Water Baptism, and Supper,
and his Censures are rejected.

Ans. If the Scripture be thy rule for thy life and Conversation, then why do
not thou obey it? For if the Scripture be thy rule, then thou must burn
offerings, and sacrifices; and if but part of it be thy Rule; why did not
thou set down what part it is? But we say Christ is our rule (which does also
the Scriptures) Math. 2. 6. Where it is said he shall rule the people, and he
is the author and finisher of our Faith. And give us that Scripture that says,
the Scripture is the Author of man's Faith, and man's rule; And as for thy Bread
and wine and outward washings, thou know little more than that, nor hardly
that, for if thou did, thou would have answered my queries, but thou
dare not confess to the power the Apostle was in, And we look at things that
be Eternal, 2. Cor. 4. And not at the things which are seen; And such as are
risen with Christ, seek those things that be above, Col. 3. And as for the
outward things, we know them where they be, and do not deny nothing in its
place, but our life is in Christ; but thou shelters thy self in outward things,
to keep alive in thy old nature, out of the Baptism into the Death of Christ,
Rom 6. 3. And as for thy Censures; you have censured one another, till you are
broken to pieces; And where does the Scripture speak of Christ's Censures; And
Christ being within, he is the Rule and Ruler, and King, (this is Scripture)
within the Saints, 1 Col. 27. Christ in you, 2 Cor. 4. Can thou not see this
Scripture within, but thou have made a trade of them so long, that thy gain
has blinded thee, and was not all the Scriptures given forth from the Spirit
of God within, by inspiration of the Spirit, 2 Timothy 3. and is not the new
Covenant, the Law written in the heart, the Scripture within, Heb. 8. Jer. 31,
30. and this Scripture within, thou makes a mock and scoff at.

And the same Gospel as ever was, the power of God we own, and are not ashamed
of Romans 1. 16. Which Gospel of Christ is the power of God to Salvation, And
Christ says, the spirit of truth should lead them into all truth; And was not
that their Rule, and if the Scripture be the Rule, what was the guide into the
Rule to know the things of God, for thou say the Natural man know not the
things of God, for they are spiritually discerned; then the Spirit must be the
Rule; and they that are the sons of God are led by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.
and Joh. 14. And is not the Law written in the heart, the perfect Law of
liberty, the Law of Love, the Law of faith in the heart; do not thou see this
is a Scripture Jam. 5. 25. Heb. 8. Romans 3. 17. And is not this faith within to
be obeyed, Romans 10. do thou not here manifest thy darkness to all people, and
is not this faith held in a pure Conscience, which the just lives by, 1 Timothy 1.
19. Thou might be ashamed to scoff at the practice of the Saints, and at the
Scriptures; but in thy dead faith thou calls Light darkness, and darkness
light, as in Isay: Who makes such an outrage against the Light, because we say
the light is in the heart, and the Spirit of God to guide us, is within,
according to Scripture which speaks of the Rule of Faith, Let Christ Rule in
your hearts by faith. Thou have put him out of his place, and preferred the
Scripture before him: And what Rule had Abraham and the Saints in the old world
before the Scripture was written.

And whereas thou speaks falsely, accusing and speaking untruths, and
persecuting with the tongue and Acts of injustice, and thou says this we do in
obedience to God, and to our Guide.

Ans. Thus thou further vents thy lies and malice; for, the Lord God who is
pure, and Christ our Light leads us to no such thing but we speaking truth to
thee, and tells thee what thou art without flattery; therefore, makes thou thy
complaint of persecution with the Tongue; but, thou have the persecuting
tongue; and when thou proves thy other slanders against us, then may thou have
a further Answer, for we own no injustice.

And whereas thou say, we say the Light in every man is the object of faith,
and a common sufficient Light, that it is Salvation to all that obey it, and
that we teach free Will, etc.

Ans. Here again thou adds lie to lie, perverting our words as thou do the
Scriptures, and speaking thy own, for we say Christ is the Light of the World,
and his Grace is sufficient for all, and has appeared to all men, Tit. 2. and
believe in the Light, says Christ, Joh. 1. 8, 12. and Christ the Light is the
Author of faith, and we say it is not he that wills or runs, but that God shows
mercy, which none is to abuse.

And whereas thou say, We teach and set up an inherent legal Righteousness,
denying the imputed Righteousness of Christ wrought in his own person without
us; that Christ fulfilling the Law in us, or his spirit, mortifying, or
sanctifying, and fulfilling the Law in us, is Justification; therefore, no
coming of Christ but that within, and so deny the 2d. coming of Christ,
contrary to Scripture, and these and many more Arminian, Popish and long since
profligated errors is laid upon their sandy foundation.

Ans. Here thou adds more lies, for Christ's second coming we do not deny, and
he the Righteousness of God we own, and never denied, and it is a false slander
of thee to say otherwise; and our foundation is Christ, which thou wickedly
calls Sandy, Isai. 28. who is a tried stone, 2 Timothy 2. and the legal
Righteousness is thy own, its none of ours, 1 Cor. 1. and the Righteousness of
Faith which says the word is nigh thee in thy heart, and in thy mouth, we own;
which thou enviously calls an inherent legal Righteousness, Romans 10. And that
which Christ wrought and did in is own person, and suffered without the Gates
of Jerusalem for Mankind we own, and never denied which thou maliciously
slanders us with the contrary, and he is revealed within us, and that makes
thee to rage; and all our Books which thou speaks of, are according to the
Scripturea of Truth, and to Christ's and the Apostles Doctrine; but thy
principles are according to the old errors thou speaks of.

But thou say thou have done with our Principles, thou needs not enlarge upon
our Hay, Wood, and Stubble, being assured the removing of our Foundation, which
thou say thou have done, will bring down our whole building.

Ans. We are Gods building, 1 Cor. 3. And we have a building of God, Ephesians. 2,
and Christ is our Foundation, which remains and stands sure, 2 Timothy And we are
built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ himself being
the head Corner stone, the Lord has laid our foundation, and no other
foundation can any man lay, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12. Zach. 8. 12. Ephesians. 2. 2. Tim. 2.
And as for hay, wood, and stuble, it is thy own, and will be burnt up, who has
denied Christ the Light, the foundation; and called him a natural, and created
Light, and Idol; but thy foundation and building is down together, it is hard to
know where it stood; And where are all your Builders and Daubers; and now after
all thy slanders and raylings, thou would make people believe thou love our
persons, And when thou have uttered all thy lies and malice, thou in hypocrisy
and feigned humility, would make people believe thou pittiest us; But we know
what thy pity is; But we are come to the true Jesus, who takes pity of our
souls; though thou long deceived many of us; I believe that few people would
hardly have believed that there had been so much poison and venom in thee, and
thou have denied Christ, the Light, the way, truth and life, and calls him
natural and created, and so art in the error thou speaks of, and thy bowels is
the belly of Hell, Jonah. 2. And what have thou to do to take the Lords name in
thy mouth, and hates to be reformed; But thou art one of them that uses thy
Tongue, saying; Thus says the Lord, when he never spoke to thee, Jeremiah 23

Thou say, Thou have born thy Testimony against us, in that which appears in
us, against the mystery of Christ crucified.

Ans. Christ Jesus which was crucified, which thou slanderously say we deny;
but him we own, it is thou that denies him to be crucified, in denying his
Light, for we preach Christ crucified, 1 Cor, 1. 23 2. Cor. 2. And him that the
Jews crucified, who were in the same envious Spirit with thee, against the
light, Jo. 1. Mat. 20. 19. and Mark 15. 13. Luke 23. 23. Rev. 11. 8. we are
crucified with Christ, Gall. 2. 20.

And if thou had written fewer errors, it had been better for thee; but
praised be the Lord God, thy deeds are brought to light and this is a poor
shift for thee to come off so, after thou have laid down thy assertions and
cannot maintain them, nor can not make them good; for our questions was
learned questions and tended not to strife, and yet stands on thy head
unanswered; and thou and all which thou have declared, has been against God
and Christ, so that thou art one that bears false witness against him, not for
him: And thou have manifested the error of thy judgment, for thy understanding
is error, Psalm. 19. Mat. 22. 22. 1 Timothy 6. 10. and that which thou have done
has been against Christ the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; and thy
Commendation of us is reviling, and slandering, for it is manifest thou have a
double tongue unbridled, Jam. 1. Tim. 3. 8. and with thy tongue thou thinks to
prevail, Psalm. 12. but a lying tongue, (Prove. 12. 19.) is but for a moment, and
he that uses slanders is a fool, Prove. 10. 18. but we cannot walk with
slanderers, Jer. 6. 20.

And thou say, Our principle has had its growth and advantage from these
means; from the pride, covetousness, formality, idleness, and cruelty, corrupt
oustomes, Idolatry, superstition of Parish Priests, and the generality of their
Hearers.

Ans. And John Wiggan Trencher Chaplain shall be put in amongst them: And thus,
when you were in your wickedness as thou speaks of before, and mocked God with
your Religion, as the end of it has manifested it self, God has overturned
it, and stained your glory, and your pride, which went before your destruction,
Prove. 16. 18. then the Lord had compassion upon us in your day, when no eye
pitied us; and revealed his Son in us, who is our Shepherd and leader, and
Salvation, Ezekiel: And thou with the rest Railed against us in your idleness
and pride, and carnality; and who was mader against Truth then your separated
Congregations in railing against the Light and Spiritual Teaching; and who were
taught of God, and Christ, and followed him, and would not follow your
pernicious ways; and when we prophesied to you of your downfall, both in your
Towns and Cities, and Army, you abused us, prisoned us, and persecuted us;
though all the things is come to pass upon you which we then spoke, and yet
thou in thy envy and malice art railing against the Truth, the Light, Christ,
that it should spread, but thou had rather the evils before mentioned should
spread, Idleness and Pride, etc.

And our Testimony was born against your pride and hypocrisy, in the truth,
and spirit, and power of Jesus, against all your false Worships, and Churches,
and Teachers, which God has thrown down according to our Testimony; and you
were found treacherous to your own Principles in all things; for we faithfully
bearing our Testimony for the Lord God to you, as he gave to us; and for
standing faithful to him, we were prisoned, and had our Goods spoiled by you;
and now you are murmurers against us, because truth stands, and your foundation
is fallen to the ground; and thou wickedly terms the true Christ who is Light
to be Antichrist.

And whereas thou say, Antichrist does never oppose Christ more then when he
appears in a mystery, when he comes in the name of Christ, and pretends to be
all for Christ, reproving much that is evil, and pleading for many commendable
things: thus our Savior tells us many false Christ's shall arise, Matthew 24.
24. in Sheeps clothing, Matthew 7. 15. in so much that if it were possible they
should deceive the very Elect.

Ans. This is directly thy own condition, who appears in a mystery to oppose
Christ the Light; but we cannot say of many commendable things thou have done,
or sins reproved; and neither Mat. 24. nor Mat. 7. says that Antichrist shall
do many commendable things, or reprove sins, for that which reproves sin is the
spirit which Antichrist is gone from; Christ said Antichrist and false Prophets
should come to the Disciples, and John saw they were come, 1 John 2. and they
went forth from them into the World; and as in the Revelations the whole World
went after them, and they inwardly ravened from the Spirit; and so keeps people
from the Spirit and Light within them, as thou do; and these have the
Scriptures, (the Sheeps Clothing) and if it were possible would deceive the
very Elect; but, John who saw they was come, said, the Saints had the Anointing
within them to teach them, and they needed not any man to teach them, but as
the Anointing teaches them; and the Apostles brought them to the Light within
them, and the Law within them; and Christ bid them not to follow the false
Prophets, but he would dwell in them, and his spirit should lead them into all
truth, Joh. 14. and 2 Cor. 4. Heb. 8. 1.

And whereas thou say, We have cried against the Priests and Teachers, as
Hirelings, and deceivers, coveteus, scandalous, etc. and their Hearers as
ignorant, superstitious, formal; and that every charge has much of truth in it.

Ans. Here thou art made to confess something to the Truth, as the Devil did to
the Son of God, and has judged thy self too; for thou was one that we cried
against at Manchester, and our testimony stands against thee as it did, who
professes what thou art not; do thou not remember Elizabeth Hulme, John
Abraham, James Harrison, and what a rage and madness thou was in when they came
to thee to declare the things of God, and how thou lift up thy Fist of
wickedness against John Abraham, and could not hold thy violent hands, and the
guilt in you all have answered our testimony, and thou yet was never able to
stand to truths face, nor answer the truth, if thou had, thou would have
answered the Queries e're now: And we are not of them which cries, lo here is
Christ, or lo there is Christ, but as the Apostle says, Col. 1. 27, 28.
Christ in you the hope of Glory, whom we preach, warning every man, and
teaching every man, that we might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus;
and Christ was not like to be found amongst you when you denied the Light, and
they that were innocent that had received the Light, quickly saw you; and this
Light has, and will stop all your mouths that denies it; and the Light is not
a show but the substance; And thou would seem to hide thy self, from the
carnal, proud professors, as if thou were not of them; but they that knows
thee, knows what thou have been, and what thou art yet, and all thy
Congregations which thou have gathered, where have thou left them now? so that
which thou (who denies the Light) has been doing, is but to beat the Air.

And all that were sober and feared God, seeing you persecuting us, and
reviling against the Light, and against the Spirit; and what unchristian
actions they used against us, was a cause through quiring into truth, to cause
them to forsake you, who denied the Light of Jesus, who broke into confusion
amongst your selves, and biting at truth, and biting at one another, till you
were consumed one of another; And so the good meaning people that did not make
Godliness a game, as you did, embraced the Light of Jesus, and came into the
fellowship of the Light and the Gospel which is the power of God, Romans 1.

And whereas thou say, The well meaning people easily fell into their Net, to
do homage to their new God, in the mean while the ignorant rash Priests and
people who dealt with them, lost themselves, and injured the truth, and gave
this people ground to glory over them.

Ans. If the well meaning people fell to us, then the ill meaning people staid
with you, and this manifests you are fallen from truth, when the well meaning
forsook you: And whereas thou say, they did homage to their new God, Nay, its
that God and Christ which (...) ever was, and will be, whom you for sook and
denied (as thou denies still) and mocked with your words like them that opposed
the Apostles, and called it a new Doctrine, a setter forth of strange Gods,
Acts; and so you did injure the truth, as thou do now, and it is Christ's Net
which they were catched in, which kept the good, and threw out the bad,
according to thy own Words; and as you have injured the truth, so has God
brought his judgments upon you; and thou has given us as much cause to glory
over thee as ever any did; but our glorying was, and is in the Lord God, and
his Son Jesus Christ, who has dearly bought us with his Blood; and thou that
denies the Light, crucifies Christ afresh, and puts him to open shame.

And whereas thou say, the right course to deal with us, is to distinguish
between good and evil.

Ans. This thou have not done, as is manifest in thy Book, but like one of the
false Prophets, who follows thy own spirit, and sees nothing, but puts darkness
for light, and light for darkness; and thou have manifested thy unrighteous
dealing to us, in all thy Book, and thou do not own the good, nor embrace it,
nor cherish it; how can thou when thou denies the Light of Christ? for, that
which does make manifest and reproves is light, and all things is manifest by
the Light, and this Light thou hate, and chofest the darkness, Ephesians 5.
and loves it more then the Light, John 3.

And whereas thou say, Thou will join issue with us to bear witness against
hireling Priests, against Tithes, against superstitious carnal Worship, against
swearing, against corrupt worldly customs, herein join with them, are they at
least in show for the power of Godliness as well as the form, for worshipping
in spirit and truth, for justice, for Righteousness, sobriety, mercy, gravity,
and whatsoever is excellent in life and conversation, so am I; yea, whatsoever
they can make appear to be evil; that I would east off with as much indignation
as they; and what further good they can show, that I have not learned, that
would I gladly embrace.

Ans. When did John Wiggan bear Testimony against Hireling Priests, and
Tyth-takers, should not John Wiggan had Tithes at Manchester to make up his
Wages, and was not he a Priest at his Chapels; where he put off his dark Ware,
denying the Light of Christ; and now when John has lost his Chapels, he will
cry against them, and their formality, now when he cannot get them; Oh,
subtilty, but would he cry against them if he had 100. or 200 l. a Year given
him, nay, would he not bless them for it; and how can thou worship God in
spirit and truth, who denies Christ the Light and spirit of God to be in every
man; Thou art a false Worshipper, and thy Worship is false; and the Lord moved
us to cry against thee; and that in thy high days, and must thou talk of
crying against corrupt Customs, and be in them thy self; for thy evil words
has corrupted thy manners, and thou art not for the power of Godliness; and
thou art far from the modesty, gravity, or justice, or righteousness, thy
language bewrayes thee, as thy lies and slanders, with mocking, scoffing,
reproachful words; and thy sawey language to Friends, and especially to
Margaret Fells; which shames both Learning and Breeding; and that most
excellent thing in life and conversation thou have denied, which is the Light
of Christ Jesus, and if thou would cast off thy evil, cast off thy lying,
slanders, reproaches, mockings, scoffings, and if ever thou will learn or
embrace good, thou must embrace the Light of Christ Jesus, which hitherto thou
have reproached; and will thou learn of us, which thou call Antichrist, thou
manifests thy self, this is but one of thy flattering scorns.

And whereas thou say, Through the Riches of Grace having cast out those
Beams which dims the eyes of many, I can better discern the meats that lies
deep in the bottom of their eye.

Answ. Thou denying the Light of Christ Jesus, and not owning the grace which
brings salvation, which has appeared to all men, as in Titus: Thou art far off
the Riches of the Grace, who calls Christ the Light, an Idol, and instead of
casting out Beams and Moats, thou art fighting against Christ the Light, Truth,
and Covenant, and Salvation to the ends of the Earth.

And whereas thou say, Being of equal ground with them, can tell them that
all their sair pretenses, and high expressions, are found to be a covering too
short to hide their nakedness and deceit.

Ans. It is Truth we hold forth, and fair pretenses is thy own condition, in
words, but out of life; and so thy nakedness is seen to all that fear God, and
thy deceitful covering which is now taken off, and thou art manifest, and thou
art not upon equal ground with us, who denies Christ to be the Light.

And whereas thou say, While they call others Deceivers, they themselves are
the more subtle Deceivers.

Ans. In this thou have declared thy own condition, for we are saved by Christ,
and hold him forth, and declare what we have heard and seen, John 1. 3. and
declares aginst all such Deceivers as thou art, who is an Enemy to Man's
Salvation, Christ Jesus the Light, John 8.

And whereas thou say, While they call others Babylons Merchants, and charge
them for selling Christ's, the Prophets, and Apostles words, they themselves do
the some, and that none sells more Babylonish then they, nor at higher rates
then they, as might be instanced in several Persons, that I forbear to mention.

Ans. We are come cut of Babylon where thou art, and all your confusions, and
have recived the Lord Jesus Christ, whom we declare freely, as we have
received, without money, or price; and we do abhor thy lies and slanders, as to
declare Babylons Merchants, and such as makes a Trade upon Christ's, the
Prophets and Apostles words, and then to do the same things our selves, which
no honest man can charge us justly with such things, but such as thee, who
sells thy self to work wickedness; and the Lord will rebuke thy spirit, for
charging that upon his innocent Lambs which they are not guilty of; and we do
charge thee to mention those particulars, and their Names that has sold such
ware at so great a rate, and what was the rate, and who and what are their
Names that bought it?

And whereas thou say, while thou endeavors to discover their deceits, thou
intends not to hurt any thing that's good in them.

Ans. It is the good in us that thou strikes at, and in that thou have
discovered thy own deceit, as may be seen all along in thy Book, together with
thy contradictions.

And thou say, Hosea 14. 9. who so is wise, and he shall understand these
things prudent, and he shall know them, for the ways of the Lord are right,
and the just shall walk in them.

But John wiggan has fully discovered his foolishness, and that he walks not
in the way of the Lord, which is Light; for Christ says, I am the Light, I am
the Way, the Truth, and the Life? and this Light he has denied.

A POSTSCRIPT.
How has thou lived in sloth and idleness, that thou have not convinced those
that turned from thee, which was thy Heareis all these many Years, that thou
begins but now, alack for thee, they are on a Foundation above thee, and so thy
Sandy Foundation, and darkness, and enmity, and making gain of the Apostles
and Christ's Words has been thy own condition; and keeping People always in
Teaching, that they may always be Paying thee; And now, that thy Goin as gone,
thou grumbles and mutters against those that be innocent, and judges them in
the practice of thy self, and so measures them with by own Earthly Spirit, and
judges them with Earthly judgment, which comes not near them.

Something in ANSWER To JOHN WIGANS APPENDIX, Wherein he Compares the Evil
Language of the Quakers, with the False Prophets.
Answ. TO tell a man he is a Liar, if he find him so, is not a Mark of a false
Prophet, for Jeremiah did so, Jer. 23. And the Apostle was no false Prophet
when he told them they spoke lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4. And Jeremiah was no
false Prophet when he said, They bent their tongues like a how, to speak lies,
Jer. 9. Nor David was no false Prophet when he said, They turned aside after
lies, Psalm 40. And the Apostle was no false Prophet when he said, Satan had
filled their hearts, Act. 5. as he has done thine, else would thou not have
uttered so many lies against us; but we are not afraid of thy Reproaches, Psalm.
51. 2. neither do we matter thy mocks, for fools make a mock at sin, Prove. 14.
16. And knowing that mockers was to come in the last times, Jade 18. Though we
have undergone the trial of cruel mockings, but God will not be mocked with thy
Religion and vain words, Gal. 6. for what thou sowest thou must reap, and our
words that are spoken to you are truth; who makes no distinction when the truth
speaks to the wickedness, and unrighteous state of man, which the wicked may
get the words, as thou do, and throw upon the righteous.

And whereas thou compares us to the false Prophets, and the unclean spirits in
the Revelations, which came cut of the mouth of the Dragon, and were proud
boasters, false accusers, and incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are
good.

Answ. John, this is thy own condition, thou have directly read it; yet before
thou said, thou would learn of us, and thou said they were the better meaning
people that came to us, thus thou foamest out thy own shame like unto the
raging waves of the Sea.

And whereas thou say, We boast of persection and sinless life, and are the
servants of corruption.

Answ. This is false, the Lord rebuke thy spirit, for our perfection is in
Christ, the crown of our rejoicing, who thou say is an Idol; and Christ we
serve, and not corruption: And see if any of our Friends have spoken such words
to thee as thou have spoken against the truth, and thou denying the spirit and
Light in men, by which they should see their salvation, thou can be no
otherwise but as a wave of the Sea, as a Well without water, and a Cloud
without rain; as in Jude: manifest to be in the false Prophets steps, 2 Timothy 3.
Tit. 1. 10. 2 Pet. 2. Art thou not here in these steps? Evil beasts, slow
bellies, etc. all that read the Scriptures may see thee.

And whereas thou say, Thou have had Converse with several Christians in
several Nations this thirty years.

Answ. This thou may speak to thy shame, who knows no more of God and Christ,
then now to call him an Idol; and where did any of all these Christians teach
thee that Christ was an Idol? I do not believe that any sect in all
Christendom would say so, but thy self; no not the Papists whom thou likens us
to, and says we are as bad: and so thou art like unto them in the Revelations,
Who blasphemeth God and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. And that
which thou did affirm in thy assertion, was contrary to God, Christ, Scripture
and Truth, and all people might see them, if there were no answer to them, if
they could but read Scriptures.

And whereas thou say, It behoved some of them, at least G. F. who was
called, as Margaret Fell affirms etc.

Answ. Margaret Fell said G. F. was called from his lawful Calling, as thou
reports; thou thy self did report it: That was the occasion of her words,
which if it was so, if his Calling had been meaner, it was better then
Butchering people as thou have done, with the sword; any of these trades had
been better then thine, for thou have been both a Priest, and a Butchering
Major; so thou might have two Trades, and has lost them both, which makes thee
^ail so. Alss, for answering thy book it did not so much concern G. F. but many
particulars which were some of them 60 miles one off another; and thy book
which we had with much ado from you, which ye were afraid should have come to
the light, it was such a work of darkness; and it was but a few days time in
our hands, which they were not likely to answer it in so short a time, besides
called on often to be taken from us, it was an uncertain thing for us to come
to answer it, or go about that work, but at last we were fain to take it in
pieces, and get it Copyed over in pieces, there was such haste with you, and
this shows you were afraid to have it answered; whereof John Wigans Wife, and
some of his misled people, made a boast as though we could not answer it,
before we could have it, which he has small reason for, as they that reads it
in mecknesse sees his folly, 2 Timothy 2. And that which we writ was true to thy
condition, thou have proved it. And whereas thou art grieved because the
Goalers and Prisoners should see thy fruits laid open, because we sent Letters
to them to give unto thee, when thou thy self would not take them of us; and we
did not send for our Letters again, as thou did thy Book, or some through thy
means; not being afraid who see them or read them. And herein thou condemns thy
self, for thou directed thy book to the Jailer, and sent it into the Town
before it came to us; so in this thou have judged thy self, for thou did not
so much as direct that a Copy of it should be given to us, and so thou renders
thy self both obnoxious and odious in thy Book and practice. And what thou have
been is known, and there is things yet to be manifest, which is a shame to
mention: and so thou have thy self begotten in many men a true opinion, that
thou art a heinous offender, in speaking such words, and writing such things
against Christ the Light. And we know none that has sent thee any Letters
sealed, but there has been a name subscribed to them. And as for scorning,
jearing, and frothy expressions, that is thy own condition John, and not ours;
and why did thou not put those letters (sent without names) into thy book,
that the wise Reader might have seen them (if there were such) and have judged
of them.

And as for me Thomas Curwen, who sent several papers to thee, being burdened
with thy wickedness, who had published thy lies abroad in the Name of the
Lord, and wast ashamed and afraid that we should have them, though thou
promised often we should have them in words, and now that we have it, it must
but be a fortnight, being a short time for them who are above 60. miles from
one another: and thou have done unjustly in that thou have not put down my
whole letters, and the occasion of them, for there is no wise man will judge
but that there was some reason why I should send such words to thee: And did
not froth, and rage, and fury appear in thee, when thou laid violent hands on
me, and pulled my coat like to tare it off my back? and can thou lift such
unholy hands and fists of wickedness unto the Lord in prayer? and will God
accept thy sacrifice which is like Cains?

And when I did peruse thy book, I found it did not prove thy assertion, viz.
That Christ the light is not saving: It therefore is but as Chaff and dirt; and
thou perverts, and wrests, and adds to many Scriptures, seemingly to prove thy
assertion good, which thou could not, for which, I say, the plagues of God
shall be added unto thee, according to the Scriptures, Rev. 22. To which John
Wigan, in his wonted fury and rage said, The plagues of God was upon me, and we
all spoke from the spirit of the Devil. yet this man before his companions
would seem to be humble, and a meek man, through his feigned words would seem
to Justify himself.

And for thy saucy language, and ill-bred behavior, and unmannerlinesse, if
thou had put all my letter down, the Reader might have seen why I charge those
things upon thee. And therefore I had good ground to speak these words through
all thy words and carriages toward me, and also thy abusive and slanderous,
and saucy expressions to my Esteemed friend in the truth, M. F. which if thou
had had either civility, or the reason of a man, or any regard to virtue,
thou would have been ashamed to utter or have written such things as thou
did; but thou have abused her letters as thou have done mine, and taken that
which thou thinks may be for thy advantage, and wrests our words as thou have
done the Scriptures, and left out that in our letters which was the cause we
spoke those things unto thee, and plainly show the cause, which if any desire
to know the cause, we have them to show, for if we should put them in our book
they would make it too great a volume, too great, together with thy slanderous
letters, and that thou should vomit so many slanders in thy book, which thou
would not let us have but only a few days, and then thou glories and boasts,
in which time thou knew we could not answer them, the particulars concerned in
it being so far distant one from another.

And John, if Thomas Curwen Husbandman, which is a better Calling then thy
Trade, who has often been moved of the Lord to write to thee, is able to
indict letters, having been often burdened with thy hypocrisy and vain
deceit, and fleshly performances, which thou have charged falsely upon me in a
letter. And here thou publishes that which thou knows not, slandering us both
with that which thou art ignorant of, not knowing but another might do it, and
so have published thy ignorance. Do thou think this will stand amongst wise
men? And thou have said thou will never learn in my Masters School, which is
Christ the Light, nor come to the Law which is the Schoolmaster until Christ,
which thou art ignorant of both. And within all this time thou might have
answered my Queries, if thou had been in the meekness, but it is manifest thou
art choked with evil, and envy, and possessed with a bitter spirit, that thou
have not power to do good.

And as for thy dreaming, it is manifest if thou had been awaked, thou would
have answered my. Queries, and cleared thy assertion, and convict me if I had
opposed my self; but thou have denied this office and work, and in stead of
giving satisfaction herein, thou have published thy own shame. I would not have
thee to envy me so much, for the good I have to thee, for which of those things
do thou thus deal with me? Is it not because I have told thee the truth? for
which of those good deeds do thou rail of me so fast? Was it not a good deed,
to tell thee thou was a Deceiver, knowirg thee to be so? for now thy fruits
makes thee manifest to be a deceiver, and whom thou have deceived, 2 Pet. 2.
Mat. 7. 24. And whereas thou have picked a few lines out of James Parkes
private letter sent unto thee, whom thou seems to pretend love to, and now
publishes them, and this was thy love; was it not time for me to forsake thee,
being long deceived by thee, and has known thy Principles and thee long, and
thy feigned love: but should thou not have put all my letter down, that the
Reader might have seen it, and judged with thy words, which was the occasion of
it: and the words which thou slanderously spoke in secret, but thou will
manifest thy self, that thy solly may appear, which cannot abide plainness;
but my letter is true to thy condition, and thou will find it so. And I tell
thee it was a fraudulous part of thee to publish a part of my letter, and not
all, or other Friends letters either, and far off the truth, and below a wise
man, but it is well that thou have published so much as thou have done, that
people may read thy book, and see the words come true upon thee.

John Wigan, this in Answer to part of thy Appendix.
WHerein thou mentions Margaret Fells Letters, and has therein falsified my
words, as it is the usual manner of thee and such deceivers as thou art, for
you do so with the Scriptures, who makes a trade of them, and teaches for
filthy Iucre, you take here a piece, and there a piece, such as will make for
your own ends, and for your advantage, and for the setting up of your Image you
make, and so leaves poor people dark and ignorant of the Scriptures, and also
of your deceitful dealings with them, and so keeps them in darkness, and
preaches unto them, that they must carry a body of fin with them as long as
they are upon the earth; and they are no other like, so long as they that are
blind follows thee, and such like that are blind, and so you all go into the
ditch together, which is your place, and shuts the kingdom of heaven against
men, and neither enters in your selves, nor suffer them that would go in to
enter, Mat. 23. 13.

But thou have intended in taking pieces of my letters here and there to make
them seem more odious to the Reader, and also thou has intended thereby to
cover thy own nakedness and ignorance of God and his truth, in leaving out the
cause and ground of my speaking those words, which is nothing but truth to thee
according to the Scriptures, where they stand written to thee, though thou
endeavors by thy overskipping, and taking words here and there to make them
nonsense to the Reader; yet as they stand, and as thou have set them, any
rational man of truth and honesty, that knows what thou have written and spoken
to me and others, will judge them to be truth to thee; Therefore for the
further manifestation of thy wickedness, I shall by plain Scripture convince
the Reader that reads with an impartial eye, and prove thee a blasphemer
against God and his truth, as it is in Jesus, and when I have done so, then let
the Reader judge whether thou be not guilty in truth and reality, and of all I
have writ to thee.

The cause of my first writing to thee was from thy blasphemous book, which
thou put out against Christ Jesus the Light, our corner stone, which thou
boastingly says thou strikes at, and I can truly say, and the Lord that judges
all hearts knows, that I had no delight to meddle with thee, seeing thee a
conceited man, only in deceit and ignorance, but I was moved of the Lord in the
vindication of his truth, to bear my testimony for his truth, and to write to
thee, and to leave thee without excuse.

(1.) In thy Book thou says, Whoever calls and worships this (the Light in
every man) as the John Wigans Blasphemy.
Redeemer worships an imaginary and fictious Christ, and indeed an idol, and in
another place of thy book thou says, That the Light in every man that comes
into the world, set up and worshipped in prayers and praises. All the Honor
and Attributes due to the true Redeemer alone being ascribed to it, which is an
Idolatry so much worse then that of Jeroboams, or of the Papists. In a third
place of thy book thou say, Admit this grand lie for the Corner stone, and
the whole super structure will consist of lies.

These with many other such blasphemous speeches thou have uttered forth in thy
book, which I shall forbear to trouble the Reader with, they being answered
before.

Again in thy second letter to me thou have sent writ these words; its likely
thou have never been so plainly told that thou sets up an idol, if thou call
the light that is in every man that comes into the world, Christ the Redeemer,
and if thou worships that light as the Redeemer, that thou art an Idolater: It
seems by these words, that thou have writ these words in thy former letter,
which I sent back with the answer, and so has not the words there written here
to produce, but here is enough and sufficient to manifest thee an absolute
blasphemer against Christ and the holy Ghost.

Answ. The Light of Christ Jesus which we bear witness of, which has lighted
every man that's come into the world, is the same light which John bore witness
John Wigan proved a Blasphemer.
of which was a man sent of God for that purpose, before Christ Jesus came to
prepare the way before him as the Scripture does testify, which prophesied of
him before he came, and which prophecies he bore witness to when he came, as
Isa. 40. 3, 4, 5. the voice of him that cries in the wilderness prepare ye
the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert the high way of our God. Read
on to the fifth verse, and Malachy the 3. and 1. Behold I send my messenger,
and he shall prepare the way before me, and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly
come to his Temple, and according to these prophecies the Angel Gabriel came to
Zacharias, and told him that he should have a son, and Luke 1. 19. and the
Angel answering said, I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God, and am
sent to speak unto thee, and to show thee these glad tidings, and in the sixth
month after the Angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a Virgin, espoused to a
man, named Joseph, which testified of the birth of Christ, as you may read in
the of Luke at large, and the Angel said unto Zacharias when he told them of
the birth of John, he said, fear not Zacharias, for thy prayer is heard, for
thy wife Elizabeth shall bear a son, and thou shall call his name John, and
thou shall have joy and gladness in him, and many shall rejoice at his birth,
and he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and he shall be filled with the
holy Ghost (even this is he that bore witness of the Light which John Wigan
calls an Idol) from his mothers womb, and after this child was born, his
fathers mouth was opened in praises unto the Lord, being dumb since the Angel
spoke to him, because he did not fully believe, and his father Zacharias was
filled with the holy Ghost, and prophesied of Christ saying, Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, who has visited and redeemed his people, and so to the end
of the Chapter, as you may read, ver. 76. and the child shall be called the
Prophet of the highest [to wit Christ] and thou shall go before the face of the
Lord to prepare his ways to give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the
Remission of their sins; and Christ himself bore witness of John, Mat. 11. and
said, he was more than a Prophet, and said, of all that were born of women,
there was not a greater then John, and said he was a burning and shining light,
as you may read. For this is he of whom it is written, Behold I send my
messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee, ver. 10.
and if ye will receive it, this is the Elias which was for to come; for all the
Prophets and the Law prophesied until John, He that has an ear to hear let him
hear, ver. 13, 14, 15. and the Apostle bore witness of John, and said, as John
fulfilled his course Acts 13. he said, Whom think ye that I am, I am not he,
but there comes one after me, the shoes of whose feet I am not worthy to loose.

Thus far we have proved unto you what John was, that he was sent of God to
bear witness of Christ by these Scriptures, with many more which might be
instanced concerning John. Now we shall go to John's testimony, and witness
which he bore of Christ Jesus, John 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God, the same was in the beginning with
God; All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that
was made, in him was life, and this life was the light of men. This is he which
John bore witness of, this same John came for a witness to bear witness of
this Light, that all men through him might believe, as you may see proved by
all the foregoing prophecies of him; he said, He was not the light, but was
sent to bear witness of the light that was the true light, which lights
every man that comes into the world. This is the light and no other which we
witness, and bear testimony of, which John Wigan says is an idol; He was in
the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not, but as
many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to
them that believed on his name, not to such unbelievers as John Wigan, who
denies him, which was born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God; This John Wigan calls an idol. And the word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us and we beheld his glory, as of the only begotten
son of God, full of grace and truth; John bore witness of him, and cried,
saying, This is he of whom I spoke, he that comes after me, who is preferred
before me, ver. 15.

Now here the reader may see J. W's. blasphemies, and lies in his book where he
says, that the light that John bare witness of, that lights every man that
comes into the world, is the word creator, and not the word made flesh, Christ;
so let the reader read John. 1. 14, 15. and this is the record of John, when
the Jews sent priests and levites from Jerusalem, and asked him, who art thou?
and he confessed and denied not, I am not the Christ, and they asked him, and
said unto him, who art thou? and he said, I am the v^ice of one crying in the
wilderness, make straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Isaiah, 1
John. ver. 23. They asked him, why baptizest thou then? and John answered,
saying, I baptize with water, but there stands one among you, whom ye know
not, he it is, who coming after me, is preferred before me, etc. Jo. 1. ver.
26. 27. Here John bears witness of him, according to the prophesies; the next
day John sees Jesus coming unto him, and said, Behold the Lamb of God which
takes away the sin of the world. This is he of whom I said, after me comes a
man which is preferred before me, for he was before me, ver. 29. 30. This is he
whom we worship as our redeemer, whom J. W. says, to worship is to set up a
greater Idolatry then that of Jeroboams, and of the Papists, and John says
further, that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come
baptizing with water, and John bore record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending
from Heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him, and I knew him not, but he that
sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, upon whom thou shall see
the spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he that baptizeth with
the holy Ghost. And I saw and bare record that this is the Son of God; and this
is he whom J. W. says, whosoever worships, worships an Idol. And the next day John
saw Jesus walking, and looking upon him said Behold the Lamb of God; and so
this is a part of John's Record and witness which he has borne of the Son of
God, the light of the world that has lighted every man that comes into the
world; with several more, as the scripture will testify, who Baptizeth with
the holy Ghost; and this is he which J. W. desires the people with whom he has
to do, and all others with fear and trembling to consider how injurious this
opinion is, and how pernicious and destructive such a sandy Foundation will
prove to precious souls; for admit this Grand lie for the corner stone, and
the whole superstructure will consist of lies, says he, and open this as the
first door of entrance (as they do) and it leads into a Babel of Confusion and
Errors; no sooner is a man entered in at this deadly gate, but he is in the City
Tohu, where first, if his eyes be anointed with eye salve by the true Jesus, he
may behold this Image of Jealousy (the Light that is in every man that comes
into the World.)

Answ. Here I desire the reader but soberly, and seriously to consider of this
man's doctrine, and compare it with the foregoing proofs, with what shall be
hereafter, and let him Judge whether it be not as absolute blasphemy as a man
can speak, and that according to the full proof of the scriptures, for Christ
Jesus. Jo. 8. 12. where Jesus says, I am the light of the world, he that
follows me shall not abide in darkness, but have the Light of life. And
again, in Jo. 12. Jesus cried, and says, he that believes on me, believes not
on me, but on him that sent me, and he that sees me, sees him that sent me.
45. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever ^eleeveth in me shall not
abide in darkness, 46. and in the 36. while ye have light, believe in the
light, that ye may be children of the light. These words spoke Jesus, who
Baptizeth with the holy Ghost, which J. W, says, If this lie for the corner
stone, all the Superstructure will consist of lies. If any man walk in the day,
he stumbleth not because he sees the light of the world Jo. 11. 9.

Now I desire the reader will seriously consider, whether J. W. be not highly
guilty of Blasphemy, and one with those Pharisees who was grieved when Christ
wrought miracles, and cast out Devils, and turned and converted many unto God,
when he entered into the strong man's house, and bound the strong man, and
spoiled his goods, ver. 29. So J. W. is grieved that there should be so many
turned unto God, and afraid for the time to come, lost there should be more,
and therefore he strikes at Christ Jesus, the Light and Corner stone, which he
calls a lie, as those Pharisees did against Christ formerly; But Christ's answer
is, If I cast out Devils by the power of God, then the Kingdom of God is come
unto you; else how can one enter, etc? which J. W. denies, that the Kingdom of
God should be come unto the Pharisees, or unto the world, ver. 28, 29.
blasphemously against Christ's own words. But Christ says, all manner of
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blusphemy against the Holy Ghost
shall never be forgiven; which J. W. is guilty of, in his wicked blasphemous
words and writings, it is past my knowledge how often. And therefore Christ's
words are fully manifested upon him, who says in the 32. verse. Whosoever
speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him, but whosoever
speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall never be forgiven him, neither in
this world, nor in the world to come, Mark 3. 28, 29. Luke 12. 10. This stands
good upon J. W. for ever, if Christ be God who baptized with the holy Ghost, J.
W. is a blasphemer against him. And so I desire the Reader to consider without
prejudice of what is proved, and furthermore whether he be not one with those
Jews that were filled with envy when they saw the multitudes, and spoke against
those things that were spoken by Paul, Contradicting and Blaspheming, Acts. 13.
45. And also one with Elimas the Sorcerer who withstood Paul, and went about to
turn the deputy from the faith. ver. 8. And also one and the same with those
Jews whom Paul was pressed in spirit to testify unto, that Jesus was the
Christ, and when they opposed themselves and Blasphemed, he shook his garment
and said unto them, your blood be upon your own heads I am clean, etc. Acts.
18. 5, 6. And also whether he be not one of those which the Apostle speaks of,
in Romans 2. 21. Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou
that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? And thou that abhorrest
Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? for thou have Blasphemed against the worthy
name of God, the Light. Romans 2. 2. Jam. 1. 7. And so now thou art proved such a
Blasphemer that I am forced to compare thee to the beast spoken of in the
Revelations: I am sure thou art one that worships him, and gives thy power to
him, for thou have spoken great things and Blasphemies against the Lord and his
anointed, the Light Christ Jesus. Rev. 13. 6.

And have opened thy mouth against God, to Blaspheme his name, and his
tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. And so now thou art perfectly proved
a Blasphemer against God, and now thou may see if thou can clear thy self of
these things, or any that takes thy part against Christ the Light, who
inlightens every man that comes into the world, which John bore witness of,
and thou have given thy power to the beast to make war with the Saints.

So now I am to prove thee to be a minister of darkness, who has affirmed,
That the light in every man is not a saving light, which I have proved already
is Christ Jesus, which John bore testimony to the true light that enlightens
every man that comes into the world, and which is the savior of all mankind,
Tit. 3. 4.

2. Thou have asserted, That God has not given a measure of the spirit to every
man, contrary to the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 12. 4, 7. who says, The manifestation
of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal.

And thou go about to make the light of Christ Jesus, with which he has
enlightened every man, a Created light, and a dim light, and a natural light;
and spirit of a natural man. And here I shall prove thee an Idolater, and a
graver up of an Image in thy dark divining, where thou art one with all the
ministers of Antichrist, who studies an Image in your brains, and the dark
imaginations of your hearts; for though thou seems to be a separated Priest,
yet it is but in the sensual, and carnal, and devilish, not in the spirit of
God, for thou crucifies that in thy dark deceitful heart, while thou art making
and setting up another spirit and light which thou calls natural, and not the
light of Christ. And here thou art worse then Surplice-men, or Homily-men, for
they will confess that the light in them which shows them sin, is the light of
Christ; and yet thou seems to confess that the light in every man is the Law
written in the heart, and if so, the new Covenant.

Answ. All this heap of confusion which thou have heaped together, does but
manifest thy darkness, and thou ministers out of it, and art an enemy to the
light of Christ, and so thou must needs be a minister of darkness. Though thou
have been a minister long, I ask thee this question, Did thou ever preach the
light of Christ to people, or did thou ever turn peoples minds to the light
of Christ in their Consciences, or did thou ever turn any from the power of
Satan to the power of God? If thou have, set us out some of thy flock that they
may be tried? but there are a great deal that will cestifie against thee, that
has been of thy flock, that is turned from thy darkness, to the light of
Christ, which thou art an enemy to, and with it they see thy deceit and
darkness, wherein thou did deceive them, and can praise the Lord for ever,
that they are turned from thy darkness.

But now for the proof of thy false Doctrine.

And 1. Is not the light which is in every man, the light of Christ that
convinces a man or woman of sin and evil? and is there another Savior besides
Christ that takes away the sin of the world? And what was that Image of God in
which Adam was Created? will thou not have Christ to be God? And thou says,
there remained a part in Adam after he had transgressed, which made him hide
himself, but thou calls this the spirit of a natural man, and a created light.
Is the light that is in man a created light? and is the law which is written in
man's heart, and the spirit which is put in the inward parts, created? and was
that Image of God which was in Adam a created Image? How was the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world, Revel. 13. 8. Rev. 5. 12.

But in plain words, Did God create any light in the beginning but what he set
in the Firmament of Heaven? Is an invisible light created, which sees God which
is invisible? Its pity to put these things to thy gross darkness; but that for
the Seed's sake it may be serviceable to others. And do thou say, The Law of
God that he writes in the heart, and his spirit which he puts in the inward
parts, is this a created light? Oh the gross darkness that is in thee! How
dare thou take upon thee to teach? Is not God Light? and is the Image of God in
man a created light? and is that created and natural? and is not Christ light,
and his spirit light, and is not the Law light, and is not the Law spiritual?
and did not Moses say to the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14, and
15. For this commandment that I command thee this day, is not hidden from
thee, neither is it far off, etc. but the Word is very nigh thee, in thy mouth
and heart, to hear it, and to do it: See, I have set before thee life and
death? Was this, that would have led them into life, natural and created? and
is not this Law righteous, and spiritual, and just, and good? as the Apostle
witnessed of it, Act. 7. 5. 3. Romans 7. 12. who said, They received the Law by
the disposition of Angels, etc. And did not Christ Jesus say, He came not to
destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; and that one jot or title of the Law should
not pass till it was all fulfilled? and is not Christ the end of the Law for
righteousness? and is this the spirit of a natural man that knows not the
things of God, that Christ is the end of?

Art thou not in this a minister of darkness, and an Idolater? And does not
the Apostle say, Romans 7. 4. That they were become dead to the Law by the body
of Christ: wherefore he says, the Law is holy, and J. W. Proved a Minister of
darkness, and an Idolater.
the commandment holy, just, and good, ver. 12. But this dark Doctrine of
thine, makes thee clearly manifest that thou art in the flesh, and the motions
of sin works in thy members, which brings forth fruit unto death, and never
knew the life of the Law yet, nor the life of the Commandment, but art alive
without the Law, and so art alive unto sin and wickedness, and knows it not,
not having the Law to be thy Schoolmaster, to correct thee for thy wickedness,
which would revive and set thy sins before thee, that thereby thou wicked might
die. But thou has not been at this School yet, for all thy learning and
divining it has been all in the darkness, thou has never come to the Law yet
which is light, which is the schoolmaster unto Christ. This thou sits judge
upon, and says its spirit of a natural man, and so living without the law, is
dead in thy sins and darkness, and so never knew what it is with thy mind to
serve the law of God, as the Apostle did, he delighted in the law of God
according to the inward man; but this is too mean for thee, this thou calls
Created and Natural, and so lies drowned in darkness, and sin and wickedness,
thy mind and all thy members committing sin, and drinks up iniquity as the Ox
drinks up water. How should thou do other, being thou art an enemy both of
Christ, and his Law, and his Light, and his Spirit? and what? art thou not a
minister of darkness in all this? and the Apostle who was obedient unto the
law of God in his heart, and the spirit of God in his inward parts, by this he
saw the body of death, which made him to cry out, etc. But he also saw his
Redeemer Christ Jesus, for he was a minister of the light, and turned people
from the darkness to the light in them, and so could confess then, the Law of
the spirit of life in Christ Jesus had made him free from the law of sin and
death. So the Apostle does not make such a separation bet wixt the Law and
Christ as thou do, who say, it is natural and created; but this is but the
Judgment of thy dark spirit, for the Apostle says, That God sent his only
begotten Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the
flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk
not after the flesh but after the spirit, Romans 7. 8. God sent forth his Son,
made of a woman, made under the law, Gal. 4. 4.

I desire the Reader to take notice of this man's darkness and ignorance of
this Light, and Law, and Spirit of God, and also of his Idolatry, who has made
and framed another Image which he calls a Created light, and a natural light,
and a dim light, and the spirit of a natural man.

And whether this Law and Spirit of God, which was given unto the children of
Israel into their hearts be natural, and also has been the guide and teacher
of his people in all ages; for Christ himself says unto the Jews, It is
written in the law, you shall all be taught of God, and the prophet Isa. said,
That all the children of the Lord should be taught of the Lord. And how should
they be taught, and be established in righteousness, but by the Light of
righteousness, the righteous Law of God written in their hearts? and this is
none of J. W's. Molten Image which he has set up, which he calls created, and
natural, and dim Light, and spirit of a natural man etc. And so here the
reader may read by what is here proved by plain scripture. J. W. first to be a
minister of darkness by his denying the Light of Christ to be the law of God,
the pure new covenant which he has lighted every man with, and his law which
is written in every heart since the new covenant; and also he may read him an
Idolater in that he has made a molten and graven Image, which he calls created
and natural, and the spirit of a Man, which is neither Light of Christ, nor Law
of God, nor new Covenant; and now I. W. thou have raced thy self out, both from
the knowledge of the Law, and the Lawgiver: So thou art proved, by the plain
Scriptures of Truth, (1) A Blasphemer. (2) A Minister of Darkness. (3) An
Idolater.

(4) I am now to prove thee an Antichrist, which was to come in the last time,
which denies Christ come in the flesh.

And that is to say,

(1) Thou goes about to prove, and has laid it down in thy Book, as though
Christ which lights every Man that comes into the World, were not God and the
new Covenant, or Covenant of God which was before the Foundation of the World.

(2) Thou lays down, that Christ is not that Word and Light which John Bears
witness of, but says, it is the word Creator. And,

(3) Thou makes a difference between the Father and the Son, and so sets up two
Lights, and two Words, and so two Gods, except thou denies Christ to be God.

Answ. And first in answer to that thou do oppose, which is, that Christ the
Light is not Gods Covenant, was not the Covenant which God made with Abraham in
Christ Jesus, did not the Apostle say the same, Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and
his Seed was this promise made, he says not unto Seeds, as of many, but as of
one, unto thy Seed which is Christ, and this I say, that the Covenant that was
confirmed before of God in Christ, etc. here the Aposte does not say as thou
do, that Christ is not Gods Covenant of Light, and also the Apostle says
that Christ has redeemed us from under the Curse of the Law, that the blessing
of Abraham might come on the Gentiles, here Christ brings the Gentiles into
Covenant with Abraham and the Jews; but this is a mystery thou never saw; and
is he not the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, in his
Everlasting Covenant Christ Jesus: And is not the Covenant of the Lord with
David and his Seed for ever in Christ Jesus? And has not the Prophet Isaiah
said in the 42. and 6. I the Lord have called thee in Righteousness, and will
hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant to the
people, and for a Light to the Gentiles, to open blind eyes, and to bring out
the Prisoners out of Prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
Prisonhouse; who is this that should do this, if it be not Christ Jesus, whom
will thou have it to be; and again, Isa. 49. 8. It is a light thing that thou
should be my servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore again the
preserved of Israel, I will also give thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that
thou may be my salvation to the ends of the Earth, who is this think
thou? this torments thee, this that reaches unto all the ends of the Earth;
Light shining in all, this torments thy dark spirit, thou makes account in thy
Book this is a created Light as thou say in thy Book, where thou quotes 2
Romans verse. 14, 15, 16. who has the Law written in their hearts, which accuses
or excuses them in the day when God shall judge the secrets of Men by Jesus
Christ, according to my Gospel: Let the Reader judge whether this be a natural
created Light, which judges the secrets of Men's hearts by Jesus Christ; Is not
this Gods new Covenant of Light to the Gentiles, which he has written in their
hearts: and does not the Apostle say in Hebr. 8. 6. speaking of the old
Covenant and Priesthood, but now has he obtained a more excellent Ministry,
and by how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which is
established upon better promises, is not this Christ? for the Jews broke their
Covenant and their Law that was written in Tables of Stone, which gendered to
bondage, and there was then a Law added because of Transgression, until the
Seed Christ came, Gallat. 24. 25. yet the promise and Covenant that was made to
Abraham in Christ Jesus stands still, and is the same, and cannot be disanul'd,
as the Apostle says, Gal. 3. 19, 16, 17. Hebr. 8. 10. The Law that was added
430. years after the promise was made, could not disanul it, for the Apostle
says, if the first Covenant had been faultless, then there had been no place
found for the second, and so this is the Covenant of God, writing his Law in
their hearts, and putting his spirit in their inward parts, for the Jews had
outward Laws written in Tables of Stone, which Laws they broke, but now Christ
Jesus the everlasting Covenant of God, which is Light made unto Abraham never
can be broken, but is an everlasting Light in the hearts of his people, and an
everlasting Law written in their hearts, and an everlasting Covenant of life
and peace, and so brings all into unity and fellowship, for there is neither
Jews nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor
female, for they are all one in Christ Jesus, and if they be Christ's, then they
are Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise, Gal. 3. 28, 29. And so
here thou art proved thus far an Antichrist, and a denyer of Christ Jesus (the
Light) to be Gods Covenant, who according to the flesh is the Son of Abraham,
the Son of David, Romans 1. 2, 3, 4. and according to the spirit the Son of God,
Paul was made a Minister of that Gospel which was promised.

But these things is a mystery to thee, and thou knows nothing of them but what
thou knows naturally as a bruit Beast, for thou cannot believe the Apostles
Testimony that he gives in the 13. of the Acts, when he is speaking of Saul,
verse. 22. and when he had removed him, to wit Saul, he raised up David to be
their King, to whom he gave Testimony, etc. Of this Man's Seed has God
according to his promise raised, verse. 25, unto Israel a Savior Jesus, when
John had preached before his coming; and as John fulfilled his course, he said,
whom think ye that I am, etc. Men and Brethren of the stock of Abraham, and
whosoever among you that fears God, to you is the word of this Salvation
sent, verse. 26. So let the Reader read this portion of Scripture, and see
whether Christ Jesus be not Gods Covenant of Light, and Promise unto Abraham,
and unto David, and also whether this be not that which John bore Testimony of,
and so now thou art sufficiently proved thus far, not only a breaker of Gods
Covenant and Promise unto Abraham and his Seed for ever, in whom the Apostle
says, all the promises of God are yea and in him Amen, 1 Cor. 20.

The next is, wherein thou has denied Christ to be that word which John bears
witness to, which was in the beginning with God saying, the neglect of this
distinction of the word Creator, and the word made flesh, is the ground of the
great mistake of many, thou say, who not considering what is testified of the
Word as Creator, do confound that Light which is set up by him in every man,
with that Light which he gives, as he is the word made flesh, and so calls that
Light saving, which is but natural, springing up with him in his Creation, yea
hence they call that Light Christ, which is but the Law written in the heart.

Answ. I desire the Reader to read over the 1st. of John, and seriously
consider what distinctions he finds made there from the word that was in the
beginning, and the word that is made flesh, and the light that lightens every Man
that is come into the World, and whether all these be not Christ, which John
bears witness of, and whether John and the Spirit of God, there have
separated them as the blackness and darkness in J. W. has done; and let the
Reader judge whether this Man be not possessed with an Enchanting Spirit of
Sorcery, and Witchcraft, and even as it were given up to work wickedness to
his own destruction, being filled with envy and malice against the Truth, which
has overthrown his rotten and sandy foundation, and causes him so to rage, that
he even blasphemes against the God of Heaven, that he even dares to separate
the Godhead, and would not have Christ Jesus to be the true Light and Word of
God, which was in the beginning, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells,
and that bodily, Gal. 3. 9. And so as thou have denied Christ to be the
Covenant of God, thou has also denied him to be the Word of God, and also has
denied him to be the Light that lights every man that comes into the world,
and so has denied his Godhead as he is a Savior, by which all the Fathers
were saved, and dyed in the faith of him, and the Patriarchs, and the Prophets
that had his word in their hearts, and thou has denied him to be the Light of
Israel, and thou has denied him to be the first fruits of them that sleep, and
the first begotten from the dead, and the first born of every Creature, thou
has denied his very life and substance, and the laying of his life down thou
has denied, for thou said, he denied faith to some, and one of thy Brethren
said, that his blood was not shed for all; and thus you spoke despite against
the spirit of Grace, and counts the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, and
so Christ is of little value to you, and you are not worthy of him, but for the
Seeds sake, and that people may not be blinded with thy wickedness and
blindness, and darkness, and that people may come to an understanding of the
Truth.

I desire the Reader seriously to consider these following Proofs, that is to
say, first of John, That Word which was in the beginning with God, by which all
things was made and Created, which was before man was made or Created, and was
glorified with the Father before the World began, whether this be not the word
Christ the Savior of mankind according to the Apostles words in the 1. of Heb.
2. ver. and so on, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he
has appointed heir of all things; by whom also he made the World, etc. And
whether this Son of God by which all things was made and Created, is not the
Savior and the Word in the beginning, and the Redeemer of all Mankind, and
whether the Word which Moses spoke of to the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 30. 14.
when he said, The Word is very nigh thee, in thy heart and mouth, that thou may
do it; and said then, he had set Life and Death before them; which the Apostle
in the 10. of Hebrews bears testimony to, who says, Christ is the end of the
Law for Righteousness to every one that believes: And when he rehearses Moses
Words he says, Who shall ascend into Heaven, that is to bring Christ down from
above, or who shall descend into the Deep, that is to bring Christ up again
from the Dead: But what says it, the Word is nigh thee in thy mouth, and in
thy heart; this is the word of Faith which we preach, that if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God has
raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Does not the Apostle say, that
this Lord Jesus is the Word, this is the Doctrine the Apostle preached the same
Word in the heart, as Moses did; But, I. W. denies this Doctrine, and this
Word, and this Jesus, that is very nigh in the heart, that preaches
Righteousness, he preaches him afar off, it vexes him to hear of him nigh in
his heart, for his heart is filled with hypocrisy and darkness, and Gods Word
and Witness lies slain in him; and so all his Preaching is of Christ without
him crucified at Jerusalem, but he knows him not, nor where he is, and so all
his separation is but in the darkness, talking of a Christ without him, and
denying Gods Covenant of Light within, Isa. 49. 8. and denying Christ the Word
in the heart, which was that which the Apostle preached; and likewise the
Apostle Peter, Acts. 10. 36. The Word which God sent unto the Children of
Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, the Word I say you know, which was
published throughout all Judea after the preaching of the Baptism of John, and
hew God anointed Jesus Christ, etc. verse. 43. to him all the Prophets gave
witness, and while Peter spoke these Words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them
that heard the Word. And what Word was this they heard when the Holy Ghost fell
on them, was it not the word the Apostle preached Christ? Oh, thou enemy of
God, how should Christ be preached, if that word which the Apostles preached
was not Christ, and were not they the Ministers of the Gospel and of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 1. 18. But as God is true our word toward you was not yea, and
nay, for the Son of God Jesus Christ who was preached amongst you by us, even
by me, and Silvanus and Timotheus was not yea, and nay, but in him was yea.

Here the Apostle clearly manifests that the word which they Preached was the
Son of God Christ Jesus; and was not the word of Reconciliation which the
Apostle preached, was not this Christ; does he not say, All things are of God,
who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given unto us the
Ministry of Reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the
World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them; and has committed
unto us the word of Reconciliation, and we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled
unto God, for he has made him to be sin for us that knew no sin, that we might
be made the Righteousness of God in him.

This message is a torment to J. W. he is none of those Ambassadors, he
carries no such message as this, this is contrary to his Doctrine, for he will
not have God and Christ to be one, nor he will not have the World reconciled,
for he says, The Light that lightens them is not saving; and how can they be
reconciled unto God, if they be not saved from their sin? he makes account that
Christ's Blood is not shed for all; and the Apostle says, He is the
Propitiation for the sins of the whole World; But J. W. says, that this Word
is not Christ, and the Apostle did commend those that he preached to, and
committed them to the word of his Grace, which is able to build them up, and to
give them an Inheritance among all them that are Sanctified.

But for the Readers satisfaction, we shall prove something out of the Old
Testament; Did not Abraham see Christ's day, and was glad, and believed, and it
was counted to him for Righteousness; was not this by Christ the Word, which
was in the beginning with God, who said, before Abraham was I am; did not Moses
write of him, as Christ says, and says, A Prophet shall the Lord your God
raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me, him shall you hear in all
things. Did not Moses see this by the word that was in his heart, which he
preached to them; and did not David Prophecy and saw Christ set up a King upon
the Holy Hill of Zion, and said, he would declare the Decree of the Lord, the
Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, ask of
me and I will give thee the Heathen for thy inheritance, and the utmost parts
of the Earth for thy possession, Psalm. 2. But J. W. would not have Christ to
have none of these, nor such large possessions, he will not have him the Light,
nor Savior of the World, nor have the Heathen for his Inheritance, and David
saw Christ a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisadecke, and did he not
see this by the Word that was in his heart, that was a Light unto his paths,
and a Lanthorn unto his steps, and he said, he had hid his word in his heart,
Psalm. 119. And thy Word is sweeter then the honey or the honey-combe: And
Solomon says, Pro. 8. 27. The Lord possessed me in the beginning, I was set up
from everlasting, from the beginning, or e're the Earth was, was not this the
word that was in Solomon's heart, from the beginning, and the word that Isaiah
the Son of Amos saw concerning Juda and Jerusalem, It shall come to pass in
the last days, that the Mountain of the Lord's House shall be established on
the top of the Mountains, Isay 2. from the 1. verse. to the 5. where he says,
Oh ye House of Jacob come ye and let us walk in the Light of the Lord, was
not this the Light of Christ, by which he saw the Mountain of the Lords House
that was to be in the last days, and was not this the Word Christ that was in
the Prophet, who said that their root should be rottenness and their blossoms
should go up as dust, because they have cast away the Law of the Lord, and
despised the holy one of Israel, which Law the Prophet saw go out of Sion, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, was not this Christ Jesus the light, and
word of God, and the Lord sent a word unto Jacob, and it lights upon Israel,
and is not this Christ Jesus Gods Covenant.

And the Prophet Isaiah, when he spoke to the people, he told them their ears
should hear a word behind them, when they turned to the right hand, or to the
left, and their eyes should see their Teacher, and he should never more be
removed into a corner, and who is this that is given for a Leader, and a
Guider, and Teacher, is not this Christ that the Prophet calls to, when he
says, Ho, every one that thristeth come and buy, etc. where he says, Incline
thine ear and thy Soul shall live, and I will make an Everlasting Covenant with
thee, even the sure mercies of David: Is not this in Christ, and is not this
Call to every one that will come and incline their ear to the Light of Christ
in their hearts and consciences, and hearken to the word in their hearts, which
is given for a leader and a teacher of all people; But, such Ministers of
darkness as J. W. never directed to this teacher and so keeping them in
darkness, keeps them in sin, in wickedness, but the Lord is coming, and is come
already, blessed be his name, to redeem, and has redeemed many thousands out of
their mouths, and from under the tyranny of the oppressor which they have long
kept poor people in, and Ier. 15. 16. where Jeremy said, Thy word is myjoy, and
the rejoicing of my heart. Was not this word Light in his heart, which is sown
for the Righteous, and joy for the upright in heart? And again, Ier. 20. 9. But
his Word was in my heart as a burning fire, shut up in my bones, and I was
weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. And again, Ier. Is not my Word
like a Fire, says the Lord, and like a hammer that breaks the Rocks in pieces,
Chap. 23. 29. Did not all these Prophets and Holy men of God speak and
prophecy with many more, which the Scripture makes mention of, from the Word
of God in their hearts that was in the beginning; has thou not here denied the
Emanuel, God with us, that the Prophet Isay testified of; and so has denied
Christ come in the Flesh, whereby thou has clearly manifested thy self to be an
Antichrist indeed, for thou have set thy self to oppose Christ; for, Christ
Jesus himself when he preached to the multitude, he said, Mat. 13. 3. etc. A
Sower went out to sow, and the Seed that he sowed was the Word of God, and the
field that he sowed in was the World, and the ground that brought forth fruit
to God was the honest and good heart. And he says again, Ye are clean through
the Word, etc. Ioh. 15. 3. And again, Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word
is truth, Ioh. 17. 17. And again, Heb. 3. Who being the brightness of his
Glory, and the express Image of his person, and upholding all things by the
word of his Power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the
right hand of the Majesty on high, was not this Christ.

But thou will say, it may be, if he be of the Majesty on high, he is not in
the hearts of people then.

Thy blindness, darkness, and ignorance of God looks so; But, the Apostle Peter
his Exhortation was, That as new born babes, they should desire the sincere
milk of the Word, that they might grow thereby. And the Apostle James exhorted
them, To receive with meekness the ingrafted word which is able to save the
Souls, Chap. 1. 21. And again, in Peter 1 epist. 2. 6. Behold I lay in Zion a
chief Cornerstone, elect, and precious, and he that believes on him shall not
be confounded, unto you therefore which believe, he is precious, but unto them
which be disobedient, the Stone which the Builders disallowed the same is made
the head of the corner, and a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, even to
them that stumble at the word, being, disobedient, whereunto also they were
appointed, 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8.

Now I. W. thou art this man, for thou has stumbled at the word, and art
fallen, and shall never rise again, this stone shall grind thee to powder; this
is our Cornerstone, which thou says, thou will confound; but, the Apostle
says, he that believes in him (and we believe in him therefore) shall never
be confounded; and so here thou will be found a liar: And thou says in thy
Book, thou will remove our foundation, which is the light in every man; which
is sufficiently proved, that it is Christ Jesus the foundation of all the
Prophets and Apostles; and here thou strives with that which is too strong for
thee, the weighty stone must needs fall upon thee. And in 2 Pet. 1. 19. where
Peter exhorted them to take heed to the more sure word of prophecy, and to the
light that shined in a dark place, and to the day star that would arise in
their hearts; but thy dark preaching is contrary to that; and 1 John 1. 1. That
which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen without
eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of
life, etc. Let the serious Reader but read this Chapter, and see if by it he
may not in his own understanding judge of the wickedness of this man, and also
in the 2. Chap. where the Apostie says, He writes no new Commandment unto
you, but an old Commandment which ye had from the beginning, the old
Commandment is the word which ye have heard from the beginning.

Again, a new Commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him, and in
you, because the darkness is past, and the true light now shines. Here the
Apostle manifests the word and the light to be one, in that he writes unto
them in the word, and in the Light that now shines, glory be to the Lord for
evermore, which the whole power of darkness has long mustered up and stood
against; but he that is upon the white Horse, who is called faithful and true,
in Righteousness he does judge and make war, his eyes are as a flame of fire,
and upon his head many Crowns, he was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood, and
his name is called the Word of God, Rev. 20. 11, 12, 13.

Now I have done with thee as concerning this head, and thou will find that
this word will judge thee in the last day, who has punctually denied Christ
Jesus to be the Word of God, which is his name, so he stands upon thee thy
condemner for ever, and so thereby thou art manifest to be the Antichrist.

So the next head that I am to manifest to the Reader, is, that thou makes a
distinction of God and Christ, and through thy denying of Christ to be the
Light that comes into the World, and thereby denies Christ to be come in the
Flesh, and thereby art the Antichrist; for thou says, that Christ is not the
word and Light which John bears witness of, but say, it is the word Creator;
and so makes a difference betwixt the Father and the Son, and so art just in
the Arrians Principle in dividing the Father and the Son, which brought in
Heresies of old into the Churches; and contrary unto the Angels testimony unto
Joseph and Mary, who said, She should bring forth a Son, and shall call his
name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins; that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, saying, Behold a Virgin shall be
with Child and bring forth a Son, they shall call his name Emanuel, which being
interpreted, is, God with us. And so contrary to this, thou would divide Christ
and God.

So here thou have denied Christ of his propriety in the Father, and have
blasphemed against the Godhead, contrary to Christ his own words, who said, I
and my Father are one; and so here thou has joined with the Jews in taking up
stones to stone him with. And also, in the 8. of John and the 16. ver. And yet
if I judge, my judgment is true, for I am not alone, but I and my Father that
sent me. And again, in the 14. of John and the 10. ver. Believes thou not that
I am in the Father, and the Father in me the words that I speak, I speak not of
my self, but the Father that dwells in me, does the works; believe me that I
am in the Father, and the Father in me. And in the 2. verse. before, Philip
says, Show us the Father, and it suffices us, Jesus says unto him, have thou
not known me Philip? he that has seen me has seen the Father.

And again, Ioh. 17. 11. Keep them through thy own name, that they may be one as
we are: And again verse 21. That they may be all one as thou O Father art in
me, and I in thee, I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in
one. And so thou that have divided the Son from his Father, and the Saints from
them both; thou have committed Sacrilege indeed, who has denied the great work
of Salvation and Redemption of Mankind, which the Apostle admired at, that God
should send his only begotten Son into the World, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life. But this Christ thou has
gainsaid, and resisted, and denied, and so is never like to have benefit by
him, but he will be thy condemnation for ever.

And here thou have fulfilled old Simeons prophecy in the 2d. of Luke, Unto
whom it was revealed by the Holy Ghost that he should not see death before be
had seen the Lords Christ, who took him in his Arms and blessed God; and said,
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, for
mine eyes have seen thy Salvation which thou have prepared before the face of
all people, a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy people
Israel; and behold, this Child is set for the fall and rising of many in
Israel, for a sign which shall be spoken against. And here thou art the man
that has set thy self against him, and is fallen, and so has denied Christ's
coming in the flesh, and also has denied God being in Christ reconciling the
World unto himself; which the Apostle said, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Was a great mystery,
God manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit. And so thou that denies
the Light of Christ, and his Spirit, which opens and reveals the mystery, thou
art not like but to be ignorant who has denied Christ in his Godhead, Ioh. 5.
7. for the Apostlesaith, There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one; and this Record
thou has denied, for first thou has denied Christ to be the Word; and secondly,
thou has denied Christ to be one with the Father; and so thou has denied Christ
to be God, except thou will have two Gods, for thou has created already two
Lights, and two Words; thou will neither have Christ to be the Light of the
World, nor thou will not have him to be the Word which was in the beginning
with the Father; nor thou will not have him to be Gods Covenant of Light with
Abraham and his Seed; and also, the promise of God unto Adam, where the Lord
said, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head.

And now let the Reader judge whether thou be not a perfect Antichrist, who
has denied Christ come in the flesh, both in his Light, wherewith he lightens
all people that comes into the World. Secondly, he denies him to be the Word
which was in the beginning, by which all things was made and created, which is
the Word the Apostle directed people to in their hearts, Romans 10. 45. Thirdly,
He denies him to be come in the Covenant of God, which is light, by which he
reconciles all things to himself, both of things in Heaven, and of things in
Earth, Ephesians. 1. 10. And fourthly, thou has denied him to be one with his
Father; and so I believe here the Reader will confess that J. W. is perfectly
proved an Antichrist; for the Apostle says, Joh. 4. 3. Every Spirit that
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God, and this
is the spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard should come, and now is in
the World. And again in the 2 Ep. of John and the 1. Many Deceivers are entered
into the World, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, this is
a deceiver and an Antichrist. And so as for I. VV. he does not only not confess
Christ, but has denied Christ to be come in the flesh, as has been manifestly
proved, and so is he of whom the Apostle says, Whosoever transgresses, and
abides not in the Doctrine of Christ has not God, but he that abides in the
Doctrine of Christ has both the Father and the Son. Here the Apostle joins
them together, and puts them not asunder, as I. VV. does; And therefore, we are
not to receive him into our Houses, neither bid him God speed, but deny him as
he has denied Christ, and has proved himself an Antichrist complete.

And whereas thou speaks in thy Book, That multitudes are ensnared for want of
dividing, or making distinctions between God and Christ, and brings the 2 of
Peter 2. 2. many shall follow their pernicious ways.

Answ. Let the Reader read the portion of Scripture; in his own judgment, and
truth of his heart, let him judge whether this Scripture be not a true
Character of thee, and thy Generation of Priests, or whether he can judge the
Quakers to be such a People as this Scripture holds forth, and by this he may
judge the falsity of thy judgment, and thy envy and malice, which breaks forth
in lying; The next words following are, Many shall follow their pernicious
ways, by reason of whom the way of truth is evil spoken of, and through
covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you; who is this
the Quakers, or it is I. W. and his company of Priests? thou breaks off
betime, if thou had written any further in Peter, it would have come upon thy
own head; But there is a verse before, which says, That there would be false
Prophets that would bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.

Here thou art perfectly set forth, for I believe never any denied him more
wickedly then thou have done, as is manifestly proved, and so art that false
Prophet there spoken on. But again, verse 15. They were such as followed the
way of Balaam, for the wages of unrighteousness, Art not thou one of these?
Again there were such as walked after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness,
must not thou needs be he who denies the Light that manifests sin and
uncleanness, thorough the obedience of which they may be preserved out of it;
but they were to receive the reward of unrighteousness, and so will thou, who
art reserved unto the day of judgment to be punished.

And now thou being thus manifested and proved to be what is before mentioned,
that the words in my Letters will fall of necesity upon thee, though thou have
endeavored to cover thy self by thy setting my words in thy own frame, and
thereby to make them seem as if they were railing Speeches, and spoken without
ground.

And 1. Where as thou says, that I writ in my Letter to manifest thy
gainsaying Spirit Core- like, Let the Readers judge whether this be not
manifestly proved upon thy head before in gainsaying the Truth Christ, who is
the Light that lightens every man, etc.

2ly. Thou say I said, Thou art without God in the World, my words are thus,
The Light in every one as it is obeyed, makes the separation from the World,
which Light thou denies, and so art without God in the World, who is Light,
and in him is no darkness at all.

3ly. Thou say I said, Thou have manifested thy self to be out of the first
step that leads to Christianity, and art a Priest of Darkness, These words are
true upon thee, for the Light Christ Jesus, the Word (which thou has denied)
is the entrance into life, and Christ is the Way, the Light, and the Truth,
and the Door, which thou have denied, and so by Christ's own words, thou art a
Thief that enters not in at the Door, the Light, but climb'st up another way,
Jo. 10. And so thy Prayers, and all thy fleshly performances must need be
abominable, who art without the Door, Christ the Light, amongst the Thieves
and Robbers, and of thy commiting Sacrilege, that is proved before
sufficiently, and also thy blaspheming against the holy Spirit of God; There
needs no more to be said to that, it is sufficiently proved before.

And in my second Letter thou says 1. I said thou begins with a lie, and ends
with the Devil, and sets J. W. next to him. Thy own Letter which thou sent to
me, which I sent thee back again, will testify that to be true, as it is there
written. And is thou offended that I should mention thy own words to thee, art
thou ashamed of them now, and art thou offended at me because I writ of that
which thou had writ with thy own Pen, thou art so muddeld that thy own actions
torments thee.

2ly. Thou say, I spoke of thy black defiled heart and conscience:

Answ. They are so, and blackness and darkness thou art filled with, who does
deny and gainsay the Light of Christ in thy own conscience, and that is the
cause thou art such an inveterate enemy against Christ, the Light, in every
man, but his witness in thy own conscience will be a Worm that will gnaw thee,
and Fire that will never be quenched one day, though thou make slight of it
now: but did not thou say in a Letter to me, thou had received my black Lines,
not that I writ these words to thee, rendering railing for railing, but my
words are true upon thee in thy present condition.

3ly. Thou say I said thou was a Child of darkness, what have thou to do to
take the name of God and Christ in thy mouth, thou enemy of God.

Answ. My words are these, Thou enemy of God that knows him not, whom none
knows but the Father, and none knows the Father but the Son, and whom the Son
reveals him to, and thou that has not a Revelation of him art a Thief, that
takes his name in thy mouth, but the cause of my writing these words was, that
thou had writ in thy Letter to me, That I ought not to judge before Christ
Jesus be revealed.

4ly. Thou says I said, Thou art no Believer in Christ, thou art yet in thy
sins, etc.

Answ. But my words are these (thou said) thou was in the light of Christ that
enlighteneth all Believers, and my Answer to those words was, Thou art no
Believer of Christ that abides not in his Doctrine, for they that believes
abides not in darkness, where thou art, but is past from death to life, which
thou art an enemy to; and therefore do not deceive thy self, for thy hope will
perish, and thy faith is vain, thou art yet in thy sins, and art thou offended
because I said thou art yet in thy sins, and is it not thy Doctrine that none
can be free from sin while they are upon the Earth, and art thou not a sinner,
that is proved a blasphemer against God.

5ly. Thou said I said, Thou was a man separated from God.

Answ. By his Light, which thou art an enemy to.

6ly. Thou says I said, Thou never knew nothing of the worship of God.

Answ. My words were these, God is not worshipped but in his spirit which
reveals him, and so thou that has not the Revelation, thou never knew the
worship of God.

7ly. Thou say I said, Thou envious poysenous heart.

Answ. But my words are these, And for thy uncivil terms that thou has
invented out of thy envious poysenous heart, as calling me the Whore of
Babylon, and a Woman drunk, and Iessabel, with many other such like terms as
these; and so now the Reader may see thy deceitful and theevish dealing,
though thou would hide and cover thy self, this manifests thee to be a Child of
darkness indeed. Thou art ashamed of thy own words, and conceales them for
these forementioned terms.

Thou writ to me in thy Letter, when thou was drunk with fury, and takes mine
in pieces, and perverts them, and belyes them, if thou had had any dram of
honesty, thou might have set some of thy own foul words down which thou writ
to me, or at least have set mine down in order as they were writ to thee, but
to wrest, and pervert, and lie for thy own ends and advantage, has been the
Trade thou has followed all thy life time with the Scriptures.

8ly. Thou say I said, Thou art under the Chain of it, it is over thee, a
fighter against God and his Truth, and the Reward thou will be sure to have,
and never look that that which is cursed will be blessed.

But thou have left these words out, and thou have preached another Gospel then
the Apostles did, this thou have left out, Thou art accursed, and no other
portion can thou have, and this is Scripture and Truth to thee.

In my third Letter thou say I said, Thou can do something in writing a Book
of thy own Dreams, and thy Imaginations and brain studies, and telling of
lies, which thou hatcheth out of darkness, but thou art a mere sot and
Ignoramus, thy evil and unclean heart, thy malicious, dark, envious spirit,
thy weakness, inability and ignorance in the things of God,

But my third Letter began thus, J. W. Thou has now made a poor end of thy
boasting words, and thy Assertion thou has very meanly proved. Thus far, and
thy way of Answering thus far, for what is written to thee manifests thy
weakness, and ignorance, and darkness sufficiently, thou can do something in
writing a Book of thy own Dreams, and thy Imaginations, and brain studies, and
telling of lies and stories which thou has hatched out of darkness, when there
is none to contradict thee; but to Answer any thing which is plain Truth and
Scripture, thy spirit and doctrine, and practice is so contrary to the truth,
and the spirit of God that gave forth the Scriptures, in this thou art a mere
sot and Ignoramus, and so framed thy Answers of lies, scandals and reproaches,
and foul language, which comes out of thy evil unclean heart, for if any man
should but read my two Papers which I have written to thee, and thy Answer of
them, they may thereby read thy malicious, dark, envious speeches, and also
thy weakness, inability, and ignorance of the things of God.

And again thou says, I having told her, that if she called the Light that is
in every man that comes into the World Christ, she set up an Idol, and if she
worshipped that Light as Christ, she was an Idolater; She answered thus, I never
heard such words but from an Infidel, and an Idolater, and a Blasphemer against
God and Christ: Thou art an Enemy of God, thou art worse then the Jews, thou
art a fit man to join with the Turk to set up Mahomet, oh thou Infidel, oh
thou child of darkness.

My Answer to his was thus, I did never hear such words but from an Infidel and
a Blasphemer against God and Christ; and I do not know that ever I heard any
that ever owned the Scriptures to be true, that ever denied so much of the
truth there written, as thou have done, never take Christ Jesus into thy mouth,
who has said Himself he is the Light, Thou enemy of God, thou art worse then
the Jews that denies he is come, thou art a fit man to join with the Turk to
set up Mahomet; do thou think that Christ has many such enemies as thou in
England? Oh thou Infidel! who will thou have for thy Redeemer, will thou not
have him that is come a Light, who has said, while you have the Light believe
in the Light, that you may become the Children of the Light; Oh thou child of
darkness, what do thou believe in? where will thou appear when the
Righteousness of God is revealed in flames of fire upon the head of the wicked?
then thou will know Revelation, which thou do not yet.

And again thou says, speaking of Christ, She says I am a witness for him
against all such Antichrists, and deceivers, and blasphemes, as thou art, thou
art a Minister of the night, and of the darkness in the Apostasy, thou art a
night Bird, the curse and the judgments that is written therein, (speaking of
the Scriptures) Christ Jesus and the Apostles has pronounced it upon thee,
thou art the man.

My Answer was, and is thus, where thou says in thy Letter to me, If ever I
was of good savor, I have lost it by the abuse of the (...) Jesus, and
miserable wresting of the Scriptures.

My Ans. was, I am a Witness for him, he has raised me up from the death to
the Eternal Life, which is the Record and Image that I bear of him, and for him
against all such Antichrists and deceivers, and blasphemers as thou art, which
John saw was entering into the World in his day and time; which spirit of
Antichrist has lived in you and amongst you until this day, and has
descended upon you from Generation to Generation in this dark night of
Apostary, and thou that art a Minister of the night, and of the darkness in the
Apostasy, thou art now tormented that the Light is come, and the day has
sprung from on high upon thousands, Glory be to the Lord for evermore; so that
many can say, that the darkness is past, and the true Light now shines, and
this torments thee, who is a night Bird.

And whereas thou say in thy Letter to me, I wrest the Scriptures.

My Answer was, and is, my Paper where it stands will testify against thee to
be a liar, where the plain Scripture is set down without any wresting, and the
curse and judgment that is therein written, Christ Jesus and the Apostle has
pronounced it upon thee, and thou art the man which is guilty of the same,
which they are pronounced against, and thou cannot hide thy self from them,
thou will be sure to find them true upon thee one day, when thou cannot cover
thy self, as thou have endeavored to cover thy nonsense with my name.

And again thou say, because I asked this question, thou asked me, what
Parish Priest in England had got more money with his Tongue then George Fox had
done since he was Journey-man Shoemaker in Manchester; and where thou say, my
Answer was, Thou art a wicked, proud, disdainful spirit, a heathenish spirit
which torments thee and many more such night Owls as thou art.

Let the Reader judge whether thou be not a wicked liar in these words thou
have set down, and whether my Answer in my Letter was as thou have set them
down, for in thy Letter to me, thy words stands thus, I think thou would not
take it well that thy friend G. F. should be called a Priest; and yet what
Parish Priest in England has gotten more money with his Tongue then he.

Where thou said, I would not take it well if my friend G. F. should be called
a Priest.

My Answer was thus, he was never of such a deceitful trade as to cheat people
of their money, or to make people believe that he would bring them to God, and
yet keep them in darkness and sin, and preach down the Light of Jesus, which
they should believe in, Joh. 12. as thou and such deceivers has done; for he
was of an honest true Calling, according to thy Report, and he was called from
it of the Lord into his work and service, as the Apostle was, and to lay open,
and manifest such deceivers as thou art, etc.

And here I charge thee to be an open and manifest liar to all that reads these
foregoing words, who has set down in the first page of thy Appendix, That M.
F. affirms that G. F. was called from the Shoomakers trade.

Now let the Reader see whether ever I mention that G. F. was a Shoemaker, for
if I had, I had spoken that I did not know, and has thou that boldness and
impudence as to say, I affirm, when I do but Answer to thy Words, and according
to thy Report he was of an honest Trade, and that he was called of the Lord
unto his work and service, I am a witness, and many thousands more, Glory be to
the Lord for evermore; which is the cause of thine and many such night Birds of
your torment, and makes you fret your selves, and curse your King and your God,
and looks into the Earth, but beholds nothing but trouble and anguish, Isa. 8.
21, 22. and this is your portion that is come upon you.

And whereas thou say, I said thou was an impudent, a wicked, ungodly liar,
thou liar, a proud disdainful spirit, a heathenish spirit which torments thee,
and many more such night Owls as thou art.

My Answer is this, Thou said G. F. is not as he was when he first came to
Lancaster: My Answer was, thou liar make it to appear, wherein did thou see him
then what he is not now, is this the Answering of the Letters that was sent to
thee to turn into lying and slandering, and villifying; this is like thy frothy
spirit indeed, that instead of Answering my Papers, thou tells of G. F. that he
is not as he was before as above, and why art thou so envious and malicious
against G. F. whereas thou say I called thee a Heathenish Spirit, thou said
in thy Letter, thou had read of a Monk, and tells a story about him, my
Answer was further, such things is the fittest for thy Heathenish Spirit to
read on, thou has more knowledge and unity with them then thou has with the
Scriptures, and the spirit of God that gave them forth; therefore it is time
for thee to give over deceiving the people, and making a Trade of Tradesmens
words, (which was the Saints) for thy belly, etc. This thou would shufle off
instead of Answering me, and whereas thou say further in thy Letter, What
Parish Priest in England has got more money then he, my Answer was, here thou
art a wicked, ungodly, impudent liar, and I charge thee to bring one man in
England that will say they gave him one shilling for Teaching, or else let thy
mouth be stopped for ever, if thou do not send some particular whom he has
taken money of, or else thou manifests thy self to be an envious spirited man,
and I shall look upon thee to be so, etc. and the lie remains upon thee. And
thou said further in thy Letter, That G. F. having caught the fish, is likely
will cast off his Leather-cloathes. My Answer was, he was moved to put them on,
when he went to cry against such bryery spirits as thine, and thou may see his
Leather-cloathes yet, if thy pride and envy will suffer thee, thou thinks he
has gotten as much with his Leather-cloaths as thou have done in thy Chapels,
Shops, and with thy Leather Belt, he has caught that which torments thee, and
many more such night Owls as thou art; who has fished long, but it has been
in the night, and so thou has caught nothing, but thy own Gain thou counts
for Godliness. And whereas thou said in thy Paper, That the Quakers trade is a
very gainful way, which has gained Multitudes to the likeing of them even for
advantage sake.

My Answer was, the Multitudes that is gained torments thee, because it
manifests thy dry, husky, false, deceitful Ministry, which has beat thybrains
all thy days to feed the Swine with, I believ thy Flock would soon be counted
that thou has gathered, for Babylon is loosing her Children daily, praises to
the Lord for ever, and the Spirit and the Bride says come and see, those that
gathers multitudes to the Lord, is like to vex and torment thee; But what gain
or advantage has the Quakers got, thou wicked liar, except thou counts
Whippings, Prisons, Stockings advantage, and the spoiling of their goods, and
rifling of their Houses, and stealing their Corn, as many of thy Generation
hath-done; and now thou art out of power, now thou smitest with thy slanderous
tongue, with lies slanders, and false accusations; But thou says thou aims at
a greater thing then getting money in opposing the Quakers, which is the glory
of thy God, which is the Devil, the God of the World is thy God, and thou has
done what thou can in opposing the Quakers to get him glory, but now is the
time that both thou and he is judged, and cast out, blessed be the Lord, and
the Son of Man who is the Light and Truth, and way to God Christ Jesus is
lifted up from the Earth, which shall draw all Men after him, and him thou
villifies, blaspheames, and speaks against, and so thou is like to speak
against us that bears testimony for him.

And whereas thou say in thy Appendix, That I said thou have a great measure
of the Spirit of envy, malice, and cruelty, and blood.

And thou said in thy Letter to me, Thou has a true measure of the Spirit, and
aim of that envy and malice, etc.

My Answer was, thou has a great measure of the Spirt of envy, malice, cruelty
and blood, and thou have done well to confess it, but there is none of this in
my Lines, but the very plain truth to thee, and upon the which is thy
condemnation for ever, this stands upon thy head, and thou can not get from
under it, and so here is an end of the substance of my Letters which he
mentions here a word, and there one in his Appendix, some of them being an
Answer to two Letters he sent to me.

And here the Reader may read the folly and ignorance of this man how he
glories in his own shame, and who speaks great swelling words of vanity, and
has manifested his own shame, J. W. so long as thou has made a cover for thy
self of lies and false accusations to hide thee under, which is all the refuge
thou can take to, as thou have done in thy Appendix, in thy taking pieces of
Sentences, thinking thereby to hide the truth, and verity, and also thereby
would cover thy own shame and nakedness; but when this refuge of lies is swept
away, then thy shame and nakedness does appear, and thy lying and wickedness
returns upon thy own head, and thy nakedness appears: Thy Pen had better been
still, and thou silent, then to have spoken and written against Christ Jesus
our Cornerstone, which thou say, thou will remove; but thou art too light,
he was before ever thou or thy Father was, which was a Liar from the beginning,
the weighty stone that is burdensome to the Nations, is too heavy for thee to
shake, and thy foundation is shaken, and crushed, and broken already, for thou
art here proved to be a blasphemer against him, and an Antichrist against him,
and these things here before written are charged upon thee, and proved against
thee, and except thou can clear thy self of the charges here charged against
thee, stop thy mouth, and stay thy Pen, and lay thee down in the darkness, and
stop thy boasting mouth; and thou says in thy Appendix boastingly, What feeble
shifts are these, my Assertions strikes at their very foundation, and before
they make that good, they would run into other matters, but though they seem to
be weary of their cause, I must told them to it till their Cornerstone and
mine be so thoroughly tried, that it may undoubtedly appear whether of them is
the true Rock Christ Jesus.

Answ. Thy Rock is a poor Rock, an old Image that thou have dug and graven
out of thy dark-brain and study, where all the Conjurers and old divining
Priests in the Apostasy, ever was, and is, this is thy Rock, a natural created
Light, and spirit of a Natural man, and has denied Christ Jesus, which is the
Rock, the Church of God, is built upon; but thou have split thy self of this
Rock, and is fallen in the pit. And thou boastingly says further in this
Appendix, That thou art willing and ready again to debate the point in
controverse with G. F. or any of his friends before the high Sheriff, or any
in Authority if they should require us to come forth for that end.

Answ. Here is a crack indeed, thou durst not have said this, but thou thinks
the Sheriff would not send for thee, thou puts it upon the Magistrates and the
Sheriff that thou thinks will not trouble thee, or else thou durst not have
ventured on this boast, for I believe that on equal terms thou durst not
engage with old Henry Wood and William Holden, not before the people to make
good thy Assertion that thou boasts so much on, which thou has no cause to
boast on, but to be ashamed of, for this is manifest of thee already in that
thou has not Answered Old H. W. Queries yet, nor cannot do, and what do thou
talk of G. F. meeting thee, there are thousands in England that would turn and
overturn thee and thy Assertions; and thou art grieved that old H. W. and W. H
a Blacksmith should engage with thee to Answer thy Challenge, for I believe
they are of ability, for did not old Hen. W. stop thy mouth before the people
that thou could not answer him; and now thou goes and calls for G. F. to
shuffle it of thee, thou sure thinks that would be an honor to thee, and by
that thou thinks thou could shuffle of answering H. W. and W. H. of making good
thy Assertion, it is an easy matter to overthrow thee and thy Assertion, any
babe in the truth may soon manifest thee that never was in the truth, and so
never mention G. F. coming to thee before thou has done with others that thou
art engaged with, for there is a cloud of witnesses against thee, all the
Saints in the Scripture bears testimony against thee, and all that knows truth,
or ever will know it, does and will witness against thee, and all of thy spirit
and principle, and before thou make any more boasting, see if thou can clear
thy self of what is here charged against thee, and proved upon thee, and by the
Scripture of truth that is to say,

(1) of being a Blasphemer against the Holy Ghost. (2) of being a minister of
darkness. (3) of being an Idolater. (4) of being an Antichrist.
See if thou can cast this of thee before thou talk and boast that thou
chiefly desires to deal with G. F. and such others as say they are Apostles,
that their Doctrine and deeds being brought to the light, it may be truly known
whether they be true Apostles indeed, or false.

Answ. Poor conditioned man what will thou try with, with thy dim, dark,
Natural created light? thou art tried and proved already, and weighed, and
found too light, and so thy trying is little worth, the false Apostles know
more of the truth then ever thou did, and yet thou art so impudent, that thou
talks of trying true Apostles, but this is like thy former folly, but all has
been to manifest and bring to light thy rotten hypocrisy, with which thou has
deceived people, but thou will proceed no further, thy folly is so manifest,
and thy filth is so uncovered that now people will see thee and thy deceitful
wickedness, that with thy lying tongue can speak of Regeneration, and new
birth, and of trying true Apostles and false, with many other words which thou
has stolen out of the Scriptures, or else thou could not have spoken them who
denies the first Principle of truth Christ Jesus the Light of the Truth, and
the life, and the way to God, and therefore he stands upon thy head, thy
condemner for ever, for I have heard many Ministers and Teachers, and seen
their Works, but I never saw nor heard such a humble jumble confused piece as
this of thine, of dividing God and Christ, and such distinctions of the Light
and Word, but proves nothing of what thou intends, but leaves it confused like
thy self, and sits as Judge upon the Son, and sits as Judge upon the Saints,
and sits as Judge upon the World, etc.

And now J. W. since thou has taken upon thee withal thy might and main to push
with thy horn against the Lamb and his Followers, and has engaged open war with
him, and has boasted as though thou would remove him out of his place, and that
in a public testimony, let us now prove and try thy foundation, and let us see
how thou will demonstrate thy strength, and manifest thy ability to perform
this that thou has undertaken, that is to say, to wit, to remove our
Foundation, or we thine, which may be manifested to the Reader by thy Answering
these following Queries.

1st. Query. Whether the Light that is in thee be not darkness, but thy
asserting, to wit, that the Light in every man is not a saving Light, as also
considering what is here proved before for the confuting of thy Assertions?

2dly. Whether thy eye be not evil, and so thy whole body full of darkness,
since that Christ has said, that the Light of the body is the eye, and by thy
Assertion thou have denied that eye, and put it out?

3dly. Whether do thou believe that thou thy self has the Light of Christ in
thee, since thou has asserted that he has not enlightened every man, yea, or nay?

4ly. If thou have the Light of Christ in thee, how comes thou by it, or where
had thou it more then other men, and if thou was one of the World, and now is
not, how came thy change, and when, and where, did thou receive that which
makes thee to differ from other men?

5ly. Thou has taken upon thee to teach people, how was thou called to it, or
by whom was thou made a Minister, did thou ever hear the voice of God, have
thou the Revelation of Jesus, as the Apostles had?

6ly. Do thou turn people from the Darkness to the Light, and from the power
of Satan to the power of God, art thou no Minister of the Letter, but only of
the Spirit, as the Apostles were?

7ly. Where is thy Flock that thou has gathered from the power of Darkness unto
the marvelous Light, as the Saints in the Scriptures were, is thy Flock in
unity and fellowship with all the Saints in Light, how is it then that thou
denies Christ Jesus the Corner Stone, and Rock on which all the Church of God
is built?

8ly. And how came thou and thy Flock to be Saints, since ye deny Christ Jesus
the Foundation, which is the Stone is laid in Sion, and how came you to differ
from the rest of people since God is no respecter of Persons, and what has made
the difference betwixt thee, thy Flock, and the rest of all other people of the
World, show it and manifest it forth wherein ye differ, and how ye came by
that which makes ye to differ?

9ly. Thou says in thy Book, thou would have us to return to the true Christ,
and thou looks upon our Christ to be an Idol, and has left us without
direction to the true Christ, thou speaks on, so my Query is where this Christ
is thou calls the true Christ, and what he is since thou has denied him to be
the Light? 2ly. Thou has denied him to be the New Covenant, and Law written in
the heart. 3ly. Thou has denied him to be the Word in the Beginning. 4ly. Thou
has made a separation betwixt him and his Father, so what is this true Christ
of thine, being thou says who worships all these (before mentioned) worships
an Idol, being thou have told us of a true Christ, and has left us without
knowledge of him, and without direction how to know him, thou will be in danger
here to be one of the blind Leaders except thou manifests to us what he is, and
where he is, which thou has not done in all thy Book, but all thy work has been
to strike at ours, and called him an Idol, and yet has found us no better.

10ly. Thou seems by what thou have writ in thy Book as though thou were a
tryer of Spirits, and makes distinctions of Lights, and speaks of two words;
and also, thou speaks as though thou could judge of Regeneration, or new birth,
and who has the spirit of God, and who has it not; and not only so, but as
though thou could try true Apostles from false, and true Doctrines from false,
so thou has taken upon thee a high seat of judgment, when thou has taken upon
thee to divide the Father from the Son.

Therefore, I charge thee in the presence of the Living God, and as thou will
answer it before the Lord and his Elect Angels, to answer to these things, when
and where, and how did thou receive the word of Life which was from the
beginning, when did thy eyes see it, when did thy hands handle it, that word of
Life that was with the Father, which the Apostl. did see and bore witness of? Jo.
1. 1, 2.

11ly. When and where did thou receive the power of God, which is, the
Gospel, the Apostle preached, which is Salvation to every one that believes.

12ly. When and where, and how was it, that the Son of God was revealed in
thee, when he was revealed in the Apostle he was to preach the Gospel to the
Heathen, did thou receive thy Ministry by the inspiration of God, and
conferred not (as the Apostle did not) with flesh and blood, yea, or nay?

13ly. Was thou not made a Minister of men, neither by men, neither was thou
taught by men, but only by the Revelation of Jesus Christ?

14ly. When and where was the Holy Ghost poured upon thee as it was upon the
Apostles when they were met together, as also Peter bears witness? Acts 5: 30,
32. who were faithful witnesses of Jesus Christ that he was a Prince and a
Savior; and so also says the Holy Ghost whom God has given. Heb. 10. 14, 15,
16. Whereof the Holy Ghost is a witness to us, etc. Now if thou have received
this Holy Ghost manifest when, and where, and how, if thou do not stop thy
mouth of thy tryings, and of thy distinctions of God and Christ, and shut up
thy treasures of darkness and sorcery, out of which thou have blasphemed
against God, and those that Worships Him.

And in thy Book thou says, speaking of the Priests, and of the World, being
clothed with guilt, were never able to this day to look this people in the
face, to wit, the Quakers.

Answ. Prove and quit thy self of being one of these Priests and people by
answering of those Queries above written, as also Thomas Curwen's 24. Queries,
and also Henry Woods Queries which all stands unanswered, and thy Assertion
stands false yet, and unproved, and thou stands proved and charged a
Blasphemer, a Minister of Darkness, and an Idolater, and an Antichrist, by
plain Scriptures of truth, which never can be broken, thou art proved to be all
these, so see if thou and all thy flock and confederates can wipe this away off
thee that is laid upon thee.

And, answer all the Queries that is sent to thee by plain Scripture, without
wresting or turning, or adding, or diminishing, left the plagues of God be
added unto thee, and if thou do not, thou and thy followers and all thy
companions will be found amongst those that are not able to look the Quakers in
the face, for thou has as much guilt upon thee as ever man had, which may well
cause thee to turn thy back, and stop thy mouth.

And so this is but an Answer to a part of thy Appendix which concerned me.

Margaret Fell.

AND whereas thou say, another writes thus, thou opposes the truth, art an
enemy to Christ, an opposer of the Gospel, the power of God, and several other
truths: the substance whereof is plain truth, and to thy condition every word,
as thou have manifested in thy Book.

And whereas thou writes, that another writes thou art in thy Willworship,
carnal Ordinances, thou hardens thy self against the truth, thou art an enemy
to God and his truth, etc.

Ans. But if thou had been an honest man thou would have put in all my words
to thee in thy Book, and their names who they were, but they have hit thy
condition, therefore art thou tormented.

And whereas thou say, this is William Houldings Paper; thou speaks falsely,
for it was mine Henry Wood, and as for mine William Houldings Paper thou have
not put it in thy Book, which speaks about George Foxes Leather-Breeches, which
thou having lost Religion, God and Christ, have made such work about his
Leather-Breeches, but G. F. likes them better then thy cloak of Hypocricy; and
so its like thou was ashamed to put my Letter in thy Book, or thy own Letter
either, in which thou made such work about them, now this is Henry Wood's
Reply: I put thee in mind first, that Thomas Curwen and I Henry Wood did write
some Queries to thee, expecting to have them Answered by thee, which were the
occasion of the Dispute, as the record of the Dispute will make manifest, and
whereof there was no end made of the assertion which was put forth, has caused
many Papers to pass and repass, and according to my freedom I passed thy Paper
upon this account, because I had been an eye witness, and an ear witness of
some proceedings there, and of thy joining with William Barret a Cheshire man,
and this was about nine years ago at Manchester at John Maddocks House in a
Dispute with our Friends; another time there was a Dispute held at the same
House between thee and Richard Huberthorn, at that time thou made thy self
manifest, for thou broke into passion, and said he was a public person, so
that thou was reproved by one of thy own Auditors Edward Gaythorn by name, but
not withstanding, thou rose up and went away, uttering these words, That if
thou had known that so many would have been present, thou would not have been
there that time, although thou had said before that thou was a public person;
I knowing these proceedings gave forth this Paper that the Reader may know the
ground wherefore I thus write; because, I had known thee thus long to oppose
Christ the Light, therefore those Queries sent by old Henry Wood and Thomas
Curwen were as Pills to thee sent for this end, that they might work out that
old leaven of bitterness which I have known lying so long within thee, as I
have made mention of before, and this I may say, truly was done in love to thy
Soul; now this not being so taken, it caused thee to spew out these words, and
to be so large in writing against Friends and the truth, and for the reason of
calling them dogs the Scriptures are very plain, for they were called greedy
dumb dogs who sought for gain from their quarter; and yet there was many to
lick up their vomit; likewise, they were called Dogs which were without as thou
may read in the Revelations.

And for thy Challenge to us we were willing to meet thee, but thou was not
willing to meet us, although thon before challenged to meet G. F. or any of his
friends; what is the cause, do thou not condescend to men of low degree, for
if I meet thee it is not with hoasting my self in other men's lines made ready
to my hand, but in the name and power of the Lord, in the Light of his Son
Christ; for this I say unto thee, if thou had not used deceit thou would have
written down my whole Paper, but I shall cause it to be written down my self
that all may see it; and do not charge George Fox with it; and since thou have
given a second Challenge, but have not answered the first, which we did call on
thee to do, and to make good thy assertions, but thou shuffles off from it, and
names G. Fox, and flees from us, and will make it good to neither, the Paper is
as follows, we desire thee with patience to read it over.

Oh friend John Wiggan it seems old Henry Wood's and Thomas Curwen's Pills
which they gave thee to work out that old Leaven that has layn so long within
thee, but this has wrought of the contrary part, and has caused thee to vomit
and spew out upon a piece of Paper, and sent forth for the Dogs to lick up, and
they being eager does take so much of this thy filthy spewing that it causes
them to vomit as thou do; therefore it was high time to call for it that no
more be made sick with it; thou have used so many friends names in it, that by
the reason that it was taken away so suddenly and unexpectedly that they cannot
reply unto it; thou says, thou have answered Henry Wood's Queries, but it
appears that they remain unanswered; and likewise thou put down 24. Queries of
Thomas Curwen's unanswered, therefore Henry Wood and Thomas Curwen will meet
thee to answer thy Challenge which thou has put forth, and says, thou would
be answered before the High Sheriff, for we are not careful to answer thee in
this matter, although thou uses the name of Christ, thou does not depart from
iniquity as it does appear by thy smiting at the Cornerstone, which is the
Light; thou art far behind the woman of Samaria, for she said, is not this the
Christ that has showed me all that ever I did? it appears to me that thou
esteems this at a low value, which shows thee all things that ever thou did,
and calls it Natural, although it testify against those things that are
natural and carnal, where thou art worshipping the God of the World, which
blinds the eye of the children of disobedience, the veil of darkness is so
thick that thou cannot see through it, nor comprehend the Light, that gives the
Light of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, which shines in the
heart: And whereas thou say, thy assertion is made good; it appears to all
that are wise that it is not made good at all; for thou has challenged another
Meeting, so appoint the place and time, and Thomas Curwen, and Henry Wood, and
William Houlding, or any of them will meet thee, and hear what thou can say
against Christ the saving Light.

Now whereas thou say, not a word in all those Papers discovers the
unsoundness of thy Assertion.

Ans. Thou should have published the Papers to the Readers, and then they might
have judged of it, whether thou have spoken truth or no, but thou art afraid to
publish that which makes against thee, but takes here a word, and there a word,
thinking thereby to villifie friends, but they are made manifest in the hearts
of people, and all thy slanders nor any thing thou can do will hurt any of
us, for was there a worse word spoken to thee, which was spoken in the truth,
then thou thy self did speak to me and other friends faisly and unjustly, and
why did thou not publish in thy Book those four sheets of Paper that the
Reader might have seen them, and our expressions in our Letters; had they been
light, vain, and frivilous, thou would have made advantage upon them and not
have hid them, but have published them in thy Book, as thou have done some few
lines of them, but they are true unto thy condition, and will stand on thy
head, and it does become Saints to bear testimony against deceit, and there is
much in thy Papers that contradicts thy Assertion, and my Paper was true and
overthrew it which thou published a few lines of; and then tells the Reader of
four sheets, and never a word to discover thy assertion, and thus thou loves
thy deeds of darkness and hates the Light, and thus thy folly is made manifest
to all men, 2 Timothy 3.

And whereas thou say, thou have not published this abroad, but we have done
it first; which is false, for we did publish nothing in the Town, for the
Letter which I gave to the Jailer thou had, but I did not send it into the
Town, but gave it to Thomas Hardy, but thou sent thine into the Town, and
abroad, and was not so honest as to give us a Copy of it; and thy assertion
was answered by plain Scripture, but was never proved by plain Scripture; but
is thy chaffie imaginations, and wresting the Scriptures, which is nothing but
spewing from a child of darkness, which hates the Light, Joh. 3. Rev. and has
not God spewed thee and thy Religion and Worship out of his mouth, Levit. 18.
28.

And whereas thou speaks, how we cursed thee with the plagues of God; the
Scripture says, the plagues of God is to thee who adds to the Scripture, as
thou have done; and it was thou that said, the plagues of God was upon me, but
thy curses are causless; so what we have writ and spoken to thee it was from
the Spirit of God, and the Lord has judged between thee and us in this matter,
and his judgment is clear, and thy hidden things of darkness is come to Light,
1 Cor. 4. and there is no Communion between Light and darkness, 2 Cor. 6. and
the mist of darkness is over thee, 2 Pet. 2. the darkness has blinded thy
eyes, Joh. 2. Reserved under the Chains of darkness, Jude 6. and Rev. 6. read
that and see thy own condition.

Whereas thou say, Had it not been a more easy and commendable work in one
sheet plainly to have discovered and refuted error, (if any such be in my
Writings) then to have filled 3. or 4. sheets with such stuff as this, surely
a right spirit would have lead them this way.

Ans. Those three or four sheets was most of them particular Letters sent to
thee by many persons, so as I said before thou should have published the
whole Letters, not part of them, and let them have spoken themselves to the
Reader, and thy errors are sufficiently manifest in thy Book, and thou would
have a sheet of Paper written to thy Book five sheets, in a few days time,
which concerns several friends 60. miles distance one from another, this was
Jahn Wiggan's policy and his peoples, to get the Book again, and to boast that
it could not be answered.

And thy next words, concerning Antichrists fair speeches and allurements,
while there is hope to make merchandise of them; is directly thy own condition,
for now thou being stirred up and opposed, rages, who did appear to ignorant
people like a Lamb, but thou was known to us before, for now thou art loud and
clamorous, and falsely accusing when thou can not get thy will about, like to
the Whore in Proverbs 7. and Joseph's Mistress, Genesis 39. and 2 Pet. 3.

And whereas, thou speaks of owning Preachers not sent, but denies the Lord
that bought them, and preaches not the same Jesus, and Gospel as Paul did, such
thou say thou ownes not, but denies.

Ans. Then thou denies thy self and thy own Assertion, for the Apostle preached
that Jesus, which said, he was the Light of the World, Joh. 1. and Joh. 8. so
thou art the man that Christ never sent, Romans 10. 15. and Jer. 23. 32. and thou
art proved the Antichrist that denies the Lord that bought thee, 2 Pet. 2. and
Jude. 4. and so art one of them that crept in unawares, who preaches another
Jesus, another Gospel then Christ the Light.

And whereas thou say, we boast of gifts, etc. and that its reported to thee
that G. Fox had the gift of Tongues, and by such like pretenses we gain a
multitude, and it is a certain Character of Antichrists last coming that many
shall follow their pernicious ways.

Ans. Our boast is not in gifts nor tongues, as knowing they begin at Babel,
but our rejoicing is in the word Christ Jesus, and in his Light, Truth and
Spirit; and we would have all men and women come to the same in themselves,
which thou denies, by which they might know the Lord, by which a multitude is
come to follow the Lord, and to walk in his way the Light, which thou enviously
calls a pernicious way, and a mark of Antichrists coming; and thou Antichrist
like would draw people from the Light, and spirit of God within them to thy own
way, but God has overthrown, and is overthrowing thy pernicious ways, and
many who have been followers of thee, now comes to follow the Lord; and that
makes thee thus to rage, Matthew 24. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 2. and our way is Christ, and
he is our gift of God.

And after this thou sends 12. Queries abroad, and thou thy self could not
answer my Queries, nor Henry Wood's; is this the part of a man of Wisdom, or
Reason? Nevertheless, I shall not let thy Queries pass unanswered, though these
Queries are not to us chiefly. Thy Queries are as follows;

1 Query. Whether it can be found in all the Scriptures that any of the true
Prophets, or Christ, or his Apostles ever used such language as is before
mentioned in any person professing Repentance toward God, and Faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ; or whether it be not clearly the spirit of an
Antichristian spirit, as has been hinted.

Ans. Thou that has denied Christ Jesus to be the Light of the World, and calls
him an Idol, and has denied Christ the Light to be saving, contrary to the
Scriptures, Luke 2. 38. thou have denied Repentance and Faith in Christ, for
thou have denied that which thou should believe in; and therefore thy words
bears the mark of Antichrist, 1 John 2. 18, 22. Joh. 4. 3. Joh. 2. 7. And what
we speak of thee is true upon thee, and the Apostle used such language to such
like, as Acts 13. 10. where the Apostle called Elimas an enemy of all
Righteousness, a child of the Devil, which perverted the Deputy from the right
way of God, as thou do people: And read Timothy and Titus, and there see what
words the Apostle gives to evil beasts and slow bellies, Titus 2. 1.

2. Query. Whether there can be any other gain in the aforesaid censures, then
to cast an odioum upon, and to cause a disesteem of the persons opposing them,
and whether this was not the practice of the false Prophets and false Apostles,
thereby to gain more credit to their own cause.

Ans. This is thy own condition, for what gain is it, by all thy former
slanderous words which thou cast both upon Christ and us, that Christ should
not be believed in, and that we should be of disesteem among people, that holds
truth forth to all people that they might believe in him who enlightens them;
and this was the work of the false Prophets and false Apostles, to disesteem of
Christ and the Apostles, that people should not believe in him, nor receive
their Doctrine; as Mat. 28. 12, 13. and 2 Cor. 10. and did they not say, Christ
deceived the people, read Matthew; and did they not say, Jeremy deceived the
people; but the false Prophets and false Apostles could get the true Christ's,
Prophets and Apostles words, but was out of the life, and not being in the
spirit, the true Apostles always judged them, as thou art now, 1 Peter 2. and
Jude.

3. Query. Whether it be not a manifest abuse of the Scriptures, and a
presumptuous introduction into the office of Christ, positively to affirm that
the sins of any man shall never be forgiven in this World, nor in that which is
to come, merely because he denied the Light that is in every man that comes
into the World to be saving, in as much as the Scripture no where says thus,
that the Light is saving.

Ans. Thou does not only deny Christ the Light to be saving, but thou denyest
the Holy Ghost to reprove the World, etc. And Christ says, all sin may be
forgiven but that which is against the Holy Ghost; and thou do also blaspheme
and sin against him, not as he is a man, but as he is the Light and spirit,
Mat. 12. 36. and whereas thou says, the Scripture no where says, that the
Light is saving, the Scripture says, Christ is the Light, and he is the
Salvation, John 8. and the Lord shall be to thee an Everlasting Light, and the
Lord is the Savior of his people: And Joh. 12. I am come a Light into the
World, says Christ; and he is a Savior: And Psalm. 27. 1. and David says, the
Lord is my Light and Salvation. And here thou lies against that which the Holy
Ghost has said, in saying the Scripture says, no where the Light is saving;
and in Isai. 49. 6. where the Lord speaking of Christ, says, I will give thee
for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the ends of
the Earth: and God is Light, and he is a Savior: and here thou may see how
thou denies the Scriptures.

4. Query. Whether this people do not censure all Men and Women in the World
(as well as the Author of these Papers) to be out of the first step that leads
to Christianity, to be Infidels and to be accursed, if they deny the Light that
is in every man that comes into the World to be saving, and whether is not this
as much as to say, that they only and none besides themselves are Christians,
and whether is not this a great appearance of pride in them thus highly to
esteem themselves above all others.

Ans. There is few people of the World will deny that the Light of Christ
(which enlightens every one that comes into the World) is saving but thou; and
such Priests as thou art who contends against the truth, and it is not pride to
confess Christ the Light to be saving, and deny them that denies it, and say
they are out of the first step, for Christ being the Light, Life, Way, and
Salvation, thou, and those that denies him to be saving, are out of the first
step to God, for Christ is the way to him.

5. Query. And whether are not all those censures directly contrary to the
Saints, and such as make them liable to greater Judgments, Mat. 7. 1, 2. Jam.
3. 1, 2.

Answ. That which has been spoken to thee has been truth, and Mat. 7. speaks
to thy own condition, who judges unrighteously of Christ and us, and thou art
in that condition where many masters is, Jam. 3. 12. from the one Master
Christ, Mat. 23.

6. Query. Whether do not these clamorous and evil speakings for which there is
no Scriptural warant, manifestly flow from bitterness, anger, wrath and malice,
as the Apostle intimates, Ephesians. 4. 31.

Ans. We do not know of any that has spoken more clamorous and evil speeches
against Christ and his people then thou have from thy Earthly, sensual,
devilish wisdom below, Jam. 3. 16. and Ephesians. 4. 31. in the malice, wrath, envy,
clamor, and evil speaking that thou art in against Christ the saving Light, etc.

7. Query. Whether any wise experienced Christian can judge of this people to
be in a perfect sinless state, who appears with these open sinful railings,
cursings, judging in their mouths; nay, since this they boast and glory in
this their shame, whether is it not evident that they are the servants of
corruption?

Ans. Railings, Curfings, Boastings and Glorying, and such like we deny, but we
speak the truth to thee, as in Rev. 22. as the plagues added to them who adds
to the Scriptures; and our rejoicing is in the Truth; and the Apostles did not
Rail when they told such false Teachers as thee, (...) what was their
properties: and its manifest by thy Railings against us that thou seems
corruption.

8. Query. Whether this has not been their manner all along, to strive to
overcome with these carnal weapons, threatenings, censurings, cursings,
revilings, etc. and since no Scriptural weapon is yet employed in the
management of their cause supported thereby.

Ans. Our Weapons are Spiritual, and by Scripture weapons we have overthrown
thy Assertion, as may be seen in the Book, and the rest of thy fellow Priests;
And censuring and revilings, etc. has not been our Weapons to overcome with,
but Truth has been our weapon, by which we answer that of God in every one;
but railing, revilings, and persecutions has been your weapons against us, the
Nation knows it, when you were not able to resist the Light of Chrisi Jesus,
and the Spirit by which we spoke: And here thou belyes us in saying, we use no
Scripture weapons, but it has been by the Scripture and the Spirit of God all
along we proved you to be deceivers, our Writings and Books will witness
against thee.

9. Query. Whether it be not abominable wickedness to father all their evil
speeches upon the Holy Ghost; and to say where they curse, rail, revile, speak
falsely and frothily, that it is by his inspiration and command.

Ans. This is thy own condition, when Christ and the Apostles spoke to the
Pharisees they did not flatttr them, nor smooth them up as the false Prophets
did, Ezekiel. 13. 14. and the Holy Ghost leads us to speak truth to every man
according to their conditions without flattery; read how many woes Christ
pronounced against thy generation in Matthew 23. so in this thou have wronged
us, and belyed us as thou have done before.

10. Query. Whether can any man rationally conclude that these people bear any
true love to that person whom they judge to be the enemy of God and accursed,
and whose sins shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come,
or rather when they profess love, and say they desire his welfare, is there not
just ground to believe they speak lies in hypocrisy as its said Apostates
should do in the latter times, 1 Timothy 13.

Ans. Our love is to all Mankind, and we would not have had thee to have run
into such sins against the Holy Ghost, telling thee plainly what would come,
and relating to thee the portion due to thy condition, as in Rev. 22. And
herein stands our love as from the Lord, who rains upon the just and unjust,
and causes his Sun to shine on both; and herein we do show the Mark of our
Father, and that we are the Children of our Father which is in Heaven; and so
our love is not partial like thine, which thou enviously and maliciously terms
to lies in hypocrisy, which was spoken for loves sake to thee; But bray a fool
in a Mortar and he will not forsake his folly, as Solemon says: and 1 Timothy And
an enemy to God thou have proved thy self; and for that cause we cannot flatter
thee, Acts 13. 2 These. 2. 3. Phillipian. 3. 18. Psalm 7. 5. Psalm 80. 6.

11. Query. Do they not plainly discover a persecuting spirit in the
aforementioned reviling, and may not any man in reason conclude that whom they
judge an enemy of God, and accursed, they would use as such, if that they had
power.

Ans. Cain is afraid where there is no fear, and thou being in his spirit
manifests the same, for when did any of us lay such violent hands upon thee as
thou did upon Thomas Curwen and John Abraham, when they came to discourse
with thee of the things of God; so that has been spoken to thee in love and
kindness, as was told thee before, that thou might have turned from thy
wickedness; that was the cause why thou thus accuses us, and as for the
persecuting spirit, and reviling that is thy own.

12. Query. And last I leave it to be considered by such as will take the pains
to read the account which I have given of the Light within, whether they do not
speak all this evil of me, merely because I have told them the truth and not
for any other cause, etc.

Ans. That which thou have spoken has been against the truth, and is lies, and
the Reader may see, thou calls Christ an Idol, a natural Light, a created
Light, and spirit of a Natural man, contrary to the Scripture; and so thou
being against Christ, the Scriptures, and Gods people, therefore have we writ
to thee, and spoken to thee, being according to thy own Challenge, in love and
in a Scripture way; and it is for Christ's sake thou hates us. And whereas thou
speaks of another sheet that thou will present to discover the mystery of
iniquity. Bring out all the strength thou have, for it will further discover
thy own iniquity, and thou shall not find Christ Natural or Created, nor an
Idol, but in his strength we shall answer thee.

And whereas thou say, to the inquirer and weak, Take heed of the Religion
that begins with a lie, for it is certain, a great judgment of God to be given
up to believe lies, 2 These. 2. 10. and that the first step to this peoples
Religion is an abominable lie; and that every one is taught and required at his
entrance into this Religion to believe this lie, I have showed in my former
Paper.

Ans. It is thy own Religion which is begun with a lie, therefore all people
are to take heed of it, who denies Christ the Light, Joh. 1. 8, 12. and art
given up to believe lies, and utter the same, 2 These. 2.

And whereas thou maliciously says, To turn people from the darkness to the
Light of Christ, being our first step is a lie.

Ans. In this thou have proved thy self a false Minister, and contrary to the
Scripture, and the Apostles Ministry, which was the same, which is the first
step; in this thou have manifest thy envy, as all young people may see who
enquireth after the Lord, Acts 2. and the abominable lie is thy own, and little
else but lies in thy Book, and so thou may expect the judgment of the Lord to
be thy portion.

And whereas thou bids them take heed of that spirit that denies Christ come in
the Flesh, least they be partaker of his evil deeds by biding him God speed.

Answ. This is thy own condition, thou art the Man who denies him to be come to
enlighten all Men, and denies his Light to be convincing, and so has denied
John's testimony; a Man sent from God, John 1. And so none that fears God can
bid thee God speed in thy evil work, therefore thou art offended, and we shall
not be partakers with thee of thy evil deeds, for no other Christ do we own but
he who dyed at Jerusalem, above sixteen hundred years since, who sits at the
right hand of God, and is revealed in us according to his promise, who says I
will come and dwell in you, as in Joh. and the Cor. 1. Cor. 3. 16. Act. 3. 20.
and Collo. 1. 26. 27, 28. and all who are called Christians confess Christ to
be come, but deny the end of his coming, to destroy the Devil and his works, 1
Ioh. 3. 68. and to take away sin, but they must have sin while they be upon the
Earth, this is your general Doctrine, and denies Christ to be come a Light into
the World according to both the Prophets and Apostles.

And whereas thou say, Take heed of that people who have no better weapons,
then censures, cursings, judging, threatenings.

Answ. Our weapons are spiritual, and we have related over to thee thy due
according to the Scripture, as the Scriptures threatens thee, and pronounces
these Plagues to be due to thee, who adds to it, and we teach that people
might follow Christ Jesus the Light of the World, and not follow thee who say
he is a natural Light, and an Idol, and a created Light, and James 3. 9. is thy
condition, and so thou art the Man that deceives people with vain words, Ephe.
5. 6. and with fair speeches the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 18.

And as for giving satisfaction thou art not likely, who denies the Light
Christ Jesus, and any who reads thy confused Book may see there is no
satisfaction given in it, though thou have perverted many Scriptures; and as
for thy further debate, upon thy assertion we told thee we were ready, and
tell thee so now again, who have challenged us twice in this thy Book to meet
us before the Sheriff, which thou might have spared this Challenge in thy
Appendix; for we had given thee an Answer before; we would meet thee; to wit,
Thomas Curwen Husbandman, William Houlding Blacksmith, William Wilson Tailor,
and Henry VVood a daily Labourer; Seeing thou art the Man who has challenged
us, we shall in the strength of the Lord meet thee when thou will, and appoint
a time and place, for we were the Men whom thou had first to deal withal in
this place; and what do thou scoffingly put Shoo-maker in, which was not in,
which is a word of thy own forging, as though thou was not able to Answer us,
or durst not stand to thy own assertions; but shuffles from them: And one would
have thought John. Henry VVood had given thee disputing enough before, when
thou was so gravel'd and stopped, thou fled away from the Table, and now it
seems thou have put it of, till the Magistrates call us out, as though they
had nothing to do, but to meddle with thy Antichristian ways; Nevertheless it
stands on thy head, and do not say we provoked thee, for it was thy own
Challenge, for thou have taken that in hand thou can not make good by the
Scriptures, without adding or diminishing, we know that before hand.

And whereas thou say, He that says and affirms the Light in every man to
be Christ is a deceiver, and an Antichrist.

Ans. The Light that lights every man that comes into the World, he that
affirmed this was no Antichrist, Joh. 1. who said, As many as receives him, he
gives them them power to become the Sons of God; and here thou have showed
forth thy malice against Christ and against the Apostle, who bore witness of
him, and in plain words calls him an Autichrist, and against us who are in the
same Doctrine, and teach the same thing, and thou have proved thy self to be an
Antichrist, 2 John 9. for Christ is the Light and Salvation to the ends of the
Earth, who does enlighten every man that comes into the world, Joh. 1. Joh. 8.
Luke 2. 32.

And thou say, what feeble shifts are those, my Assertion striks at their
very foundation, and before they make that good they would run into other
matters, they seem to be weary of their cause, but I must hold them to it, till
their Cornerstone and mine be so thoroughly tried that it may evidently appear
whither of us be of the true Rock Christ Jesus.

Ans. Thy Rock which thou so calls, is tried and found to be no Rock but
confusion, who denies Christ Jesus the true Rock, which the Prophets prophesied
of, should come, whom the Apostles witnessed was come; and for thy false saying
that we grow weary, and before thou complained we urged thee on, how stands thy
confusion together, with reasonable men, let them judge, and we do not shuffle
with thy assertion, neither are weary of our cause, (which thou say we are)
for we need not, for we know what thou art who is wholly bent against Christ,
it is thou which is weary of thy cause, and shuffles as thou have reason; for
we relate some other of thy Assertions which thou have laid down, art thou now
ashamed of them, and yet say, thou will hold us to it, and yet answers
nothing to the purpose, and it is Christ the foundation which thou strikes
against, as the Jews did, but to no purpose, and thus thou and thy fellow
Priests has stricken at him, who is our foundation, till you be all fallen
into the ditch, and leads the people thither too, it is manifest to the Nations.

Thou say in thy Appendix again, Thou art willing to debate the point in
controversy before the Sheriff, or others in Authority, and say let not G.
F. think to shuffle himself out, and put his task upon others, for he must
know because it is affirmed that he was called of the Lord from his Trade as
the Apostles were, my desire is to deal with him chiefly in this matter, and
such others as say they are Apostles, that their Doctrine and deeds being
brought to Light, it may appear whether they be true Apostles indeed or false,
and preach another Gospel then Jesus and Paul did, as I have cause to suspect
them, and doubt not to prove them to be, if they adhere to the Principles laid
down in their Printed Books, and maintained in their late debate.

Answ. This is thy shuffle and base charge, whereas thou say G. F. would
shuffle from it, and lay it upon others, that is false, its thou would shuffle
from those which thou have begun withal, it seems we gave thee enough the
last time, thou needs not call of G. F. for the least of us in the Truth is
able to Answer thee, and to see if thou can make good thy assertions, which
thou could not make good in the last Dispute, nor have not done yet, which we
yet call on thee to do, which by the Scriptures of Truth thou can not prove,
without adding or diminishing; and the same Jesus and Gospel whom Paul
preached, whom we own, which thou say thou will prove an Idol, and prove us
Antichrists who affirm this; and as for all our Books, which are given forth
from the Truth we own, and our deeds are brought to the Light, and by this
thine are seen, and thou too, to be one of the false Teachers, and thy deeds to
be deeds of darkness, and why do thou pervert M. F's. words, in saying G. F.
was called from his Trade, when her words was, he was called from his Calling,
as thou reports and thou talks of trying Apostles, and denies the Light
Christ, in thy dark spirit, and calls Christ an Idol and natural Light, and as
for G. F. whose name thou have published abroad in thy Letters up and down
beyond the Sands, and toward Manchester, and to M. F. and sometimes scoffing
at his Leather-Breeches, sometimes at one thing, sometimes at another, and
never was so civil as to write to him, so we do look thou should make thy
assertions good to us, before thou meddle with him, for they concern us, and we
are the Men that will encounter with thee, as before mentioned, according to
thy Challenge, whom thou in scorn calls Meckhanike Men; and as for me Thomas
Curwen, I nor none of us are no more Mechanicke then thy self, nor never had
collection yet John. Though I have been a Prisoner above four years, can
thou say so John; and as for me G. F. I never spoke with thee but three times
since thou came hither, and once at London, and I heard such evil language from
thee as I never heard from man; and I coming into the last dispute with
friends, and then there being liberty granted, I hearing thee lay down thy
Assertions, and affirming them together with thy people; first, That some men
that came into the world had not the spirit of God; which was put to thee to
make good, (being thou was the mouth for them) by plain Scripture, without
adding or diminishing, which thou seemed to prove out of Jude, which thou
could not; and that God denied faith to some men, and that Christ did not
shed his blood for all men; and that Balaam had no more spirit then his horse;
and that wicked men had not the spirit of God: These things with several others
which you asserted was put to thee to make good, which thou have not done to
this day; Nevertheless, thou have challenged to meet me G. F. and having
dispersed my Name in several Papers in a slanderous way; and thy brother Price
which came down to M. Fell's Chamber, and Challenged me out, which I presently
came up, and sent William Houlding to thee, and bid thee come down to me in the
Hall, but thou would not come at me.

And whereas thou challenges me G. F. to meet thee before the Sheriff.

My Answer is, send me word when thou will, and that thou will make these
Assertions good, by the plain Scriptures without adding or diminishing, which
thou have laid down to me, for I am ready to meet thee through the power and
strength of Almighty God, and if I have liberty, according as thou have
challenged: and many things more I have of thine for thee to make good (which I
shall not here put to Ink and Paper) by plain Scripture, for truth remains over
all deceit. G. F.

And why do thou flatter me William Houlding, do thou now own Mechanics;
but thou owned none when thou writ to M. F. but jeared at G. F. in this report,
and lost thy Religion to talk of his Leather-Breeches, and thus Fools will be
meddling with that which does not concern them, busy bodies in others matters:
And when thou had abused M. F. in thy Papers, she sent for thee to speak with
thee about the abuse, but thou would not come at her, and manifested herein thy
guilt and uncivility; and do thou not make a noise abroad against us, amongst
ignorant people, and keeps them from the Light, that so thou may get some
Collections of them; for thy Letters to M. F. signifies something of a false
fear and jealousy, that something should have gone besides thy mouth, cruly I
think that is the cause of thy rage against us, who owns Christ Jesus the Light.

W. H.

Here follows a Copy of a Paper which was given to John Wiggan of his
Assertions.
FRiend John Wiggan, we hearing of a Book thou have given into the Town before
we had a Copy of it, another Challenge to us to meet before some public
Magistrate, and the Sheriff, we William Houlding Blacksmith, and Henry Wood a
daily Laboring man, who cannot read on a Book, and Thomas Curwen Husbandman,
and William Wilson Tailor; who in the strength of the Lord desire to give the
said John VViggan a meeting before the Sheriff, as he has challenged us, and
has sent his Challenge into the Town and not to us, with many villifying and
slanderous words in the said Book which he has sent amongst the people; so let
all the wise in heart judge of this man whether he has carried himself like a
Rational man yea or no.

The Assertions are as follows.
1. For John VViggan to prove and make good out of the Scriptures of truth. 1.
that Christ does not enlighten every man that comes into the World with a
saving Light, contrary to John 1. 9.

2. That the Light wherewith every man is enlightened that comes into the World
is not a saving Light.

3. To make good that which thou have laid down, that there is some men that
comes into the World has not the spirit, contrary to John 16. 8. Acts 2. 7.

4. That Christ's blood was not shed for all men, contrary to the 1 Epistle of
John 2. 2.

5. That Balaam had no more of the spirit of God then his Horse, and which was
held forth in the dispute against us, contrary to Numbers 24. 17.

6. That Balaam did not see the Starr of Jacob, contrary to Numbers 24. 17.

7. And that wicked men has not the spirit of God, nor the Holy Ghost,
contrary to Gal. 2. Neh. 9.

8. That the Light before faith is not pure, contrary to Romans 7. 12.

9. And that Christ the Light that lightens every one that comes into the World
is an Idol, contrary to Ioh. 1. 9. 22. 13 and 46.

10. That the Grace of God is an Idol, contrary to Ephesians 2. 5, 8.

11. And that there is no mercy with God, contrary to Psalm 13. 6.

12. That Christ is not the Word, contrary to Revel. 19. 13.

13. That the Light is a false Christ, contrary to Ioh 12. 33, 46.

14. And that Light does not shine in darkness, contrary to John 1. 5.

15. And that God who is the Word, does enlighten every man that comes into the
World, is not saving.

16. And that the Light Christ that enlightens every man that comes into the
World, is a Natural Light.

17. That some are in the flesh, and has not the Spirit: This is he to make
good and prove how they can quench it, and grieve it, that has it not.

18. That some that comes into the World have not a saving Light.

19. Some there are that are in the flesh, and never had the spirit, contrary
to Romans 10.

20. That the time must come that men must break their Plowshares into Swords
and Spears, which his brother Price justifies in a Book, and John Wiggan was
offended because we marked it out for error; and these things we would have the
said John Wiggan to stand to, and make good before the Sheriff (as he
challenged) by plain Scriptures of truth in the New Testament.

For both the Scriptures and Common Prayer testifies against thy Principles.

Some more of John Wiggan's Assertions, which are not many of them, in the
former above written.
1. THat the Light in every man that comes into the World, is not the Door, nor
the Mediator, Savior, nor Redeemer, nor the Way, Truth, the Life, the Lord
that bought them, nor the Cornerstone, nor the infallible spirit.

2. That it is not the true Jesus, but an Idol, the Light wherewith every man
is enlightened, or the Light that lights every man.

3. To follow Christ the Light is to follow a pernicious way.

4. That the Light was natural, and spirit of a natural man, and was that in
Adam which let him see his sin.

5. That Light which is darkness spoken of in Math. 6. 22, 23. lets man see his
Creator.

6. And this Light looks upon every thing done, or to be done of man, and yet
this Light makes not any thing that is done, to be good or evil, and yet this
Light shows the Creator, and this Light in man will render God Righteous in
his Proceedings against man.

7. That Christ does not give his spirit to every man that comes into the World.

8. That they in Jude spoken of, as Cain and Cora, and Balaam had not the
spirit.

9. And this Light with which every man is enlightened is Natural, and its
gross to say, that the Light which enlightens every man is Christ.

10. That the Light in every man is but the spirit of a man, the Law written in
the heart.

11. That who so worships that Light that enlightens every man that comes into
the World, as Redeemer, worships an imaginary and fictious Christ, and an Idol,
denying the person of the true Jesus.

12. That whosoever says, that he that is the Light in every man is Christ, is
a deceiver and an Antichrist, and John Wiggan will prove them so.

13. And it is the subtle deceiver, and adversary Satan, that says, the Light
which does enlighten every man that comes into the World, is the Lamb, and the
Lord, and the object of faith.

14. And the Light that does enlighten every man is the Word, and before he
said it was the Natural man's spirit, and an Idol, etc.

15. That the Light, the word God, which enlightens every man is natural, and
man by it knows nothing of Christ, though he confess by it, he knows the
Eternal power and Godhead, the fullness whereof dwells in Christ bodily.

16. And the word God, the true Light, which does enlighten every man that
comes into the World; he says, is darkness, Mat. 6. 22, 23.

17. And the word God does enlighten every man that comes into the World, by
setting up a Light and spirit in man, which is called the Candle of the Lord,
and writing a Law in his heart, and the Light which does enlighten every man,
is not the word which was in the beginning.

18. And Christ came a Light into the World not to enlighten every man that
comes into the world, and this light is able to seek and feel after God his
Creator, and by it man may know his Creator, and the Eternal power and Godhead,
it is a created Light, a great Light, it is but a Candle Light, but it
discovers man's transgressions, and this Light springs up with man's spirit,
and this Light is the Spirit of a Natural man, (which does not know the things
of God) and this Light discovered Adam's sin, and this Light is Natural and not
Spiritual.

19. But this Light knows nothing of the Gospel mystery hid in God, nor
Redemption by Christ, nor of Gods good purpose, and Grace, nor of the Law of
faith.

20. This Candlelight, to wit that Light wherewith every man that comes into
the World is enlightened, is not able to discern the mystery of God in Christ.

And so make good these things by Scripture, or stop thy mouth for ever, for
thou Challenged us first, or give over Challenging; for we would have
discoursed with thee privately in a Christian way in thy Chamber, but thou in
great rage denied it; And another time Thomas Curwen came into thy Chamber in a
Christian way, and thou took hold of him and shook him by his Coat, and like to
have torn it off his back, and laid violent hands on him, and would have
thrust him out of thy Chamber: for, its very well that the discourse be before
a Magistrate to keep thee civil, for thy carriage in the last dispute was not
so hansome.

So provided that thou keep thy people in order, and thy self also, that you
may speak one by one, and so speak as many as will on both sides, that the
spirit need not be limited in any, for thou was the first man that broke the
order in the last Dispute, and spoke when another man was speaking, which was
taken notice of by all the wise and sober.

And also provided that thou keep down that foolish spirit of Laughter, and be
more modest and civil then thou was in the last Dispute when we were
discoursing of the things of God, and answer these things by Scripture
according to thy Challenge before the Sheriff, and in the strength of the Lord
we will meet thee, if liberty may be had, and when thou have made good these
things by Scripture; if thou have any thing to say to any else they will answer
thee.

These Principles he has laid down, and spoken to friends, and some were in
Books, which his brother Evan Price sent to us, and John Wiggan was offended
because we did mark them for errors; which you may see how contrary they be to
the Scriptures of truth.

William Houlding Blacksmith, Henry Wood who is a daily Laboring man, who
cannot read a word on a Book, and Thomas Curwen Husbandman, and William
Wilson Tailor, dointend to give John VViggan a meeting before the Sheriff
according to his Challenge, if the Lord will: And these things and also worse
things in the Book we desire to be brought forth to the light at the Dispute,
and there they may be proved; for he did Challenge us first, though our Lives
be out of disputes, yet we shall give him a meeting, and for him to make these
things good by plain Scripture.

And also besides all the scandals, slanders, and villifyings, and lyings, and
unsavory saucy language, and scornful, reproachful speeches, in a jearing,
scoffing, and villifying way against us; and these be some of his notorious
Principles, which he could never make good by plain text of Scripture, which he
has long made a trade upon to get his living by, and in a feigned carriage and
humility to go up and down, and insence and sow discord, and to make the minds
of the simple envious against such as honors God and loves virtue, but his
rage and violent hands has been known upon Richard Huberthorn, John Abraham,
Thomas Curwen, and others; who may seem to be simple, and in an outward
appearance to be a humble man to those who swallow down all, without any
question, proof or trial, but when he comes to be tried, his rage, and passion,
and violent hands comes to be felt and seen by such as Reasons with him in a
Christian way.

We desire thee I. VV. that thou would send for the Book which thou and thy
brother Price was grieved, because we marked them for errors, which was so
contrary to Scripture.

Here follows some Queries for J. W. to Answer.
1. WHether I. VV. is a fit man to preach the Gospel of peace, that lays
violent hands on people?

2. And whether or no that he can preach the Gospel of peace, and be not in the
peace himself to all men.

3. And whether or no this was the spirit of Christ in I. VV. when Thomas
Curwen went to reason with him of the things of God in a Christian way, and
like to have torn his Coat off his back, that T. C. was feign to cry out, what
a Minister of Christ and fight?

And also John Abraham, when he went to him to be satisfied in the things of
God; he laid hands of him, and thrust him away; Whether or no these be the
fruits of a Minister of Christ, and whether or no these be not the fruits of a
Natural man; and whether or no this spirit can give satisfaction in the things
of God, but only with his Natural spirit, make use of the Scriptures for his
own end?

4. And whether or no such a persecuting spirit (both with tongue and hands) be
not always blind.

5. And whether or no the blind leads any whether but into the Ditch, so
whether or no he that leads into the ditch does know the things of God that
leads to Heaven.

6. And whether or no this blind spirit may not give forth many Queries for
others to answer, and yet answer none proposed to him, and lay down many
Assertions, and make none good by the Scriptures of truth, as you may see Henry
VVoods and Thomas Curwens Queries lies unanswered yet, and his own false
Assertions not proved by the Scriptures without adding or diminishing.

7. And so whether (a striker, a railer, a fighter) Christ sent such to preach
the Gospel of peace, and such as disdaines and scorns Tradesmen, and calls
them Mechanicke men, as John VViggan does?

8. And whether or no he does not go in the high Priests rode, scorning the
Apostles, as being Tradsmen and Fishermen, and unlearned?

9. And whether or no these simple Tradesmen did not bring more Glory to God
then all the wise men (such as John VViggan) in the Earth, or Pilat with his
Greek and Latin; yea, I say Abel, Jacob and David, Keepers of Sheep, and Elisha
called from the Plow, and Amos a Herdsman, and Peter and John Fishermen, and
Paul a Tentmaker; Nay, did not the Jews mockingly call Christ a Carpenters
Son: And what think you now of John VViggan who has called and Challenged us
Mechanic men, twice to meet him before the Sheriff, that he would make good
his erroneous Assertions, and when we laid down his Assertions, and said, we
would meet him, he now disdaines us as Mechanic men.

10. Whether these hands that will thrust and pull, and hale, and like to pull
peoples Clothes off their backs, be the holy hands that are lifted up in
Prayer, 1 Timothy 2. 8. or the fifts of wickedness spoken of in Isa. 48. 4.

Thomas Curwen. William Houlding. Henry Wood. William Wilson.


ERRATA.
Page the 3. line the 2. for some read so. p. 6. l. 10. f. the r. thy. p. 24.
l. 22. f. thing r. things, p. 25. l 22. f. not as r. as not. l. 32. f leght r.
light. p. 43. l. 4. f. the spirit of a man, r. the spirit of a natural man. l
27. f. is r. not. p. 52. l 3. f. springing r. spring. p. 54. l 16. f. deserve
r. discern. p. 64. l 8. for knows the things of God, r. knows not the things of
God. l. 28. f. ligh read light. p. 66. l. 36. f ligh r. light p. 73. l. 36. f.
is r. his. p. 78 l. 4 f. game r. gaime. l. 15. where ever is twice, blot out
the one. p. 87. l. 9. f. overshipping r. overskippng p. 88 l 31. f. Luke the
tenth, r. Luke the first. p. 103. l. 10. f. sad r. said. p. 105 l. 23. f.
without r. with our. p. 130 l 34. blot out deserves line 36 for seems read
serves.

THE END.
Some Scriptures which overturns John Wiggan's Assertions.
GOD so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, Joh. 3. 16.
that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting Life.

I have no pleasure in the death of him that sins. Ezekiel. 18. and 33. 11.


I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked.

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all Men
liberally, and upbraideth no Man. James 1. 5.


God has made of one blood all Nations of Men, perverse disputings of Men of
corrupt minds. Evil Men shall wax worse Acts 17. 26.
and worse. 2 Timothy 3. 13. Christ is a Light to lighten the Gentiles. 1 Timothy 6.
5.
Luke 2. 32. Salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles.

The grace of God which brings salvation has appeared to all Men. Titus 2. 11.
2 Timothy 3. 13.


They turned the Grace of God into Lasciviousness. The Worlds Jude 4.
were made by the Word of God. By the Word of God the Heavens were of old. As
many that corrupted the Word of God. Heb. 11. 3. 2 Pet. 3. 5. 2 Cor. 2. 17.
Colos. 2. 9. Joh. 1. 9. Joh. 1. 5.
In Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. The true Light which
does enlighten every Man that comes into the World. I am the Light of the World
says Christ, so Christ is that Light which shines in darkness, and the
darkness comprehends it not.

God commanded Light to shine out of darkness, and shined in our hearts to give
us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of 2 Cor. 4. Joh. 8 12. John 12. 36.
Job 42. 14.
God in the face of Jesus Christ. I am the Light of the World (says Christ)
they that fellows me shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the Light of
Life, believe in the Light while ye have the Light, that ye may be the
Children of the Light.

Such as Rebels against the Light, Men love darkness rather then Light, Every
one that does evil hates the Light, neither does he bring his deeds to the
Light, lest his deeds should be reproved, And every one that does truth, brings
his deeds to the Light, that he may see whether his deeds be wrought in God,
but Jo. Wig. says, the Light is not salvation, contrary to David, Psalm. 27.
The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, who then shall I fear.

Jo. Wiggan says, the Light does not reprove the sin of unbelief, contrary to
Paul to the Ephesians (who says) whatsoever is reproved is manifest in the
Light, and so this is plain that unbelief is manifest by the Light.

But there is a spirit in Man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding. Job. 36. Psalm. 104.


The dust turn to the Earth, and the spirit to the Lord that gave it.

They also that have erred in spirit shall come to understanding, Eccles. 12.
they that murmured shall learn Doctrine. Thus says the Lord, he that created
the Heavens and stretched them out, he that spreads Isaiah 42 6.
forth the Earth, and that which comes out of it, he that gives breath unto
the people, and spirit to them that walk therein. Gods saving health among all
Nations, let all people praise the Psalm. 67.
Lord, let all people praise the Lord, let all Nations praise the Lood and
sing, but Jo. VVig. speaks contrary to David, how can Gods saving health be
among all Nations when they have not the Saving-Light. Look unto me all the
ends of the Earth, and be saved, for I am God, and there is none else. but Jo.
Wiggan says, they have nothing but a created Light, that is darkness, Mat. 6.
22.

Oh Jerusalem wash thy heart from wickedness that thou may be saved, how long
shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee. All flesh shall know that I am thy
salvation, but how can all flesh know his salvation, when they have not the
spirit, as J. Wig. affirms. This is good and acceptable in the fight of God
our Savior, who will have all Men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the Truth, but Jo. Wiggan says, God denies faith to some Men: and so gives God
the lie, and says Christ does not enlighten every Man that comes into the
World with a saving Light. And with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in
them, that perish because they receive not the truth in the love of it, that
they might be saved. But how can they obey the spirit and truth, when they have
it not, may Jo. Wiggan say, I will that Men pray every where lifting up holy
hands. But were thy hands holy J. VV. when thou laidst such violent hands upon
me, Tho. Curwen, and thy spirit of God. Turn ye at my reproof, and I will pour
out my spirit unto you, I will Ezekiel. 11. 36, 37.
put my spirit within you.

I will put my spirit within you, and will make you a new heart, and a new
spirit -- Such as vexes the spirit -- The 37. 14.
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh -- But Jo.
VVig. maniests that he knows nothing of this warfare, who says some has not
the spirit to war with, he that sows to the flesh shall of the flesh reap
corruption, but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life
everlasting. -- Jo. VVig. that would not have the spirit in every Man, its
plain he sows to the flesh, and not to the spirit, for he says it is not
within them: Quench not the Spirit. They erred in Spirit. 1 These. 5. Isai. 29.
Jude 11.
They have erred from the faith. And Balaam erred from the spirit. Shall
receive a Recompense of their error. Romans 1.

The spirit of the Lord came upon Balaam. The Spirit of the Lord came upon
Saul. 1 Samuel 10. The Spirit of the Lord came 1 Samuel 19.
upon the Messengers of Saul. And so this overthrowes John VViggan's Assertion,
who says wicked Men have not the spirit. -- All the while my breath is in me,
and the spirit of God is in my Nostrils, Christ is the Savior of the World,
and Job 27. John 4. 6. 33.
gives unto the World. -- My flesh I will give for the life of the World,
Joh. 6. 15. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel, Mark 16. They
that believe shall be saved, but they that believe not shall be damned. I am
the Light of the World. I am not come to judge the World, but to save the
World. Ioh. 12. John 8. 9. Chap. John 17.
That the World may believe that thou have sent me. -- God was in Christ
reconciling the World unto himself, 2 Cor. This is condemnation, that Light is
come into the World, and Men loved darkness rather then Light, because their
deeds are evil. I am come a Light into the World. Joh. 9. Done despite against
the Spirit of Grace. Hebr. 10. But they rebel'd and vexed his holy 3. John John
12.
Spirit, therefore the Lord became their enemy. Ifai. 63. 10. verse. Zach. 2.
The Spirit of the Lord remained among the Children John 2. Acts 2. Mal. 2. 15.
of Israel. I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, for I have poured out my
spirit upon the house of Israel, says the Lord God.

So here thou may see they that erred from the faith, and erred from the
spirit, and hated the Light, had it. -- contrary to John VViggan's Doctrine
aforementioned. -- Did not I make one? yet had he the residue of my spirit,
that he might seek a godly Seed, therefore take heed unto the spirit. The
Gospel which ye have heard, which was preached to every Creature under Heaven.
-- Warning every Man, that they might Colo. 1. 23. Heb. 2. 1 John 2. 2.
present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus. -- That by the Grace of God Christ
should taste of Death for every man. -- Christ is the propitiation for our sins,
and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole World. -- And many more
Scriptures might be aledged, which does overthrow Jo. Wiggan's Assertions that
proves wicked Men had the light, and the spirit, and Christ dyed for all Men.

John VViggan, In stead of Answering to the Assertions, thou tells us of a
natural and created Light, springing up with Man's nature, and natural Man's
spirit, which is an Idol worse then Jeroboams and the Papists; nevertheless
thou say this light will let them know much of God, and of the eternal Power
and Godhead.

Now that this Light which is an Idol will show the Eternal Power and Godhead,
and yet show nothing of Christ in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells. --
How stands this together John -- And can a natural Light, an Idol know the
Eternal Power and Godhead, know much of God, and seek and feel after God --
Idols are dumb, Haba. 2. and has eyes and sees not, as the Scriptures faith,
and was this natural Light an Idol, which reproved them for their sins; Does
not the Scripture say Adam was made in the Image of God, in Righteousness and
true Holiness, and was this an Idol he was made in, which reproved him for sin:
And Judas who was made Partaker of the Ministry, and the Light which John was
sent to bear witness of, was a created Light, and an Idol, worse then
Jeroboams, which as many as received him (that thou calls an Idol which cannot
hear nor see) he gave them Power to become the Sons of God; by this natural
Light and Idol the World was made, by thy account; and this which thou calls a
natural Light and Idol, was in the World, and the World knew him not, and this
Light which thou thus calls, shines in the darkness, and the darkness
comprehends it not. This is John Wiggan's Assertion, but my Queries I sent unto
thee, which thou shufles of, and do not Answer them, since thou talks so much
of Bread and Wine; whether it be Christ or no? seeing some of thy fellow
Baptists Teachers are turned Papists, who were wrangling against the Light, and
now say the Bread is Christ, after they have blessed it, and therefore we suspect
thee, seeing thou art posting on the same Rode against the Light, so fast.

And instead of Answering, thou have taken upon thee to be a Judge of Christ, a
Judge of the World, and a Judge of the Saints conditions; and confusedly
patches all together, and thou divides God and Christ, and calls Christ the
Light a natural and a created Light, and an Idol worse then Jeroboams, and the
Papists, which all sober people may see what a pack of confusion thou have
heaped together in thy Book, for a natural light and Idol cannot bring people
to seek and feel after God, nor know the Eternal Power and Godhead, neither
was it a natural Light and Idol that showed Judas his sin when he had betrayed
Christ, neither was the Image of God which Adam was made in; and God the word
that enlightens every Man that comes into the World, a natural light and an
Idol.

John Wiggan, thy eye is blinded, it is time for thee to give over thy Trade,
with thy erroneous principles and doctrine. And Christ when he bid them Believe
in the Light, Joh. 12. It was not an Idol he bid them believe in, but it was in
Christ the Light, and in Christ was life, and the life was the light of Mon,
and this was not an Idol, and this is the same principle and doctrine which we
suffer for, there was a Man sent from God whose name was John, he came for a
Witness, to bear witness to the true Light, and that was the true Light which
enlightens every man that comes into the World, that all through him might
believe, and as many as received him (to wit) the light wherewith all be
enlightened, he gave them power to become the Sons of God, Joh. 1. to the 12.
verse. And so this Light which does enlighten every Man that comes into the
World, shines in the darkness, but John VViggan's darkness cannot comprehend
it, and thus he judges the things of God with his darkness, in calling the
Light of Christ, and also that which convinced Adam, etc. a natural and created
Light, and an Idol, and the spirit of a natural Man which knows not the things
of God, and also he compares the Light in every Man to the state of the 1 Cor.
2.
natural Man there spoken of, 1 Cor. 2. calling Light darkness, and to the
natural and sensual state in Jude, for nature being subjected, is in it self
not sensual, but being gone out of its course, becomes sensual; but this is
like to the rest of his meanings he has given to other things in his Book, but
we do intend to put him to make them good by plain Scriptures, without adding
or diminishing; for our foundation for ever stands sure, for we speak not of
the natural Man's spirit, but of Christ the Light, the second Adam, the Lord
from Heaven, nor do we speak of the Law of works, nor the first Covenant, but
we speak of the new Covenant in the heart Christ the light our Foundation, whom
all the Prophets foretold of, who is come to teach his people himself, who Joh.
VViggan pretends to remove, and so has run himself into further confusion.

And Ioh. VViggan says, that the Light which does enlighten, etc. is the word
Creator, and yet he says it is natural and created, and an Idol worse then
Ieroboams: And thus all may see he confesses that the Light is the word
Creator, and and yet he says it is an Idol: Joh. Wiggan says, God the Word
enlightens every Man that comes into the World, and a more excellent light and
life comes in by the Son, which none receives but who receives the Son, and are
born again.

Answ. They which receives this Light which thou call the word Creator, (in thy
own assertion) becomes the Sons of God; for John said this was the true Light
which lighteneth every Man that comes into the World, and as many as receives
him to them, he gives power to become the Sons of God, and this word is Christ,
as it is plainly proved; And God was in Christ, but thou goes about to divide
God and Christ: By the word of God was the Heavens of old, 2 Pet. 3. 5. We
understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God, Heb. 11. 3. And that
by this Word they became the Sons of God, according to the Scriptures, before
laid down, what difference then do thou make betwixt this word Creator, and
that which comes in by the Son, as thou speaks of, what can the Son do more
then make them Sons: So herein thou have quite overthrown thy self; what
further excellency, or what more Redemption can be had by Christ, then to
become the Sons of God.

And whereas thou say that we are Adulterers, but we see that thou art
adulterated from the spirit, which causes thee to vent forth such language as
thou do and thy hearers; for whereas thou scornfully told William Houlden,
that he was an unfit Man to meet thee before the Sheriff: Thy Assertions are
so gross and so erroneous that I do not question but in the strength of God, I,
or any other that were named to thee, to meet thee before either the Sheriff,
or any other in Authority in England, that thou may make them good by Scripture
without either adding or diminishing, which thou can not do but overthrow
thy own assertions:

And whereas Tho. Rushton one of thy Hearers said, I was a silly Man, and was
not fit to Reply to what thou had written against me, but I having had perfect
knowledge of thee this nine years, and how thou have stood in opposition
against the Truth, Christ the Light; that in his strength I stand to Reply to
thee, or to appear before the Sheriff or any other in Answer to thee.

I fear the Lord, and am not afraid of your great boasting and scornful
reproachful words.

Henry Wood.

A POSTSCRIPT.
HOw now John Wiggan, did not thou pretend at Lancaster that thou could not
swear, because it was a Command of Christ and the Apostle which forbids
swearing: And why could thou not bear Testimony before the Judge, but that then
thou would have time to consider of it -- Though before thou had laid down thy
Reasons and Arguments which thou intended to produce, which thou showed to John
Stubs and others -- And where was thy Arguments and Reasons when thou came
before the Judge had thou forgot them, that they stood thee in no stead, but
that thou must have time to consider of it; it seems thy Arguments and Reasons
did not satisfy thy self, or else thou jugled, or durst not confess Christ's
Doctrine openly, or otherwise fainted Esau like, and so was ashamed of Christ
and his Doctrine before men: And did not John VViggan enter his Recognizance
for his appearance at the next Assizes at Lancaster And what is the matter John
-- how have thou given the slip from under sufferings? has the heat of
persecution scortched thy Blade. Furthermore did not John Wiggan enter into a
promise before the Judge that he would preach no more, and that he might have
time to consider of the Oath: And so upon this condition he was set at Liberty,
and to appear at the next Assizes: And then did not John Wiggan give the slip
and go to London; And when he should have been at the Assizes, he lay there in
holes and corners, and preached and published his lies against the Truth: But
Truth has sunk thee into the Sea, and will meet with thee where ever thou
go.

G. F.

The Copy of this last Sheet was miscarried, and came not to the Printers hand
till the rest of the Book was finished.

THE END

