A Word of Remembrance, Repoof and Counsel, TO ENGLAND AND LONDON: Put forth by
One that Loves and Longs for their Prosperity.
OH People of England and London, remember thy former Zeal, when thou wast
willing of thy self, to enter into a League and Covenant with thy God, with
Hands lifted up to the Heavens, that thou would Reform, and square thy Life
in Matters of Religion, according to the Word of God, and the best reformed
Churches; for the performance of which, thy Ministry did sound an Alarm, for
Men and Money, which was answered in a large measure, in an Army which God
furnished, with a Spirit of Prayer and Courage, in subduing thy Enemies, which
thou did then judge, was an answer of thy Days of Fasting and Prayer, in
which thou did greatly rejoice, and set many Days of Thanksgiving a part, to
praise the Lord for his Goodness, which thou did account at that time
Infinite Mercy.

These thy Enemies being subdued, that did Tirannize over thee, both in
Spirituals and Temporals; and God did put a Prize into thy hands, that thou
might have been happy, had thou improved it, but thou did grow Proud and
Kicked against the Lord, and fell from thy Promises and Engagements, and the
Mercies now are swallowed up in Selfe-Intrest; none must now Serve and Worship
God, but as one Sort of People would have it; and when that could not be
obtained, then Hatred and Malice did increase, and those that stood in the Gap
in a day of trouble, must now be made the Objects of Scorn and Reproach in the
Streets: And this was occasioned by some that carried a great stroke in
Religion, because they had not their Lust satisfied, to have all brought into
one Uniformity in Religion; bitter and sharp Disputations were daily; by which
means Brethren were divided, and looked one upon another, as Enemies and
Strangers, rather choosing to close with the common Enemy, that endeavored to
destroy them both, then to own one another; which to accomplish, there was
secret Designs carried on with much Industry, for a closure with that party,
that God had born a Testimony against, in the face of the Son, to the Terror of
the Nations, in making of them like the Chaff of the Summer Threshing-Floor.

This Design at last taking effect, the common Enemy having now obtained that
which they long looked for, through the help of those restless Spirits, who must
now be the Subjects of Ruin and Dissolation; but those who had engaged their
Lives, Liberties and Estates, and spilt much Precious Blood, to save the City
of London from Dissolation, by Fire and Bloodshed, their Houses from Plundring,
and their Wifes from Ravishment, and their Children from being Murdered; these
I say, must now be delivered up to be destroyed by a revengful Enemy; in which
thou did sport thy self in their being Executed, and their dead Bodies set
upon the Gates of thy City, for the Fowls of the Air to eat, further assisting
the Enemy to Persecute, in filling the Prisons and Dungeons with such as fear
the Lord, that prayed for thee, and sought thy Welfare; thy Ungratefulness is
written in Capital Letters, that they that run may read it; nothing will
satisfy thee but a great Trade, which to accomplish, thou must have a K.
though thou did destroy thy Friends: But had thou ever such a loss of
Trade, as now thou have, by which Poverty is coming upon thee as an Armed man?
Thou did complain of Taxes and Oppression, had thou ever the like as now
thou have, and art like to have? Thou did complain of Profaneness, and the
abuse of God's Ordinances; but was there ever such Profaneness, and Contempt of
God's Word and Ordinances as is now? What designs there is to destroy all
Virtue, and to encourage all Vice, I shall leave to the Rational to Consider.

Oh People of England and London! I appeal to your Consciences, whether these
things be not true, and many more of the like nature; Oh! remember how many of
you that pretended much Religion, how deep you were in encouraging of
Profaneness, in making Bone-Fires, Drinking Healths, Roasting of Rumps, to the
abuse of the Creatures, Swearing and Blaspheming of the holy Name of God, all
manner of Debauchery committed, which must needs enter into the Ears of the
Lord of Host, and do undoubtedly cry unto him for Vengeance upon this Nation
and City. Oh! England and London, look into thy aforesaid Actions, and repent
of thy Wickedness, humble thy self before it be too late; consider how
Strangers now throng thy Streets, the Gunsmiths and Sword-Cutlers can inform
you, if they will, how the French and Irish Papists, do this day buy up Arms,
and how they walk in Companies Armed, and how they buy up Horses in Smithfield,
is notoriously taken notice of: Surely these things speak no less than Ruin to
thy Inhabitants, if God in much Mercy prevent not; how are the Papists Meetings
this day suffered, and Idolatry pleaded for, and the Lord's People who desire
to Worship him in Spirit and in Truth, are abused in such a manner, as the like
has never been since those People have born the Name of Protestants, nor
hardly ever before, as it has of late been.

Oh People of England and London! be ashamed and horribly amazed, for this thy
abusing thy Friends, and strengthening the hands of thy Enemies; was ever
People so Industrious to destroy themselves, as you have been? Oh! let my
Counsel be acceptable unto thee, and repent, which my Soul desires; who am one
of thy poor Children, that have, and do pray for thee, and shall conclude with
the Words of my Master once to Jerusalem; Oh! that thou had known, in this
thy day, the things that belong unto thy present and Eternal Peace; least it
fall out with thee, oh England and London, as it did to Jerusalem, that it
shall be suddenly bid from thine Eyes.

M. C.


