PROPOSALS Humbly offered for Raising One Million of Money.
THE Victuallers or Alehouse-keepers within the City of London and Liberties
thereof, are very numerous, and also all England over.

The Victuallers or Alehouse-keepers in London, are put to a considerable
trouble and expense for getting and renewing their Licenses, viz. for a new
License a Guinea or more, and for renewing, every year Twenty Shillings and
upwards for their License Fee, to some Officers and others within the said
City, besides attendance a day or two sometimes together, at their expense and
loss of business that time.

The Alehouse keepers and Victuallers in the several Counties in England, pay
perhaps 7 s. 6 d. for a new License, and for renewing once a year 3 s. 6 d. and
upwards, which goes to the private gain of some particular persons.

That in the said City of London and Suburbs, as also in the several Counties
in England and Wales, etc. there are a great many Innkeepers, Coffee-houses
and Cooks, which sell a great quantity of Ale and Beer yearly, without paying
for any License for the same.

So that if 15 s. per Ann. for a License were paid to the King toward the
charge of the War, within the said City of London and Bills of Mortality, for
all Alehouse-keepers, Innkeepers or their Tapsters, Coffee-houses or Cooks
selling Ale or Beer, and also upon all persons selling Brandy or other strong
Waters within the Liberty of the City and Bills of Mortality aforesaid, and
Penalty for those refusing to take a License for the same.

And if 7 s. 6 d. per Annum for a License for the Alehouse-keepers, Innkeepers
or their Tapsters, Cooks and Coffee-houses, and persons selling Brandy or other
Strong Waters in the several Counties in England, Wales, etc. And a Penalty
upon refusal thereof; besides, the reasonable Fines for new Licenses, as
occasion serves: This will amount (by computation) to the Sum proposed, without
any hardship to the people concerned therein; many of which pay greater Sums
than now proposed, and no benefit thereby accrues to the Public.

The same Persons (if approved) may License the said Victuallers as before,
viz. the Justices of Peace in the several Counties, His Majesty only appointing
a Register and Receiver in each County in England, Wales, etc. whose attendance
need not be above one Month in a Year.

All which is humbly left to the Consideration of this Honorable House, by
John Cuthbert, John Nicholls.



