THE WORKS OF EPHESUS EXPLAINED IN A SERMON BEFORE THE HONORABLE House of
Commons at their late Solemn Fast, April 27th. 1642. By JOSEPH CARYL, Preacher
to the Honorable Society of Lincolnes INN.

1. SAM. 2. 30. Them that honor me, I will honor. MAT. 24. 46. Blessed is
that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so doing. Printed for
John Bartlet and William Bladen, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Guilt
Cup, near Saint Augustines Gate. 1642.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
TWo things mightily advance any Work. A true Pattern, and a due
Encouragement. I conceive there is no one Text in Holy Scripture, in which both
are more closely, or more clearly laid together then in that, handled in the
following Sermon. There, you have a Pattern for your Degrees in Working: Most
cases call you up to labor, and some to patience: There, you have a Pattern
for the special kinds of your work: The removing of those, both Things and
Persons, which you cannot but see are evil: The trying of those which say they
are, or are said to be Good, and are not. There, you have a Pattern for the
Acceptance of your Persons with God in those works: The spiriting of them
with Sincerity, and the crowning of them with Constancy. There, you have an
encouragement unto all such works: Jesus Christ observes, and highly approves
them All. Your Constancy and Sincerity, your Trying of Hypocrisy and removing
of Impiety, The sweat of your Labors and the exercise of your Patience are
most pleasing unto Him. Work by these Rules (Worthy Senators) and Peace shall
be upon you, and upon the English-Israel of our God. It were very incongruous
to detain you long in the Suburbs of an Epistle, to whom (I fear) time can
hardly be dispensed to look into the City. The uncessant importunity of the
Kingdoms work took off some part of it, and obscured others in the Delivery.
Work then presses the soul indeed, when it comes so fast, that it shortens
communion with God: A day with whom Fasting is infinitely better then a
thousand Feasting-dayes, though with an Abasuerus. I have again repaired those
breaches with Hest. 1.
the pen: and have sent it somewhat fuller with this second message to your
eyes, then it came with the first unto your ears. The Lord make way for it,
both as heard and read, into all your hearts: and make you faithful ever, in
doing his work, as he will be for ever more then Faithful, Royal, in
providing you and yours a reward. I will not interrupt your Great affairs in a
Preamble, further then by reading, subscribed,

Your servant in the Faith of Christ, JOSEPH CARYLL.

Die Mercurij 27o. Aprilis 1642.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons in Parliament, that M. Goodwyn,
and M. Caryl shall be desired to publish in Print the Sermons they preached at
the Fast, before the House of Commons. And it is further ordered, that none
shall presume to print them for the space of two Months, but such as they
shall appoint.

H. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. de Com.

I Appoint John Bartlet, and William Bladen to print my Sermon.

JOSEPH CARYL.

Errata:
Page 5. lin. 1. nine, read ninth, p. 16. l. 5. her, r. you, l. 15. r. the
comma after also. p. 43. l. 16. carcass, r. carcasses.

A SERMON PREACHED At the late FAST before the Commons House of PARLIAMENT.
REV. 2. v. 2, 3. I know thy works, and thy labor and thy patience, and how
thou can not bear them which are evil, and have tried them which say they
are Apostles and are not, and have found them liars.

And have borne and have patience, and for my name sake have labored and have
not fainted.


THat ancient Character of this Book (quot verba tot Sacramenta) as many Hier.
in praef ad Bib.
mysteries as words, like that flaming Sword in the 3d. of Genesis which stopped
the way to the tree of life, may here seem to stop the way to this Tree of
Knowledge. Time has always proved the surest Interpreter of a Prophecy, and
the event expounds more in one day, then the Comment of many Ages. Yet as the
greatest Rivers, so the most mysterious books of Scripture run not in the
same continued depth: Though in some places they can scarce be sounded, yet in
others they show their bottom and may be waded.

This is evident (as in others, so) in this Book of Revelation, most of whose
Truths (as some have said of all truth) lie in a deep pit; yet even here we
may sometime discover truth in the superficies of the letter; even here are
many plain Doctrines, and practical observations. Such the Text now read
holds forth unto us; about such (waving all Quaeries concerning the Prophecy) I
intend (Honorable and Beloved) through the assistance of Christ and your
Christian patience, to speak at this time, not unsutably (I hope) to this
great presence and solemn occasion.

The words are part of that Epistle written to the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus; and with him to the whole body of that Church, and in them to all
Christian Churches, v. 7. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the
Spirit says unto the Churches. Integris igitur Ecclesias haec scribuntur,
says Paraeus, and whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written Par.
in loc. Romans 15. 4
for our learning, says the Apostle. I need not therefore trouble my self
about a parallel. It is enough that the common sense and abstracted
construction of this Scripture, is very applyable both to the business of this
day, and to the businesses of these (if ever any) busy times.

The Text contains in General, the Observation which Christ took of, the
Approbation which Christ gave unto the works of that Church: in and about
which works, Christ observes and approves three things.

First, a double Gradation. 1. Labor. 2. Patience. Some in working do not
labor, and most in laboring are not put to the use of patience; in these
works of theirs both are joined, the pains of labor, and the exercise of
patience.

Secondly, Christ observes and approves a double Specification of these works,
or what these works were. 1. The removal of those who were apparently naught,
Thou can not bear them which are evil. 2. The Trial of those who had an
appearance of being good. Thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and
are not, and have sound them liars.

Thirdly, Christ observes and approves a double qualification of these works.
1. The sincerity and uprightness of them, Thou have borne and have patience
and have labored. Why? not to make thy self great, or thy name glorious, but,
for my names sake. 2. The Constancy, courage and unweariednesse of them, thou
have done all this, and yet thou have not fainted.

I begin with the Observation which Christ takes of their works in general, I
know thy works. To whom this (I) relates we may read in the former verse.
These things says he that holds the seven stars in his right hand, who
walks in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks. A description which fits
none but him, to whom all power in heaven and in earth is committed, Jesus
Christ, God and man; I know. There is a twofold knowledge, first, simple. 2.
Mixed. Simple knowledge is the bare apprehension of the object, what it is. Mixed
knowledge is that which carries along with it either pleasure or dislike,
according as the object is, we apprehend. (Thy works) Works are of two sorts,
Good or Bad, and in reference to either: works are taken sometime strictly as
opposed to words, as opposed to thoughts: Sometime more largely, and so our
words come in account among our works, and so our very thoughts are works; yea
in a large sense, even things not done, nor spoken, nor thought may be numbered
among our works.

To abstain from evil is a work of grace, to omit good is a work of sin,
not to do our duty is a work of darkness.

In this larger sense take works in the Text. Good works are expressed here in
these two verses: and some evil, the decay of their first love, and the
consequent of it, falling from their first works in the two following, where
he is plain with them, I have somewhat against thee; he reckons up their
faults too, and in refernce to both pronounces, I know thy works, I clearly
apprehend all; what are good I know and approve, what are evil I know and
dislike. Hence observe,

That all the works of men lie open to the sight of Christ who is God and Man.
Be they good or evil, be they actions, words or thoughts, be they abstinences
from evil, or omissions of good, they all fall within the prospect of Jesus
Christ. The ways of a man (says Solomon) are before the Lord, and he
pondereth Pro. 5. 21.
or weighs as in a balance all his ways. If they be but half a grain to
light, his beam Pro. 15 3.
will discover it. The eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil
and the good. The hundred thirty nine Psalm is but a continued Paraphrase upon
this point, v. 1. O Lord thou have searched me and Ps 139. 1. etc.
known me, Men often search men and yet cannot know them. There are secrets and
depths in man which man cannot reach: What man knows the things of man, save
1 Cor. 2. 11.
the spirit of man which is in him? But the Spirit of Christ knows what is in
any man, better then any man's own spirit. He has a thread which will lead him
into all, and thorough all the Labirynths and turnings of the most Matchavilian
spirit. He has a light which will discover in man the very depths of Satan, v.
24. Thou have searched and known me, Me, not only Me natural (of which he
speaks, verse. 15, 16. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in
secret, thine eyes did see my substance yet being imperfect and in thy Book
were all my members written) but also Me civil and Me moral, as it is
expounded, verse 2, 3. Thou know my down sitting and my uprising (thou art
at both ends of all my works) thou compassest or winnowest my path (if there
be any chafe or trash thou will make it fly) and art acquainted with all my
ways. He finds God not only at his fingers ends, but at his tongues end too,
v. 4. There is not a word in my tongue, but lo o Lord thou know it
altogether. His knowledge staieth not here in the porch or lobbies, but passes
into the presence, yea into the privy chamber, v. 2 thou understandest my
thoughts, and not only thoughts present, but those which are in posse and to
come, thou know my thoughts, (...), afar off, that is before I thought
them. Things before they be, are known to him, by whom all things have their
being. Who knows (says Solomon, Pr. 27. 1.) what a day may bring forth? man
knows not what is in the womb of the next day, we cannot see (unerringly) an
hour before us. But Christ knows what lies in the Womb of eternity, he knows
what all ages shall bring forth, he can see thousands of years before him. He
declares the end from the beginning and from ancient times the things that are
not yet done. Is 46. 10 Heb. 4. 13.
All things, says the Apostle (whether past, present, or to come) are naked
and open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do, (...), both elegant
Metaphors and implying thus much, that as the outward proportion and lineaments
of the body are distinctly seen. When that is naked and uncloathed, that as
the bowels and internals are perfectly discerned when the body is dissected,
even so are we, and all we do, and all that shall be done before the Lord.

That Sea of Glass like Crystal (Revel. 4. 6.) standing before the Throne is
well expounded to represent the whole world with the confluence and series of
all things therein: The World is like the Sea, because so tempestuous, up and
down, ebbing or flowing ever; but it is called a Sea of Glass like crystal,
to note that Christ does not only look upon it, but through it, it is to him,
corpus diaphanum, a clear and transparent body.

There are four motions very necessary to be made First part of the
application in regard of the present duty.
in regard of this days duty, Prayer and Fasting; the Doctrine in hand joins
strongly with me in the making of them all.

First, the duty of this day moves us to Selfe-searching and Self examination.
The voice of this duty, sounds like that voice of the Prophet Jeremy, Let us
search and try our ways: Like that voice of Lam 3. 40. Zeph. 2. 1.
the Prophet Zephany, Gather your selves together, or as others render it,
Fan your selves, yea Fan your selves o Nation not desired. This is a day
wherein every work is called to the touchstone, to try their metal, and all
our ways to the balance, even the balance of the Sanctuary, that we may
know their weight. The Doctrine calls as loud for this also. For does Christ
know our works, and shall we be ignorant of them? Does he travel into our
hearts, and shall our hearts be terra incognita unto us? Shall we be strangers
at home? A sin of Ignorance is less then a sin of Knowledge, but to be
ignorant of those sins we may know, for the enquiry, increases and heightens
them. Paul in one case after he had searched, said, I know nothing by my self,
yet 1 Cor. 4 4
am I not hereby justified: but if we know nothing by our selves, because we
will not be at the pains to search, we shall hereby be condemned; both
because the best have many sins they may know, and because to all their
sins they have added this, the not endeavoring to know them. The Heathens
say, that Oracle of theirs came down from Heaven, Nosce teipsum, know thy
self; I am sure no Christian can ascend to Heaven, unless he know himself:
Unless he both know himself to be a sinner, and desire to know (according to
his light) in what he has sinned.

Secondly, The duty of this day moves us to the free, full and sincere
confession of sin, which is the putting of our selves into the hands of
Justice, in hope of mercy. This is one of the essentials in a Fast, and we
find a fourth part of the day allowed to it in Neh 9. 3.
the 9. of Nehemiah. The Doctrine moves as strongly for confession as this
days duty can. What more prevailing Argument to confess our sins unto God
then this, that we cannot conceal our sins from God. God calls for
confession, but not for information. Why do we make such long Narratives in
Prayer? Why do we tell the story of our sinful lives in the ears of God?
What, is it to teach or instruct the Almighty? O no, God knows our sins
enough to punish them, though we do not confess them: but he will never know
them, so as to pardon them, unless we confess them. Take then that excellent
counsel of the Ancient, Fac confitendo propitium, quem tacendo non facis
August. To. 8. in Ps. 74.
nescium, make him willing to pardon thy sin by confessing, whom thou do
not make unknowing of thy sin by concealing: For though thou sit as close
this day upon the Idols of thy heart, and the evils of thy way, as Rachel did
upon her Fathers Images, yet thou do not hide thy sin from God, but the
mercies of God from thy sin.

Thirdly, the duty of this day calls us to Self abasement and blushing, to shame
and confusion of face before the Lord. Thus Ezra in the day of his mourning
cries out, O my God I am ashamed, and blush to lift up Ezr. 9. 6.
my face to thee. So Daniel in his Fast, O Lord to us belongs Dan. 9. 8.
confusion of face; that is, (as I conceive) we have great reason to be ashamed
and blush: For those natural tinctures of the face, the white and the red are
so confounded in a blush, that while it lasts no man can distinguish the
Complexion. The present doctrine calls us to this graceful shame, and becoming
confusion of face. Shame arises two ways, first from the doing of somewhat
against common light, and ordinary Principles. Secondly from an apprehension
that what we have done, is known. The very sight of a man, who (to our
knowledge) knows such a thing by us, fetches a blush from bare ingenuity. How
should this make us ashamed this day, while we consider our selves in his
presence, who knows every sin of our Lives, or rather our whole Lives to be
a sin: Who knows all the error of our works, or rather all our works to be an
error: Who knows the lightness and vanity of all our ways, or rather all
our ways to be but lightness and vanity. Any, but a whores forehead, a
forehead steeled with impudence, will be ashamed of such works as these, when
we hear God knows them: For none can hear and believe, and not be ashamed. O
let not the show of our countenance witness against us (as it did Isa. 3. 9.
against those Jews) that we have this day declared our sin as Sodom. If we
be not ashamed, it will; there was no show of shame in their countenance, and
that was to declare like Sodom. To confess sin in the sight of God, and not
be ashamed, is an act of impudence not of repentance. It is better to hide our
sins for shame, then not to be ashamed of them, when they are not hid. O let
the show of our countenance witness for us, that we have this day declared our
sins as Sion, as the mourners in Sion. Let us be ashamed, that we may never
be ashamed.

Fourthly, this duty bids us be very cautious and watchful. When we come to be
humbled for all our old sins, we had need take heed we do not renew our
sins, and make debts while we come to get discharges. Our miscarriages in
this duty may be such as will provoke God, while we come to pacific him, and
fasten those judgments upon the Kingdoms, which we are seeking to remove. As
therefore we are called to the duty of fasting, so the duty calls to us, take
heed how ye fast. This motion the Doctrine brings also, and cries with a mighty
voice, take heed how ye fast. Why? Fasting and Prayer are a work, I, strong
work, spiritual work. Therefore Christ who knows all our works, knows
these above all. In a sense, all our Services in reference to God are
eye-services; but on this service his eye is fixed, 1 King. 8. 29. Mat. 18. 20.
as it was prayed about the Temple, Let thine eyes be open toward this house
night and day. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I
in the midst of them. To be in the midst, notes a Special presence. I will not
only stand at the door, and look in; but I will come in amongst you, and
into the midst of you, to take a view what all do, of all your Services: as
well as to take delight in, and give assistance to, or concurrence with my
faithful Servants. In the two and twentieth of Matthew it is said, That the
King came in to the Feast to see Mat. 22. 11, 12.
the guests. And there quickly espied out a man, a single person (though but
one, he could not escape in the throng unseen) that had not on a wedding
garment. Surely Christ that King is come this day to the Fast, to see his
mourners, and he will quickly espy every man in this Congregation, that has
not on him a mourning garment, that has not in him a mourning heart. He knows
when it is a Fast and when not, when it is his Fast, and when it is our Fast.
As he questions, or rather upbraides the Jews, did ye at all fast unto me,
even Zach. 7. 5.
to me? As here he discovers it none of his Fast, by a failing in the end. So
in the 58. Chapter of Esaias, he discovers it to be none of his Fast by their
failing in the manner, Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? He knows Isa. 58.
5.
when we are but as a people that seek, and when we seek indeed. When we only
act a part, and personate a holy Praying, Fasting, humbled people, and when we
are really such. He knows whether we are come together by the Order and Law of
our own hearts, or only by the Law and Order of the State. He knows when we
make a work of Fasting, and when but only a talk of Fasting. But when is
Fasting a work? you may learn that in the Fast of Niniveh: In the close of
which it is Ion. 3. 10.
said, that the Lord saw their works. And what were their Fast-works? It is
added by way of exposition in the next words, The Lord saw their works, that
they turned from their evil ways. Unless God sees turning from our sins in
a Fast, he sees no work in a Fast; It is not talking of sin, nor talking
against sin, but turning from sin, that is the work. This must be the
result of all; Abstinence, Prayer, Preaching, Hearing, Covenanting, Mourning,
must all be resolved into turning from our evil ways, Without this God sees
no work in Fasting, but the work of hypocrisy, and such can expect no wages
but the wages of hypocrites, to have their praying and weeping, and tears
here, rewarded with weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth for evermore.

So far of the point as it may be applied to the works of this Special
Duty. Now for works in General.

First, it convinces those who think of drawing a Curtain, and spreading a
veil of darkness between Christ and their works. Some while they do things
not fit to be seen, would willingly persuade themselves, they are not seen in
doing them. Thus the proud, subtle, merciless oppressor is described in the
tenth Psalm. He has said in his heart, God has forgotten, he hides his Ps.
10. 11.
face and will never see it. The same sort of men (a sort of men as bad within
a degree as bad can be) are brought in under the same Notion of Atheism, In
the 94th. Psalm. They break in pieces, O Lord, thy people, Psalm. 94. 5, 6, 7.
and afflect thy heritage, they slay the widow and the stranger, and murder
the fatherless; yet they say (v. 7.) the Lord shall not see, neither shall the
God of Jacob regard it. Others perhaps have not made out this heart securing
conclusion; yet with those in Job, they argue and debate it. Job 22. 13
How does God know? can he judge through the dark Cloud? You may read these
Querists resolved in the next words; Thick Clouds are a covering to him that
he cannot see. He that will let his heart dally awhile about blasphemous
Questions, may quickly be settled in blasphemous Conclusions. But let all such,
whether questioning or resolving, hear themselves fully and bitterly confuted
by the Psalmist in the place before quoted: Psalm. 94. 8, 9, 10.
Understand ye brutish among the people, and ye fools when will ye be wise? He
that planted the ear, shall not he hear? He that formed the eye, shall not he
see? He that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? The Lord knows the
thoughts of man that they are vain; and this the vainest thought of all, That
God knows not their thoughts. Moses saw him who is invisible. Do not think
that Heb. 11. 27
he who is invisible cannot see. God like the Opticke virtue in the eye, sees
all, and is seen of none. No man needs a window in his breast (as it is said the
Heathen Momus wish) for God to look in at, every man before God is all Window.
There is no darkness (faith Elihu) nor shadow of death, where the workers of
wickedness may Job 34. 22.
hide themselves. No natural darkness, no artificial darkness, no dust
raised, or mist scattered by Politicians can hide them. The eyes of Christ are
as a flame Rev. 1. 14.
of fire; and the School of Nature teaches us, that the fiery eye needs no
outward light, that sees (extra mittendo) by sending out a ray, and by the same
ray which apprehends the Object, does also enlighten the Medium, or passage to
it.

Secondly, this may be for Admonition. To lay a mighty restraint upon our
Spirits, and keep us from every evil work. It was an advise of the Moralist
to his Scholars, that they should ever carry in their eye a conceived
representation of some severe Cato, or Critical Aristarch, as the Overseer and
censurer of all their actions. That, he thought, would hold them in Compass.
God seems to speak the same Counsel, and almost the same Language to
Abraham: Walk before Genesis 17. 1.
me, and be thou perfect. The eye of Conscience restraines much, it is hard for
a man to sin under the eye of Conscience: What then is the eye of God? who is
greater then Conscience, and knows all things. Could we as 1 Ioh. 3. 20. Ps.
16. 8. Acts 2. 25.
David speaks (in the type) of Christ, set the Lord always before us: Or as
the Apostle quotes it, could we foresee the Lord always before our face, we
should not be so often, so easily moved by temptations as we are. And as this
should caution all men in all works: so especially those who are actively
concerned in works of Justice. In these, as Christ has a more special
Interest (all power being put into his hand, and from him communicated unto
man) so upon these he has a more special Eye. God stands in the
Congregation of the mighty, Psalm. 82. 1.
he judges among the gods; Not always by consenting, for they may err and
judge unjustly, v. 2. And Christ will never vote with such; but he always
judges by discerning whether the sentence be just or not. Iehoshaphat warnes
his Judges upon this very ground, Take 2 Chr. 19. 6
heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you
in the judgment; as if he had said, I cannot ride circuit with you to all
places, or fit with you in all your Consultations; but the Lord can and does,
he is with you in the Judgment. With you, not only by way of assistance, and
protection (as that phrase often imports) but also by way of notice-taking, and
observation. He keeps a record of every judgment, and will at last judge
them all over a second time.

Thirdly, the Doctrine carries wrath and terror in it, against all
evill-workers. Woe to them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the
Lord, and their works are in Is. 29. 15.
the dark, and they say, who sees us? and who knows us? And why woe to
these? The Psalmist tells us why, arguing the certainty of revenges upon this
ground: Thou Lord have seen it for thou beholdest mischief Ps. 10. 13, 14
and spite, to requite it with thy hand; though no eye of man or Angel sees
it, yet thine does. And therefore though no hand of man or Angel requite it,
yet thou will requite it with thy hand. Surely I have seen yesterday the blood
of Naboth (Murder ever bleeds fresh in the eye of God, to him many years, yea
that eternity which is past, is but yesterday.) Surely I have seen yesterday
the 2 King 9. 26.
blood of Naboth, and the blood of his sons, says the Lord, and I will
requite thee in this plat, says the Lord. Blood shall surely enough be
requited with blood, because surely the Lord has seen it. That which a man
sowes the same also shall he reap; he that sows to the flesh shall Gal. 6.
7, 8.
of the flesh reap corruption. And why? the reason is intimated in the
beginning of the 7th. verse, God is not mocked; you cannot cozen him with
tares, and Cockle in stead of Wheat; All our works done are as seed under
ground, such as we cast in such will the crop be at harvest: Never better for
the kind: always worse for the degree, time ripens sin and improves the
punishment; They have sown the wind, and shall reap the Hos 8. 7.
whirlewinde.

Fourthly, this serves for our comfort and encouragement in good works 3.
ways.

First, if God knows them, then they shall not be lost in the darkness of
Secrecy. The counsel of Christ is, when thou do thine alms, do not sound
a Trumpet, Mat. 6.
when thou prayest enter into thy closet, when thou fastest appear not unto
men to fast. And least any should be discouraged, he as often subjoynes, your
Father sees in secret. When the left hand knows not what the right hand does,
God knows what the right hand does; he is nearer to us, then we are to our
selves. But although our light (as Christ also advises) shines so before men,
that they may see our good works; yet many men will Mat 5. 16.
send them to the Land of darkness, where all things are forgotten; often
burying the works, while they who wrought them are alive. It is too usual to
write the faults of others in brass, and their noblest undertakings and
successes in the water or on the sand: Such is man's unrighteousness. But the
point yields comfort still; No good work shall be lost in the darkness of
oblivion: For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and Heb. 6. 10.
labor of love, which ye have showed to his Name. Our works come up for a
memorial before God, and are registered Act. 10. 4.
in Heaven for ever: Yea or many works (in despite of envy) he says (as of
the woman's anointing him.) Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the
Mat 26. 13
whole world, there shall also this that you have done be told for a memorial
of her. He has and will answer the Prayer of every Nehemiah, Remember me, O my
God, concerning Neh 13. 14.
this, and wipe not out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God,
and for the offices thereof? Yet further, though we our selves should do much
good which we do not know (for there are as sins, so (in a sense) good
works of ignorance) or if we our selves should not remember the good which we
do knowingly (as the Apostle speaks of himself, I forget that which is
behind) Phil. 3. 13.
yet the Lord will at the last redeem our works out of this darkness, also
the darkness, both of our own ignorance and forgetfulness. When saw we thee
^^ Mat. 25. 37, 38.
hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty and gave thee drink? when saw we thee
naked, and clothed thee? or a stranger, and took thee in? It seems these
were strangers to their own Acts, either not understanding, or not remembering
what they had done, Christ therefore expounds and remembers for them: Verily I
say unto you, inasmuch Ver. 40.
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren ye have done it
unto me. Neither secrecy, nor forgetfulness, nor ignorance, our own or
others, can long cover a good work. Let it be our care only to do good, it
is the care of Christ to record the good which we have done.

Secondly, that Christ knows our works has this comfort in it, Then they are
rightly understood. There was never any great thing done in the world, but it
fell under misconstruction. And often such glosses are given as do corrupt the
Contexture of sincerest works: For the conclusions of malice are ever like
those of Logic, following (partem deteriorem) the worser and weaker part, if
it can but snatch a shadow, or shape a surmise of either. How often are works
of holiness interpreted hypocrisy? and the works of zeal vainglory? How
often is contending for the faith mis-called faction? Iud. 3.
and contending against superstition, humor? In the midst of all these
clamours and loades of slander, this may bear up our hearts, God knows our
works. And though now ignorance and malice sit upon and censure our works,
yet God will put them forth (at one time or other) with the Comment of our own
honest meanings upon them: Not tortured and wiredrawne with false expositions
of an adversary. He will Ps. 37. 6.
bring forth our righteousness as the light, and our just dealing as the Noone
day. This quieted Jobs Spirit in the midst of all the mis-apprehensions of his
friends, Behold Job 16. 19.
my witness is in Heaven, and my record is on High.

Thirdly, seeing God knows our works, they shall certainly be rewarded. It is
one of the vanities which Solomon observed under the Sun (and it is a vexing
Eccl. 4. 4.
vanity) That for every good work a man is envied of his neighbor. But will
it not balance this vanity, that for every right work a man shall be honored
and rewarded of his God? Those works which the world entertaines with Scorn,
and besmeares with Calumny, Christ who knows them will entertain with an
Euge, and reward with Glory, Well done good and faithful servant, Mat. 25.
enter into thy Masters joy. Man does, yea he ought to do many good works,
which are never known of man. And those which are known, come usually but to
an ill market; at the best it were scarce worth the while, to do good, if all
the pay were to be expected from the hands of men: But as we can do no good
work, but it is known to God, so because it is known it shall be repayed: Blow
not a Trumpet (says Christ) your Mat. 6. 2.
Father sees in secret; And observe what is three times inferred upon that,
Your Father which sees in secret, himself V. 4 6, 18.
will reward you openly; himself will do it, he will not send his Steward.
And because many say (non tua sed te) Lord let us have thee rather then thine;
therefore he will not only reward such himself, but himself will be their
reward: And O, how exceeding Genesis 15. 1.
great, how exceeding all greatness is that reward, which has no measure but
infiniteness. I, so watchful is Christ over the least grain of good we do,
that he has protested a cup of cold water (almost an indiscernable charity)
given to a Disciple of his, in his name, Mat. 10. 42
shall in no wise (there is a double negative for it) lose a reward. Water is a
small courtesy, and cold water a less; yet though thus given, as prepared by
nature only, without the least charge to heat or mix it, it cannot miss a
reward. And if works of Love which cost us nothing shall be thus rewarded,
what shall we be repayed for those, in which (like Araunab to David) As Kings
we give unto the King? When we are royal and magnificent for Christ, When we
spare no cost, 1 Samuel 24. 23.
nor stick at any price to serve Christ and his Church, or Christ in his
Church. If we shall be rewarded thus for cold water from the spring, which can
hardly be called ours, what shall we be for warm water, from our brows and
bodies given to a disciple in Christ's name. If we shall be thus rewarded for
water, what shall we be for our blood shed for the name of Christ. When for
Christ's sake we labor and sweat, and dye to do good for others. When to Christ
and to his people in his name, we give our time, and our strength, our sleep
and our meats, our comforts and recreations, our credit and our estates, our
liberties and our lives. When Ahasuerus read in Hest. 6. 1, 2, 3.
the book of the Records of the Chronicles, how Mordecai had discovered a
treason against his person. The King enquires what honor and what dignity has
bin done unto Mordecai for this? It seems if the King had thought on, or read
him sooner, he had rewarded him sooner. God has ever in his eye all the
Records and Chronicles of your good works, he reads your journals every day,
and when he meets with any that have done or spoken aright for him, he enquires
what honor, what dignity has been done for this man? If none has been done,
he will do it himself, if any thing has been done, he will do yet more: He
that honors 1 Samuel 2. 30.
me I will honor. Who would not work for thee O King of Nations? Who would
not work for thee O King of Saints? None shall lose a word, no nor a thought
for Christ. Wherefore (as the Apostle concludes, so shall I this first
Doctrine) My Beloved Brethren, 1 Cor. 15. last.
be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. And this
leads me on to the first part of the Gradation, observed and approved by
Christ in their works, The laboriousnesse of them, I know thy work, and thy
labor.

Laborious working in a good cause is very pleasing God is not unrighteous to
forget your work, Heb. 6. 10.
and Labor of Love. Where we have the same Gradation in the same words, and
there, not to forget, is to delight in. God is himself a pure Act, and he
loves to see man Active: And the more active we are, the more like we are to
God, and therefore the more liked of God. Likeness is the ground of Love: He
makes his Heb. 1. 7.
Angels (or messengers) Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire Spirits are
the most active creatures living, and fire is the most active creature without
life. Fire is the most operative Element, and flame is the most operative part
of the fire. No sooner had man received his being, but he is put to labor (to
serious labor, though not to consuming labor) The Lord God took the man Genesis
2. 15.
which he had made, and put him into the Garden to dress it, and to keep it.
No sooner was man fallen, but he was put upon sore consuming labor: In the
sweat of thy face shall Genesis 3. 19.
thou eat thy bread. Sin brought in sweat, and now not to sweat increases
sin. It is a part of our holiness to submit to that which was a part of our
curse. The idle man is Satan's Agent, and the laborious man is Gods: Not but
that Satan has nimble hands and heads in his service. Satan's idle man is he
that will not do the work which God sets him, he is ready enough to toil
(like a horse) in the work his own lust sets him. He will not work in the
Garden of some honest employment, or not there honestly; and all this while he
is idle, though he sweats and breaks his sleep, because he does not a stroke
of Gods work. Of such an idle man it is chiefly said, Diabolus quem occupatum
non invenit ipse occupat; He imployes whom he finds not well employed. On the
contrary, Deus quem occupatum invenit ipse occupat; God imployes them whom he
finds well employed. He found Moses laboring on the plains among his flocks,
and sends him to Pharaoh for the deliverance of his people. He finds Peter and
Andrew casting a Net into the Sea, and he says follow Mat. 4. 18, 9. Eccl. 9.
10.
me, and I will make you fishers of men.

Then hear the counsel of the Preacher, Whatsoever thy hand finds to do,
do it with all thy might. To do, and not with the might we have, is to do
nothing. We live no more then we work, and we work no more then we labor. As
idleness is the burial of our selves, so unlaboriousnesse (if I may so
speak) is the burial of our works; without diligence they not only flat,
but dye upon our hands. There are some whose very business is idleness, and
there are many who are idle in their business. See thou a man diligent in
his business Pro. 2^. 29. Romans 12. 11.
(says Solomon) Not sloathfull in business (says the Apostle) To be slow in
business is ill, but to be sloathfull is far worse An industrious man is
often wearied with working, but he is never weary of his work. Spontaneae
lassitudines morbos loquuntur, is an Aphorism Hip. Apb.
of Physicians. To be weary when we know not why, foresh^wes diseases of the
body. I am sure it is an Argument of a diseased soul. The heart of the
sluggard is like the field of the sluggard, overgrowne with Pro. 24. 30
weeds.

They who work for Christ, should imitate Christ in his work for us. I must
work the works of him that sent Ioh. 9. 4.
me (says Christ) There is an Emphasis in that expression, (...). As they
speak in Jeremy, Come Ier. 18. 18.
let us devise devises against him: Which notes strong plotting to mischief
the Prophet: so to work a work, notes the strong intention of Christ upon it.
Many do rather play their works then work their works: And it is observed,
that as mean men play: so commonly rich and great men work, but for
recreation. Christ who had unsearchable riches in himself, and in greatness
was Gods Fellow, will yet work a work for us. Shall we think any labor too
great for him? Christ by his own labor in your cause (when your fowls lay a
bleeding) has out-bid all the labor you have or can bestow in his cause, now
his Church lies a bleeding. I know (Honorable and Beloved) you have often
dined upon business: so did Christ, My meat is to do the will of Ioh. 4. 34.
him that sent me, and to finish his work. I know you have labored in the
midst of many crosses, but Christ labored for us upon the Cross. I know you
have wrestled with many difficulties; but Christ for your sakes wrestled with
death, that King of terrors. You have had many conflicts; but Christ was in an
Agony, he sweat blood, and he spilt his blood. It is said of Christ in the Isa.
53. 11.
Prophet, That he shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied. Whenever Christ looks upon a believing, repenting soul, he sees
in that the travel of his soul. There goes my work (says Christ) and this
satisfies him. To do good is reward enough to it self; but to see the good we
have done, is a satisfying reward. Let me say the same to you, whose souls
have traveled, and are still traveling, and resolve to travel still in this
great work: When you shall see of the travel of your souls, you will be
satisfied. When any one shall see a good Law, and can say indeed the travel of
my soul went to the making of it. When any shall see a good Magistrate, and
can say, I see in setting up him the travel of my soul. When any shall see a
faithful Minister, a shining Light, put into any Candlestick, and can say, I
see of the travel of my soul in putting of him there. When any shall see
truth and peace, purity of worship, and piety of life fully established and
promoted in these Kingdoms, and can say indeed, I see in all these the travel
of my soul: I will not much be troubled how to satisfy such for their pains,
I am sure this sight will do it, when you see the travel of your Ps. 128. 2.
souls, namely, the fruits and blessed effects of it, you will be satisfied.
Blessed is he that fears the Lord for he shall eat the labor of his hands, ye
and of his heart and head, and tongue. Who would fear to labor for God? who
is able to make, and will make our work our food, if we make our work our
labor. Be ye therefore as so many Suns, or rather be ye all as one Sun, As
a Ps. 19. 4, 5.
Bridegroom coming every morning out of your chambers, and rejoicing as a
strong man to run your race. But withal, remember to run (as Christ the
Sun of Righteousness Heb. 12. 1.
did) with patience the race which is set before you. This your pattern, the
Text calls for also; the works of this Church were full, as of diligence, so of
patience. I know thy labor and thy patience.

It is very acceptable unto God, when we labor in his with patience. There is
a twofold patience exercised He. 10. 36.
in our labors:

First, the patience of waiting. Secondly, the patience of suffering.
The patience of waiting Gods time, and the patience of suffering Man's
reproach. They who will work for Christ shall be exercised both ways, and
Christ is much pleased to see his holding out under both.

First, the patience of waiting upon God. Ye have need of patience, that after
ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. Here is first doing
the will of God, which includes the labor of the former point, Then comes
patience. And why such need of that? The promise, that is, the good promised,
cannot otherwise be received. Why not? I shall touch three reasons why?

First, Though God never fails his own time, yet he seldom comes at ours.
The Israelites in Egypt groaned long for deliverance; but as soon as the time
preordained by God was come, they were delivered. He did not stay an hour
beyond that. Hence it is observable, that the Lord smote the first borne of
Egypt at Genesis 15. 13. Exodus 12. 40. 41.
midnight, and why at midnight? because then exactly the 400. or 430. years of
their captivity were expired, and they determining at midnight, God came
presently, he deferred them not till Morning for their deliverance. It came to
pass, says Moses, at the end of the 430 years, even the self-same day it
came to pass, that all the Hoasts of the Lord came out from the Land of Egypt.
So Belshazzar was slain in the night, In that night, etc. And why in that
night? because then exactly the 70. years of the Dan. 5. 30.
Jews captivity in Babylon were ended; And they ending at night, God stayed
not till the Morning. We have a saying much like our selves, a day breaks no
square, but it is not so with God. We read once of the shortning of the days
of evil, but never of the lengthening of them. Thus God never fails his own
time. And it is as true, that he seldom comes at ours. The Summer is ended,
and we are not saved, say they in Jeremy, they looked for salvation that Summer
at furthest. We are short-breathed, and short-sighted, and so, very apt to
ante-date the promises Ier. 8. 20.
in regard of their accomplishment: That which is but a moment in the Calendar
of Heaven, seems an age to us. This and the remedy are put together in the
second of Habbakuk, where the vision is said to tarry, and Hab. 2: 2.
not to tarry. It tarries not in reference to the time fixed by Christ, but it
tarries in reference to the time supposed by us. What must we do in this case?
if it tarry, wait for it, there is no remedy but patience. Lengthen patience,
and that will make the time short.

Secondly, the present dealings of God with a people, do many times carry a
show of contrariety against his own promises and purposes. He brings Israel to
Ex. 14.
the Sea, and suffers an Army to incamp at their backs, when he meant to
deliver them. Clouds and darkness are Psalm. 97. 2.
round about him, when judgment and justice are the habitation of his Throne.
Without patience there is no abiding under these clouds and darkness, till the
light of his justice and judgment breaks forth.

Thirdly, God cannot bear it with patience, that we should limit him, either
to the time, or manner, or means of help. He complains of the Jews for this
presumption, they limited the holy One of Israel. It is insufferable to
circumscribe an infinite wisdom and power. Ps. 78. 41.
He will work, but when he pleases, and how he pleases, and by what
instruments he pleases, and if he please without instruments, and if he please,
by weak and improbable, by despised and exploded instruments. Except patience,
there is nothing can keep us close to the work of God, while himself takes,
and of right may take such transcendent liberty.

As thus in laboring for God we shall be put to patience in waiting his time:
So,

Secondly, there will be use of patience to suffer the mis-apprehensions,
wrongs, reproaches, and oppositions of men. First, the misapprehensions of
those for whom you labor. Some are for a while more sick of their physic,
then they were of the disease, and then the Physician must have the patience to
hear from his Patient, you will kill me. When Moses was laboring to deliver
the Israelites from their hard bondage, read their opinion of him. The people
met Moses and Exodus 5. 20, 21.
Aaron, who stood in the way as they came forth from Pharaoh, and they said
unto them, The Lord look upon you, and judge, because ye have made our savor
to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put
a sword into their hands to slay us. They thought he would undo them quite,
and while he attempted to recover their liberty would endanger their lives.
Again, they expostulate with him at the Red Sea: They said Exodus 14. 11, 12.
unto Moses, because there were no graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away to
dye in the wilderness? wherefore have thou dealt thus with us, to carry us out
of Egypt? Is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us
alone that we may serve the Egyptians? For it had been better for us that we
should serve the Egyptians, then that we should dye in the Wilderness. How
angry were this people with their begun deliverance? how did they prefer
bondage before it, and put this miracle of mercy among, yea below their
greatest afflictions? What patience almost could bear this? but who could
bear it without patience?

Further in the second place, they who work for Christ shall be sure to meet
with reproaches, slanders and oppositions from professed enemies. When Nehemiah
labors to restore Jerusalem, he is slandered Neh. 2. 19.
with rebellion. What will you rebel against the King, cry Sanballat and
Tobiah and Geshem the Arabian. In a sense we may say of this reproach, as
Hierome of heresy, it is such as does not become a man to be patient under it.
None ought to be so patient under it, as not to vindicate his loyalty, yet
every one ought to be so patient under it, as not for fear of such aspersions
to forsake his duty. Nehemiah confutes the slander, not by desisting from his
work, but by the fairness and integrity of his work. By that time patience
has digested this or the like reproaches, you must look for scoffs. So in the
same place, They laughed us to scorn (says good Nehemiah) and derided us.
Neh. 4. 2, 3.
In the fourth Chapter they are jeering again. What do these feeble Jews?
Will they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a
day? Will they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish that are burnt?
Even that which they build if a Fox go up, he will even break down their
stone-wall. Words as full of scorn, as profane wit or rancoured malice could
make them. And the weight of these scoffs, did lie so heavy upon the spirit of
Nehemiah, that he could not ease himself, but by breathing Heaven ward. Hear
Neh 4. 4.
o our God, for we are despised. Woe be unto those who by scoffing set
Nehemiah's a praying Scoffs were never any match for prayers, nor ever will be.
There is no greater argument of a desperate cause, nor clearer prognostic of
ruin to such, then when they begin to deride. For though the patience of men
may and ought to bear even this: yet the patience of God will not. When
scoffers whet their tongues, then assuredly God is whetting his Sword. Once
more you have need of patience; for when you have borne reproach and detision
daily, then look for contrary plottings and opposition. The Histories of Ezra
and Nehemiah are so full of these, that I refer you to the whole. What,
raising of Parties, What hiring of Counselors, What Letters to the Court, What
bribing of Nehemiah's near friends to take them off, could do, was done, in
opposition of his design. And while God has such a work to do, and men have
such corruptions in their hearts, and the Devil such temptations in his hand,
the like will be done again And if so, O Patience, Patience! who can do any
thing for Christ without thee?

Wherefore let patience have a perfect work, otherwise works to perfection.
In patience Iam 1. 3. Luke 21. 19
possess your souls. As faith gives us the possession of Christ, so patience
gives us the possession of our selves. An impatient person is out of his own
power, his parts and abilities are as lost to him, he cannot use them. Neither
is there any nearer way to our own ends and comforts, then patience. First
wait patiently on God: For the Lord is a God of Judgment, blessed are all they
that Isa. 36. 18.
wait for him. You will say, there might be blessedness indeed, in waiting
upon a God of mercy. But how can we be blessed in waiting upon a God of
Judgment? Is there any Motive in Judgment to invite attendance?

I answer: First, Judgment is not here taken as opposed to Mercy, but as
opposed to severity and rigor. O Lord correct me, but with judgment, not in
thine anger, lest Ier. 10. 24. Ier. 30. 11.
thou bring me to nothing. To correct in judgment and in measure are the
same,; Judgment is the moderation of anger. It is a blessed thing to wait on
him, who we are sure, makes reason, not rage, the rule of his Actions, who
holds every passion in the Golden Bridle of Moderation.

Secondly judgment is here taken for equity, as it is opposite to injustice,
either in not punishing the wicked, or in not relieving the good. That man is
blessed who waits upon a just Judge with a just cause.

Thirdly, judgment is here taken for wisdom, as Judgment is opposed to
folly and weakness of understanding. It is a great burden to wait upon a
fool; but we can easily stay for the resolutions of the wise: who we are sure,
have the compass of a business in their heads, and are skilled in timing and
ordering every circumstance. How blessed then are they, who while they work
for, can wait upon this God of judgment: whose moderation, and justice, and
wisdom are such, as will not suffer him either to do any thing before the
set, the fit time come, nor to stay the doing of it one minute after. Hence the
Church is brought in admiring God, and rejoicing that she had waited on him.
None ever repented of this patience. Lo Isa. 25. 9.
this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us. This is the
Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. The
words have a sound of victory and triumph in them. It should seem the enemies
had mocked them (as they did David) with their God; Where is now your God? They
had (it is Ps. 42 10.
like) blasphemously scorned them, concerning the true God (as Elijah did Baals
Priests justly, concerning that I doll, when it delayed to help them) either he
is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure 1 King.
18. 27.
he sleeps, and must be awaked. At the noise of this blasphemy, the Lord
awaked as one out of sleep, and like Psalm. 78. 65, 66.
a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine, and he smote his enemies in
their hinder parts (they fled) he put them to perpetual shame. Then his people
with an Ecce of admiration cry him up, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for
him. They who but a season wait for God, shall have matter of glorying in him
for ever.

Secondly, bear (I beseech you) with patience the reproach of men: For
reproach is a great proof of sincerity. Work on, though men scoff on. And
hereby you shall (as the Apostle speaks of himself and his Fellow Laborers 2
Cor. 6. 4, 8.
in the Gospel) approve your selves as the Ministers of God (in this your
work for the Church and Commonwealth) in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses: by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good
report, as deceivers and yet true. It has been said, that to do well, and
hear ill, is Kingly; I am sure it is Christianly. Christ never did more, or
better for us, then when he was most derided. Here was the patience of Christ,
here the strength and victory of his Love. It had showed the mighty love of
Christ, in the work of our redemption; if, when he came into the world, the
world had entertained him with honor, and had put him to death only (as
Caiaphas gave counsel) because it was expedient that one should dye for the
people; Ioh. 18. 14
but to come and dye for those, who (he knew before) would mock and revile
him; yea, to do the work while they actually reviled him: This was
stupendous love and patience to a miracle. It is commendable to do good, while
all praise, commend, approve, and honor; but to do good while multitudes of
all sorts and sizes reproach, revile, scoff and slander, is admirable, is quid
divinum, and bids up fair, to the love of a Savior. No man ever undertook a
great work but he was mis-understood: Will thou kill me, says that Jew to
Moses, when he came only to pacify him, and save them all. If your work Act.
7. 25.
be misscalled, or mis-reported by men, patience will make this a vantage
ground, for the raising of your acceptance with God. What the Apostle speaks
of Domesticke servants, is as true of the Public servants of a State: If when
ye do well and suffer for it (the tongue is 1 Pet. 2. 20.
a persecutor, Gal. 4. 29.) ye take it patiently, tbis is acceptable with God:
Or as the Greek more elegantly, this (...).
is thanks with God, that is, certainly for this God will thank you.

But such, who can endure most reproach, can least of all endure impiety. He
who is a very Atlas in bearing a world of shame, cannot with any liking bear a
grain of sin. And when sin grows great he has no patience to bear it.
Such was the holy and zealous temper of these Ephesians, though they had
unconquered patience for waiting and suffering, yet they had none for sinning.
Thou can not bear them that are evil.

This is the first sort or kind of their works here specified, and by Christ
approved, the removing or taking away of the evil. Hence observe, That,

It is (as an Argument so) the duty of those who are good, not to bear them
that are evil. It is an Argument, for from hence this Church receives Letters
Testimonial from Heaven of their goodness. The height and elevation of grace,
may well be taken by our opposition against evil. The more holy any man is,
the less can he bear with his own sin: For this, I conceive to be an
experimental truth, That the less corruption any one has remaining in him,
the greater burden it is unto him: And they who have most corruption in them
feel it least. Now as it is in reference to the evil in our selves, so
proportionably to that in others. The more holy any man is, the less he can
bear with those who are unholy and profane.

But I shall prosecute the point only under the Notion of a duty. It is the
duty of those who are good, not to bear such as are evil.

Evil men, and evil manners are heavy burdens. They are burdens to God: I am
pressed under you (says Am. 2. 13. Isa. 1. 24.
God to such) as a Cart is pressed with sheaves. God will not bear them. I
will ease me of mine adversaries. They are burdens to whole Kingdoms and
Churches; they cannot bear them; they sink and ruin under them, if not
removed. They are burdens to all good men; they must not bear them, it is
their duty to remoove them.

For the clearing of this point, I shall open those two principal terms in it:

First, who these evil ones are that must not be borne.

Secondly, what it imports, Not to bear them.

To the former. In a sense, all men living on the face of the earth are evil
men. Why call thou me good, says Christ, to one who knew no more of him
then Man: There is none good but God, scil. essentially, perfectly, and
independantly. Mat. 19. 17.
There is none that is good and sins not; there is none that does good, and
sins not. Now though every evil man be a burden; yet there is a necessity
of bearing many, and a duty of bearing some. We that are strong (says Saint
Paul) ought to bear the infirmities Romans 151.
of the weak. Infirmity is a degree of evil: And these weak ones troubled
themselves about things they needed not, about the things they had no just
cause to be troubled at (for to be troubled at any thing which gives a just
cause of offense, is not weakness but strength) yet they must be borne with.

We must therefore distinguish of evil men.

First, some are private and close offenders, others are public and
scandalous.

Secondly, some are weak and scrupulous, others are obstinate and pertinacious.

Thirdly, some are evill-doers, and evill-practisers only, others are
evill-promoters and evill-plotters.

Fourthly, some are seduced and misled, others are seducers and leaders into
mischief.

Fifthly, some are curable and willing to be reformed, others are incurable and
hate to be reformed.

Such as are public and scandalous, such as are obstinate and pertinacious,
such as are evill-plotters and evill-promoters, such as are seducers and
misleaders, such as are incurable and hate to be reformed; these, and if there
be any like unto them; ought not to be borne.

As for those who are close and private offenders, they come not under any
legal Cognizance, and though many offenses of such may be insufferable in
their own nature, yet there is a necessity of bearing them: For such as are
weak and scrupulous, it was (a little before) proved a duty to bear them: For
those who are only evill-doers, and seduced, they being willing to reform and
be cured, in some cases (I say in some cases) Justice may bear them, and
charity in all.

For as it was in the Laws of Leprosy among the Jews: Many who had risings
and scabs, or spots in Lev 13.
the skin of the flesh, were not yet to be judged unclean, and put out of the
Camp. There were certain Criteria, signs or tokens given by God himself, on
which the Priest was to ground his judgment. So now many have sins and
errors (whereof those spots and risings were a figure) who yet must not be
thrust away from us presently. Such indeed must, whose spiritual sores carry a
proportion (if we can find it out) with those corporal. It is agreed on by
all, that those leprous spots did note out our several malignities of
soule-diseases; but what degrees or kinds of soul-diseases is not agreed. It
were to be too much an Origenist, strictly to enquire about all, or confidently
to conclude about any; yet there can be no danger in offering a conjecture
suting the rules before given.

I shall instance only in four of those signs, whereof the first, which is
also often mentioned in that Chapter, is, when the hair in the soar is turned
white, and when the plague in sight is deeper then the skin. The white Lev. 13.
3.
hair may note such as have continued long, and are grown old in any
wickedness. The deepnesse of the plague, such whose wickedness is not only
acted by their hands, but seated in their hearts, and sunk into their spirits.
A resolved, studied way of evil, is a deep soar; deeper then the skin, such
men are far worse then they appear.

The second token of Leprosy, was, when the skab did spread much in the skin.
Though it had no white hairs, V. 4, 8.
though it were no deeper then the skin, yet if it did spread much in the skin,
such an one was a Leper. It may figure such, whose sinful courses (after
admonition) are gaining and growing still upon themselves, or are scattered and
spread to the infecting of others.

A third token was, The quick, raw (or living) flesh in the V 10, 11, 14.
rising. It is one of the most remarkable things in all this law, that quick
or sound flesh in the soar should be judged Leprosy, and the man unclean:
Whereas, if the Leprosy covered all his flesh, he was pronounced clean. V. 13.


Hereby first may be meant, such as justify themselves and their wickedness,
as Jonah said of his passion, I Ion 44.
do well to be angry, angry even unto death: so they of their unwarrantable,
yea abominable ways, both in practice and worship, We do well to do so, even
to the death; this is living flesh in the midst of the soar. When a sin
shall be maintained for holiness, and superstition stood to for pure devotion:
Whereas, he who humbles and judges himself, is like him, who had the
Leprosy all over, and might be declared clean.

Or secondly, such may possibly be figured by the quick raw flesh, who sin
against the light of knowledge, and the quickness, yea rawnesse of a galled
Conscience.

A fourth note of Leprosy was, When after the healing of a bile in the skin,
in the place of it a soar did arise, with the former Symptoms of white hair,
and deepnesse in the flesh. This may signify relapsers, whose sinne-soares V.
18, 19, 20.
break out after promises and appearances of healing: Such as return with the
dog to their vomit, and 1 Pet. 2. 22.
with the Sow that is washed to their wallowing in the mire. Many Relapsers
prove as bad as Revolters, who of all men are most profound to make slaughter,
and do mischief; Hos. 5. 2.
Therefore beware of them, these are not to be borne. From these and the
subsequent signs of Leprosy, laid down in this Chapter, with the former
distinctions, we may discover who those evil men are that must not be borne.

The second enquiry is, what, not bearing does import. As all the Negative
Commandments have in them an Affirmative: so has this Negative rule in the
Text. Not to bear, denies and affirms.

In the Negative sense, Not to bear, is, first, not to like or consent unto.

Secondly, Not to countenance or uphold.

Thirdly, Not to allow or permit, which is commonly called a Toleration.

Fourthly, Not to hide or conceal.

Fifthly, Not to pity or compassionate.

In the Affirmative sense, Not to bear, is, first to admonish and reprove.

Secondly, To oppose and resist.

Thirdly, To censure and punish.

Fourthly, To remove and cast out.

Fifthly, In some cases to destroy and cut off, either first, by the sword of
the Law, or secondly, by the Law of the sword, either in a Judicial way, or in
a Martial way.

In the thirteenth of Deutronomy, we have both senses expressed, in the case of
Entisers to Idolatry. If thy Deuteronomy. 13. 6
brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son or thy daughter, or the wife of
thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul, entise thee secretly,
saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou have not known, thou, nor
thy fathers, etc. Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken Ver. 8.
unto him, neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither
shall thou conceal him. Here are the Negative Acts of Not bearing. The highest
of the Affirmative follows in the next words, But thou shall Ver. 9.
surely kill him. Not privately or without Judgment, That, were to commit murder
in punishing of Idolatry. Thou shall surely kill him, notes the Order of
killing such, after publicke-Iudgement, not the killing of them without Order
and Judgment. As it is expounded in the next words, Thine hand shall be first
upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hand of all the people. So was
the Low of stoning to death; The hands of the witnesses shall be first Deuteronomy.
17. 7
upon him. And so much legality was observed in the stoning of Stephen, the
Witnesses began. But to the point, Act. 7. 58. Ps. 101. 8.
David resolves as high: I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that
I may cut off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord. His son Solomon
directs as high: Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come
forth a vessel for the finer. Take away the wicked from the Prove. 25. 4, 5.
King, and his Throne shall be established in righteousness. Wicked men are
dross, they have no good metal in them; they can never be made fit vessels
to serve, or current money to enrich, or jewels to adorn the Throne: For the
taking this dross away, he does not arm a hand of violence, but a hand of
justice. The very dross about a Princes Throne must be removed with duty and
respect. Saint Paul reproves the Church of Corinth for holding communion with
an incestuous person; and charges them 1 Cor. 5.
to punish him (as high as the power of a Church can reach) with
Excommunication; Therefore put away from among your selves that wicked person.
Himself could Ver. 13.
not bear false brethren (they are worse then open enemies) for an hour. To
whom we gave place by subjection, Gal. 2. 5.
no not for an hour. His imprecation (in the same Epistle) goes deeper then
his practice. I would they were even cut Gal. 5. 12.
off which trouble you.

The truth is, First, such evil men will not long be Nemo errat sibi ipsi, sed
dementiam spargit in proximos. The Apostle compares them Sen Ep. 94
to Leven, which quickly sowreth the whole Lump. On this ground he advises
Timothy to shun profane and 1 Cor. 5. 6.
vain bablings (that is profane and vain bablers) for 2 Timothy 2 16, ^7.
they will increase unto more ungodliness, and their word will eat as does a
Canker or a Gangrene. This is often given as a reason why the Jews might not
bear the Canaanites. Thou shall make no Covenant with them nor Exodus 23. 32.
33.
with their gods, they shall not dwell in thy Land, lest they make thee sin
against me. And when contrary to this rule they did bear them, the event is
answerable to that minatory praediction. They did not destroy the Nations
concerning whom the Lord commanded them; but were mingled Psalm. 106. 34, 35, 36.
with the heathen (then immediately follows) and learned their works He means
not works of Art or Agriculture, of war or peace; but of false worship and
Idolatry) They served their Idols, which were a snare unto them. It was an
ancient heresy of the Pelagians (denying the Aug Tom. 7. lib ^ de pec mer, c.
9.
propagation of sin) that all sin is handed from one to another by example,
and taken in by imitation. But it is a too much experienced truth, that sin
is mightily increased and spread by example and imitation. We have seen
dangerous, if not destructive errors, and vain superstitions spreading far
and near, when countenanced with the practice, and by the tenets of some in
great place. Those opinions and innovations which at first were begun by a few,
and hist at by many, grew suddenly into credit with most, and would in time
have invaded all.

Secondly, if we bear such, though we could escape the pollution, yet we shall
fall under the guilt of their sins. We sin in others, while we suffer them to
sin: We commit all the evil which is in our power to hinder, if we hinder it
not. Vitia aliorum si feras, facis tua. We become guilty of other men's sins,
not only by commanding, counselling, and approving them; but (if we may) by
not stopping and restraining them. I will judge the house of Eli for ever
(says the Lord) for the iniquity which he knows, because his sons made
themselves 1 Samuel 3. 1^
vile, and he restrained them not. He gave them fatherly advice, but he did not
use his Fatherly Authority. When Christ calls his people out of Babylon, this
Rev. 18. 4.
is added as a reason, that ye be not partakers of her sins: Which partaking
in her sin, as it notes danger of infection, of getting some taint and spots
in Babylon: so it notes also danger of contracting some guilt, by not opposing
or protesting against the Idolatry there practiced, and heresy there
maintained, though they keep themselves pure from all practice of the one, or
maintenance of the other. And that,

Thirdly (which is an inevitable consequent of the two Babylon, in the place
before cited, that ye receive not of her plagues. And Rev. 18. 4.
when the people of God have strength and power, they are as much obliged to
cast Babylon out from amongst them, least they be partakers of her plagues: For
God will plague Babylon wheresoever he finds her. There is no safety in being
near them who are under the curse of God. Escape for thy life (say the Angels
to Lot) look not behind Genesis 19. 17.
thee, neither stay thou in all the plain: Escape to the mountain, left thou
be consumed. Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men (says
Moses to the Congregation) Number. 16. 26.
and touch nothing of theirs, left ye be consumed in all their sins. And if
there be so much danger in being near them, what danger is there in bearing
them. A companion of fools shall be destroyed. When an overflowing Pro. 13. 20.
storm sweeps away the wicked, the tail of it may dash their best neighbors.

Fourthly, when God does not punish them with the Take heed unto your selves
(says Ioshuah to Israel) that ye love the Lord your God: Else, if ye do in
any wise go back, and cleave to the remnant of those Nations, even those that
remain among Josh 23. 11, 12, 13.
you, and shall make marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to
you: Know for a certainty, that the Lord your God will no more drive out any of
these Nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and
scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until you perish from off
this good Land, which the Lord your God has given you. A Text, whose Comment
(in a great part) has lately been made in Ireland; and is written to us in the
blood of many thousands. Of all the evil which has fallen upon them we may
say, this is your bearing with evil. You have borne them, and they have broken
you. It is better to learn by other calamities then our own. And to take
Example, then be made One.

Lastly, Not to bear the evil is mercy, not only to Israel felt from the
hand of God was this, Why Isa. 1. 5.
should they be stricken any more. Ephraims sorest judgment for Idolatry was
this, Let him alone. If you would Hos. 5. 17.
be a friend to evil men, wound them. A kiss is enmity. Favor and compliance
fattens their sins, and hardens their hearts, whereas reproof and punishment
may possibly reform and heal them. It was the wish of that good King; Let the
righteous smite me, it shall Ps. 141. 5.
be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil, which
shall not break my head. There is no standing still in evil, the best, if let
alone, when they do amiss, will be worse; How bad then will the worst be if
they be let alone. And when they are at the worst, it is worst for themselves.
Is it not then a kindness to smite them? It is always a kindness offered,
though often it be not a kindness received: For of many that of Solomon is
verified, Though thou should Pro. 27. 22
bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a pestell; yet will not his
foolishness depart from him. And the Apostle is express in a Propheticke
threat, Evil men and seducers 2 Timothy ^. 13.
(that is, evil men who are seducers, or among all evil men, especially
seducers) shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. They cousen
others, and the Devil couzens them. But if these will not receive this
kindness of smiting (ad correctionem) to amendment, it will be a kindness,
which they cannot put off, to smite them (if they by Law deserve it) ad ruinam,
to death. Seeing they as through the patience of God, so through the patience
of man in bearing and forbearing them, do but treasure up wrath against the
day of Romans 2. 5.
wrath, and the Revelation of the righteous judgment of God. The judgment of
many had been (comparatively) Light, if they had not been so much borne with.
As favor to a murderer often kills a second man, so it often adds a degree of
wrath to the second death of the murderer. And this is proportionably true of
every evil one we bear, unless such repent, they poor souls bear the more
for ever.

The point yet is liable to some Objections from 1 Cor. 13. 6
a clearing to others.

First, that of the Apostle, Love bears all things. If all things, then evil
things, for many things are evil.

I answer, Love is indeed the badge of Christ's Disciples, Genius of the Saints.
And love has broad shoulders, it can bear much, yea love can bear all
things, which consist with love; but sin does not. Love is the fullfilling of
the Law, and sin is the transgression of the Law, therefore love cannot bear
sin. Gal. 6. 2.
Bear one another burdens (says S. Paul to his Galatians) and so fulfill the
Law of Christ. Love can bear any thing that concerns the fulfilling of the
Law, but if anything be a breaking of the Law it cannot bear that. It can
bear the infirmities and passions of others, It can bear the afflictions and
sufferings of others, it can bear the wrongs and injuries of others against it
self, but it cannot bear wrongs and injuries done to God.

Secondly, Charity is not contrary to Justice. We Thou wast a God who
forgavest them, though thou Psalm. 99. 8.
tookest vengeance of their inventions. And man may forgive, where he takes
vengeance. It is said, that God suffered (or bore) the manners of the
Israelites forty years in the wilderness. He bare them indeed in the way of
much patience, but he did not bear them in a way of the least compliance. For
with many of them God was not well pleased, that is, he was exceedingly Act.
13. 18. (...). 1 Cor. 10. 5
displeased (there is a (...), in the Apostles expression, (as the words
following do evince) For they were overthrown (or as another place has it,
their carcass fell) in the wilderness. Theirs was a great punishment, and
therefore Gods was a great displeasure.

Thirdly, Christ is all Love as well as all lovely. He is but Ephesians. 5. 2.
Love Incarnate. And his Love is made the pattern of ours. Walk in Love as
Christ has loved us. Now Jesus Christ though he came into the world with love
enough, to bear the sins of every man in the world, and with resolution to
bear the sins of all the Elect: so as to suffer and dye for them; yet he would
not bear so much as one sin of any one man, so as to countenance or comply
with it. He would not bear Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, as full of love
as he was. He would not bear buyers and sellers in the Temple, as full of Love
as he was, but whipped them out. He would not bear his own Peter when he spoke
foolishly, as full of Love as he was, but rebukes him with, Get thee behind me
Satan, Mat. 16. 23. Christ in love bore all our sins, but he will not bear
with any. Do not out-love your rule, and then bear as much evil as you can.

Lastly, the love of our selves is the measure of our Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Mat. 19. 19
Now no man ought so to love himself, as to bear his own sinne-evils. Holy
self-love casts the first stone at a man's own sin. Therefore it cannot be
love to others to bear them in evil. No, the Spirit of God does interpret
that as hatred. Thou shall not hate thy brother Lev. 19. 17
in thy heart: Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer
sin upon him. Or (as it is rendered out of the Original) that thou bear not
sin for him. To oppose evil in thy brother is the best way to do him good,
and thy self too.

Secondly, it may be objected, That the Master of Let both grow together until
the harvest. Mat. 13. 30.


I answer first, by that approved Maxim (Scriptura Parabolica non est
Argumentativa) We may not argue from every particular in a Parable, but only
from the General Scope of it. The Scope of the Parable is only this, to show,
that good and bad will be mixed together to the end of the world. Or it shows
what God (out of his Prerogative) will suffer: Not what man (in duty) ought. It
holds forth the pleasure of God to us, to which we must submit: Not a pattern,
or a rule by which we must walk. God is able if he please, to pluck up at
once all the tares and weeds in the world, yet he lets them grow: But this is
no warrant for us to let them grow, which are in our lawful power to pluck up.

Again, the letter of the Parable is clear, that he forbids Ver. 29.
the wheat must be rooted up also; that is, a total extirpation: For indeed,
if God should at once destroy all wicked men, the very Compages or bands of
humane society would in a moment be dissolved. But we know the plucking up of
many wicked ones, is a great advantage to the growth of them who are good. So
then whatsoever justice upon the Tares will help the increase and fruitfulness
of the wheat, that is not so much as aimed at in this Parrble. And none but
such acts of justice are intended in this Doctrine.

Thirdly, for answer take that excellent rule, given By the maine truths M. F
Rom in his great Oracle.
(says he) found in the whole Scripture, the single and scattered places,
which make some show of disproportion to the whole must be expounded and
resolved. Or if the way of reconciling them be doubtful and difficult (as who
can deny, but the infinite wisdom of the Creator, may far exceed all the
wisdom of the creature) those places may stand as secrets not understood; but
they may not break in pieces that body of truth, which we find by joints
fitly and proportionably joined together in the body of Scripture. Seeing then
the command of God, the practice of all good Kings, Magistrates, Ministers and
people, according to their several places, recorded in Scripture, are clear,
that evil persons, as limited and explained, must not be borne. This or the
like Texts may not be interpreted against them, but by them. One Scripture
often expounds, but never contradicts another.

The point carries in it, first a reproof and conviction bear the infirmities
To. 15 1.
of the weak, which in duty they ought, But can well enough bear the iniquity
of the strong, which in duty they ought not. If a tender conscience did but
scruple a Ceremony, or but stop (it may be) at some of their yester nights
dreams, a late upstart Innovation: Such were cast in their opinion presently
(and it may be it would not be long before they heard on it) as persons
intolerable, as men not to be borne. But as for idle, ignorant, blind,
covetous Shepherds, these were no burden to some, and too much borne by all.
As for swearers, drunkards, scoffers at that which is Religion indeed,
prophaners of the Lords day, these were no burdens, they were the companions or
followers of some, and too much borne by all; even there, where they are the
greatest burden of all, at the Lords Table. As Neh. 13. 24.
for professed Papists, and such as were Popishly affected, Who (like that
impure off spring in Nehemiah) spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, and could
not speak in the Jews Language, but according to the Language of both people,
these were no burdens to some, and too much borne by all the men of that
Generation. Yea what discernable pains did some take to make them light enough
for all to bear. Had not some studied a compliance and accommodation with Rome?
Had they not almost beaten out a middle way? which yet would have proved no
better then that broad way which leads to the chambers of everlasting death?
What a cry was there by some for peace and unity? And why? Not that Jerusalem
might be a City Ps. 122. 3.
compacted, or at unity within it self, as the Psalmist speaks (which ought
to be not only the prayer, but the earnest endeavor of us all, and is one of
the most desirable and comely things in the world) But that Jerusalem and
Babylon, Sion and Sodom, might be compacted, and at unity one with another.
Hence their blending of truth and error, of superstition and holy worship.
Hence their mincing and mangling our Doctrines and Tenets, and handling of
controversies as if they handled thorns, which they were afraid to touch.
Hence their gentle dealing with error, and speaking Popery so fair. What
could all this portend but a hope, yea a design that at last unrighteousness
and peace might embrace, that truth and a lie might kiss, that light and
darkness might mingle, that Christ might have communion with him, whom our
Fathers called Antichrist? and we believe he has given us no cause to mend his
Titles. Genesis 49. 15.


Surely that which was prophesied of Issachar in reference to civil burdens,
will be the History of such men in reference to spiritual, they crouched
between two burdens, and bowed their consciences to bear (and were angry with
all that bowed not with them) possibly for Issachars reason too (though I judge
no man's intentions) because they saw that rest was good, and the Land that it
was pleasant. Good Hezekiah once offered himself to bear any burden of fine
or ransom, 2 Kin. 18. 14.
that he might purchase his peace with the King of old Babylon, I have offended
(says he) return from me, that which thou put upon me I will bear. We
have cause to fear that some men have offered to bear much, and lay down
great prices for the purchase of peace, with the King of new Babylon. It is a
good bargain to buy truth with the expense of peace, but it is a miserable, an
undoing, a breaking bargain, to buy peace with the expense or rendering up of
any truth; though without question peace is a richer commodity then should be
bangled away upon trifeling niceties, or the crochets of Schoolmen. Such as
are properly called, Dissidia Scholarum non Ecclesiarum.

Secondly, this truth wipes off that false and scandalous aspersion which is so
commonly cast in the faces of the best: as if they were the people whom the
Psalmist Ps. 68, 30.
describes, that delight in war; as if they were all for troubled waters and
the fire of contention, as if they were indeed like Solomon's froward man that
sows strife. Yea Pro. 16. 28.
some will not fear to fasten that wickedness upon them, which God by his
Propher justly charges upon those Hypocrites, Ye Fast for strife and debate,
ye Is. 58. 4.
pray for strife, ye preach for strife, ye consult for strife. And what is
taken for the occasion of all these hard speeches, which ungodly sinners (as S.
Jude speaks) Iud. v. 15.
have spoken against them? Nothing but their answerablenesse to the duty of
this Text, They cannot bear 1 Kin. 18. 17.
them that are evil. Elijah was traduced for the Troubler of Israel, only
because he could not bear idolatrous Priests and Idol-worship. The Prophet
Jeremy was accounted a man of strife and a man of contention to the Ier. 15. ^^*
whole Earth. A man of strife! there is much in that expression. Christ was
called a man of sorrows, to note the multitude of his sorrows, or as if he
had bin composed Isa. 53. 3.
of all kinds and degrees of sorrow. Antichrist is called a man of sin, to
note him, Merum scelus 2 These. 2. 3
(as Beza gives the emphasis of such forms of speaking) a man made up of
wickedness, or evil in the abstract. So when Jeremy was called a man of
strife, it sets him forth for a common Barretour, the veriest wrangler in a
Country. As if he were another Ismael, his hand against Genesis 16. 12.
every man, and every man's hand against him. And how got he this style? Only
because he could not bear the profaneness of some, and the will worship of
others. His service among the Jews was in this sense like that of Manlius
Torquatus among the Romans, who gave it over, saying, Neither can I bear their
manners, neither can they bear my government. The Jews could not bear his
plain dealing and reproves, neither could he bear their hypocrisy and
rebellion. And Jeremy had almost been like Manlius in giving over upon this
ground, Then I said I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his
name, Chap. 20. 9. But (he recovers himself) his word was in mine heart, as a
burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could
not stay. Heathens may, but believers cannot quite give up their work, because
of the contradiction of sinners. And hence he becomes a man of strife. For in
the close of that verse he shows, that he had avoided all other occasions, I
Ier. 15. 10.
have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent to me on usury, as if he had
said, I kept my self exactly within the bounds of my calling, I have not
troubled my self or this people with any other matters: I have not entangled my
self in any of the affairs of this life, which 2 Timothy 2. 4.
he expresses by the Synecdoche of not lending upon usury: and yet he was a man
of contention. On the same terms we have many men of contention at this day.
But as it was commanded Jeremy by the Lord in that Chapter, ver. 19.
so may we say to these for all the clamours of men, Let them return unto you,
but do not you return unto them. For, do they strive against sin? It is
their duty. Do they oppose error? they are called to it. Do they beat down
superstitious vanities? God commands it: Can they not bear evil? It commends
them to God: To agree with men thus were to conspire against Christ. Such peace
on Earth is war with Heaven. And we may answer all men, who would have us
quiet with evil, as that Sword did to those who said unto it, O thou Sword of
the Lord, how long Ier. 47. 6, 7.
will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest and be
still. How can we be quiet, seeing the Lord has given us a charge against
Askelon, and against the Seashore (of Babylon) there he has appointed us. He
has given all his people a charge against iniquity, against every evil, there
he has appointed them. And may this Sword and Bow of all the upright in
heart, be like the bow of Jonathan, and the Sword of 2 Samuel 1. 22.
Saul, not turning back nor returning empty, from the blood of sinne-slaine,
and from the fat of our mightiest corruptions both in Church and Commonwealth.

Let me therefore close this Doctrine with Exhortation impotency is your
strength for God, and this impatience your holiness. Bear not evil in your
Governments, in your Families, in your Children, in your Servants, in your
friends that are as your own souls, no, nor in your own souls.

But let this word be to You especially, even to You (of the Great and
Honorable Assembly) who are the called of God and the King, and the chosen of
this whole Nation. Your great work for God, for the King, for the whole
Nation, is, to find out and take away both things and persons which are evil.
Let your Acts testify before Heaven and Earth, that you cannot bear them. It
was a noble resolution of the Israelites, who were no sooner informed that
their Brethren the children of Reuben and Josh. 22. 11.
the children of Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasseh, had built an Altar on
the borders of Jordan: but presently they resolve to fight against them. They
will not Ver. 12.
bear them in this, though their Brethren: the reason was, because as the
Moral Law taught but one God, so the Ceremonial taught but one Altar; and
therefore a second was insufferable. And had not their answer V 13, 14. Ver. 21.
to the Princes (sent in Embassy) satisfied them (that they meant it not for
Sacrifice) doubtless they had taken deep revenge in that quarrel of God. And
let me beseech you this day to take up the like resolution, and speedily to
execute it against every Altar, yea every thing about Gods worship, whose
Authors and abetters cannot give as good an account for its beginning,
standing and continuance, as those Reubenites did for that. I hope, I have
seasonably moved you this day of your Fast to resolve on this. For the Prophet
tells us, this is Gods Fast, Is not this the Fast that I have Isa. 58. 6.
chosen? To loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to
let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Those things then,
which are bands of wickedness, resolve now to loose them, whatsoever is a
heavy burden resolve to undo it: when 1 King. 21 9, ^0. Iejunioru^ dies
insumebantur in reconciliando Deo, maleficijs tollendu et jure dicendo Iunius
in loc.
you are showed any yoke that is not of Christ's making, resolve as in the
sight of God this day, to break it. That so all the bands being loosed, the
burdens undone, the yoakes broken, every one that is oppressed may go free. It
was a custom among the Jews upon the very day of their Fast to enquire after
public offenders. This was the reason why cursed Iezabel (to put a face of
holiness upon murder) caused a Fast to be proclaimed, that she might slay
innocent Naboath, pretending that he had blasphemed God and the King. Change
the persons and the president in the maine is very imitable. It is a good part
of a Fast-duty, to judge those to stoning (some legal punishment) who do
indeed cast stones of blasphemy either at God or Kings: And so in a proportion
to judge any evil doer.

Again, I exhort to this the removing of evil as the most proper method of
doing good. If the body natural be distempered, it is to little purpose to be
at the charge for Cordials and Restoratives, until the noxious humors be
purged and carried away. No man will bring in goodly furniture into his house
until the dust and rubbish be swept up and cast out. I doubt not your
approbation (nay, who has not seen your practice?) of this course for the
restoring of the body politic, and the Adorning of Gods house (his Church)
whose house are we, even as many as hold fast the confidence Heb. 4. 6.
and rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end.

Lastly, I exhort to the removing of these burdens, the evils of sin, least
we provoke God to lay other burdens upon us, more (blessed be his name) then
he has done yet of the evils of punishment; They that will bear the former
burdens, shall bear the latter whether they will or no: Be they persons or
Nations. We have heard heretofore such outcries against some faithful
Ministers, as Amaziah made at Court, against Amos. The Land is not able to
bear all their words. We have just cause to fear Amos 7. 1.
that the Land will not be able long to bear all their works, who made this
cry: if they be borne. The burden of Gods wrath will sink a whole people
together, who are willing to bear the errors and vanities of one another. At
least our children may bear the sin of this generation, in bearing their sin,
as the children of the Israelites did their Fathers sin. Of whom God speaks,
(Numb. 14. 27.) How long shall I bear this Generation? Your carcasses shall
fall in the Wilderness, v. 32. And your children shall wander in the
wilderness forty years and bear your whoredoms: their Fathers dyed and
they carried their Fathers sin forty years, and were so long debarred the
possession of the promised Canaan. If we should (as they) prove false to
Christ, our carcasses may fall and our children may wander (who knows how
long) in a wilderness of trouble and distraction, bearing this spiritual
whoredom of ours, before they shall be admitted to the Canaan of a settled
condition.

Therefore (to conclude all) do not this great, this dangerous evil, The
Bearing of them that are, The Bearing of that which is evil. Bear not
Oppressors and Merchants, rather then Stewards of Justice in the State. Bear
not Buyers and Sellers, Money Changers rather then Ministers in the Temple.
Bear not the Seats of those who have sold and vexed Doves, but have spared
Crows, and admitted unclean birds to nestle there. Bear not ignorant, idle,
Idoll-Shepheards, who feed themselves and not the flock. Bear not sons of
Belial, who make men abhor the offerings of the Lord. 1 Samuel 2. 12 17.
Bear not profane Atheists, blasphemous Swearers, swinish Drunkards, filthy
Adulterers, bloody Murderers, false Witnesses in any corner of the Land: Bear
not Idolaters, who change the truth of God into a Lie, and Romans 1. 25
worship the creature more then the Creator (or the creature with the Creator)
who is blessed for evermore: Bear not a Graven Image, nor the Maker, nor the
Adorer of it; But defile all the Coverings of the Graven Images of Silver, Isa.
30. 22.
and the Ornaments of all the molten Images of Gold, cast them away as a
menstrous cloth, say unto them, with amighty voice (a voice has been heard as
the voice of many waters already) But say it now with a mighty voice, even the
voice of a great thunder) Get ye hence. Bear not superstitious Rev. 14. 2.
Innovators, who are all for mixtures in the worship of God: Whose minds are
corrupted (and they have a mind to corrupt others) from the simplicity that is
in Christ. 2 Cor. 11. 3
The Gospel and the ways of it are not Simple, as Simplicity is opposed to
depth of wisdom (for therein is made known the manifold wisdom of God) But
as simplicity Ephesians. 3. 10.
is opposed to mixture: As in Philosophy we distinguish between simple and mixed
Bodies: so in Divinity we may between simple and mixed Ordinances. Every thing
the more simple (in this sense) it is, the more excellent it is, and more free
from corruption: And God who infinitely excels All, is most Simple: He is Ens
Simplicissimum, Simplicity is his first Attribute. I hear, the Heralds have a
rule amongst them, That the most simple Bearing is the most honorable Bearing;
Coats full of Devices show a mean Descent. I am sure the simplest Worship is
fullest of Honor. A Religion full of devices could never, nor ever shall prove
(it has often attempted to purchase) a Pedigree from Heaven. Then bear not
mixing Innovators. Neither bear the old mixtures, the old Leaven which was
left in the first reformation. Take away the names of Baalim (the Remnants of
Superstition) that they may no more be remembered by their Name. Hos. 2. 17.
Consider, and consider whether you should bear that, which has been groaned
to you as a burden, by many, by most Petitions from all the Quarters of the
Land; I mean plainly, Our present Frame and Constitution of Church Discipline
and Government. But let this come to Trial. Though Ephesus had not the
patience to bear them or those things which were evil; yet Ephesus had the
patience to hear and try those who said they were good (though upon the debate
it appeared) they were not. Thou have tried them which say they are Apostles
and are not, and have found them Liars.

This is the second great work specified about which Second work of the Text.
that Church labored and exercised their patience. And should now be
discussed, but I will only hint at those three particulars, which the words
hold forth concerning such trials.

First, The necessity of them. None either persons or things, although they
pretend divine Authority, ought to be admitted without trial: For here, such
as said they were Apostles were found Liars. Who, remembering Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 Cor.
13. 9. Mat. 24. 24 Acts 20. 29, 30. 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Cor. 18, 13, 14. Mat. 24 24
that all men by Nature are darkness, and that the best are but in part
enlightened: That Christ and his Apostles have prophesied, False Christ's and
false Apostles shall come, and that the worst men shall come in the best
shapes, A Devil will transform himself into an Angel of Light: That these
false Teachers are many, and that they shall have many Followers, their Art
being so exquisite, that it will deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect:
Who (I say) taking in these thoughts, will not conclude the necessity of a
Trial, though Ius divinum be the plea.

Secondly, the words hold forth the justice and equity of such Trials. Such as
pretend divine Authority ought not to be rejected or condemned before Trial.
Thou have tried them which say they are Apostles. It is most reasonable that so
high and sacred a plea as that should be fully heard. Prejudices and
suspicions, bare reports and accusations, miscarriages and ill successes cannot
single, or all together, bear out the rejection of any thing or person, before
Trial, which claims by Divine right.

Thirdly, the words hold forth the fruit and benefit of such Trials. Due trial
will quickly discover those who are but pretenders, it will unmaske hypocrites:
Thou (having tried) have found them liars. As the Furnace to metal, or the
Balance to coin, such is due Trial to men, it will show what is Dross, what
is Light. I say, due Trial will show it: For if you bring a light piece to a
false beam, it will return for current. Then it must be a due trial; due for
the Nature of it, not a Trial of Curiosity, but of Sobriety, not of
Temptation, but of Disquisition. Due also in regard of the Rule it is made by.
Not by Tradition, not by Custom, not by Councels, not by that which is usually
called Antiquity: Josh. 9. 4.
The torn Garments, and moldy bread of cunning Gibeonites, will not prove
them come from the far country. Some things are so old that they are the worse
for it. Like the Gibeonites bread they mould: Truth does not so. It is as
ancient as God, and (except the Law of Ceremonies) ancient, as God is, who
never waxes old. Truth is old, but it waxes not old; that which does is ready
to vanish away: So the Apostle defines it. Such is the condition Heb. 8. 13.
of things that wax old, and such will their Lot be, they must vanish.
Whatsoever truth came from Heaven with Christ, shall never (in it self) feel
decay. Whatsoever moulds now, though it be as old as the world, came but from
our borders, This World: Heaven is the far country. Therefore the trial
cannot be made by that which is usually called Antiquity: But by that which
transcends all humane Antiquity, Customs, Councels and Traditions (though all
these may contribute some help) The Word of God. That has enough in 2 Timothy 3.
15, 17.
it to make the Man of God perfect; and what can be added to perfection? That
has enough in it to make all men wise unto salvation. And what any man should
do with wisdom beyound that, I know not.

Ob. If any say, The Word of God is often the thing in Question. The
controversy arises about the sense of a Text.

I answer (with our learned writers against the Papists) the Scripture is both
Text and gloss, and ever has light in some place to clear the darkness of
any other.

There is another rule of trial given by Christ, which I will but touch also.
By their fruits ye shall know them: do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs
Mat. 7. 16.
of Thistles. The fruit of Apostleship was by pains in Romans 1. 13 c. 16. 5.
preaching of the Gospel, and readiness to suffer for the Gospel, to save
souls. They cannot be Apostolical who preach not, or very seldom, and those
who would preach often they hinder. The fruits of Apostolical Doctrines and
Ordinances, are first the advancing of God in his free Grace, and the abasing
of man in regard of any Self-sufficiency or Free Will. Rom 14. 17.


Secondly, the settling of unquiet consciences, and the bringing in of assured
peace into the soul.

Thirdly, The mortifying of lusts, and the perfecting of holiness in the fear
of God. Those Doctrines or institutions about worship cannot be Apostolical,
which set up man's will, and leave his conscience unsettled. Which give advantage
to his Lusts, and leave his Graces unassisted.

Do but make serious trial by these rules, and whatsoever says it is, and is
not Apostolical, will be found a lie. 1 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15.
The benefit of such a trial is unspeakeable, Truth will get more Luster, and
we can lose nothing but our dross, our hay and stubble; Our services will find
more acceptance with God, and we shall have more satisfaction in our selves.
And if after all your trials you attain not what you ought (Man's blindness
makes this too possible) yet this will be some answer, that you have
endeavored what you can: Whereas not to try at all (as our case stands) were
unanswerable. What Apology can it bear, if (as Daniell speaks) after all that
is come upon us, we make not our prayer (and improve not our endeavor) Dan 9.
13.
that we might turn from our iniquities and understand his truth.

I have but two admonitions in a few words from Third part of the text
the third maine branch of this Text. First, do all these works for Christ's
name sake. Otherwise you may do much good for others, but you shall get
nothing (to purpose) by it your selves. Look to your ends and aims. They who
built Babel did it to get themselves a Gen 11. 4.
name; but they who will restore Jerusalem must do it to get Christ a name. If
you labor and have patience, for Christ he is engaged for your reward; if for
your selves, Christ has said and almost sworn it, Verily you have your
reward. There is nothing more miserable then to have our full pay in this
world. And yet it is Mat. 6. 2.
most certain that no good we do, will (redundare in personam) do us good
beyond (if it do so much) unless we make God our end. Iehu had a worldly 2 Kin
9.
Kingdom for destroying Baals Priests. The most we can have is a worldly
reward of honor, riches or greatness, for a good work done for worldly ends,
When ye have that ye have to the utmost worth of it. No man ever made more of
such a work, or ever shall. If we seek our own glory, we shall never enter
into Gods. It is a sad thing to do good with an ill heart.

Secondly, to shut up all, do and suffer all unto the end; let it be said of
you as of Ephesus, you have labored and have not fainted. Sincerity is ever
accompanied with constancy. They who work for right ends, will work unto the
end. They who seem what they are not Nemo potestdiu personam fictam far,
ficta cito in naturam suam recidunt. Sen. Ep Heb. 6. 9. Gal. 6. 9. Rev. 3. 11.
will quickly (if they be put to it) cease to be what they seem. And they who
work by art only, will soon return to their own nature. But (Honorable and
Beloved) I hope, nay I know better things of you, though I thus speak: only I
admonish you (with all humbleness) in the Apostles language, Be not weary in
welldoing, for in due season you shall reap, if you faint not. Or in the words
of Christ to the Philadelphian Angel, hold fast, let no man take your crown.
It is constancy which sets the crown upon the head of every action. If at any
time any of your spirits begin to faint (as who may not have a qualme) then let
me bespeake such a one as he Prophet does almost fainting Israel. Have thou
Isa. 40. 18.
not known? Have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord the
Creator of the ends of the Earth faints not, neither is weary. If you say,
what is that to me? though God who is omnipotent faint not, yet I who am but
weakness, may. No, while God has strength he who works for God cannot
utterly want it. For (as it follows) He gives power to the faint, and to them
Ver. 29.
that have no might, he increases strength. Even the youths shall faint and be
weary, and the young men shall utterly fall (the greatest strength and vigor
of natural Ver. 30.
abilities is weakness and infirmity without God) But they who wait upon the
Lord, shall renew their strength, Ver. 31.
they shall mount up with wings as Eagles; they shall run and not be weary,
they shall walk and not faint. Christ who gives you work, will also give you
strength. As it is your duty not to faint, so it is his promise that you shall
not. What a Master do we serve? who helps us Ioh. 15. 3.
to do his business, and then pays us for doing it, who works so in us, as
if we did nothing, and then rewards us so, as if we had done all. To him who
gives all both strength and reward, both Grace and Glory, be all strength
ascribed and Glory given, for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

