AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations CONTINUED UPON The Thirty Second,
the Thirty Third, and the Thirty Fourth Chapters of the Book of JOB: BEING The
Substance of Forty-nine Lectures, delivered at Magnus near the Bridge, LONDON.

By JOSEPH CARYL, Preacher of the Gospel, and Pastor of the Congregation there.

Pro: 18.17. He that is first in his own cause, seems just; but his
neighbor comes and searches him.

LONDON; Printed for M. Simmons, and are to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst at his
Shop at the three Crowns against the great Conduit at the lower end of
Cheap Side. 1661.

TO THE CHRSTIAN READER: TO Those especially of this CITY, who yet continue
helpful toward this WORK.
SIRS;
YE have had (according to my poor measure) the whole disputation between Job
and his three friends, Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar, explicated in nine parts
already published; I now (through the blessing and good hand of God with me)
present you with the Tenth; which indeed, without any design or pre-intent of
mine, proves like the Tenth wave from the vast ocean of this holy Book,
somewhat bigger, and fuller, I cannot say (and it is my reproof having been so
long conversant in this book that I cannot say) stronger and better, i. e.
more spiritual (which alone is the strength of Scripture writings) then the
former; but such as it is (and that it is such as it is, I own and humbly
acknowledge the goodness of God in using me to do it, such as it is (I say) I
freely tender it to your favorable acceptance, and dedicate it to the glory of
God and the common good: knowing that it is both my duty and Interest to show
the small improvement though but of one single talent, rather then, either
through sloth or slavish modesty to hide it in a Napkin.

In the prefatory Epistle to the second part of this book, there was an
endeavor of a discovery concerning the distinct opinion of Jobs three friends,
as also of what himself held fast and insisted upon all along in distinction
from theirs. And now that I have done with all that was said on both sides by
the disputants, and am come to open the discourse of Elihu, who appeared as
Moderator to give a determination about the Great Question, so long ventitated
among them; it may seem somewhat necessary, and I am much persuaded (if in any
competency attained) it will not be unprofitable, to give The Reader a brief
prospect of what Elihu aymeth at and does in this his large and accurate
discourse, continued in six Chapters throughout and divided into (besides his
General preface which takes up the whole thirty second Chapter) four
remarkable sections.

Elihu is introduced by the penman of this book in a great passion, both with
Job and his three friends, and he gives us an account why he was in such a
heat of passion with both (chap: 32.2, 3.) Then was kindled the wrath of
Elihu; against Job was his wrath kindled, because he had justified himself
rather then God. Also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because
they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job.

It remains therefore, that Elihu was the man, who found an answer in this
great difficulty and yet condemned not Job. And indeed he condemned him not (as
his friends had done) as a man imperfect and crooked in his ways, as a man
that feared not God and eschewed not evil, In or for these things Elihu did
not condemn Job, though his wrath was kindled against him: he condemned him
only for this, because he complained so much of the severity of Gods dealings
with him, and so, by consequence justified himself rather then God. And in
that point or for that fault he spared him not, but reproved him as sharply and
condemned him as deeply as his friends had done upon other and those (most of
them) undue and insufficient grounds. Thus we read his censure of him ( chap:
34.35. Job has spoken without knowledge, and his words were without wisdom.
And again (chap: 35.16.) Therefore Job opens his mouth in vain, he
multiplyeth words without knowledge; that is, without a clear knowledge of
himself both as a creature and as a sinner, as also of the design and purpose
of God in afflicting him.

Now, besides those passages in the discourse of Elihu wherein he charge Jobs
three friends with folly for condemning Job when they could not answer him, and
those wherein he reproves Jobs ignorance or want of knowledge, for wondering how
such great evils should fall upon him, notwithstanding his integrity, likewise
his boldness or penemptoriness in his own cause, justifying himself rather
then God, yea and desiring to plead his cause before him; I say besides these
passages, we at first reading might conclude that Elihu did nothing else
throughout these six chapters, but enlarge or paraphrase upon those things,
which had long before been spoken to by Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, and by Job
himself as much as by any of, if not beyond all them three.

But upon further consideration of the matter in the whole series and
contexture of his discourse, we may collect two things, instanced in and
insisted on by Elihu alone, upon which his particular opinion and sentence is
grounded in distinction from all the rest. The clear understanding of which,
will lead us to a fair solution or removal of those doubts which arise about
the question or matter in debate.

The two distinct points produced by Elihu, are, First, about Revelation, or
how God is pleased to manifest his mind and will to man. Secondly, about
Mediation, or the means which God has graciously afforded man to heal those
breaches, which sin has made between God and him, and so either firstly, or
afresh to reconcile man again to himself.

The Former of these is handled (chap: 33. v. 14, 15, 16, 17.) For God speaks
once, yea twice, though man perceives it not. In a dream, in a vision of the
night, when deep sleep falls upon men: Then he opens the ears of men,
and seals their instruction, that he may withdraw man from his purpose, and
hide pride from man. And thus, as it is said in the verse following, He keeps
back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword; that is,
these speakings of God are by the saving power and Spirit of God made
effectual for his salvation both temporal and eternal.

The latter is handled in the same chapter, beginning at the 23d verse to the
end of the 30th. If there be a messenger (or Angel) with him, an interpreter,
one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness: then he is gracious
unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a
ransom. His flesh shall be fresher then a child's, he shall return to the
days of his youth. He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable to him,
and he shall see his face with joy, etc.

Hence the opinion or determination of Elihu may be thus conceived.

That, notwithstanding all the confusions and disorders which seem to be in
the affairs of this world, the providence of God over mankind in General,
and his great mercy toward the righteous in special, is seen most eminently
in these two things.

First, In that he inspires them with the knowledge of heavenly things, or
acquaints them some way or other with his mind, both as to the meaning of what
he does to them, and of what he would have them do.

Secondly, In that he provideth and sends them a messenger or mediator both to
instruct them in their duty, and to pray for mercy, and so consequently to
deliver them, when their soul draws near to the Grave, and their life to
the destroyers.

Both these gracious dispensations of God are proper to righteous men, or at
least appropriate to them in a peculiar manner; the righteous are the men for
whom God provides a messenger or mediator, and the righteous are the men whom
God savingly and effectually inspires with the knowledge of his will, in the
things which concern both their present work and future reward. Neither has
Satan any power so to darken their understandings about those great things as
to make them miscarry; and as for all his other mischievous plots and practices
against them, they serve to a clean contrary purpose then he intends,
according to that most comfortable assertion of the Apostle (Rom: 8.28.) We
know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who
are the called according to his purpose.

Satan provoked God for a license to heap outward calamities upon Job in
stripping him naked of his worldly substance, and in tormenting his body with
grievous pains and sickness; which latter Elihu prosecutes at large (chap:
33.19, 20, 21, 22.) He is chastned also with pain upon his bed, and the
multitude of his bones with strong pain; so that his life abhors bread,
etc. And what he speaks of sickness is applicable to any or all sorts of
affliction; in all which (as it is said, v. 27, 28, 29, 30.) God looks upon
men, and if any say I have sinned and perverted that which is right, and it
profits me not; he will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his
life shall see the light. Lo, all these things works God oftentimes with man,
to bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the
living.

From these premises we may collect both what is proper to the righteous; and
that, in whatsoever is common to them with the wicked, there is neither
disorder nor confusion. For though the best of the righteous are liable to the
same outward evils which the worst of the wicked are, yet their condition is
not the same; seeing to the wicked those evils are purely punishments, and but
the beginning of those sorrows which shall never end; whereas to the righteous
they are either but chastisements for some sin already committed, or
medicaments to prevent the committing either of the same, or of some other sin.
And as for those who by such chastnings are brought to a sight of their sins
and forsake them, their souls are (by this means, v. 30.) brought back from
the pit to be enlightened with the light of the living.

This point is yet more fully and plainly prosecuted by Elihu in the 36th
chapter; where he informs us, how sufferings are differently to be conceived
of according to a threefold difference of the persons suffering. The first, and
chief, is of those, who are truly righteous and keep close to God in
righteous ways. The second is of those who being righteous in their state have
fallen foulely in their way, with whom we may also reckon such as are yet in an
unrighteous state, yet shall be and at last are converted and brought home to
God. The third is of those who persevere and obstinately continue in their
wicked state and ways, stopping their ears, and hardening their hearts, both
against instruction and correction.

Elihu seems to put all these together (v. 5, 6.) Behold God is mighty and
despises not any, he is mighty in strength and wisdom, he preserves not the
life of the wicked, but gives right to the poor. More distinctly,

He speaks of the first (v. 7.) He (that is, God) with-draweth not his eyes
from the righteous: but with kings are they on the throne, yea, he does
establish them for ever, and they are exalted.

He speaks of the second sort v. 8, 9, 10, 11. And if they be bound in fetters
and holden in the cords of affliction, then he shows them their work and
their iniquity, that they have exceeded. He opens also their ear to
discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity, etc.

He speaks of the third sort (v. 13, 14.) But the hypocrites in heart heap up
wrath; they cry not when he binds them; they dye in youth, and their life is
among the unclean.

These three sorts of men are dealt with by God according to their kind. The
last of them being altogether wicked and incorrigible, abide under wrath for
ever.

The second being in an evil state or having done that which is evil, yet
humbling themselves (through grace) and being bettered by their afflictions,
are usually restored to a prosperous estate in this life, and in case they die
under affliction, are always crowned with the blessedness of eternal life.

The First sort, walking constantly (humane frailties excepted) in their
uprightness, are not only preserved in peace, but receive high favors and
special marks of honor from the bountiful hand of God; which is true,
especially according to the condition of those times, wherein God did more
engage himself to his faithful servants in promises of temporal happiness,
then now he does in Gospel times.

And yet even these, as now they are not, so then they were not always
exempted from sufferings; For as the second sort of righteous men are often
afflicted in a way of chastisement for their sins; so the Lord reserves to
himself a liberty (his Sovereignty allowing it) to afflict the best and
holiest of his servants for the trial of their graces, or the magnifying of
his own grace to them and in them; as a Master of Heroic Arts and Games
imposes a very laborious task upon his Schollar-Champion, not as a punishment
of any default, but to confirm his strength and exercise his valor.

The due consideration of all these things laid together by Elihu, might well
satisfy Job, and sustain his faith in a patient bearing the burden of all
those calamities, which the Great and most wise God was pleased to impose upon
him, and likewise convince him that he had failed much in giving out so many
impatient complaints about them. And no doubt they prevailed much with him,
both toward his conviction, and the quieting of his heart under those
dispensations; For we hear no more of him in that language.

Yet Elihu thought he had not done enough, but continues his discourse, and
draws a further demonstration for his purpose, from the wonderful works of
God in nature, from the rain, thunder, snow, winds, etc. which he does from
the 27th verse of the 36th Chapter, to the end of the 37th, and with that
concludes his answer.

The scope of Elihu in that long and learned Philosophical Lecture was to
teach and assure Job, that, God who causes and disposes those various
alterations and terrible impressions in the air, both for the humbling and
benefiting of man, does much more both send and overruled all those changes and
afflictions which befall the sons of men, here on earth, to humble them and do
them good. And further to assure him, that if man be not able to give a
satisfying reason of those works of God in nature, but is often gravel'd and
forced to sit down in a silent admiration; then surely man is much less able
to fathom the depth of Gods purposes in all the works of his providence, but
must in many of them only sit down quietly and submit; For (as Elihu
concludes from these premises (Chap: 37.23, 24.) Touching the Almighty we
cannot find him out, he is Excellent in power and in Judgment, and in plenty
of Justice he will not afflict, (either causelessly or more then needs, though
we seldom see the causes or acknowledge the need of his afflictions) men do
(that is, they ought) therefore fear him; and if any are so proud and high in
their own thoughts that they do not, at their peril be it, for) he
respects not any that are wise in heart; that is, as the carnal wisdom of
worldly men cannot be a bar, so the true wisdom of godly men is no
privilege against the Sovereign power of God in afflicting them. And
therefore Job, though truly wise in heart, must not look for any such respect
from God as to be untoucht by or priviledg'd from affliction.

For the close of all, we may sum up the whole scope of Elihu's under-taking
with Job, yea of the whole Book of Job in these six points or propositions.

First, No man can stand before God in his own personal righteousness.

Secondly, How righteous soever any person is, yet the Lord may afflict and
break him in what way and in what degree himself thinks fit.

Thirdly, God has most wise and gracious aims in afflicting his righteous
servants.

Fourthly, His most righteous servants may not take the liberty to complain as
if they were wronged, or as if God were either rigorous or unrighteous in the
least, how much or how long soever they are afflicted.

Fifthly, There is nothing gotten by complaining or striving under the
afflicting hand of God; and therefore.

Sixthly, It Is best for us or our wisest way when things are at worst with us
to give glory to God both as just and good, and (possessing our souls with
patience) by faith to wait in hope, till he gives us a fresh experience of
his goodness, either by sweetning our troubles to us, and supporting us under
them, or by bringing us out of them (as he did Job) in the fittest season.

If in perusing this discourse of Elihu we carry these general results in our
eye, we shall read both the Text and Comment with more clearenesse in our
understandings at all times, and with more profit (when at any time under them)
in our chastenings, which, that we all may is the prayer of

Your affectionate Servant in this work of Christ JOSEPH CARYL.
The 24th of the 3d Month 1661.
AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations UPON The Thirty-second,
Thirty-third, and Thirty-fourth Chapters of the Book of JOB.
JOB, Chap. 32. Verse. 1, 2, 3. So these three men ceased to answer Job, because
he was righteous in his own eyes.

Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite of the
kindred of Rain: against Job was his wrath kindled; because he justified
himself rather then God.

Also against his three friends was his wrath kindled: because they had found
no answer, and yet had condemned Job.


THe last Chapter ended with these words, The words of Job are ended; the
beginning of this tells us his three friends had ended theirs. So these three
men ceased to answer Job; Thus we have had the whole dispute between Job and
his three friends; Now follows the determination of it. The disputants having
done, the moderators begin; First Elihu, and after him God himself. Elihu
spends six whole Chapters in delivering his mind upon this Controversy; yet he
makes some pauses and overtures, moving or inviting Job to a reply. But Job
interposed not a word.

We may consider this whole discourse of El^hu in four distinct parts; the
first contained in the 32d and 33d Chapters; the second in the 34th, the third
in the 35th, and the fourth in the 36th and 37th Chapters of this Book.

In the first part, he directs his speech; first to Jobs three friends, in
this 32d Chapter; Secondly, to Job himself in the 33d.

In this Chapter we may consider, first a rational transition from the dispute
between Job and his friends, to this discourse of Elihu, in the five first
verses; Secondly, we have a very Rhetorical or patheticall Preface, wherein
Elihu endeavors to gain attention by giving an account, or the reasons of
his undertaking, in which he interweaves many Apologies for himself, in
venturing upon so hard a task, respecting both his youth, and the weight of
the argument. He amplifies and continues upon this subject to the end of the
32d Chapter; wherein he engages himself by solemn promise to carry on the
business without respect of persons, without fear or flattery.

Yet more distinctly in this first part, The transition; first, a reason is
assigned why Jobs friends left off speaking. As it is not good to begin to
speak, so neither to give over speaking, till we see and can give a reason for
it; The reason here given, is, because Job was righteous in his own eyes (v.
1.) Secondly, a reason is given not only why Elihu did begin to speak, but why
he began to speak as he did, in anger; first, against Job, which is laid down
in the second verse, Because he justified himself rather then God; Secondly,
against his friends ( ver. 3.) Because they had found no answer, yet had
condemned Job, or, because they censured him, though they could not confute
him. In the 4th and 5th verses, we have a discovery of the cause of Elihu's
modesty in forbearing so long to speak, which he further inlargeth in the
following parts of the Chapter.

Verse. 1. So these three men ceased to answer Job.
They who had maintained the dispute all this while, ceased, rested, or sat
down. When men speak they usually stand up or stand forth. The word in the
Hebrew may be rendered thus; They sabbatized, implying they had found it a week
of hard work, Verbum ipsum (...) ind^cat contentionem and desat gationem
disputationis praeteritae and ingentem vim positam in repugnando and refutando.
Pined;
and strong labor in dealing and tugging with Job; And now as if their seventh
day or Saboth were come, they sat down and took their rest. Speaking,
especially arguing and disputing with a knowing and resolved adversary, is
tough work; And they who have been at it to purpose, may for very weariness
have causee-nough to rest or take their Saboth; so did these three men, they
ceased or sabbatiz'd from answering Job.

We may yet further enquire, why did they cease? First, some men cease to
answer, because they have no more to answer. Secondly, others cease to answer,
because they suppose they have answered enough already, and will answer no
more. Some say the former was the reason why Jobs three friends ceased to
answer, they had no more to answer; Others take the latter, that they had no
mind, no will to give any further answer. But the reason expressed in the text
(which should satisfy us and superseed further queries) is, Because he was
righteous in his own eyes.

As if it had been said, Because they saw they had done no good upon him, Job
kept his ground and maintained his standing, he disputed every inch with them,
and yielded not an inch; as they found him at first, so he was at last, they
saw him a man immoveably set down in his own purpose and opinion, and
therefore, because they could get nothing by speaking, they would speak no
more. It Is but lost labor, (as we say) to wash the Blackmore. The constancy
and warmth of Job in defending himself they judged obstinacy and a humor to
oppose, or but the swelling of a proud spirit; whereas indeed it was the love
of truth, not of contention, a zeal to do himself right, not to do them
wrong, which caused him still to hold up the Bucklers, and adhere so stiffely
to his own opinion. Thus despayring to convince or bring him to an
acknowledgement; that he was unrighteous, they ceased.

Because he was righteous in his own eyes. That Is such another form of
speaking ( Pro. 3.7.) Be not wise in thine own eyes; As also that ( Pro.
26.12.) See thou a man wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a fool
then of him. You may easier reduce a man that is indeed ignorant, then him,
that thinks himself very wise, or knowing, but is not. This was the
apprehension of Jobs friends concerning him, He was a man (thought they and so
they said) righteous in his own eyes.

There are three sorts of righteous persons. First, such as are righteous in
the eyes of God, and so the Godly are under a twofold notion; First, as being
pardoned for or justified from their unrighteousness, through faith in Christ;
Blessed are they who are thus accounted righteous in the eyes of God. Secondly,
they are righteous, as avoiding unrighteous, and doing righteous things. There
is a seed a principle of righteousness in persons justified and regenerated,
which daily puts it self forth in righteous actings; He that does
righteousness is righteous (1 John: 3.7.) He is so, both as to his state, and
as to his actions, in the eyes of God and good men.

Secondly, Many are righteous in the eyes of men, they have fair appearances
and outsides; you can read nothing amiss in their conversation, yet they are
unrighteous, yea altogether unrighteous in the eyes of God, yea and possibly in
their own too; They cannot but see their own wickedness, though they can
conceal it from the sight of others. Hypocrites are like painted Sepulchers,
fair without (as Christ spoke of the Pharisees) but within full of
rottenness. They seem that to men which God sees they are not; They can show
their best side to and hide their worst from men, but they cannot play this
game with God; he sees their best is bad, because it is but the covering, not
the hating, not the mortifying of that which is bad.

Thirdly, There is another sort who are righteous in their own eyes; such
Solomon describes ( Prove. 30.12.) There is a generation that are pure in their
own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthiness. These have a great
opinion of themselves; They think all is right and well with them, when indeed
they are filthy and unclean, their hearts being yet unchanged, though their
ways are smoothed; and though they may have left off to do many filthy
things, yet they are not washed from their filthiness. The text in hand puts
Job into this third sort of righteous men. But was it thus with him? I answer;
First, Job was a man righteous in the eyes of God, in both the notions
mentioned; he was righteous as justified and righteous as sanctified. Secondly,
Job was a man righteous in the eyes of many men; for he says ( Chap. 29.11.)
The ear which heard me blessed me, and the eye which saw me gave witness to
me; yet Job had not an universal testimony given by men; There were some, I
cannot say many, in whose eyes he was unrighteous; He was so in the eyes and
opinion of his friends especially. Though none could, as to the eye, tax Job
with any unrighteousness, no not they who doubtless had sifted his life to
the bran, yet his friends thought him unrighteous, and he stood judged as
unrighteous in their eye.

As for the third sort of righteousness, that of being righteous in our own
eyes we must distinguish; Job was indeed righteous in his own eyes in a good
sense, and that under a twofold consideration; First, as not having committed
any gross or scandalous act of wickedness, as he professed at large and with
much confidence in that apology and vindication which he made for himself in
the Chapter foregoing; where he calls down the severest judgments of God upon
himself, if he had done such things as he was suspected of, especially if he
had defiled himself with those common polutions of the world, wantonness,
injustice and oppression. Job stood upon it that he was thus righteous.
Secondly, Job was righteous in his own eyes, as to the allowing of himself in
any the least sin or unevenness, either of heart or life; Thus much his
protestation or imprecation amounts to in the 33d verse of that Chapter; If I
have covered my transgressions as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom;
As if he had said, I have not lived in the love of any sin whatsoever. Thus Job
was righteous in his own eyes, protesting to God and before men, that as he
was not scandalously wicked in any kind, so he was not closely nor
hypocritically wicked; every sin was his burden, and the abhorrence of his
soul. In any other sense Job was far from being righteous in his own eyes; He
never either said or thought he had done no evil, or was altogether sin-lesse,
like white paper without blot or blur; yea we very often find him confessing
his sins and failings ( Chap. 7.20.) I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee
thou preserver of men? He makes a like acknowledgement ( Chap. 9.2.) I know it
is so of a truth, but how shall man be just with God? If he will contend with
him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand. Again ( ver. 20.) If I justify
my self, my mouth shall condemn me: If I say I am perfect, it shall also
prove me perverse. And while he affirms the general viciousness of nature,
he must needs imply his own ( Chap. 15.14.) What is man that he should be
clean? and he which is, borne of a woman, that he should be righteous? Behold
he puts no trust in his Saints, yea the heavens are not clean in his sight,
how much more abominable and filthy is man? In this universal conclusion, he
includes himself, therefore Job was far from being righteous in his own eyes
in any proud opinion of his own righteousness or freedom from any stain of
sin. So much for the opening of those words, containing the reason why his
friends ceased to answer; Because he was righteous in his own eyes.

It was the design of these three men not only to convince Job that he was a
sinner, but to bring him upon his knees as a notorious sinner; And yet all
their allegations and arguments could not bring him to it; My righteousness
(said he, Chapt. 27.6.) I hold fast, I will not let it go. Now, when they saw
him thus resolved and stiff in maintaining the goodness of his cause, and the
integrity of his spirit, they quitted the business, or as the text says,
ceased to answer.

Hence note; We cease to do when we cannot attain our end in doing.

Impossibilium nullus est conatus.
When we see it is in vain to persuade, we give over persuading, Despair of
working our end, puts an end to our working. Industry is at a stand, yea
withdraws when impossibilities appear. And though nothing be impossible unto
God, yet we find God himself giving over both speaking and smiting when he
sees he is like to do no good by either. Thus he expresses his purpose (
Isa. 1.5.) when he had spent many rods of sore Judgments and afflictions upon
that people, when he had stricken them till, from the crown of the head, to
the sole of the feet, they were nothing but a continued wound, and yet they
received not correction; he presently reasons thus, Why should ye be stricken
any more, ye will revolt more and more. As if he had said, The end why I smote
you was to amend you, to bring you home to my self, to cause you to turn
back, or return from your evil ways, but I see I have lost my labor, and
spent not only my rods but my scorpions in vain upon you, therefore I will
cease from this kind of work, why should ye be stricken any more, ye will
revolt more and more. And when God has spoken long to a people who regard it
not, he cease to speak any more, but says, Why should ye be taught any more?
Let the Prophets tongue cleave to the roof of his mouth, let him be dumb and
silent, as the word is ( Ezekiel. 3.26.) Thou shall be dumb, and shall not be a
reprover (why) for they are a rebellious house. After all thy speaking, they
continue rebelling, therefore speak no more. We read the like dreadful
prohibition ( Hos: 4.4.) Let no man strive nor reprove another (let all ways
of reclaiming this people be laid aside) For thy people are as they that strive
with the Priest; That is, they are obdurate and desperately engaged in
wickedness ( Hos: 4.17.) Ephraim is joined to Idols (he cleaves and sticks
fast to them, he will not be pulled from his own inventions) Let him alone.
Thus God says to his Prophets and Ministers, cease, he says to his
Ordinances, cease, when sinners will not cease to sin and do wickedly against
the Lord. The same unprofitable and incorrigible people are threatened in the
same manner by another Prophet ( Amos 8.9.) It shall come to pass in that day,
says the Lord God, that I will cause the Sun to go down at noone. And ( ver.
11.) I will send a famine in the Land, not a famine of bread, but of hearing
the words of the Lord. God would stop the raining down of heavenly Manna, and
the people should not hear, because they would not. Such was the sentence of
Christ against the Jews (Math. 23.37.) O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often
would I have gathered thy children together as a hen gathers her chickens
under her wings, but ye would not? What follows this refusal? read and tremble
( ver. 38.) Behold your house is left unto you desolate, for I say unto you, ye
shall not see me henceforth, etc. As if he had said, because ye have been so
unteachable, therefore ye shall be taught no more. It is sad, when we give God
occasion to give over either speaking to us or afflicting us. God will not
always strive with the unwillingnesse, much less with the wilfulness of man;
nor will men be always doing that to men, which they see does them no good. So
these three men ceased, etc.

Secondly, Note hence; When men are obstinate and will not be reclaimed, it is
good to give over.

Why should they who in any kind are absolutely resolved, be further moved? (
Acts 21.14.) When Paul's friends saw he would not be persuaded, they ceased:
they had used much persuasion to keep him from going up to Jerusalem, because
of the sufferings that were prophesied should befall him there, yet when he
stood out, in an holy obstinacy against them, clothed with a gracious spirit
of courage to suffer for Christ; When he would not be persuaded they ceased,
saying, the will of the Lord be done. As it was the height of Paul's holiness
that he would not be persuaded, he was obstinate for Gods cause, or for the
doing of a duty; so it is the height of many men's wickedness that they will
not be persuaded, they are obstinate against God, or against the doing of their
duty; Such as are infected with the lust of contending, will maintain that
opinion pertinaciously, which they cannot maintain truly. As some strive for
the love of victory, rather then of truth; so others strive because they love
strife even more then victory, and had rather contend then conquer, because
that puts an end to strife. In such cases they do best who do no more; And if
Jobs case had been such, if he had held up the discourse, not for truth but for
victory, or because he would have the last word, like a clamorous Sophister,
who has always somewhat to say, though nothing to the purpose; In that case,
I say, Jobs friends had done wisely in ceasing to answer; They indeed did well
upon their own supposition, though as to the truth of Jobs condition they
failed greatly. Job was not a man of that spirit, he that persists in holding
and defending truth, is not obstinate but constant.

Further, as to the ground why they ceased, according to their supposition,

Observe; To be righteous in our own eyes is hateful both to God and good men.

A man is never so vile in the eyes of those who can discern him, as when he
is righteous in his own; how righteous soever any man is, he should be little
in owning it. To insist much upon our own righteousness, savours rankly of a
Pharisee ( Luke 18.9.) Christ spoke a parable to this purpose (that is the title
of the Parable) ( ver. 9.) And he spoke this parable unto certain which trusted
in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others. Then follows the
Pharisees boast of his fasting twice in the week, etc. And when the text says
( ver. 14.) the Publican went down to his house justified rather then the
other. It does not imply that the Pharisee was at all justified, but rather
that being righteous in his own eyes, he was under a sad sentence of
condemnation in the eyes of God. The meaning is not that the Pharisee was
somewhat justified, and the Publican more; But that the Pharisee was not
justified at all. It is our duty to follow after righteousness, but our sin to
boast of it ( Math. 5.3.) Blessed are the poor in spirit. The more poor we
are in spirit, the more rich we are in spiritualls. Poverty of spirit is
directly opposite to our being righteous in our own eyes. Christ came not to
call the righteous but sinners to repentance. (Math. 9.13.) By the righteous
there we are to understand those that are righteous in their own eyes, those
that have high thoughts of themselves; The sinners whom Christ calls to
repentance are the poor in spirit, though indeed the righteous in their own
eyes, are the greatest sinners. As we never do worse, or more against right,
then when we do that (as it was said of that ungoverned age, Judge. 17.6.)
which is right in our own eyes, so we are never worse, then when we are
righteous in our own eyes.

From the whole matter of these words, we see, that as Jobs friends had been
mistaken all along in that which they spoke, so now in the reason of their
ceasing to speak; which was a supposall that Job was righteous in his own
eyes.

Hence observe; There is nothing more common then for men to mistake and
misjudge one another.

Jobs friends concluded him settled in a proud conceit of his own
righteousness, because he constantly denied their charge of unrighteousness.
Some impose an opinion upon their brethren which is not theirs, and make them
say that which they do not affirm; how injurious is this! yea some mis-judge
the word of God, as well as the words of men. They wrest the Scriptures, (2
Pet. 3.16.) They make the Scripture speak that, which the holy Ghost never
intended. It is dangerous to strain the word of a man, much more the word of
God. The former proceeds from a want of charity, but the latter is a great
impiety. There could not be a more unrighteous thought conceived of Job in any
man's heart, then that he was (as his friends thought him) righteous in his own
eyes; yet thus they thought him, nor would they think otherwise of him, let
him say what he would to the contrary. So much of the first verse which gives
us a reason why Jobs friends sat down and ceased to answer; His being (as
they judged him) righteous in his own eyes. In the next verse Elihu gives out
a severer Judgment against him then this; To be at all righteous in our own
eyes (according to the sense intended) argues a man to be both very blind and
very proud, but for a man to be so righteous in his own eyes, as that he dares
justify himself rather then the most righteous God, argues not only
blindness and pride, but pride and blasphemy; yet thus says Elihu of Job, as
it follows.

Verse. 2. Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite of
the kindred of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled, because he justified
himself rather then God.
Here comes in the fourth speaker, as a moderator or determiner of this great
dispute; And he begins, much unlike a moderator, in a heat.

Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu. Novus hic est disputa^di actus, nova
etiam argumenta^di forma, tanto subtilior qua^to magis in seipsam reflexa. Nam
videtur argumentari (ut logici loquuntur) quasi ad hominem, ex ipsis Jobi
verbis and dictis. Pined:
It is very common for men to grow hot in dispute, but for a man to begin his
dispute with an heat, that is very strange; many have been all in a flame upon a
little discourse, but to be in a flame upon the entrance of a discourse, is a
thing almost unheard of. Yet thus it was with this man; Then was kindled the
wrath of Elihu.

The Hebrew is, his nose or nostrills were angry. The Metaphor is taken from
Horses, Bears, Lions, Bulls, or any furious creatures, who send forth fumes of
wrath or anger at their nostrills. The blood at the heart of an angered angry
man is enflamed, and he, as it were, breaths out fire and smoke at his mouth
and nostrills. Elihu came in a flame to this business.

How uncessant were the oppositions of Job! no sooner had those three men
ceased speaking, but a fourth rises up to speak. The Good man found no rest;
his three friends had their Saboth, they ceased or rested from the dispute, but
Job was at weekday labor still, attending the words of this angry moderator.
Mr. Broughton renders, The anger of Elihu was in choler. Anger is hot, but his
anger was heat, or at least his anger was heated, yea it was not only heated
as at the fire, but kindled like a fire.

Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu. Anger is a fire; Philosophi ira^ (...),
faciunt, spiritus affectuum instrume^ta sunt; ut res phantasiae imprimitur, ita
spiritus commovetur ad habendam vel d^pellendam. Coc:
and (as Solomon says) can a man take fire in his bosom, and not be burned?
so I may say, can a man carry anger in his bosom, and not burn himself, if
not others with it? And as fire is blown up by bellows, so is anger by
provocation. The anger of God is expressed in a heat ( Deuteronomy. 29.24.) What
means the heat of this great anger (ver. 20.) The anger of the Lord and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man. And ( Psalm. 2.12.) If his wrath be
kindled but a little, etc. The least sparklings of it are terrible. The anger
of God is a most dreadful fire; and the anger of man has much dread in it. We
have need to look to our passions. Fire is good, but it must be kept in its due
place; fire on the hearth, fire in the chimney is good, but fire in the roof,
or among the household stuff consumes all. There is (as I may say) an hearth
for anger where it will do no hurt.

Then was kindled the wrath
of Elihu the son of Barachel.
There are many questions about this person among the learned; It would be too
great a diversion, and possibly an unprofitable one to stay upon them. We have
him here described, First, by his name. The Hebrew Etymologists say, This
proper name Elihu signifies, He is my God, or my God is he. And as he is
described by his name, so by his nativity or parentage; Elihu the son of
Barachel the Buzite of the kindred of Ram.

His Fathers name Barachel, signifies in the Hebrew, one whom God has blessed,
or, the blessing of God. The sons name was, my God is the Lord. And the fathers
name was, the blessing of God, or, one whom God has blessed. We may note a
piece o^ holy devotion in the old fathers in giving significant names to their
children. And surely it may be of much use to give our children good and
significant names, such names as carry a remembrance of duty, or of mercy. When
Alexander the Great, met with a common Soldier whose name was Alexander, He
said to him, Be sure thou do nothing unworthy the name of Alexander. His name
had a great encouragement in it to gallantry in war. And it is noted of
Diadumenus, Ego curabo ne desim nomini Amoninorum.
that having obtained both the Empire and the name of Antoninus, he said, I
will labor all I can, that I may not be injurious to the name of the
Anthonines. This should be much more our care and study, where holiness makes
the name honorable; John signifies the grace of God, And, as I remember it is
the saying of one of the ancients, concerning a bad man so called, Thy name is
John, but thou art not John; thy name signifies grace, but thou art not
gracious. Ambrose said to the virgin Agnes, or Anne, There is chastity in thy
name, do not contradict thy name. So Jerome writing to Pammachius, which name,
signifies a fighter against all; Do thou (says he) fight against all sin,
against the Devil, the world, and thy own corruption. The same Author writing
to Melecius, which signifies, Honey sweetness, Have thou (says he) the
sweetness of honey in thy manners. And to Probus he writes, Thy name
signifies honesty, Then be thou an honest man. The Apostle exhorts (2 Timothy
2.19.) Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity; It is
a great argument, seeing all who profess the Gospel are called Christians,
from Christ, that therefore they should adorn that most worthy name by worthy
walking. And let me say to all those whose names signify any thing of God, of
Grace, or goodness, ye have a good and gracious name, let not your actions be
a reproach to God, nor a shame to the profession of his grace. A good heart
will make a good use of every thing, and is provoked to have more then a name
for that grace or goodness which is in his name, even to be really that which
his name is. How should an Elihu, whose name signifies He is my God, labor
after this holy assurance that God is his? How should a Barachel, whose name
signifies the Blessing of God, be always praying and waiting for the blessing
of God, or returning praise to God (both in heart and life) for all his
blessings?

Elihu the son of Barachel
The Buzite.
Here Elihu is described by his family, as before by his father The Buzite,
that is, coming from Buz. Yet there is a difference about that, some say he had
that name from the place where he dwelt; we read ( Jer. 25.23.) of a place
called Buz. Others say, he was called the Buzite from the name of his family;
As he descended from Buz the son of Nabor Abraham's brother ( Genesis 22.21.)
Mi^cah has borne children unto thy brother Nahor, Huz his first born and Buz
his brother. Master Broughton is clear in it, who gives this gloss upon the
text; Elihu the Buzite, of Buz Abraham's brothers son of the family of Ram,
famous then for knowledge. Rebecca and Jacob seem to have left religion in
Nahors house. Thus far he. Jerome says, Hieron: in tract: Heb: super Genesm.
Elihu was descended from the second son of Milcah, whom the Septuagint call
Bauz, from him was Balaam the sorcerer, who according to the Tradition of the
Jews was this Elihu spoken of in the book of Job, at first, an holy man and a
Prophet, but afterward an apostate. But I leave that as a Rabbinicall
Tradition. Apparet, quod sicut Eliu dicitur Buzitis quia originem traxit ex
Buz; ita dicitur de Ram rationae maternae originis. Melcha enim matter Buz fuit
filia Aram unde et 70 loco Ram legunt Aram Proinde sicut tres reges
visitaverunt Job causa amicitiae, ita Eliu causa cognationis, de qua vendicavit
sibi in Job plusculum audacioris licentiae. Ianson: Quis iste fuer^, quaerunt
interpretes, Gramatici certant, and adhuc sub judice lis est. Drust:


We have yet a further description of Elihu in the Text.

Of the kindred of Ram, of the family or posterity of Ram. Who this Ram was is
much controverted by Interpreters; nor is the controversy yet ended who this
Ram was. Some say he was that Ram spoken of ( Ruth 4.19.) But it is not likely,
that he was so ancient as Job, or if he were, he would not leave the Israelites
(from whom Pharez was descended) to dwell among the Edomites. Others say he was
that Aram mentioned ( Gen: 22.21.) But neither does this appear true; for then
Elihu could not be a Buzite, but must draw his line from Kemuel the brother of
Buz. The Chaldee Paraphrase tells us, he was Abraham. And to clear this it is
said (as our own learned Annotators have given it) that he had a threefold
gradation in his name; First, he was called only Ram, which signifies high;
Secondly, Abram, which signifies A high father; Thirdly, Abraham, which
signifies the high father of a multitude. But, upon which to determine I
conceive it impossible, nor is there any great matter in it. Only this seems
clear, that the family of Ram was some great and illustrious family in those
times; and we may take notice how distinct and punctual the penman of this
book was in describing the pedigree of Elihu. And there may be two reasons why
the Spirit of God directed him to be so; First, because he was but a young man;
Neutrae sententiae accederom, sed Ram alium quempiam fuisse putarim virum
celebrem et clarum ex familia Nahor. Merc:
And therefore as Saul (1 Samuel 17.56.) when he saw David a young man, he asked
after his parentage; Enquire whose Son this stripling is; I would feign know
his kindred. So the kindred of Elihu is thus distinctly set down, that he who
by reason of his youth was little known as to his person, might be the better
known by his Ancestors, or parentage.

Secondly, His parentage is thus distinctly set down, to assure us, that this
is a true history; For some have made the whole book of Job to be but a
parable, asserting there was no such real thing. But this one passage gives an
undeniable proof, that this was a real history, and the matter really acted.
This person being described by his own name and his fathers name, and the next
of his kindred.

From the consideration of the person who carried on so great a part in this
business, Elihu, the son of Barachel the Buzite of the kindred of Ram, who was
of a strange Country, and if allied to Abraham, yet at a great distance; we may
observe; God did preserve a seed of religion, and of holy men to maintain his
truth among those who lived in dark places, and were wrapped up in many errors
and superstitions.

This was also noted from the first words of this book, There was a man in the
Land of Vz; A man of gracious accomplishments and of a heavenly light. Here
also was Elihu the Buzite, A man that had great knowledge about holy things (as
we shall see afterward) in those parts and times when and where abundance of
darkness, blindness and ignorance reigned.

Having thus described Elihu; The history proceeds.

Against Job was his wrath kindled, because he justified himself rather then
God. In the former part of the verse it is said; Then was kindled the wrath of
Elihu; Not specifying against whom, nor the cause why; here he doubles the same
words, with an addition, first, of the person with whom he was angry; Against
Job was his wrath kindled. And as he tells us the mark or object of his wrath;
so he gives, secondly, the reason of it; Because he justified himself rather
then God. Before I come to the explication of this latter branch, take these
two brief notes.

First, A godly man in maintaining a good cause, may give just reason of
another passion or anger. Job was a good man, and his cause was good, yet you
see a wise and a good man's wrath is kindled. Paul and Barnabas were two good
men, yet a difference arose between them ( Acts 15.39.) And the contention was
so sharp between them that they departed asunder.

Secondly, Considering the cause of this anger in general, Because he
justified himself rather then God; we see it was an anger for Gods cause.

Hence note; Anger for God or in the cause of God is holy anger.

Though for the most part the flesh or our carnal corruption is the cause of
anger, and it begins at self; yet sometimes it is stirred in the cause of God.
It is said of Moses, the meekest man on earth ( Numb. 12.3.) that when he saw
the idolatry of the people ( Exodus 32.19.) His anger waxed hot; He was so angry
that he cast the Tables of the Law which God had written with his own hand, out
of his hand and broke them. It is said ( Mar. 3.5.) Jesus Christ looked about
on them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts; He also
expressed a great deal of zealous anger ( Joh. 2.15.) When he made a whip of
small cords, and drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. (...) id genus
irae notat, quo fertur quis ad abolitionem peccati, cum quo si sit veritas
justissimus effectus est. Coc:
Some of the Hebrews tell us, that the word here used for anger, signifies
anger carried out to the destruction of sin, and that is a very gracious anger.
There are two things which exceedingly declare the holiness of a man's spirit.
First, when he can patiently bear loads of evils and wrongs in his own
cause, or which have but a private respect. Secondly, When he is ready to take
fire in the cause of God; many dull and sluggish souls can hear God abused,
Hoc probes abnegationem tui and mundi, si injuriarum ferens sis, peccatum autem
far non possiis; idque ita ut non ad vindicandum sed ad emendandum
exstimulares.
and their spirits stir no more then a stone; Elihu was angry, but it was in
the cause of God; or, Because Job Justified himself rather then God. When we
are angry with sin, we are angry (as the Apostle advises us to be) and sin
not. That Is anger without sin, when we are angry with sin; and are stirred up
to oppose and suppress the pride and insolency of man's spirit or speeches
against God; To be angry for our own honor, and interest, or Gourd; is an
argument of undue love to self. When God spared Nineveh the Prophet was
exceeding angry ( Jon. 4.1.) But his was sinful anger; because he was angry
for his own sake, fearing to be called a false Prophet; He set himself down
to see what would become of the City, that he might have a personal glory, and
be cried up for a Prophet indeed. And when God had smitten his Gourd, he was
angry and angry unto the death (ver. 8.) and all because he missed that which
pleased himself. Many can be angry when they themselves are discredited, but
when dishonor is cast upon God, or his interest slighted, how quiet and tame,
how cold and dull are their spirits! The anger of this man was a noble anger,
as to the occasion and rise of it, Jobs selfe-justification, or Because he
justified himself rather then God.

This is a high point, and may justly provoke our anger, Elihu was not angry
with Job because he justified himself against his friends, but because he
justified himself rather then God.

Here a question will arise, and it will ask some pains to determine it; Was
this true? did Job justify himself rather then God? Was it possible Job
should do so? I shall give only a general answer to this question; Job did not
justify himself rather then God, either explicitly, or intentionally, but by
consequents he did. And though it be granted that Job gave just occasion of
this sharp reproof by his rash and passionate speeches, uttered in the heat
of dispute, and in the grief of his heart, yet it cannot be denied that Elihu
did somewhat strain Jobs words, though not beyond their sense, yet beyond his
sense, and gave them the hardest interpretation (somewhat beside the rule of
charity) which they could bear, nor did he observe that meekness and
moderation which might well have become him, to a man in that case. O how hard
is it not to offend or do ill, while we are doing well!

To clear this a little further consider, There is a twofold straining of
words; First, beyond the sense of the words spoken; Secondly, beyond the sense
of the speaker. I do not say Elihu in affirming this of Job, strained his
words beyond their sense, but he strained them beyond Jobs sense. Job spoke
words which might lay him under this censure, that he justified himself rather
then God; But this was far from his intention; For doubtless he had rather a
thousand times his tongue should have been cut out of his mouth, then to
justify himself with it rather then God, or to speak a word to the
disparagement of Gods Justice. So then it was hard for Elihu to charge Job
thus, though Job had let fall some inconsiderate speeches, which administered
occasion for such a charge. And as one of the Ancients speaks of difficulties
and seeming contradictions in Scripture; Distinguish the times, and the
Scriptures will accord; So distinguish the time of this dispute, take Job at
the beginning of it, before he was teazed and heated by his friends, and then
he spoke at a very low rate of himself; If I were righteous I would not know
my own soul. But in the heat and toward the later end of this long dispute,
Job gave too much advantage for such a construction to be put upon his words,
that he justified himself rather then God; then which nothing can be said more
unjustifiable, nor more reproveable.

Hence observe; To justify our selves does usually and justly lay us open to
the reproof of others; or, To justify our selves, draws blame upon our
selves.

To justify, is four ways used in Scripture.

First, (which is the most remarkable and excellent act of it) God justifies
man ( Romans 8.33.) It is God that justifies. This act of divine Grace consists
in two things; First, in the imputation of Christ's righteousness to us;
Secondly, in the free remission of our sins.

Secondly, Man justifies God ( Luke 7.29, 30.) And all the people that heard
him, and the Publicans justified God, being baptized with the Baptism of John.
Where to justify imports as much as to Glorify does, ( Acts 13.48.) And when
the Gentiles heard this, they were glad and glorified the word of the Lord;
That is, they readily approved and received the word of the Lord; when we
approve the Doctrine, and doings of God, his word and works, then we justify
him. And how ready should we be on all occasions to justify God, who only is
and is altogether good, when he is so graciously ready to justify us who are
evil, altogether evil and ungodly.

Thirdly, We read in Scripture of man justifying man, which is done any of
these three ways.

First, He that consents to what another has done (though the deed be evil)
justifies him in doing it. A secret liking of any man's action is (as much as
that amounts to) the justification of his person.

Secondly, He that openly approves or applaudeth what another has done,
justifies him much more. To consent with sinners is sinful, to flatter them
in their sin is abominable.

Thirdly, He that stands up to maintain and defend what another has done,
justifies him most of all. All these acts of justification Job denied his
friends, while he said ( Chap. 27.5.) God forbid I should justify you; That
is, that I should secretly consent to or openly approve and maintain what you
have said concerning me, or you in saying it.

Fourthly, The same man is said to justify himself; this selfe-justification
is that which kindled the wrath of Elihu against Job; The text is express;
Because he justified himself, etc. This justification of our selves is of two
sorts.

First, Internal and mental; when in our hearts we give sentence for, or
approve of our selves; when we inwardly boast and glory of our selves, whether
in what we are, or in what we do and affirm. The Pharisee ( Luke 18.11.)
stood and prayed thus with himself (or to himself, that is, silently) God I
thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
or even as this Publicane; I fast twice in the week, etc. Thus he justified
himself.

Secondly, There is an external and vocal selfe-justification, when we openly
commend, and cry up our selves; Thus Jehu justified himself (2 Kings 10.16.)
Come see my zeal for the Lord; He would needs blow a trumpet, and proclaim
before all men how good a man he was, and what good he had done.

Yet further, the justification of our selves is twofold.

First, Lawful, yea and commendable; Take that in two particulars.

First, That man who is really and indeed in a justified state, through the
free grace of God in Christ, he, when a just occasion is offered, may justify
himself declaratively before men; For as we ought always to justify our
selves declaratively by our works, that is, give evidence by our works that we
are justified by faith; so we may justify our selves by our words, to magnify
the rich grace of God in justifying us freely through Christ. David called
others to take notice of what God had done for his soul, ( Psalm. 66.16.) Thus
a believer may lawfully at any time, and at all times, it is his duty to
justify himself before men, by giving as the Apostle directs (1 Pet. 3.15.)
an answer to every one that asks a reason of the hope that is in him, (that
is, of his justified state) with meekness and fear.

Secondly, A man that is sound at heart, honest and upright with God, may
lawfully justify himself, as to the integrity of his intentions, purposes,
and designs, when he falls under other men's jealousies and suspicions. David
being often unjustly condemned by Saul, was as often in this work of
justifying himself against him, ( Psalm. 7.8.) Judge me, O Lord, according to
my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me; As if he had
said, I am judged unrighteously, but I appeal to thy righteous judgment, who
fully know (which I also know, my conscience bearing witness) mine
integrity. I appeal to thy mercy for the many sins which I have committed
against thy self, b^^ I appeal to thy Justice whether (as I am accused) I
have at all sinned against Saul. We may read Paul doing the same at large
while he professed (1 These. 2.3, 4.) that he did not act upon covetous designs
for himself, nor was a flatterer of others, but as he was allowed of God to be
put in trust with the Gospel, even so he spoke, not as pleasing men but God,
which tries the heart. As it was the continual practice of false Apostles and
others to discredit Paul's Ministry, by bringing his person out of credit, so
it was his continual care to counter-worke them, by a professed vindication of
himself. We may lawfully justify our selves and our actings, when we are not
only suspected, but falsely accused, and wrongfully charged about them, and that
either of these two ways.

First, When we are charged to have done that evil, which we never did, then
we may justify our selves by a flat denial; David did so in that case ( Psalm.
7.3, 4.) O Lord my God, if I have done this, if there be iniquity in my hand,
etc. As if he had said, O God, thou know I have not done this which many
burden me with. Again ( Psalm. 35.11.) False witness did rise up, they laid to
my charge things that I knew not; I have not had so much as a thought to do
that which they say I have actually done. Thus he discharged himself of those
crimes, which indeed he never committed nor was guilty of.

Secondly, We may justify our selves lawfully, when the good we have done is
charged upon us as an evil deed, or we looked upon as evil doers, when we
have done, nothing for the matter, but our duty, and that in the manner
according to rule. Thus when Paul had justified himself, by denying the evil
which Tertullus, accused him of, ( Acts 24.12, 13.) he presently justified
himself also in what he had done well, though his enemies judged it evil (
ver. 14.) But this I confess, that after the way which they call heresy, so
worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the
Law and the Prophets. This selfe-justification is often very needful; For as
there are some who call evil good, so there are others, who call good evil,
and make that a man's fault which is his commendation. It was accounted a crime
by some of old to be less vicious then others, and it is accounted a crime by
some at this day to be more virtuous then others; to be more holy, more exact,
more wisely precise and circumspect in our ways then others, many interpret
folly, and stamp with madness. (2 Corinthians. 5.13.) Paul was thought beside
himself, a mere Fanatic in his high actings for Jesus Christ; when our
actions are thus misrepresented, and put under such disguises, every good man
is obliged to do himself right. For as we may honestly accuse others, and
declare the evil that we know they have done, when called to it; so we may
speak out and declare the good we have done, and maintain that to be good (if
it be good) which we have done, (though many call it evil) when called to it.
Thus a man may stand upon his terms with all men, and yet be humble, and
deeply sensible of his own sinfullnesse and vileness before God. Paul saw
nothing, upon the matter, but sin in himself ( Romans 7.14, 24.) When I would
do good, evil is present with me; O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death; That is, of sin; as it is called ( Romans 6.6.)
Thus he spoke when he had to do with God; But when he had to do with men,
when he saw himself called to answer the accusations, and wipe off the
aspersions which the enemies of the Gospel cast upon him. (1 Corinthians. 4.4.)
then he says, I know nothing (that is, no evil) by my self, Paul was very
conscious of his natural infirmity, yet very confident of his spiritual
integrity. And therefore when he saw the Glory of God was like to be obscured
through his abasement, and to be ecclipsed by the shadows and darkness which
men cast upon his Ministry, then he took due honor to himself, and made the
most of himself, according to truth, in the eyes of all the world. Thus I have
showed what justifying of our selves is lawful, and I have done it that we may
more clearly discern, what I am to show next, or

Secondly, Namely, what that justifying of our selves is, which indeed is
unlawful, reprovable and blameworthy; I shall instance it in a few
particulars.

First, They justify themselves sinfully, who do good with a desire to be
seen and applauded of men for it; thus Christ charged the Pharisees ( Math:
6.5.) They pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen of men: and ( ver: 16.) They disfigure their faces, that
they may appear unto men to fast. It is not a sin to be seen of men in doing
good, but to do good to be seen of men is sinful, and the patching up of a
selfe-justification.

Secondly, They justify themselves sinfully, who would pretend, or seem to
have done that good, which indeed they have not. There is as much of this
hypocrisy lodging and working now in the hearts of the children of men, as was
of old in the heart of Saul (1 Samuel: 15.13, 14. to the 22d verse) who professed
highly to have fulfilled the will of God to a hairs breadth; Blessed be thou
of the Lord (said he to Samuel) I have performed the commandment of the Lord;
Thus he insisted upon his integrity, and justified himself to the face of
Samuel, who quickly convinced him that he had done the Lords work to halves.

Thirdly, They justify themselves sinfully, who either totally deny, or
extenuate and lessen the evil that they have done; this kind of sinful
selfe-justification was opened largely at the 33d verse of the former Chapter,
upon that imprecation made by Job, If I covered my transgression as Adam, by
hiding mine iniquity in my bosom. I refer the Reader thither for a fuller
discovery of it.

Fourthly, They justify themselves sinfully, who mingle their own works with
the works or righteousness of Jesus Christ for justification; for though such
pretend to Christ, and say they take up Christ and his righteousness for
justification, yet it will be found a selfe-justification only; seeing unless
Christ justify us wholly, he justifies us not at all; As the Apostle
concludes ( Galat. 5.4.) Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of
you are justified by the Law; ye are fallen from grace; That is, ye who mingle
your works with Grace, are not justified by Grace, but (which will be (unless
repented of) your condemnation) by your works.

Lastly, They justify themselves sinfully, who say they are justified by
Christ from their sins, while they continue in their sins, and hold fast their
iniquities; For as they that mingle their own good works with the
righteousness of Christ, are selfe-justifiers, so also are they that take hold
of the righteousness of Christ, while they will not let go, nor part with
their evil works. To look for justification while we continue in the love
and practice of any known sin and unrighteousness, is as sinful as to expect
justification by our own righteousness.

Object. But does not the Scripture say, that God justifies the ungodly (Romans
4.5.)

I answer, Though God justifies the ungodly, yet the justified are not
ungodly; God justifies the ungodly and makes them holy by the grace of
sanctification, as well as righteous by the grace of justification:
righteousness of life is always the fruit of righteousness by faith.
Therefore if any man continuing in any known sin, says he is justified, he
has justified himself, for none do so who are justified of God. O how deeply
are they condemned by God who thus justify themselves! Nothing is more
desirable then to be justified by God, and nothing is more dangerous then to
justify our selves, either by our own righteousness, or in our
unrighteousness. Now as to justify our selves any of these ways, is
exceeding sinful before God, so to justify our selves any way, lays us open
or obnoxious to the censures of men. And that is the reason why this holy man
Job was so deeply censured; For though he justified not himself in any of
those senses which are are sinful, yet he did some way justify himself, and
while he justified himself only as he might, he was condemned as having
justified himself in a way which he might not. We had need be very cautious,
how we any way or in any kind justify our selves, few having done it without
incurring censure, if not condemnation from others.

But what was Jobs selfe-justification, or of what kind, that it raised such a
dust, yea kindled such a flame of Anger in the breast of Elihu? I answer;

Job did not justify himself by lies or falsehoods; that was not the matter
for which Elihu was angry with Job, but because he supposed he was more tender
of his own name then of Gods. Thus the Text speaks expressly; Against Job
was his wrath kindled, because he justified himself rather then God.

Hence note; To justify our selves rather then God, is not only sinful but
flagitious, not only sinful but blasphemous.

Let God be true and every man a liar (Romans 3.4.) woe to those who go about to
save their own honor, by speaking that which reflects dishonor upon God, or
who keep their own credit untoucht, by exposing his to any hazard; let God
be just and every man unrighteous. As whosoever exalts himself, humbles God
(when we exalt our selves vainly, we humble God as much as we can, and so it
will be interpreted) so he that justifies himself in any degree unduely
accuses God, how much more he that justifies himself rather then God. To
commend or praise our selves, in the hearing of men, is unsavory, to commend or
praise our selves rather then men (who are our fellows, yea though our
inferiors) is odious, how much more to justify our selves rather then God, who
is infinitely above us. It becomes the best of men, to accuse, judge and
condemn themselves, to draw up their own enditement, and say, we have
deserved worse then we suffer from the hand of God; and have done less then
duty requires at our hand.

But, because to justify our selves rather then God, is a thing so horrid, few
will be brought under this conviction, that they are guilty of it, or
chargeable with it. And therefore I shall endeavor to make it appear, that
there are many who though they do not justify themselves rather then God
directly and barefaced, yet they do it secretly or constructively. I shall
make out this in general as it may concern any man, while I more distinctly
show, how Job incurred this suspicion, and gave Elihu more then a probable
ground to say, that he justified himself rather then God. Job never said, he
was more just then God, but he said many things which gave Elihu occasion to
say, That surely he justified himself rather then God.

First, When he spoke so largely of his own innocence, spending five whole
Chapters in the vindication of it, and spoke so little, comparatively, of the
righteousness and justice of God, this might bring him under a suspicion of
justifying himself rather then God. For what could this intimate to his
hearers, but that he had better performed the part of a gracious and righteous
man, then God had of a gracious Father or righteous Judge. Though all that be
true (how much soever it is) which we speak of our selves, yet it is not good
to speak much, much less all of our selves; especially when upon that account,
we may seem to dispute either the justice or goodness of God in dealing out
the troubles and afflictions, under which we suffer.

Secondly, While Job did so often and so boldly offer to plead his cause before
Gods tribunal, and was so importunate for a Hearing, this carried a secret
implication, that God had not dealt well with him, or at least had not
considered his cause thoroughly, for if he had, surely he should have found more
favorable dealing from God then he daily experienced.

Thirdly, While Job complained so often and greatly of the greatness of his
afflictions, of the weight and heaviness of the hand of God upon him, and,
that he being but a poor worm, the great and mighty God should stretch out
his strong hand against him; This also might be construed, as if he thought God
did not take a due measure of his infirmities, but let temptations take hold of
him which were not common to man, and burdened him beyond what he was able to
bear. Now, what was this, but to justify himself rather then God?

Fourthly, While he complained that the hand of God had not only touched him,
but even abode and dwelt upon him, that he was consumed from morning to
morning, that he had not only wearisome nights, but months of vanity appointed
to him, that his afflictions were not only exceeding sharp, but exceeding
long, yea that though they were extremely violent, yet perpetual, this bare
hard upon the goodness and wisdom of God. For, to say that God over-acts in
the measure, and exceeds in the continuance of our afflictions, reflect alike
upon the honor of God, and are rather a justification of our selves in bearing
the cross, then of God in laying it onn.

Fifthly, Job in several passages of this book desired God to make an end of
him, and take him out of this world; he was troubled that God did not kill him
out of hand, or outright; this was a justification of himself rather then
God, as if he knew better, whether it were more fit for him to live in a
sickly, weakly, painful condition, or to be delivered out of it by death. As
we should be willing to die, when God calls, so to live till God calls, and not
to hasten death; He that believes (as he ought) will not make have out of the
troubles of this world, much less out of the world, because he finds it
troublesome.

Sixthly, He seemed to justify himself rather then God, while he was so much
troubled, because God did not presently reveal to him the reason of his
troubles; Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God has
hedged in? was his complaint ( Chap. 3.23.) that is, wherefore is the light of
this natural life given to me, whose way is in the dark, and who know not the
reason why I am thus afflicted? We ought to sit down in this assurance, be our
condition never so restless, that the most wise God has a reason for every
stroke of trouble (...) lays upon our loins, though we see it not. They who
cannot fully resign themselves and their ways to God, yea resolve their wills
into the will of God, are much disquieted and restless in their minds, when
they see not the reason of Gods dealing with them, or why it is so with them?
Let all such know, this also is to make our selves wiser then God, and to
justify our selves rather then him. And therefore from all these
considerations take these two Inferences, which may keep us ever at a distance
from this high presumption, yea (which we should carefully avoid) from the
shadow and appearance of it; The justifying of our selves rather then God.

First, It is enough to condemn us under the guilt of this sin, if we allow
not all that God does to be good, yea and best for us, how much or how long, or
in what kind soever be is pleased to afflict us with evil. It is our duty to
accept, that is, to take well at Gods hand, the punishment of our iniquity
(Lev: 26.41.) how much more to welcome the sorest and heaviest cross which he
is pleased to lay upon us, either for the chastisement of our faylings and
falls, or for the trial and exercise of our graces. It is said (2 Samuel: 3.36.)
Whatsoever the king (meaning David) did; pleased all the people; There was a
wonderful consent and harmony between the peoples spirit and David's actions;
Surely whatsoever God does, should please all his people, what ever he
dispenses, be it sweet or sour, hard or soft, light or darkness, it should
please all his people, and please them highly; and so far as we come short of
this frame of heart, so far do we justify our selves rather then God.

Secondly, It is a fault not only if we are not satisfied and pleased with what
God does, but if we do not praise and glorify God in and for what he does;
and that not only in his justice that he has done us no wrong, but in his
goodness, that he has done all for our profit. That which turns to man's
profit, should also turn to the praise of God; But (as the holy Apostle
assures us, Heb: 12.10.) God chastneth his children for their profit (and that
the best and noblest profit) that they might be partakers of his holiness;
therefore we ought to praise and glorify him, or to glorify him with our
praises while he is chastning us. Truly God is good to Israel (Psalm. 73.1.) He
is so, not only when he gives Israel outward good things, or things good to
fense, but when he afflicts, when he writes bitter things against his Israel,
and shows them only visions of sorrow and matter of amazement. Till our souls
are wrought up to this Justification of God in his goodness, when things are
worst with us, we in some degree justify our selves rather then God.

Again, for as much as Job, who cannot in all things be acquitted from this
charge of justifying himself rather then God, was yet of another spirit and
principle, then indeed or professedly to justify himself rather then God.

Observe; We may speak amiss and wrong God when we do not intend it, nor
have the least thought to do so.

David prays for the pardon of unknown sins ( Psalm. 19.12, 13.) Cleanse thou
me from secret faults, keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let
them not have dominion over me. To justify our selves rather then God
knowingly, is a presumptuous sin; to lay any blame upon God directly is
blasphemy, David prayed not only to be kept from such gross sins, but to be
cleansed from secret sins, that is, from those sins which he did not know that
he had committed them, and which he never had any intent to commit. We may so
mis-place words and mis-guide actions, when we think not of it, that we may
quickly sin against God, yea and justify our selves rather then God; That
which we do or speak is to be judged by a rule, whether it be good or evil,
not merely by our intentions though good, nor by our not intending of evil.
We may be judged to have done or said evil, though we meant no evil in doing
or in saying so. Words and actions well meant may sometimes justly undergo an
ill construction. They that hear should interpret every word in the most
favorable sense; but if we speak unwarily and unsafely, or (as Moses once)
unadvisedly with our lips, we may thank our selves if we fall under reproof
for what we have spoken. Therefore beg of God to set a watch over your mouth,
and to keep the door of your lips, let nothing pass unexamined. It Is our
wisdom to read every word over and over before we speak it; Many hear ill,
who have spoken well, how much more may they who speak doubtfully or
dangerously. We have seen the cau^^ why Elihu was so angry with Job, the next
verse will tell us why he was so angry with Jobs three friends.

Verse. 3. Also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because they
had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job.
We find Elihu angry on all hands, angry with Job, and angry with his three
friends; some querie upon this renewing of his anger (as God did Jonah) whether
he did well to be thus angry or thus to appear in passion, and break out
afresh in wrath? and whether the reasons of his anger will bear him out to
have been angry with Reason; anger prevails most in those in whom reason
prevails least, and they have usually the strongest passions, who have the
weakest judgments; children and aged persons, the sick and pained are apt to
be angry with others, and hard to be pleased themselves. And it is a general
ax^om; Invalidu^ omne natura querulum est.
The weak and impotent are naturally angry and passionate. Therefore we had
need look to our passions, that they grow not strong, for they will soon
proclaim us weak: he is a wise man indeed, that can be at once wise and
angry. ( Proverbs 19.11.) The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it
is his glory to pass over a transgression; And as there Solomon teaches us,
that discretion mastereth anger, so he assures us, that angry persons are more
then indiscreete, foolish. ( Eccles. 7.9.) Anger rests in the bosom of
fools. Anger often assaults the prudent, but if it abides and takes up its
lodging in any bosom, it is in the bosom of a fool, at least, in that point,
he does foolishly who lends his bosom (though but one night) for anger to
lodge in. And as at all times, so then especially we should narrowly watch and
severely bridle our passions, when (as Elihu here did) we undertake to advise
those who are mistaken, or to reduce those that are out of the way; when we
give counsel to others, we should be sedate and quiet our selves. A Physician
must not be angry with his patient, nor is it proper to apply medicinal
healing counsel to the mind of another with an exulcerated mind. Much might be
said concerning this anger of Elihu, but I have spoken to that before in
opening the former verse, therefore I shall not stay here upon it; but proceed
to consider the reason why he was so.

Because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job. Not to find an
answer may proceed;

First, From a defect of pains and industry in seeking it; An answer must be
sought and dug for it must be studied and prayed for, else it will not be
found.

Secondly, The not finding of an answer, may arise from the defect of ability,
not of industry; many labor hard, but can make nothing of it; It Is probable
Jobs three friends labored much, yet found no answer; And then it was no
defect of industry but of ability, they found no answer, because they could
not. They (as we commonly speak) did even beat their brains, and bite their
nails for an answer, but could not attain it, they pumpt hard, but the water
would not come, God hid the thing from their eyes; so then, they had not found
any answer, because after all their search they could not; nor should it seem
strange to us that they could not. At best we know but in part here, and till
God by his Spirit teach us, we know nothing at all; So that I say, it should
not seem strange to us, that these wise and good men could find no answer for
Job, but that which follows seems strange, even to amazement, that though they
could not, yet (which, how also could they answer to their own consciences!)
had condemned Job.

What, condemn a man, and not answer him? it is worse then to condemn a man,
and not hear him. Possibly he that is condemned unheard, may yet deserve a
condemnation; But if we condemn a man unanswered, he certainly, as to us, is
condemned undeservedly. And therefore this course of proceeding (if any) is
liable not only to suspicion whether it be right, but to condemnation as
utterly unrighteous. Though it may be a good man's case not to find an answer,
yet surely a good man will not condemn when he cannot answer.

But it may be demanded; Did Jobs friends indeed find no answer before they
condemned him? we have heard of their answers all along. No sooner had Job
ended his former speeches, but they presently answered ( Chap. 4.1.) Then
Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said (Chap. 8, 1.) Then answered Bildad the
Shuhite and said (Chap. 11.1.) Then answered Zophar the Naamathite and said;
yea they all three answered Job a second time, and two of them a Third, how
then could Elihu justly say, they found no answer, and yet had condemned Job?

For answer to this objection; I say, They answered Job, but they did not
answer sufficiently. The vulgar latin translation puts this gloss (which is
more then the rules of translation allow) into the text, rendering the original
thus; Ed quod non invenissent responsionem rationalem. Vulg:
Because they had found no rational answer, and yet had condemned Job. They
did not find out nor hit upon the right answer. Improper and insufficient
answers, how many soever of them we heap up against any man's argument, are no
answers, they are not worthy to be called answers. That only is an answer which
carries a conviction in it, which reaches the state and strength of the
question, or removes the objection. In this sense Jobs three friends had found
no answer, and yet had condemned Job.

The Hebrew is they made him wicked, (...) Sept: and posuerunt eum esse impium.
or condemned him as a wicked man. So the Septuagint, they had no answer for
him, and yet concluded him wicked; we say, they had condemned Job; and the
reason of it is, because to condemn a man is to leave him under a supposal of
wickedness, and to stigmatize or brand him for a wicked man. All the wicked
shall at last be condemned, and none ought to be condemned, nor are any
condemned justly now but the wicked; He that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just, even they both are an abomination to the Lord, (Pro.
17.15.) There is a very elegant transposition of the words in the Hebrew; we
may render the text thus; He that justifies the wicked, and wickedeth the
just, etc. The law of Moses gave an express rule against this perversion of
Judgment, in terms quite cross to those in Solomon (Deuteronomy: 25.1.) If there be
any controversy between men, and they come unto Judgment, that the Judges may
Judge them, then they shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked.
Which you may render thus; They shall justify the just, and wickedise the
wicked, that is, they shall declare the just man just, and the wicked man to be
wicked. That man either really is, or is accounted wicked, who is cast in his
cause and condemned. That was a dreadful sentence (the Scripture ( Acts 1.20.)
shows it fulfilled upon the traitor Judas) when he is judged, let him be
condemned (Psalm. 109.7.) we put in the margen, let him go out guilty or
wicked. In this sense Jobs three friends when they condemned him, cast him as a
wicked man, though they had nothing to answer the plea which he made for his
own integrity. We must not conceive any such wickedness in them, Damnarunt
pro impio, etsi nulla in eum crimina probare possent quibus ille suam vitam
contaminassent. Merc:
that they were resolved to condemn him right or wrong, yet they held their
conclusion against the light and reason of all his premises, and though they
could prove no ill against him, yet vehemently suspecting him, they concluded
he was an ill man, and so condemned him.

Hence note first.

Some will proceed to condemn both persons and opinions, though they can give
no reasonable account why they condemn either. We read ( Isa. 56.10.) of dumb
dogs, that cannot bark; that is, who know not what to speak o^ say to
purpose. There are many who (in this sense) cannot bark, yet they will bite;
and when they have no answer, they will condemn; and usually dumb do^gs that
cannot bark have the sharpest teeth, and are best at biting, or they are
better at condemning then at answering. As some find an answer where there is
none; that is, when such reasons are laid before them as are unanswerable, yet
they will not give over answering, but still seek a knott in a rush, and draw
the saw of contention a^well without end as without cause; so others cannot
find an answer where it is; yet when they cannot answer, they can censure and
condemn him for wicked or perverse, whom they cannot prove so. It Is much
easier to say a man is faulty, then to find ^^^ault; yet they who have a mind
to find faults, are seldom to seek for somewhat or other which they call so.

Note secondly.

To condemn opinions or persons when we cannot answer them, is a practice
justly condemnable. It Is unjust (as was intimated before) to condemn a man
before he is heard. For though possibly a man unheard may have justice when he
is condemned, yet all agree it is injustice to condemn him when he is not
heard; Now if it be injustice to condemn a wicked man before he is heard, how
unjust is it to condemn a man in whom we can find no wickedness after we have
heard him.

Thirdly, From the manner of the phrase here used, Note.

To condemn a man is to render him wicked. Condemnation (as was showed) is due
only to the wicked, and if an innocent be condemned, he is reputed wicked, and
receives punishment as guilty. As that sentence of condemnation which proceeds
out of the mouth of God against impenitent sinners and evil doers, binds the
guilt of their evil deeds upon them, and delivers them up to punishment; so he
that condemns his brother, fastneth guilt upon him, and speaks him deserving
punishment; for as where guilt is, punishment follows, so a fault is
conceived to go before. There are these three things in sin, the fault, the
guilt, and the blot, or pollution of it; he that fastneth guilt by
condemnation, fastneth the fault and blot much more; how sad is it then to be
deservedly under condemnation? And how great is the privilege of believers, to
whom (though in themselves they deserve it) there is no condemnation! (Rom
8.1.) They who in this life are past condemnation, are also passed from death
to life. Many are condemned who are good in the sight of God; but all
condemnation makes a man evil, yea wicked in the sight of the world. And
^^^ause every sentence of condemnation renders a man wicked in the eyes of
worldly men, therefore righteous Magistrates will not condemn hastily; They
will not judge (as Christ did not, Isa. 11.3.) after the sight of their eyes,
nor reprove after the he^^^^ of their ears; To judge by the sight of the eye,
is to Judge according to the first appearance of things, before inquisition
has been made, and to reprove by the hearing of the ear, is to reprove
acco^ding to the first report which is made, without examination. We must not
judge thus, because we must judge in righteousness, which cannot be, if we
judge thus. How deliberate, how tender should we be in condemning any man,
seeing condemnation does not only impose a punishment upon, but suppose a
crime, a wickedness, a fault in him. It is grievous enough to bear
punishment, but to bear the burden of a crime or fault, is in reality much
more grievous.

But seeing Elihu declares his anger against Jobs three friends, because they
condemned Job, and had found no answer. Some will say, did not Elihu condemn
Job so too? No, he condemned him indeed, but he first found an answer. Again,
Elihu condemned Job, but not as his friends condemned him, his friends
condemned him as to his state, judging him unsound at heart; But Elihu
condemned him only as to this or that particular act or speech; He condemned
him, First, because he spoke so largely in the justification of himself (
Chap: 33.8, 9, 10, 11.) Surely thou have spoken in my hearing, and I have heard
the voice of thy words, saying, I am clean without transgression; I am
innocent, neither is there iniquity in me. (And Chap. 34.5, 6.) For Job has
said, I am righteous, and God has taken away my judgment; should I lie
against my right, my wound is incurable without transgression. Secondly, he
condemned him for complying with the wicked, not that he thought Job acted like
them, but because being a godly man, he in his sufferings spoke sometimes and
behaved himself like them ( Chap. 34.8.) Which goes in company with the
workers of iniquity, and walks with wicked men. Further, he charged him with
stubbornness against God ( Chap. 34.37.) For he adds rebellion unto his sin;
and (which sounds strangely) with an easiness toward evil men ( Chap:
36.17.) Thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked, judgment and justice
take hold on thee. Thus Elihu condemned Job many ways, but he condemned him
not, without finding an answer.

Yea, I may say, Elihu is he, who in this great controversy and difficulty,
has found an answer, and yet has not condemned Job, that is, he has not
condemned him as his three friends had condemned him: He condemned not Job as
one perverse and crooked in his ways, he condemned him not as one that feared
not God and eschewed not evil, He condemned him not as an hypocrite, rotten at
heart and unsound in his estate; Thus Elihu found an answer for Job, but
condemned him not, no not while his wrath was kindled against him, because he
justified himself rather then God.

And the process of this book will show, that though Elihu (in the sense
spoken of) condemned not Job, yet he found an unanswerable answer, such an
answer, as to which Job neither could nor would make any reply; and that is the
special business we have to look at in prosecuting his discourse, even to
find out the answer which he found; for that will be as the key of the work,
to open the whole matter to us, and to show us wherein Job had either failed or
exceeded, either in bearing the crosses laid upon him by God, or in managing
this controversy with his friends.

JOB. Chap. 32. Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken:
because they were elder then he.

When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men, then
his wrath was kindled.

And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said, I am young, and ye
are very old, wherefore I was afraid, and durst not show you mine opinion.

I said Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom.


THis context assigns the reason, First, why Elihu forbear so long to speak,
namely, because he was young, that reason you have in the 4th verse, as also in
the 6th and 7th. Secondly, why he began at last to speak, namely, because his
elders, those grave ancient men would or could speak no more. This he lays
down in the 5th verse, When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of
these three men, then etc.

Verse. 4. Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken.
The Hebrew is, He expected Job in words; Job was long in words, or he spoke
long in many words; and all that while Elihu waited, he kept silent; but when
Job had spoken out, and Elihu had stayed some time after, to see whether either
himself, or his friends would speak again, then he began. Mr. Broughton
translates, (...) pationtem expectationem sonat, qua duramus in malis, nos
rebus melioribus servantes. Bold.
yet Elihu waited to speak with Job. The word notes the most patient
expectation, a waiting with much long-sufferance, a waiting also in much
confidence, as reserving our selves till better times, or for a more favorable
dispensation. So the word is used ( Dan. 12.12.) Blessed is he that waits,
and comes to the thousand three hundred, and five and thirty days; that is,
Blessed is he that waits out those days of the Prophecy there specified; he
has a stretched out patience, that waits to the very last day, and to the
last of that day. The word is used again ( Habak. 2.3.) If the vision (that
is, the mercy or deliverance revealed and promised) tarry, wait for it; that
is, if it tarry beyond the time supposed by man (it never tarries beyond the
time appointed by God) wait patiently for it, that is, for the accomplishment
of it; yea the word implies a waiting, as it were, with open mouth, or gaping
to receive that good which is assured by prophecy or in the promise. Such an
expectation is here ascribed to Elihu, he waited for the issue of that great
and long debate between Job and his three friends, or he gaped for such a solid
answer as might satisfy him, and determine the Question under debate; Now
Elihu had waited till Job had spoken.

Hence note.

First. As it is always our duty to wait on God, so sometimes on men. We
should wait, First, to see what men will do for us; we should wait,
Secondly, to hear what men have to say to us; we should wait for counsel,
for comfort, for instruction^ for conviction. We should wait, Thirdly, to
perform duty, and to do good to men. Thus God is pleased to wait upon (his
creature) man, ( Isa. 30.18.) Therefore will I wait to be gracious; As God
waits to bestow acts of grace on man, so man should wait to perform offices
of love and respect to man, or to give him advice, help and assistance, as his
case and needs require.

Secondly, Consider Elihu who had waited long as a hearer, was afterward a
great speaker.

Hence note.

They that will speak to any man's case rightly, must first hear him patiently.
They must be hearers, who would be learners; Paul sat at the feet of
Gamaliel, there he waited as a learner; And if they must wait as hearers, who
would be learners, how much more ought they, who would be reachers, reprovers,
or reformers?

Thirdly, Elihu waited that he might speak opportunely, or in time,

Hence note.

Due times and seasons of speaking must be observed and taken. ( Ecclesiastes
3.7.) There is a time to speak, and a time to keep silence. The providence of
God po^nt wise men to both. And usually times of silence fit us for times of
speaking; Every thing is beautiful in its season; words spoken in their
season, are not only more effectual, but more beautiful, they are like apples
of gold in pictures of silver. And therefore as the wise man gives us caution,
( Eccles. 5.2.) Not to be rash with our mouths to utter any thing before God;
So we should not be rash with our mouths to utter any thing before men, but
well to consider what we have to say, and wait our time to say it. The Apostle
James. (Chap. 1.19.) would have us swift to hear, slow to speak; and probably,
the slower we are to speak, the surer we speak; Hasty speaking has given men
more dangerous stumbles and falls, then ever hasty going did. The Prophet
represents our Lord Jesus Christ thus be speaking his Father as to his
preparation and furniture for the exercise of his Prophetical, yea of his
whole Mediatoriall office ( Isa. 50.4.) Thou have given me the tongue of the
learned that I might know how to speak a word in season. As there is much
wisdom in hitting the matter what to speak, and the manner of speaking, how to
cloth and dress the matter of our speech; so there is much wisdom in hitting
the time and season when to speak. And as to time a thing well in acting, so
to time it well in speaking, is the better half of it. Elihu waited till Job
had spoken. What I have now touched, may be one reason of his waiting; But the
special reason of it follows in the text.

Because they were elder then he; and good reason that he should wait upon his
elders. (...) significat non tantum fenem sed senia confectum, and non tantum
senem aetate sed sapientia.
The Hebrew is, They were elder for days; they were not only old men for days,
but elder for days then he; The word, strictly taken, imports a man more then
old, even one that is worn with age. Further, it denotes a twofold eldership;
First, an eldership in time, days or years. Secondly, an eldership in
wisdom, and understanding. They are our elders indeed, who are wiser then we;
eldership in time deserves respect, but eldership in wisdom commands it. And
as such are expressed by this word in the Hebrew, so both the Grecians and Romans
express their wise men by a word of the same force; Senators were elders, not
always in time (there was no Law much less necessity that every Senator
should be an old man) but in understanding: every Senator ought to be a wise
man, though not an old man. They who are to govern others wisely, had need be
furnished with wisdom themselves. Gray hairs alone cannot make a good
Magistrate. We read the word applied both to Church-Elders called ( Isa. 37.2.)
The Elders of the Priests, and to State-Elders, called Elders of the people (
Exodus 17.5.) or of the Land ( Genesis 50.7.) The Elders of the Land of Egypt went
with them. It Is said ( Psalm. 105.21, 22.) Pharaoh made Joseph Lord of his
house, and ruler of all his substance, to bind his Princes at his pleasure,
and teach his Senators wisdom. Young Joseph made Pharaohs wise men wiser, and
gave counsel to his counselors. Here Elihu calls Jobs friends Elders, and we
may take him either speaking strictly, that they were his Elders in time, or
speaking modestly, that they were his Elders in wisdom, knowledge, and
understanding, and therefore he was not hasty to speak, but gave them their
scope, waiting till Job had spoken, Because they were elder then he.

Hence note, First in General.

Young men should show respect and wait upon their Elders. The Apostle would
not have Timothy slighted, though young, (1 Timothy 4.12.) Let no man despise thy
youth; He charge the people not to despise Timothy because young; and he
charge Timothy to carry it so, that none might have the show of a cause to
despise him though young; Let no man despise thy youth; let not those that
seek occasion find it. Now, as young men, especially young Ministers should
be so holy and grave in their conversation, as not to draw disrespect or
contempt upon themselves, and as no man ought to despise the young merely
because they are young; so all men ought to honor old age. The old Law was
express for it ( Levit. 19.32.) Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and
honor the face of the old man, and fear thy God, I am the Lord. See, how
these two are joined together, Thou shall honor the face of the old man, and
fear thy God; As if he had said, honor old men in the fear of God, or show
fear to God in the reverence and honor which thou give to old men, who
having lived a long time or many days in the world, bear at least a shadow of
the eternity of God who is The anciant of days, who lives and abides for ever.
There is a twofold stamp of God upon old men, more then upon other men. First
their very age has a stamp of God upon it, for though all ages put together,
are not a moment to eternity, yet, as to our computation and reckoning, old age
bears the fairest image of eternity: Secondly, old men bear a resemblance of
God in their wisdom, ('it is to be supposed that the oldest are wilest, as Elihu
speaks v. 7.) So then old men are to be reverenced not only for their
precedence in time, but for their experience, wisdom, knowledge and prudence,
Seris venit usus ab annis.
all which represent them more like to God then younger men.

Secondly, Look to the special way wherein Elihu showed reverence to his
Elders, even by his long silence; he did not rudely not rashly break into
discourse, but waited till they had done. This modesty of Elihu is both
commendable and imitable, who would say nothing as long as Job or any of his
friends had any thing to say, Mira in hoc elucet antiquuorum in publicis
concertationibus gravitas et stupendum inviolabiliter servati in dicendo ac
respondendo ordinis exemplum. Bold.
because they were elder then he. As the light of nature teaches reverence to
the aged in all cases, so more particularly, in this. There shines (as to this
point an admirable comeliness in the disputes of the Ancients, and a most
eminent example of order inviolably kept both in proposing and answering. Their
rule or maxim was, Let the Seniors speak, let the Juniors hear. Let Old men
teach, let young men learn. It is the note of a learned Commentator upon this
place from what himself had observed. Living (says he) once at Paris in
France, where, in a Monastery, Majores natu loquantur juniores audiant; senes
doceant, adolescentes discant; Pulcherrima disciplinae sententia. Drus.
three Indians were brought up and instructed in the Christian Religion, I
could not but admire to behold how studiously, and strictly they kept to the
Laws of speaking, the younger not offering a word till the Elder had done; The
practice of these Indians brought with them out of Heathenisme may reprove the
imprudence of many, yea the impudence of some young men among us, who will be
first in talk, when their betters and elders are in place; The Prophet
threatened this as a great judgment ( Isa. 3.5.) The Child shall behave himself
proudly against the Ancient. The child is not to be taken here strictly, but
for any inferior in age, though possibly himself be arrived to the state of
manhood. As if the Prophet had said, there shall be a general confusion among
all degrees of men, without respect had to age or place, every stripling will
take the boldness to talk and act unseemly before his betters. Obeisance and
silence, bowing the body, and holding the peace, are respects which ought to be
paid to our Superiors whether in time or authority.

But as young men should not be forward to speak in the presence of their
elders, so they should not be afraid to speak when there is cause for it,
especially when their elders forbear or refuse to speak any more. Thus Elihu
who had long kept his mouth (as David in another case did Psalm: 39.1.) with a
bridle, and was dumb with silence, yet at last his heart was hot within him,
and while he was musing, the fire burned, and (as it follows) he spoke with
his tongue.

Verse. 5. When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three
men, then his wrath was kindled.
When Elihu saw it, that is, when he was as much assured of it (by their
gesture and carriage) as if it had been visible, that those three men had no
more to say, or would say no more (for the words may be referred indifferently
to their will or power, when, I say, he saw they had no more to say) Either,
first, to convince Job of error, or secondly, to defend the truth of God, which
they had undertaken (when he saw this) his wrath was kindled, at that instant
time, and for that very reason, his wrath was kindled. Some conceive (as was
showed before) that this anger proceeded from the passionateness of his spirit,
and so tax him with it as his fault; but I rather consent with those who say it
proceeded from his zeal for God, and so it was his virtue and his praise.

I have met with these words two or three times already since I entered upon
this Chapter, and therefore I shall not stay upon them here; And as this anger
of Elihu was spoken of before, so the same reason which was given before of his
anger is repeated and reported hear again; Then his wrath was kindled because
they had no answer in their mouths, that is, because they had no more to say
against Job whom they had condemned; and because they had no more to say for
God whose cause in afflicting Job they had defended; I shall only add a few
brief Notes upon this Verse, and so pass on.

First, Some men answer till they have no more to answer. It Is very possible
for a good and a wise man to be at the bottom of his reason, in some points, or
to be brought to such a wall, that he can go no further; David says, I have
seen an end of all perfection, which as it is true of all outward commodities
and conveniences, which men enjoy, so both of their corporal and intellectual
abilities, or of what they can either do or say. The best of men may see the
end of their best perfections in all things, but Grace, and the hope of Glory.
Their stock and treasure may be quite spent, their spring exhausted, and they
gone to their utmost line and length. There Is no more answer in their mouth,
nor work in their hand.

Secondly note; It may put a wise man into passion to see how ill some wise men
use their reason, or that they can make no further use of it.

Then was the anger of Elihu kindled when he saw, they could answer no more, or
that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men.

Thirdly, As the anger of Elihu is often spoken of, so still we find some what
or other is assigned as a ground of it;

Whence note; We should see good reason for our anger before we are angry,
whether in our own cause, or in the cause of God.

There is nothing can excuse anger but the cause of it. Reason is a good plea
for passion; And he that has a true reason for his anger, will probably manage
his anger with reason, yea, and mingle it with grace; And so his proves not
only a rational, but a gracious anger.

Fourthly note; Provoked patience breaks out into greater passion.

In the former Verse, we find Job waiting, he waited long and patiently; but
being disappointed of what he waited for, his wrath broke out; His anger was
kindled; As when God waits long and is disappointed, his anger is increased in
the manifestation of it (Romans 2.4, 5. ver:) Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness and forbearance and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance? but after thy hardness and impenitent heart,
treasurest up wrath, etc. As if he had said, the more patience God spends upon
thee, the more wrath is treasured up ^^r thee, and that wrath will break out
the more fiercely and violently to consume thee, the longer it has been
treasured up. Now I say, as the wrath of God is the more declared against man,
by how much his patience is the more abused; So the abused patience of man will
turn to greater anger, and he grows the more passionate by how much he has
been the more and the oftener deceived. Thus Elihu is still described acting
angerly, yet in the very next verse we shall find him speaking soberly, plainly
and to purpose.

Verse. 6. And Elihu the son of Barachell the Buzite answered and said.
When Elihu saw these three men gravel'd, and that after all the outcry they
made against Job, they were forced to leave him as they found him, unconvinced
of those crimes, of that hypocrisy, which they had laid to his charge, he
hereupon saw himself engaged to undertake the matter and offer his opinion.

Concerning Elihu, his name, his fathers name, Barachel, his tribe or stock, a
Buzite, I have spoken at the 2d verse, and shall not add any thing of it here;
only take notice, That here Elihu begins his own preface; The former part of
the Chapter contained the report of the divine historian concerning Elihu; but
these are the words of Elihu himself; here he begins like an Orator to gain
favor with and attention of his hearers, or to prepare the minds of his
hearers to receive what he had to say; And upon this subject or piece of
Rhetoric (making Prefaces) he spends the whole that remains of this Chapter.
And Elihu, etc. answered and said, I am young, and ye are very old (that is it
which he said) therefore I was afraid and durst not show mine opinion.

As if he had said, I am conscious to my self of the weakness which
accompanies youth; I very well know my own incompetency for such a work; I am
young.

Parvus secundum dies. Heb:
The Hebrew is, I am few of days, or, little according to days; if you should
reckon or measure, me by days, I am very little; And is not every man so? If
you measure any man by days, is not he very little? Thou have made my age a
span long (said David, Psalm. 39.7.) that is quickly measured. Job spoke thus (
Chap. 14.1.) Man that is borne of a woman, is of few days, and full of
trouble; He says not, this or that man, but man, take old men, the Elders,
take all men, the oldest men are but few of days in themselves considered; and
comparatively to the age or rather the eternity of God, their utmost age is but
as a drop to the ocean. Thus all men, even ancient men are few of days, which
is here the description of a young man, I am young (says Elihu) or few of
days; but compare one man with another, so some have few days, and others
many days; young men have few days, and old men have many days, compared
with one another.

I am young,
and ye are very old.
(...) decrepitus.
The word notes decrepid old age, the very dregs of age, the utmost line of
life; old age like a heavy burden bows the back, and criples the limbs of the
strongest and stoutest sons of Adam. See more of this word ( Chap. 15.10.
Hominis aetates in septem partitur, Hippocrates 1 Parvulus ad annum 7 mum. 2
Puer ad An: 14. 3 Adolescens ad An: 21. 4 Juvenis ad An: 28. 5 Vir ad An: 50. 6
Senex ad An: 56. 7 Decrepitus post quamdiu vivit.

) There are several divisions of the life of man, some cast it into four
parts, suitable to the four seasons of the year; some into five, alluding to
the Acts of an Interlude or play; others into seven, in allusion to the
Planets; now what ever division you make of the life of man, this decrepid old
age is the last.

I am young, and ye are very old,
wherefore I was afraid, and durst not show mine opinion.
What effect that sense which Elihu had of his youth or fewness of days
produced in him, is set forth in these words; 'twas fear, I (says he) was
afraid, etc. There is, (as to this point) a twofold fear: First, a cowardly
fear; Secondly, a modest fear; when Elihu says, he was afraid, he does not
mean the fear of a coward; but of a modest man: it is not not cowardice to be
afraid of doing many things, to fear to do those things which are unlawful,
or which are uncomely, is no part of cowardice. This latter fear surprised or
rather composed Elihu; he was a man bold spirited enough, but modesty made him
afraid to show his opinion. There is a great elegancy in those words; (...) est
serpere and denotat timorem serpentum latebras quaerentium and videri
metuentium. Aben Ezra.
I durst not show mine opinion; They imply, he hid his speech, as Serpents hide
themselves when men approach. ( Micah 7.17.) Serpents which are a terror to
men, and make them afraid, are also afraid of men, their appearance causes
them to run and hide their heads. The Rabbis take much pains in their
Criticismes about this word to express a virtuous modesty. As it is a duty to
be (as Christ exhorts his Disciples to be) especially in times of persecution (
Math: 10.10.) wise as Serpents, so it is a virtue to be fearful as Serpents,
even to fear as much to be heard by some men, as Serpents fear to be seen by
any man. Reptilium more dimisi me; unde vulgatus reddit, Demisso capite veritus
sum. Drus:
Thus Elihu held down his head, he was afraid and durst not show his opinion
suddenly, nor declare his judgment in the case, for the reverence he bare to
those graver and elder heads.

Note hence.

First, Young men are apt to run into mistakes, their heat usually exceeds
their light. Youth drives furiously, and commonly carries presumption with it,
or is it self hurried by presumption. Though God has given a young man a good
understanding, quick parts, and a ready tongue, yet he wants much, because he
has not seen much, and so is very liable to miscarriage. He cannot look
through, nor see to the end of things; for as it is the great and sole
privilege of God to cast an eye quite through all intermediate, both actions
and revolutions, and to see the end from the beginning: so it is more peculiar
to those that are aged and long experienced, to see much of the end of things
in their beginnings, or to see what is like to be as well as what is. It Is the
part of a wise man to consider what may come, and whether things tend; there is
much weakness and deficiency in young men as to this. As most young men want
senses exercised (as the Apostle speaks of all un-improved Christians of what
age soever ( Heb: 5.19.) as I say, most young men want senses exercised) to
discern what is good or evil; so they want senses exercised to discern what
good or evil is like to be, they rarely see effects in their causes, or events
in their prognostics. Therefore Elihu might well say, I am young, therefore I
durst not venture to show mine opinion. Paul gives Timothy somewhat a strange
warning (2 Timothy 2.22.) Flee youthful lusts. Timothy was young, but was he
noted for indulgence to any youthful lusts? what lusts does he mean? surely
not drunkenness, nor uncleanness, nor any loose behavior; for though the
most sober and temperate young men, have in them the seed of all these, yea of
every lust, yet Timothy at that time was a pattern, a mirror, not only of sob
iety, but of holiness; and Paul was even forced to bid him take more liberty
in the use of the creature, then he used to allow himself; Drink no longer
water, but use a little wine for thy stomach sake, and for thy often
infirmities. Surely Timothy was a man that fled such youthful lusts fast and
far enough when he drank nothing but water, and must be bid to drink a little
wine (1 Timothy: 5.23.) What lusts then were they which Timothy was exhorted to
flee? the words following ( ver. 23, 24, 25.) seem to clear it; that because
he was young, he should take heed of rushing into unnecessary Questions and
disputes, which young men are apt to do in the heat of their spirits; nor are
there any lusts of the lower or sensual appetite, to which the heart of man is
more intemperately and vainly carried out, then to those of the understanding;
and therefore the Apostle counsels Timothy to avoid unprofitable Questions,
knowing that these gender strife; (Those Questions cannot promote faith in or
holiness toward God, which only stir up and foment strife among men) and
the servants of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all, and patient.
These virtues, and graces, are opposed chiefly to the youthful lusts which
Paul exhorts Timothy to take heed of; As if he had said, Be not too hotheaded
and hasty (as young men are very apt to be) in pursuing of controversies and
entangling thy self in the thickets of Opinionists. Elihu was of an excellent
temper, who, because young, was afraid and durst not show his opinion.

Secondly, Note.

It is good to fear, and suspect our own judgments, or, to fear that we may
err, they seldom do or speak amiss who fear they may. An over-confidence
of being in the right, has settled many in a wrong way; to be under a sense of
our readiness to fall, preserves us from falling, ( Hosea 13.1.) When Ephraim
spoke trembling, then, he exalted himself; There are several senses given of
that place, but according to our translation, the meaning is carried thus; When
Ephraim was in an humble frame, and jealous of himself, not confident, nor
over-bold (as some are who presume to carry all before them) when he spoke
trembling, or did even tremble to speak, then he did that which tended to his
own advancement and exaltation. This gracious trembling does at once settle us
the faster, and raise us the higher in the ways and things of God. It is a
high point of wisdom to have low apprehensions of our selves; though that be
true, Tanti eris aliis quanti tibi fueris.
You shall be esteemed of others, as you esteem your selves; If a man
under-value himself others will; yet, it is best erring on that hand; Let the
price be much too low, rather then any thing too high, when you are occasioned
to put a value upon or rate your selves.

Again, Consider what an excellent speaker Elihu was when he came to it, as
will appear hereafter, yet see how he stood trembling, he durst not speak,
nor offer his opinion.

Hence note: Usually they who have most ability to speak, are most backward to
speak, or sparing of speech.

They are not easily brought to it, who have it in them; The belly of Elihu was
as full with matter, as an Egg with meat or a bottle with wine; yet how slow
was he in opening himself? They who are and have least are most desirous, if
not ambitious, to appear most, and would make up in seeming what they are not
in being. As Elihu in this verse has showed himself afraid to say any thing,
so he shows us in the next, who, he hoped, would have said all, and altogether
have saved him a labor.

Verse. 7. I said, days should speak, and multitude of years should teach
wisdom;
Or, as the text may be rendered, let days speak; Loquantur dies sunt enim
verba permittentis q.d. sinam loqui illos, non praeripiam eis loquendi locum.
Pisc:
days shall not be hindered by me from speaking, let days speak their fill.
But what means he, when he says, let days speak? how can days speak; it is
an elegancy in Rhetoric, when that which belongs to a person, is ascribed to a
thing, as here speech to time, let days speak; that is, let those who number
many days, who have lived and seen many days, let them speak; they who have
lived most days on earth, are yet indeed (as Bildad told Job, Chap. 8.9.) but
of yesterday, and so have lived, as it were, but a day; yet, according to
common account, some men are so very old, that you may call them days, and to
them we may well say, let Days speak. Johannes de Temporibus.
We read of one who was called John of Times, because he had lived (if the
Records spoke true) three hundred years and more. An old man is a man of
days; and thus Elihu might say, let days, that is, old men speak.

But Children can speak, why then does he say, days should speak? I answer;
There is a twofold speaking; First, natural, thus Children, as soon as they
are out of their swadling-bands, learn to speak; such speaking is but a
natural act; Secondly, There is a speaking which is an artificial or studied
act; thus Orators and men of eloquence speak; such speaking Elihu intended
when he said, days should speak; He looked they should speak to purpose,
speak by rule, even the quintessence of reason; he presumed they would have
brought forth somewhat worthy of their years, and that he should have received
such instruction from them, as they had learned from old age it self; I said
days should speak Children can speak words, but old men should speak things,
every word should have its weight; their tongues should drop as the
honey-combe, and be a tree of life to feed and refresh many. It is most truly
said of the word of God in Scripture, Every tittle of it has a mountain of
sense, a mighty weight of truth in it; And surely the words of old men should
be weighty and convincing; They should speak truth with such evidence both of
testimony and reason as may put to silence all those who speak against or
besides either truth or reason. As, day unto day (says David, Psalm. 19.2.)
utters speech, that is, every day speaks somewhat; so men of days should
speak much both for instruction and conviction. I said days should speak.

Hence note.

That Is not to be esteemed as done at all, which is not well done, or not done
to purpose. An old man does not speak unless he speaks wisely, edifyingly, and
to the point. The aged speak like children, when they speak foolishly, or
unfruitfully. He only is a good speaker, who speaks that which may do others
good, or make them better. We say proverbially and truly both of saying and
doing, As good never a whit, as never the better.

I said days should speak,
and multitude of years should teach wisdom.
Elihu reckons the age of aged men, by multitude of years; this he does only
to highten the matter; what wisdom might he not expect from a multitude of
years? that is, from such as had lived a multitude of years. Certainly
thought Elihu, they will Teach wisdom.

There is a twofold wisdom; First, that which is merely rational; Secondly,
that which is spiritual; or there is first, a common; secondly, an holy
wisdom; Elihu expected wisdom of both sorts, but chiefly of the latter, from
multitude of years. He expected they would teach the wisdom which the Spirit
of God had taught them; Sapientiam intelligit, quae in vera dei and nostri
cognitione sita est; cujus author sit spiritus dei, non hominis animus, non
anni, non usus, non experientia. Merl:
that wisdom which consists in the true knowledge of God and of our selves,
that wisdom which is from above, that which man has not from himself, nor is
taught him by days or years, by use or experience only. And it was very
probable, that they who from their youth had been instructed in the things of
God, being grown old, should also be grown further in this wisdom, and riper
in this sort of knowledge. And therefore Elihu spoke according to the rule of
right reason, when he judged that those three aged men had attained to a very
high degree of divine light. Such is the goodness of God to his people, that
usually they grow in grace and knowledge as they grow in years; For though God
is Debror to no man (but Creditor to all men) and though old age in it self
considered, deserves nothing of God, yea is not only undeserving, but (because
sin multiplyes as our days do) ill deserving, yet as Christ says, To him
that has, (that is, who uses and improveth what he has) more shall be given;
And therefore though true wisdom be a free gift, and is infused and wrought by
the Spirit of God, yet we may in probability, and ought according to charity,
judge, that they who have most days, have also most wisdom. Though wisdom be
not entayled upon old age, yet there we are most likely to find it. I said
multitude of years should teach wisdom.

Hence observe first.

We may well expect they should be very wise, and knowing, who have had much
means, and many opportunities of obtaining knowledge and wisdom. And
therefore we have reason to expect much wisdom from those who have had a
multitude of years past over their heads; It is a common rule in Logic,
Causis sufficientibus positis in a^tu necessario sequitur effectus.
When sufficient causes are put in act, the effect must needs follow; And so
where probable causes are in act, probably the effect will follow. Old men
having been well brought up in youth, and having had fair opportunities to
attain knowledge and wisdom, are rightly presumed and judged well stored and
stockt with both. Where shall we find wisdom, if not among the Ancients?
where, if not among a multitude or throng of years and days? where else
should we look for it? shall we go and enquire among the green heads and
young beginners for it? shall we go to novices and children for it? We may
say, surely they who have been long taught, have learned much, surely they who
have heard many soule-searching Sermons, and continued from day to day under
the droppings of divine truths, are full of fruit and very fruitful; whether
shall we go for fruit else, if not to these? shall we go to those that live
as upon the mountains of Gilboa, where David prayed no rain might fall? shall
we go for Gospel-fruit to the wild naked untaught Indians and Barbarians, or
to the rightly instituted and plentifully instructed Churches of Christ? may we
not more then say, conclude, surely these are wise, and full of spiritual
understanding? Quanquam te Marce Fili Annum jam audientem Cratippum idque
Athenis abundare oportet praeceptis institutisque philosophiae, etc. Cic: de
Offi: lib. t.
The Roman Orator Cicero took it for granted that his son Marcus was well
grounded in and plentifully furnished with the principles of Philosophy,
because he had been at Athens a whole year, and there heard Cratippus a famous
Philosopher read many excellent Lectures about things natural and moral. And
may we not say to many thousands of Gospel-hearers and professors, what? you
that have heard such, and such able Ministers, you that have had the word so
long preached, and that at London (more famous for Gospel knowledge, then
Athens for philosophy) surely you are filled with all knowledge in the mystery
of Christ, and with all goodness in the practice of go^linesse. And
doubtless, the Lord will argue it with those that have had time and
opportunities, as a rich price in their hand to get wisdom, as Elihu did with
his friends being aged men. Who can imagine, but that they are full of wisdom,
that they abound in knowledge and spiritual understanding, who abounding in
days and years, have abounded also in means of knowledge.

Note Secondly.

As old men should abound in knowledge, so they should approve themselves ready
to teach the ignorant. I said days should speak, and multitude of years
should teach wisdom. It Is a duty incumbent upon them who have learned much, to
teach much. To conveigh wisdom and knowledge to others is most proper to such,
as well as most ornamental, and honorable. To be knowing our selves is a great
mercy, and to help others to the knowledge of what we know is a great duty; we
loose one special end of knowing, if we know only for our selves. To
communicate and diffuse our knowledge to others is the noblest way of using it,
and the best way of improving it, and that in a double respect; First, it is
the best way of improving it, as to increase; Secondly, it is the best way of
improving it, as to reward. The more we give out our knowledge, the more we
shall have of it, and the more we shall have for it both from God and men. The
Apostle says of a Gospel Minister (1 Timothy 3.2.) He must be apt to teach, not
only able, but apt, that is, ready and willing to teach; now what the Apostle
speaks there of an Elder by office, is true of those that are elders in time,
they also should be apt to teach; not only able, but ready and willing to teach
in and according to their sphere and power. I said days should speak, etc.

Thirdly, Note.

It Is a reproach to old age, not to be knowing and w^se, not to be able and apt
to teach wisdom. That old age is venerable, not which has white hair, but
which whiteneth with virtuous and worthy actions; Senectus illa venerabilis
est, non quae canis sed meritis albescit. Ambro: lib: 7. Epist. 70.
Elihu speaks here, not only narratively but reprovingly, he reflects upon the
ancient, whose abilities come not up to or do not equal their years. The
aged may well blush and be ashamed to be sound ignorant of, or unskilful in
any thing that they ought to know. The Apostle shames the Hebrews with this,
and tells them they were dull of hearing (Heb. 5.11, 12.) because when for the
time they ought to be teachers, they had need that one should teach them again
which be the first principles of the oracles of God, and were become such as
had need of milk and not of strong meat; As if he had said, When for the
time, days, and years, which have gone over your heads, (the reproof lies
there) you should be able to teach others, what a shame is it that you your
selves should not be capable of those higher teachings, which he calls strong
meat, but must be dealt with about the very principles of Religion, and be fed
like Children with milk and spoones? How is it that you who should have had
senses exercised to discern both good and evil, should be so little able to
distinguish them, either in their minds or degrees. These were spiritually
Children, while naturally old men; They had not learned of their teachers, when
the Apostle had reason to hope they had been able to teach learners, yea were
learned teachers. Some are exceeding old, and exceeding ignorant, they have
multitude of days upon them, yet if asked, they are not able to hold forth the
least Number of divine truths, possibly not one in a right understanding; As
gray hairs are a crown of glory when found in the way of righteousness, so
gray hairs are crowns of glory, when found in a way of wisdom, knowledge, and
understanding, otherwise to be old and dotish, old and sottish, how
dishonorable is it! yea, they that are old and ignorant, shall at last find
their old age, a strong aggravation, as of all their sins, so especially of
their ignorance.

JOB. Chap. 32. Verse. 8, 9. But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration
of the Almighty gives them understanding.

Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged understand judgment.


ELihu, as was showed in the former words, having in vain waited for the
wisdom of the Ancient, proceeds in this Context to give the reason why the
Ancient are not always wise.

Verse. 8. There is a spirit in man; and the inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding.
There Is the reason of it; we render the first word of this eight verse by the
Adversative particle (But) there is a spirit in man; it is usually rendered by
the Affirmative particle, verily, truly, or indeed. Mr Broughton says, Certes
a spirit is in sad man.

These is some difference in opinion about this spirit affirmed to be in man.
Diverse expound Elihu intending the Spirit of God; there is a spirit; that is,
the divine Spirit, the holy Spirit of God, or God the Spirit is in man. (...).
Symmach.
One of the Greek translations puts it into the text; Surely the Spirit of God
is in man; and the Chaldee paraphrase gives it in a like expression; Surely
there is a prophetic spirit in the son of man, or, in the sons of men. Some
are induced to this interpretation, because it would be (say they) but a cold
argument to commend what he had to say for the rectifying Job, by telling him
that man has a reasonable soul, which is common to all men. Yet I rather
conceive that in this first part of the verse, the spirit spoken of is the
natural spirit of man, which in the latter part of the verse he affirms is
instructed, by the inspiration of the Almighty, with supernatural light for
special services. The word is often used in Scripture to note the reasonable
soul, or those powers of the soul which are the vessels of reason, or in
which natural reason has its seat and exercise. There is a power of
reasoning in man, (...) animam rationalem denotat.
or a spirit which is able to discourse of all things; there was such a
natural power implanted in man at his Creation, and though that power be much
weakened and broken by the fall, yet there are, to this day, some remains of it
in all men as borne into this world; Surely there is a spirit in man; And
because the word is universal, or extendable to all men, therefore it is more
then probable the word spirit here is to be taken in the largest sense; for
every man has not the Spirit of God: yea the word here used for man, notes man
of the meanest rank or lowest form; surely there is a spirit (in enosh Mr
Broughton translates) in sad man, in sickly man, in weak man, in the sickliest
weakest and lowest of men there is a soul, a spirit endued with reason; this
is, as the substratum or ground of the whole business, Surely there is a
spirit in man. And in the latter part of the verse, Elihu shows what that is
which heighteneth raises and improveth this natural spirit, certainly there
is a spirit in man, every man has a reasonable soul.

And the inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding. Inest quidem
hominibus vis illa rationatrix sed quae nisi dei afflatu dirigatur, vere sapere
non potest. Bez. (...) a (...) anhelavit.
The work of God inlightning man is expressed by breathing; when Jesus Christ
gave his Disciples the Spirit, he breathed upon them, (or inspired them) and
said, receive ye the holy Ghost (John 20.22.) For, as in the first Creation,
when God gave man a natural being, he breathed into his nostrills the breath
of life, and man became a living soul (Genesis 2.7.) so in the second or new
Creation God breaths a spiritual life into that life, and man becomes a
quickened soul; And as his own soul is quickened by the holy Spirit of grace,
so he is fitted, as an instrument in the hand of God, to quicken the souls of
others with grace, or to instruct them in the ways of grace.

The inspiration of the Almighty
gives understanding.
But has not the reasonable soul of every man an understanding? Doubtless it
has. Therefore I answer; The understanding may be taken two ways; First, for
the faculty; Secondly, for the furniture and enrichings of it; now though
every man has an understanding, yet every man has not a furnished and an
enriched understanding, a beautified and an adorned understanding. The
Scripture speaks of some men as if they were nothing but understanding ( Prove.
1.5.) A wise man will increase knowledge, and a man of understanding will
attain unto all Counsel; Every man has an understanding, but every man is
not a man of understanding; every man is not a man of understanding in natural
and civil things, much less in things divine and spiritual. As some men have
so much will, or rather wilfulness, that they are nothing but will; and some
have so much passion, that they are nothing but passion; so others have such
riches and treasures of understanding, as if they were nothing but
understanding. Now, it is the special inspiration of the Almighty which gives
such an understanding; that is, an enlarged and an enriched understanding. We
say, the inspiration of the Almighty g veth understanding.

The Hebrew is but one word, (...) Intellectificat eos. Brent.
which we may express as some do, It Intellectifieth. So then, the scope and
meaning of this verse is plainly this; That howsoever every man, the meanest of
men, has a reasonable soul, yet the furniture of the understanding, or man's
fullness of wisdom and knowledge is by gift or inspiration of the Almighty; and
therefore some read the verse thus; Surely there is a spirit in man, but the
inspiration of the Almighty makes them to understand. Thus Elihu would g^ine
credit and authority to what he had to deliver, as being by the teachings and
dictates of the Spirit of God. Est spiritus in hominibus, spiratio autem
omnipotentis docet. Sept:
The Seventy comply fully with this rendering; There is a spirit in men, but
the inspiration of the Almighty teaches; As if Elihu had said, Though man be
endewed with natural knowledge and reason, which can do somewhat, yet until
light shines from above, till the spirit of God comes in and enlarges the
natural spirit, it cannot see far, nor do any great matter. Or take the
sense of the whole verse thus, in connection with what went before; Though old
age has odds of youth, yet one man as well as another has a spirit of reason
and judgment in him, whereby through supply of special inspiration from God
(who can do all things) he may be able to know that which want of years
denies him. From the words thus opened,

Observe, First.

Wisdom or understanding is the gift of the Spirit of God. We have a like
assertion by way of question in the 38th Chapter of this book ( ver. 36.) Who
has put wisdom into the inward parts, or who has given understanding to the
heart? who has? has man put wisdom into himself? or has he made his own
heart to understand? the Question denies, no, man has not done it. Wisdom is
an Influence or an Inspiration from the Almighty; knowledge to order common
things is of the Lord ( Isa. 28.26, 29.) His God does instruct him (the
husbandman he means) to discretion (in ordering the ground) and does teach
him; how much more in spiritual things and the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven. ( Prove. 16.1.) The preparation of the heart in man, and the Answer of
the tongue (that is, The fitting of the heart for any right answer of the
tongue) is from the Lord; both the general preparation of the heart for
service or use, and the special preparation of it to this or that service and
use is of the Lord, and so is the Answer of the tongue for the discharge of it.
( Eccles. 2.26.) God gives to a man that is good in his sight, wisdom and
knowledge and joy; As God gives man the knowledge of things, so wisdom to
know how to order and manage the things that he knows; Some have more
knowledge then they know how to manage, their knowledge masters them, they are
not masters of their knowledge; they have more knowledge then wisdom. Now God
gives to him that is good in his sight (that is, to the man whom he chooses
and is pleased with) knowledge and wisdom; and then he gives him joy, that is,
Comfort in the exercise of that knowledge wherewith he is endued; this is a
notable and a noble gift of God. We read ( Isa. 11.2.) The spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him, the spir^t of wisdom and understanding; It is a prophecy
of Christ, who being made in all things like to man, had a natural spirit, or
a reasonable faculty, and he had that furnished by the spirit without measure;
the spirit of the Lord rested upon him, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of Counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of
the fear of the Lord; even Christ as man received an unction or inspiration
from the Almighty for the fullfilling of his Mediatoriall office; much more do
mere men for the fullfilling of any office they are called unto. (2 Cor 3.5.)
We are not sufficient of our selves so much as to think a good thought; Our
sufficiency is by the Inspiration of the Almighty. ( James 1.17.) Every good
gift and every perfect gift is from above; It is not a vapor that rises out
of the earth, but an Influence which distills and drops down from heaven, it
is from above; that is, from God, who though he be every where filling both
heaven and earth with his essential presence, yet (according to Scripture
language) his most glorious and manifestative presence is above; and therefore
to say, every good gift is from above, is all one as to say, it is from God.
Daniel and those other three Noble youths of the Jewish race exceeded all the
wise men of Chaldea in rare abilities, and the Scripture tells us, whence it
was, that they did so. ( Dan. 1.17.) As for these four Children, God gave them
knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom; and the assertion is laid
down in General ( Dan. 2.21.) He (that is, God) changes times and seasons, he
removes Kings and sets up Kings, he gives wisdom to the wise, and
knowledge to them that know understanding; All these Scriptures speak with one
Consent the language of this Text, It is the Inspiration of the Almighty that
gives understanding. And if we compare 1 Samuel: 10.1. with the 6th 9th 11th and
12th verses of the same Chapter, we have a most remarkable passage to this
purpose. Where Saul having received the unction from Samuel, both as an
assurance of and a preparation for the exercise of his kingly office over
Israel; Samuel tells him ( ver. 6.) The Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee,
and thou shall prophecy with them (that is, with the company of Prophets spoken
of in the former verse) and shall be turned into another man. And the holy text
adds ( ver. 9.) God gave (or as we put in the margin turned) him another heart.
There is a twofold turning or changing of the heart, or of a man into another
man. First, by gifts of Illumination; Secondly, by the grace of Sanctification;
the great change of the heart is that change, of Conversion, by the grace of
Sanctification; Saul was not turned into another man, nor had he another heart,
as changed by Grace (for he showed still his old heart in his new kingly state)
but he had another heart, or he was another man as changed by gifts; the spirit
of the Almighty gave him understanding for the Government which he was called
to; for whereas before he had only a private spirit, taken up about cattle and
the affairs of husbandry, then God gave him a spirit of prudence and valor, a
spirit of wisdom and magnanimity, a Noble and an Heroical Spirit, befitting
the Governor of so great and populous a kingdom, both in peace and war.
Every Calling is a mystery, much more the Calling of Kings and Supreme
Magistrates. It was said to Imperial Rome; Tu regere im perio populos Roman
memento; Hae tibi sint arts --
Do thou remember to Rule Nations and Kingdoms, let these be thy arts; This
Art the Spirit of the Lord gave Saul, even knowledge and skill to rule and
govern; yea he had a gift of Illumination, not only for government, but for
prophecy, he was found amongst the Prophets; and when ( v. 11th) they asked
(wondering) Is Saul also amongst the Prophets; As if they had said, How strange
and unheard of a thing is this, that Saul should be furnished with the gift of
prophecy, and join himself with the Prophets? They who before were acquainted
with his person and manner of education, were even amazed at the sight; And
while they were surprised with this amazement, one of the same place (as it
seems wiser then the rest) Answered and said, but who is their father? (ver.
12.) That Is the special word, for which I allege this text. What? Saul among
the Prophets! is it not strange that he should be Inspired! Then one Answered
and said, who is their father? As if he had said, Do not any longer stand
wondering at this thing, but consider who is the father of Saul as a Prophet,
as also the father of all these Prophets. Saul was the son of Kish as to
natural descent, but he had another father as he was a Prophet, and so all
these Prophets, had (besides theit Fathers as men) one and the same father as
Prophets. Therefore wonder not that ye hear Saul prophesying, for all these
whom ye hear and see prophesying, have not these gifts by birth from men, nor
by industry from themselves, but from God who is a free agent, and inspireth
whom he pleases. The same God who, by inspiration, has freely bestowed those
gifts upon the other Prophets, has also inspired Saul with a gift of prophecy.
The Spirit of God is his father (in that capacity) as well as the father of
these other Prophets. And hence that Scripture runs in the plural number, who
is their father? Unless God give power from above, the understanding is dark,
the memory unfaithful, the tongue stammering; It is light from on high that
teaches the skill of prophecy. Solomon had the greatest measure of
understanding of any mere man since the fall of man, and of him it is said, (1
Kings 4.29.) God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and
largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the seashore. Solomon's heart
had been as narrow as another man's, if the Inspiration of the Almighty had not
widened it. When Moses was so sinfully modest, as to excuse his Embassy to
Pharaoh, supposing himself not fitted for such an undertaking ( Exodus: 4.10,
11.) O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore nor since thou have
spoken unto thy servant, but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue. God
presently put the question to him, Who has made man's mouth? etc. As if he had
said, Cannot he give words into thy mouth, who gave thee a mouth? cannot he act
thy organs of speech who made them? Now therefore go and I will be with thy
mouth, Est deus in nobis, sunt et commercia caeli, sedibus aethereis spiritus
iste venit. Ovid.
and teach thee what thou shall say. The Inspiration of the Almighty shall give
thee understanding. Heathen Poets have boasted of their ^^ptures and
inspirations. The people of God have a promise of the Spirit to lead them into
all truth, and to help them in maintaining those truths.

From this general, that the furniture of the understanding is the gift of
God, or by Inspiration of the Almighty, take these hints by way of Coralary.

First, If a right understanding flow from the Inspiration of the Almighty,
then pray for an understanding, pray for the Spirit; Ye have not because ye
ask not, says the Apostle ( James 4.2.) God gives wisdom, but he gives it to
them that ask it ( Jam: 1.5.) If any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God,
who gives liberally and upbraideth not. God upbraideth us not, either with our
want of wisdom, or with the abundance of wisdom that he is pleased to supply
us with, and give out to us. When Solomon was put to his choice what to ask,
he said, Give thy servant an understanding heart. God gave Solomon wisdom, but
Solomon asked it first. All good things are shut up in promises, and the
promises are opened to give out their good things, when we pray. ( Prove. 23.5.)
When thou Cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding,
then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
God. To pray well is to stud^e well, because by prayer light comes in from on
high to make studies successful, and the work to prosper in our hand. As the
Almighty breaths down on us, so we must breath up to the Almighty. To expect
and not to pray, is to tempt God, not to trust him.

Secondly, Do not only pray for wisdom, but use means, and be industrious
for the obtaining of it; The gift of God does not take off the diligence of
man. God does not work in us that we should sit still. ( Prove. 2.4.) Then
shall thou know wisdom when thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her
as for hid treasure. And where is this treasure to be had? Surely in the mines
of Scripture, and in all those Appoyntments wherein God has promised to meet
his people, to shine upon them and give them the knowledge of his ways in
Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, Be thankful for any gift of knowledge; for every beam and ray of
light be thankful; It is God who commands light to shine out of darkness, and
that God who at first commanded light to shine out of darkness, daily shines
into our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ, (2 Cor. 4.6.)

Fourthly, If understanding be from Inspiration, then they who have received
much understanding, must be cautioned against two evils; First, not to be
proud, nor high minded; that our gifts come from on high, should make us very
low in our own eyes. What have thou that thou have not received, and if thou
have received it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? These
are the Apostles soule-humbling and pride-mortifying questions or
expostulations rather (1 Cor. 4.7.) You that have received the greatest gifts,
whom the Inspiration of the Almighty has made most wise and understanding, be
ye most humble in your selves. Secondly, let me add (which is another
dangerous rock upon which great gifts are apt to dash and split you) take heed
of despising those who have received less; our portions are divided and
allotted to us by the hand of God. Divine wisdom gives us our portion of
wisdom; He that has most, has no more then God has given; and he that has
least, has as much as God is pleased to give. They despise the wisdom and
question the understanding of God in giving wisdom, who despise those to whom
he gives less wisdom and understanding then he has given to themselves.

Fifthly, To those who have received but little, I say also two things, by way
of caution; First, do not envy those who have received much; It is of God
that they have more then you, is your eye evil because the eye of God is good?
Secondly, be not discontented with your own lesser portion; do not sit down
sullen; say not, we will do nothing with what we have received, because we
have not as much as others: we know the doom passed on him who having but one
talent hid it in a napkin. If we are discontent with a little portion, or with
one talent, that little is too much, and that one too many for us; nothing does
more dim the glory of God, nor more destroy and eat out our own comforts, then
discontent; the Devil, since his fall, is the most disconcented spirit in the
world, and he was not contented while he stood, he thought he was not high
enough, and that was his undoing. They who are discontent with the gift of God,
loose what is given, and so fall into deeper discontent; yea, as the Apostle
speaks in another case (1 Timothy 3.6.) into the condemnation of the devil.

Sixthly, Then, let us not be lifted up in our own natural wisdom and
reason, he that would be wise, must become a fool, (1 Cor. 3.18.) until we
see our own wisdom folly, we cannot attain the wisdom of God, or Godly
wisdom.

Seventhly, This shows us the reason of the various kinds, and several
measures of gifts among the sons of men. Men differ not more in the measures
and degrees of their outward estates, worldly riches, titles and honors, then
they do in the measures and degrees of their inward abilities, wisdom,
knowledge, and understanding: men differ not more in the feature and figure of
their faces, then in the furniture of their minds. One has five talents,
another two, a third but one. And as the various degrees of the same gift, so
diversities of gifts are from the sovereign pleasure of God. The Apostle is
large and very distinct in this matter (1 Cor. 12.4, 8, 9, 11.) There are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit; to one is given by the Spirit the
word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same S^^rit, to
another prophecy, to another discerning of Spirits, to another diverse kinds of
tongues, etc. But all these works that one and the selfsame Spirit,
dividing to every man severally as he will. It is only the will of the Spirit,
the will of God which makes this division and diversification of gifts among
men. And as the Apostle shows here the rise or spring of all to be from God,
so he had showed that the reason and intendment of all this is the benefit of
men ( v. 7.) The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal. What ever your gift is God has given it for profit and use. One has
skill in sciences, another in languages, one is more acute, another more solid,
one has a stronger judgment, another a quicker fancy and a more searching
invention, One is best at an argument to convince the understanding, another at
a motive to quicken the affections; one can confute an error and state a
Controversy well, and another can best discover sin, and convince the
Conscience; one has weight of matter, but is slow of speech, another has a
fluent tongue, but is less material; a third is both; but all to profit
withal. Such a Character was given of those three Eminent men in the beginning
of the reformation, Res sine verbis Lutherus, verba sine rebus Erasmus, res and
verba Philippus.
Luther, Erasmus, and Melancthon; Luther had matter and not words, he did not
affect any exactness of style or speech; Erasmus had words at will, but less
weight of matter; Melancthon was full in both there was a concurrence or
complication of many eminent gifts in him. The same Erasmus, mentioned last but
one, has a like passage in his Preface to the works of the Ancients (which he
with wonderful skill and industry redeemed from many mistakes, and set forth
more defecate and pure to the view and use of the world) where observing the
different veins of diverse Authors in their writings, he concludes thus;
Several men have their several gifts, as it pleases the gift giving Spirit
to give to them. In Athanasius we admire a serious perspicuity of speaking, and
in Chrysostom a flowing Eloquence; in Basil, besides his sublimity, a pleasant
language; in Hilary we see a lofty style, well marched with the loftiness of
his matter; in Cyprian we reverence a spirit worthy the crown of Martyrdom;
and we are in love with the sweet incentives and modesty of St Ambrose; In
Jerome we commend his rich treasures of Scripture-knowledge, and must
acknowledge in Gregory a pure and unpolisht sanctity. He shuts up thus; Least I
should be tedious; others ^^ve, from the bounty of the same Spirit, their
distinct abilities, by which they are commended to the consciences of the
Godly. The Inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding. And as this is
true with respect to the gifts of Illumination, which Elihu pitcheth here upon;
so it is much more true in reference to the gifts of sanctification; The
Inspiration of the Almighty gives a spiritual understanding to know sin, and
hate it, to know Christ and love him; so to know as to be conformed unto, yea
transformed into that which we know. The Inspiration of the Almighty gives this
understanding, this heart-changeing and life-renewing understanding.

Again, There is a spirit [in man] and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
them understanding; The word is Enos, weak man.

Hence Note.

God can make the weakest and the unlikeliest of men wise and full of
understanding. It is no matter what the man is, if God will use him; he can
make Enos to be Ish, the weak man strong, the ignorant a learned a knowing
man; Amos was a husbandman, and God gave him an excellent understanding; the
Apostles were Fishermen, and yet the Inspiration of the Almighty made them wise
above many; God can make the wise foolish, and fools wise. The power of God
triumphs over all humane power, and in all humane infirmity. So much the
Apostle teaches (1 Cor. 1.27.) God has chosen the foolish things of the world
to confound the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the things
which are mighty; And base things of the world, and things which are despised
has God chosen, yea and things which are not, to bring to naught things which
are, that no flesh should glory in his presence. God chooses those things which
have the greatest improbility for his work, that the power and success of the
work may be ascribed to him alone. When we choose, we should choose those that
are fit for the work, to which they are chosen; we should not choose a fool to
govern, nor one that is of low parts himself to teach others; we should pitch
upon the wisest and ablest we can get. Joseph said well to Pharaoh (Genesis
41.33.) Look out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the Land of Egypt.
We cannot make men wiser then they are, and therefore we must choose and take
those that are wise to do our work. But when God comes to do his work, he
often takes the foolish and the weak, because as he calls them to, so he can
fit them for his work. As the strongest opposition of nature against grace
cannot hinder the work of the Spirit; when the Spirit comes, he will make a
proud man humble, a covetous man liberal, an unclean person modest and
temperate; so the weakness of nature cannot hinder his work. If a man below
in parts, God can raise him; Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou
ordained strength (Psalm. 8.2.) or (as Christ alleges that text, Math: 21.16.)
Thou have perfected praise; one might think, Surely God will take the aged,
the learned and great for his praise; no, he ordaines praise to himself out of
the mouths of babes and sucklings, that is, out of their mouths who in all
natuturall considerations, are no way formed up nor fitted to show forth his
praise. ( Isa. 32.4.) The heart of the rash (or hasty) shall understand
knowledge. Heady and inconsiderate persons, whose tongues (as we say) run
before their wits, shall then be grave, advised, and serious, both in what they
do, and (as it follows) in what they say; The tongue of the stammerers shall
speak plainly, that is, clear words with clear reason; or they shall speak
well both in matter and form, right things rightly. All this the Lord does
that he may honor himself, and lift up his own name only, which alone is to
be lifted up. Never fear to put an empty vessel to a full fountain; no
matter how empty the vessel be, if the fountain be full: God delights in
broken weak and empty creatures, that he may mend, strengthen, and fill them.
There is a spirit in man [in weak man] and the Inspiration of the Almighty
gives them understanding.

Elihu having showed the original of man's wisdom to be from God in this 8th
verse, makes an inference from it in the 9th; The inspiration of the Almighty
gives understanding; And what then? surely even hence it comes to pass, that,

Verse. 9. Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged understand
Judgment.
It is well conceived by some Interpreters, that the Apostle does more then
allude to, even cite this text (1 Cor. 1.26.) You see your Calling Brethren,
how that not many w^se men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many Noble are
called. If God should choose only of mostly wise men, they would be ready to
say, we are chosen for our wisdom; If he should choose and call only or mostly
rich men, they would be ready to think, we are chosen for our riches; If he
should call only or mostly Kings and Princes, they would conclude, we are
called for our Greatness; Therefore the Lord passes by most of these, and
calls the Fisherman, calls the poor man, the ignorant man, and says, You
that have nothing, you that (in the esteem of the world) are nothing, do you
follow me, who have all things, and can supply you with all. Thus here says
Elihu, Great men are not always wise; Why not? the reason is because God does
not always bestow wisdom upon them, It is the Inspiration of the Almighty
that gives understanding; Greatness does it not; Not many wise men after the
flesh, not many Great or Noble are Called. Elihu and the Apostle Paul speak
the same thing almost in the same words. This is also a proof of the divine
Authority of this book, as well as that (1 Cor. 1.19.) taken out of the
speech of Eliphaz in the 5th Chapter at the 13th verse; He takes the wise in
their own craftiness, etc.

Great men are not always wise. The word always is not at all in the
Original text, and therefore put in a different Character; Great men are not
wise; but it is well supplied by that word always; For the meaning of Elihu is
not that great men are never wise, but not always wise.

Great men, the Rabbis, the honorable men of the world, (...) Magnus unde
Rabbi Magister, qui multam eruditionem habet. Honorabiles Pagn: Magnates. Tygur:
men in Authority and great place are intended by this word. The Officers
which King Ahasuerus set over his feast, are called Rabbis (Est. 1.8.) so that
we may expound it here in the largest sense, as including all sorts and degrees
of Great ones.

Great men are not always wise. That is, wisdom neither flows from, nor is
it always associated with Greatness. As some are little yet great, little in
the world, yet great in true wisdom; so others are Great, yet little, they are
little in wisdom, or have little true wisdom, though they are great in the
world, or have great worldly wisdom.

Hence note.

It is not greatness of birth, of place, or power, that can make any man wise,
nor does it at all assure us, that a man is wise, because we see him exalted to
and settled in a place of power and greatness. The Prophet ( Jer. 5.4, 5.)
finding some very incorrigible and hardened in sinful courses, concluded them
mean persons, and in the lowest form of the people. Therefore I said, Surely
these are poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way of the Lord, nor
the Judgment of their God. To be poor and foolish is very common; these are
poor and foolish (says the Prophet) but surely I shall find the Great ones
better accommodated with wisdom; and thereupon he resolved, I will get me to
the great men, and will speak unto them, for they have known the way of the
Lord, and the judgment of their God; That is, these great men have had great
means of knowledge, and we have reason to suppose them as great in knowledge,
as they are in place or power. But did the great men answer his expectation?
did he find that in them, which he sought and looked for? nothing less: The
great men proved more foolish, or less in true knowledge then the poor, as it
follows, But these have altogether broken the yoke and burst the bonds; As
if he had said, I thought these great men had been wise, but I see they are
very fools. What can be a greater argument of folly, then to break those
yoakes and bonds, which the wisdom of God has put upon us? It Is both our
wisdom and our freedom to be bound by the most wise and holy will of God; and
hence the Prophet accounts this one as strong as a thousand arguments, to prove
that the Great men among the Jews were not wise, because they were not only
unwilling to be bound to the obedience of the will of God, but wilfully burst
those bonds. When Jesus Christ came into the world, the great ones, the Rabbis
had the least true wisdom, they would not believe on him, nor receive him; yea
some boasted of this their unbelief as an argument of their wisdom ( John
7.48, 49.) Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? No;
they were too wise to believe; Faith in Christ was left to the fools, and
counted folly by those wise men; But this people (say they, meaning the common
sort or ignorant vulgar) who knows not the Law are cursed. And they thought
them accursed because they believed in and received Jesus Christ, the chiefest
blessing. Great men are not always wise in civil things, very rarely in
spiritual things; They have not always the wisdom of a man, they seldom
have the wisdom of a real Christian. They are not always worldly wise, or
wise for this present world, much less are they always wise for the world
which is to come. Great in title, and wise in truth, are a sweet couple, but
seldom seen. If so

Then there is no taking of things upon trust from the greatest in the world.
As it is dangerous to follow the multitude ( Exodus 23.2.) the most are usually
the worst, and they who are evil, will lead to evil; so there is no
following great ones blindfold, for even they are often blind, or (which is
worse) will not see; And they who either do not or will not see their own way,
may soon lead others out of the way, and turn them aside to that which is
not good.

Again, This first part of the verse (Great men are not always wise) is
rendered by the Septuagint, men of many years, (...). Sep.
or great in years, are not always wise. The Original word may refer to
greatness of age, which consists in having lived many years, as well as to
greatness of honor, which consists in the enjoying of high places and
dignities. But I rather adhere to our translation, that the great men here
intended are the Great in power and place, not in years and days, though it
be a truth, that such are not always wise; and if we take in that sense also,
it is a further confirmation of the general truth in hand, That wisdom is the
gift of God, and therefore those men are not always wise, whom we might most
probably look upon as such. For as we see Great men, who have the advantage of
means for education in learning, are not always the wisest; so the aged, who
have that great advantage of time and experience to gather vvisdome are not;
Both often come short in abilities of understanding and prudence, the former of
their inferiors, the latter of their Juniors. This is express in the latter
part of the verse, and therefore needs not be inferred from this first part of
it, by way of interpretation; Great men are not always wise, then follows
this disjunctive proposition; Neither do the aged understand Judgment; or,
that which is right.

The word Mishpat is taken two vvayes in Scripture; first, for the rule of
Righteousness; Samuel told the people, the judgment or manner of the
Kingdom, (1 Samuel: 10.25.) that is, how the kingdom should be ordered and
governed, according to judgment and rules of righteousness. Secondly, Such an
actual Administration as is according to that rule of righteousness, is in
Scripture called judgment. The aged do not always understand judgment in
either notion; they do not always understand the rule, nor do they always
act according to the rule which they understand; they who fail in one, much
more in both these, do not understand judgment. Sometimes the aged are at a
loss and know not what to do, and oftentimes they are so entangled with
their lusts, that they will not do what they know. Yet here remember, these
words are not to be taken as an absolute negation of vvisdome to the ancient,
much less as a reproach upon them: For usually the aged are most understanding
in judgment, and we may more probably and do more frequently find Judgment
with them, then among those that are young. And therefore when Elihu says,
neither do the aged understand Judgment; his meaning is only this, old age
does not give vvisdome, nor is it the old man's privilege only, to understand
judgment.

Hence note.

As honor or greatness of estate, so age or greatness of years, does not
confer wisdom upon any man. Time does neither stop nor convey knowledge and
understanding; old men have not their knowledge by their Antiquity, and
therefore, as no man is wise at all times, so no man is made wise by time. In
strict sense, vvisdome is not the daughter of time, but the gift of the
eternal. It is not time but divine favor which makes wise. They are soon
made wise and learned, whom God will teach. The teachings of God make young men
like the ancients in vvisdome, and without his teaching, the aged are like
children in folly. Intelligentia juris non pendet a senectute. Pisc:
God sometimes denies vvisdome to the Ancient, and sometimes he takes vvisdome
from them. And God suffers old men to act like children, to go out of the way,
to do foolishly, that he may stain the glory of all flesh, and that all might
both know and have their dependence on him alone. Hence take two or three
deductions.

First, From the Connection of these two verses, we learn that, The spirit of
God is not tied to any age or degree of men; The Inspiration of the Almighty
gives understanding; Great men are not always wise, etc. The Spirit of God is
a free Spirit; and as the Spirit is free because he moves without any desert in
the object; as also because he gives liberally, plentifully, and abundantly; so
the Spirit of God is free as to the choice of objects, he gives here and not
there, he passes by this man, and takes hold of that, he sometimes passes by
the rich, and takes the poor, ( Eccl. 9.15.) The poor wise man saved the
City; sometimes he passes by the old, and takes the young; and he does all
this, that we might ascribe all to himself, not to the age of man, not to any
thing in man. God has promised to be with his Church, and with his Ministers
by his Spirit to the end of the world; but the Spirit has his choice as to
particular men, and none have been more deceived then they that thought the
Spirit in bonds or tied to them; Come (say they, Jer: 18.18.) let us devise
devices against Jeremiah; For the Law shall not perish from the Priest, nor
Counsel from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet; The Priests are of this
opinion, and Jeremiah is out of the way, he is a false Prophet, and therefore
certainly we may proceed in our devices against him, for we have the opinion of
the Priests and Prophets with us; Thus they spoke, as if the Spirit of God had
been bound up to that order. We ought to seek wisdom at the Priests mouth;
yet they who rest upon their vvisdome may soon be deceived; knowledge may
perish from the Priests mouth, and counsel from the ancient. The great Cheat
which the Pope has put upon the world is, That the Spirit of God is tied to
the pumells of his Chair, or that there he cannot err. But as particular men,
so whole Counsels of learned and aged men have erred. True vvisdome is not the
birth of time, nor the peculiar of a party, but the free gift of the Spirit of
God, who is most free, both in what he gives, and to whom he gives. Therefore

Secondly, Let us not pin our faith or our Consciences upon men, how great, or
how Ancient soever they are; Let us give respect to the Ancient, and the
honorable, (not to do it is not only uncivil but sinful) yet let us not
give up our Consciences to them; For great men are not always wise, neither
do the aged understand Judgment; We must not reverence any man's person to the
prejudice of the truth. The opinions of great or ancient men are not to be
received, as Oracles, without debate; we have liberty to Consider of them, and
to Compare them with the rule: We must prove all things, and hold fast that
only which is good. Quae in philosophia dicuntur ea oportet existimatione ejus
qui dicit detracta, seorsum per se examinari, Etenim canities dicentis, gestus
supercilist, etc. faciunt ad percallendum imperitum Auditorem. Plutaret de
Auditione.
A heathen gave that direction to those who hear philosophical discourses;
You must take off all those considerations which concern the person speaking,
and only mind what is spoken: his Antiquity, that he is an old man, and his
authority, that he is a great man, must not sway you; His outward gesture, tone
and gravity, his severe or demure looks, which much affect, almost astonish
unlearned auditors, and make them ready to swallow any thing that is uttered,
must all be laid aside when the matter delivered and asserted, comes to be
examined and laid in the balance. Believe what is said because you judge it
true, do not believe it true because such or such a man has said it; because
an old man, or a great man, or a good man has said it. How strictly then and
religiously is this to be observed in hearing the word of God, and the
doctrines of faith? in that case be sure to lay aside all that concerns the
speaker, and weigh what he speaks alone and single in the Balance of the
Sanctuary.

Thirdly, Then, we ought not to despise what young men say, because of their
youth. -- Tempora quippe virtutem non prima negant, non ultima donant.
If old men be not always wise, then wisdom may be with the young; sometimes
an opinion is undervalued, because it is the opinion of a young man; and truths
are not received, because he that delivers them has not seen many days. As
it is a sin to adore old age, or to give up our faith and Conscience to it; so
it is a sin to slight youth, in doing so we may slight the truth. Paul says to
Timothy, Let no man despise thy youth; Which as it is a Caution to Timothy (as
has been showed) to carry himself wisely and warily, lest he should occasion
others to slight or despise him; so it is a Caution to the people, that they
should not despise him because of his youth; That which is the true glory of
gray hayess, does sometimes Crown the youthful head, wisdom (I mean) and
ripeness of understanding. Corpore Juvencula, animo cana fuit. Ambr: de
Agnete. Ser: 90.
It was said of a godly woman, She had a youthful body, but an aged mind.
Samuel was young in years, but in grace elder then old Ely; Jeremiah was
young, but how wise did the Inspiration of God make him? Daniel was young, yet
wiser then all the Magicians and Astrologers; Timothy and Titus were young, yet
honorable for p udence and piety; and therefore, seeing great men are not
always wise, neither do the aged understand Judgment, as we should not
accept what old men say because of their age; so let us not slight what young
men say because of their youth.

When God furnishes young men with abilities, and calls them to his work,
even old men must be willing, at least not disdain, to hear them. Christ must
be heard in or by whom soeever he will speak. God indeed does usually serve
himself by the aged, yet he has abundantly testified that truth is not bound
up to old age. Modesty should bridle young men from being over-forward to show
themselves, but it must not shut or seal up their lips. Old men must have the
pre-eminence; Elihu shows us that order ( v. 7.) I (says he) said days shall
speak, and multitude of years shall teach wisdom: We must first attend and
give ear to our elders. And when we are to choose Officers or Governors, to
choose ignorant Greene-heads before knowing Gray hayres, were a perverting of
all order. Therefore men of years having grace and wisdom proportionable, are
to be preferred before the younger. In that case it were a shame to advance
young men, with a neglect of the aged. But when God gives more grace and
understanding to young men then to ancients, our approbation should follow his
preparation, and whom he qualifies best, we should soonest choose. The order of
Nature is good, yet not always fittest to be observed. Right reason and the
rule of the word of God must sway and cast our vote, no the age and years of
men. When Samuel was sent to anoint a King in the place of Saul among the sons
of Jesse, he looking on Eliab said, Surely the Lords anointed is before him (1 Samuel: 16.5.) but the Lord said unto him (v. 6:) Look not on his countenance, or
on the height of his stature, because I have refused him, for the Lord sees
not as man sees; for man looks on the outward appearance; but the Lord
looks on the heart. Now, as we are not to be taken with the beauty and
stature of men, so not with their gray hairs and outward gravity. Old men are
not always wise; wisdom and a heart for God, a good heart, or a heart to do
good, may dwell with a green Head, even with a greener then seven, the eighth
o^ greenest of all (so was David's) that come or stand in a day of Election
before us.

JOB. Chap. 32. Verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Therefore I said, Hearken to me: I
also will show mine opinion.

Behold, I waited for your words: I gave care to your reasons, whilst you
searched out what to say.

Yea, I attended unto you: and behold, there was none of you that convinced
Job, or that answered his words:

Lest ye should say; We have found out wisdom: God thrusts him down and not
man.

Now he has not directed his words against me: neither will I answer him with
your speeches.


ELihu having asserted this negative proposition in the former verse, Great men
are not always wise, neither do the aged understand Judgment, makes his
inference from it in these words.

Verse. 10. Therefore I said hearken to me.
As if he had said; Though I am none of the great men of the world, though I am
none of the aged among the sons of men, yet hearken unto me; for seeing great
and aged men are not always wise, nor have engrossed all wisdom and
understanding to themselves, it is possible that some beams of wisdom may
shine forth even from so mean a Junior, even from such a puny as (I must
confess) I am.

We may also make the inference from the 8th verse; There is a spirit in man,
and the inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding. Therefore I said
hearken to me; As if he had said, Though I am a young man, and have not had
either those natural or accidental advantages of the ancient for the
gathering of any great stock or treasures of wisdom, yet there is an
inspiration of the Almighty which gives understanding. If the Lord will make
use of me, and inspire me, if he please to breath his truths into me, and
irradiate my soul with divine light, I may be able to do and say some thing
in this matter. The inference, you see, follows well and without strain from
either of those premises.

Therefore I said, hearken to me. It may be queried, to whom did Elihu say
this? We translate the words indefinitely, not determining them to this or thar
person; But the Original seems to speak personally; Therefore I said, hear
thou me. Which may be understood two ways; First, that Elihu directed his
speech principally to Job, Hear thou what I shall say. Secondly, that Elihu
spoke to the whole company there present, as if they had been but one man; we
may speak in a congregation of hundreds and thousands, we may speak to many,
as if there were but one to hear; as what is spoken to a few, may be intended
to all. ( Mark 13.37.) What I say unto you, (my Disciples) I say unto all,
watch. So that which is said to all, is surely said to every one in the
assembly where it is said. Though we take Elihu here, as speaking directly but
to one person, yet we must take him as desiring that every person present
should take it as spoken to himself; Hearken to me.

Hence note first.

When any speak reason, and hold out truth, they are to be heard. No man
should stop his ear with a prejudice to the person. He that speaks truth,
deserves to be heard: though (as Elihu) he be a young man, or inferior to many
in age, yet he is to be heard, though inferior to many in power and experience,
yet he is to be heard; ( Eccle: 4.13.) Better is a poor and wise child, then
an old and foolish King that will not be admonished. And better is a poor and
wise child, then an old man that can give no admonition. As that man is in a
sad condition, whether king or subject, that will not be admonished, so that
man, be he never so ancient, is not much to be regarded, that is not able to
give admonition. But though both discreet young men, and discreet poor men
are to be heard when they speak truth and reason, yet that of Solomon (Eccle:
9.16.) is too often verified; The poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words
are not heard. Most conclude. if a man be poor, his counsel is so too, and if
he be young, how can he be a counselor? yet, hear me (says Elihu) (...)
Scientiam meam. Mont.
I also will show mine opinion, or my knowledge.

I will show what my understanding is, or what light God has given me in this
case. The words are plain.

Note from them.

What truth ot truths we have received and know, we should communicate and make
known. It Is a duty to show our opinion when we have a call and an occasion to
show it, as Elihu here had. Some have knowledge, who will not show it; They
(which Christ forbids, Math: 5.15.) put their candle under a bushel. God has
lighted a candle, and set it up in some men's spirits, yet they either quite
conceal or much obscure it. God has given them a talent of knowledge, and
they like the unprofitable servant, wrap it up in a Napkin. They will not show
their opinion. Not to show what we have, when called to it, is a denial that
we have it. As good not have a candle, or a talent, as let our candle be hid,
or hide our talent. The very Heathen condemned this, while they said, Covered
virtue, is buried virtue. Yea while a man covers his virtues, parts, and
abilities, he burieth himself alive, or is dead while he lives. As, the
Scripture says, they have only a name to be alive, but are dead, who make a
show of more then they have ( Rev: 3.2.) so they have a name to be dead, or may
be numbered among the dead, who will not show what indeed they have.

There are two things which hinder men from showing their opinion; First,
idleness, they are loath to take the pains to show it. Secondly,
shamefastness; There is a commendable modesty, it is not good to be
over-forward in showing our opinion; But that modesty is sinful, which quite
hinders us from showing our opinion. They who keep in their knowledge and
opinion either through idleness, or shamefastness, do almost as ill as they
who show their opinion, and declare their knowledge through pride and and
high-mindednesse, or merely to show themselves, to show their wit, and to make
a noise of their parts and learning. It Is sinful selfe-pleasing either to know
only that we may know, or to publish what we know only to be known. With some
it is nothing that they have knowledge, unless others know that they have it.
An affectation to appear knowing, is as bad as to be ignorant. I will show
mine opinion (said Elihu) But why would he show it? We have reason to judge, it
was from the honesty of his heart, not from the height of his Spirit. And when
ever we show our opinion, we ought to show it out of an honest heart, and for
honest ends, such as these.

First, To instruct those who are ignorant.

Secondly, To reduce those who are out of the way.

Thirdly, To feed hungry souls with wholesome doctrine. ( Prove. 10.21.) The
lips of the righteous feed many.

Fourthly, To strengthen the weak.

Fifthly, To confirm the doubtful.

Sixthly, To comfort the sorrowful.

Seventhly, To encourage the fearful.

Eighthly, To quicken the sloathfull in the ways and work of God.

Lastly, And above all, That God may be glorified by the use of the talent that
he has given. (1 Pet. 4.10.) As every man has received the gift, even so
minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of
God. Stewards must not set up their own, but their Masters Interest. We should
minister by every gift as Stewards of the manifold grace of God.

I will show mine opinion ( says Elihu.) But what haste? Elihu it seems
foresaw some ready to object; Why do you a young man take upon you to speak
in a cause, wherein so many of your Elders and Betters have not prevailed? why
are you so busy? It Is much boldness for you, or such as you to declare your
opinion in this controversy, wherein such wise, learned, and godly men have,
without success, engaged already. To this objection, Elihu makes a preventing
answer, rendering this account of his undertaking; As if he had said, I have
attentively observed all the passages and traverses of this dispute, I have
heard all that Jobs friends have offered, whether for vindication of the
justice and righteousness of God in laying that great affliction upon him, or
for the conviction of Job, to make him see his sin, and sit down humbled. I
have heard all this (says Elihu) and upon the whole matter I find, Job is yet
unanswered, or that there is need of a further answer to stop his mouth, to
silence his complaints, and humble him under the hand and sovereign power of
God.

This is the scope and sum of these two verses following.

Verse. 11. Behold, I waited for your words, I gave care to your reasons,
whilst you searched out what to say.

Verse. 12. Yea I attended unto you; and behold, there is none of you that
convinced Job, or that answered his words.


You have the general sense of the text, I shall yet proceed to a more
particular explication of it.

Behold, I waited for your words. (...) moratus est, praestolatus est,
expectavit.
The word which we translate to wait, imports three things in Scripture; First,
an act of hope, or to be carried toward any thing desirable, with a wonderful
desire to enjoy it; Hope causes the soul to breath after fruition. Secondly,
the word implies that grief or trouble which possesses the mind upon a long
stay or detainment of that good which we desire and hope to attain. Thirdly,
it notes, the souls patient waiting (though grieved and burdened with present
delays) for future enjoyment. In all or any of these senses, Elihu might say,
Behold, I waited for your words, I earnestly desired to hear you speak to
satisfaction, and I am grieved that you did not; and I would, if need were,
patiently wait still, did I not perceive you had done, and quitted your hands
of this work.

Behold, I waited for your words. (...)
Mr Broughton renders, Behold, I waited through your speech, or, into your
words. I stood still, but I have not been asleep, I have long expected, you
would say what is right, and I have seriously considered what you said, I
waited for your words; I gave ear to your reasons.

Attendi usque ad sensa vestra; Iun: i. e. Accuratissime and quam pentissime
sensa animi vestri exploravi. Id:
That is, to find what convincing reason was couched in your arguments. The
Hebrew is, I gave ear to your understanding; That is, I attended to find out
your apprehensions, or to gather up your sense in this matter, that I might not
mistake your meaning, nor answer at random. The vulgar translation reads it, I
have heard your wisdom; That is, what wisdom there was in your words. The
truth or reason that is in words, Audivi prudentiam vestram. Vulg:
Diligentissime auscultavi rations vestras, quas ex and pro intelligentia
vestra attulisti, and quas doctas esse purestis et ad rem aptas. Merc:
is the wisdom of them. So that, when Elihu says, I gave ear to your
reasons, or, to your understanding, it intimates that he took the exactest
heed he possibly could to find out the utmost tendency and purpose of their
discourse. As if he had said; I have weighed every tittle that ye have spoken,
and tried it by mine ear, to find whether it were solid yea or no.

There is one clause further to be opened in this verse; I gave ear to your
reasons, While you searched out what to say.

This implies that Jobs friends did ever and anon, take time to consider
either each man with himself, or that they consulted one with another, what
answer to shape and make to Job.

Whilst ye searched out. The word which we translate to search out, (...)
Scrutatus, perscrutatus est remota and obstrusa.
notes the strictest search after that which is hidden, remote and secret. It Is
applied ( Deuteronomy? 13.14.) to that care which Judges ought to take in finding out
the truth of an accusation brought against enticers to Idolatry. The strictness
of the Originoll is, While ye searched out words. As if he had said, I am
persuaded you have strained your selves to the utmost, to find out what to say,
you did not speak what came next, but searched for your answers.

We may learn a good lesson from the practice of Elihu; we see he was no idle
hearer; yea in him we have the description or character of an active hearer; I
waited for your words, I gave ear to your reasonings, while ye searched out
what to say.

Hence note.

We must diligently hear and give ear, weigh and consider what is spoken,
before we give answer. No man is well prepared to answer, but he that has been
an attentive hearer. And as no man can be a fit answerer in points under
disputation, so no man can be a fruitful practiser in points of instruction,
but he that has been a diligent hearer. It Is our duty, when the word is
preached, to wait, not for a sound of words, not for fine words, or words
dressed up with affected eloquence, but for sound savory words, for words that
have weight and light in them, for words that have strength and authority in
them, to prevail upon the heart, and conquer us to obedience. These are the
only words, worth the waiting for; and for these we ought to wait.

Secondly, Before Elihu comes to give his opinion, he tells Jobs friends, that
he had diligently heard the matter out, even all their reasonings and
searchings.

Hence note.

We must not make a judgment from any one part of a discourse, we must take
all together. We must compare the first and last, the Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and ending of what is said; We must look quite through. It Is not
ingenuous to pick up this or that passage, to take a piece here, and a piece
there; we can never make a true judgment, till the whole is laid together. As,
many exceedingly mistake about the works of God, so about the words of men,
because they judge the whole by this or that part: Whereas they should judge of
the parts by the whole. As therefore we ought not to make conclusions about the
providentiall works of God, till the last Act, or till all is concluded; so we
must not judge the discourses of men, till the last word, or till they have
concluded their discourse. Hear a man out, and then answer him.

Ab aequo attentienem sibi conciliat. Merc:
Thirdly, Elihu seems to challenge it as his due to be heard speak, after he
had fully heard them speaking.

Hence note, They who have had the patience to hear others, ought to have the
privilege of being heard themselves.

Hear me, says Elihu; Why so? I have heard you. It is but equal and
rational, that he should have liberty of speaking, who has showed an
attentive perseverance in hearing.

From the last branch of the verse, while ye searched out what to say.

Observe.

We ought to ponder and try what we speak, before we speak it. The work of
the tongue must follow that of the understanding. ( Eccl: 12.10. (...)
) The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words, or words of delight, words
of pleasure. The preacher sought; But how did he seek? He sought diligently
and earnestly. The preacher sought, but in what way did he seek? surely he
sought by diligent study and earnest prayer, to find out acceptable words. What
words were those? not men-pleasing words, not soft words, which might pass
with all sorts, or humor all phansies, not such words as would serve for
pillows under bad men's elbows. The acceptable words which the Preacher sought,
were words of truth and sobriety, words of power and Authority; in no other
sense may we seek out acceptable words, or words of delight; nor is there any
true delight, but in words of truth. Thus every faithful Preacher should seek
to find out acceptable words; every holy and wholesome doctrine is made up of
such words. Only thole doctrines and exhortations which are formed and composed
of such words, are (as the Apostle says of the great doctrine of Jesus Christ,
manifested in the flesh to save sinners) faithful sayings, and worthy of
acceptance (1 Timothy: 1.15.) Elihu took notice of this in Jobs friends, they did
not speak hand over head, but searched what they might say most to the purpose
(as they judged) of the cause in hand, and to the profit of their hearers.

Elihu thought he had not yet spoken enough in way of apology for himself.
And therefore the penman of this dispute represents him speaking further, yet
much to the same sense.

Verse. 12. Yea, I attended unto you, and behold, there was none of you that
convinced Job, or that answered his words.
I attended unto you; That is, I did not only desire to receive full
satisfaction from you, but I attended, hoping at last to find it. I stayed, I
did not make haste, nor did I hasten you. Vsque ad intima vestra considerabam
vos. Drus:
Some expound the word with a great significancy, I did as thoroughly consider
and attend what was said, as if I had looked into you. Thus (says Elihu) I
attended unto you.

But what did he find? He found two faults in their words after he had attended
unto them thoroughly. First, he found them faulty, because none of them had
convinced Job. Their proofs did not make good their accusations. The second
fault which Elihu found, was, They had not refuted Jobs assertion. As if he had
said, Ye have spoken much, but upon the matter have done little. I waited, and
I attended, expecting great things from you, but I have bin deceived in my
expectation, For having taken out the strength and substance, the spirits and
quintessence of your speech, I find nothing coming up, either to a conviction
of Job, as faulty in matter of fact, nor to an answer of him, as defective in
matter of argument. So that when I have laid all that ye have spoken in the
balance, it weighes too light, Job is your match, yea, he has over-matcht you.

Behold, there is none of you that convinces Job. The Hebrew word which we
here translate to convince, answers the Greek in the New Testament, which is
also translated, To reprove or convince. (...).
And both the Hebrew and the Greek, carry a threefold signification.

First, to prove, or to make good what is affirmed, either first by reason and
argument, or, secondly, by testimony and authority. When such proofs and
reasons, such testimonies and authorities are brought in, as a man can make no
exceptions against, or cannot evade nor reply to, then he is convinced. The
Apostle giving a description of faith ( Heb: 11.1.) says, It is the substance
of things hoped for, (...).
and the evidence (or conviction) of things not seen. The Spirit of God makes
conviction before faith acts. He brings such proofs, such clear evidences,
that though the thing be not seen, yet the soul sits down convinced, that it
is so, as fully as if we had seen it. The greatest conviction we have to
believe, is from authority and testimony; yea, that is properly and only faith,
when we consent to a thing upon the testimony and authority of another.

Secondly, The word signifies to reprove, or rebuke with words: (...).
( Math: 18.15.) Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and
tell him of his fault. To reprove a man, is First to tell him of his fault, and
then to blame him for it. Every man's fault must be clearly proved, before he
can be justly reproved. Thus the Baptist reproved Herod (Luke 3.19.) And
because Light proves, therefore it also reproves ( John 3.20.) Every one that
does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved. The same word is used ( Ephesians: 5.11.) Have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. And again (1 Timothy:
5.20.) Them that sin (that is, either openly, before all, or whose sin has
been proved before all) rebuke before all; and, as the same Apostle directs (
Tit: 2.25.) Rebuke them sharply.

Thirdly, The word signifies, as to prove and reprove, so to chasten and
correct, to rebuke by the hand as well as by the tongue ( Heb: 12.5. (...), Cum
ab eo argueris.
) Ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaks unto you as unto children;
my son, despise not thou the chastning of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him. When thou art rebuked of him by blows, or receivest sencible
convictions. ( Rev: 3.19.) Whom I love I rebuke and chasten. Here in the Text
we must understand the word in the first sense. There is none of you that has
convinced Job; That is, ye have not proved what ye have said; Ye have called
him an hypocrite, and told him that he has oppressed the poor, and detained
the right of the fatherless; But ye have proved none of these evils against
him. Ye have not proved the matter of fact, that he might sit down
penitentially confessing himself such an offender, as ye have accused him to
be.

Hence note.

We can never convince another by what we say, until we prove what we say. If
we reprove any man for an error in his judgment, and do not prove it to be
an error; or if we reprove a man for sin in practice, and do not prove his
practice sinful, or that he has practiced that sin, no conviction follows.
What is said and not proved comes to the ear only, not to the conscience.
Therefore says Christ ( John 8.46.) Which of you convinces me of sin. Find a
spot in my life if you can. I know you are ready to slander me with, but you
cannot convince me of evil. It is said of Apollos (Acts 18.28.) He mightily
convinced the Jews. How did he convince them? not by reproving them only, for
not receiving the Messiah; he did not barely tell them, ye are a company of
unbelievers: but he reproved them by proving the necessity of their receiving
Christ the Messiah, and the evil of rejecting him, showing by the Scriptures
that Jesus was the Christ. Here was proof, and so conviction followed. He
convinced them by authority, by the testimony of the word, comparing Scripture
with Scripture, the prophecy, with the history of Christ. The Apostle would
have the Ministers of the Gospel mighty at this work ( Tit: 1.8.) They must
hold fast the faithful word, that they may be able by sound doctrine, both to
exhort and to convince the gainsayers. Not only must they be able to rebuke
gainsayers, this will not do it; they must also convince them, or stop their
mouths. (James 2.9.) If any of you have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and
are convinced of the Law as transgressors. How does the Law convince? Not only
by reproving, but by proving, It shows us a rule, and says, there you have
departed from it; here is the line, and there ye have transgressed, or gone
over it. Thus ye are convinced, that ye are transgressors. He is both wise and
faithful, he does his work like a workman that needs not be ashamed, who
not only gives reproof but proof, either of error in judgment, or of evil
in practice. For the close of this point, I may show you three great convincers.

First, The holy Spirit of God; This office of the Spirit Christ sets forth (
John 16.7.) I will send the Comforter, and when he is come (what shall he do?)
He will convince the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of Judgment; That
is, he will bring proof home to the conscience, to show sinners their evil
state and evil lives; He will also bring home to their spirits the
alsufficiency of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and so overcome their
unbelief, that they shall nor be able to refuse the offers of grace. He will
likewise show them such reasons why they ought to be holy, and walk in the
ways of righteousness, that they shall neither have power nor will to gainsay.

The second great convincer, is Conscience. They who were so forward to accuse
the woman taken in adultery ( John 8.9.) were at last convicted by their own
Conscience, and went out one by one; Their conscience told them they were
guilty, if not for that sin, yet of other sins as bad as that. They were so far
before from judging themselves for, that they took no notice of their own
faults; they were severe against the woman, but they flattered themselves, till
Christ made their own consciences, their convincers. And surely conscience
will one time or other convince to purpose, They who have refused or outstood
conviction by the word, yea and put by the motions of the Spirit, shall at last
find conscience convincing and speaking home to them.

The third great Convincer, is Jesus Christ in person; Of him in the
performance of this office, the Apostle speaks clearly ( Jude v: 15.) Behold
the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints (And what comes he to do?) To
execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. Christ will make
the greatest of ungodly ones in that great day to acknowledge, that all their
hard speeches which they have spoken against the Saints, or godly men, were
spoken against him. When profane men are among their wicked companions, they
can jeare at the godly professors of the name of Christ, even while they
pretend to honor Christ; But Christ will make them see, that they sco^ned him,
while they scorned the least of those that feared him, and believed on his
name, The great day will be a day not only of executing Judgment, but of
conviction, every mouth shall be stopped, and all the world of wicked men shall
become guilty in their own sight before God. These are the three great
Convincers. The holy Spirit of God, the Conscience of every man, and Jesus
Christ in the judgment of the great day.

And let those who now undertake that great work of conviction, often remember
(which was a little before mentioned and set down) the method to be used and
observed in it; First, prove the matter, and then reprove the man. None were
ever wrought to any good, by bare reproof, much less by force. Men are not to
be driven into the faith by fire and sword, by terrors and imprisonments;
conviction must do it; and that will do it to purpose. This is the first
thing which El^hu blamed and burdened Jobs friends with; They reproved him, but
did not bring sufficient convincing proof against him. There was none of you
that convinced Job.

Secondly, He lays this to their charge, that They had not answered his words.
As ye have not proved your own allegations, so ye have not refured nor
infirmed his reasons.

But how could Elihu say, They had not answered his words, when to every word
he spoke we find their several answers? Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and
said; Then Bildad the Shuhite answered and said; The like is said of Zophar the
Naamath te. They had been answering all the while, yet says Elihu, Behold,
there was none of you that answered his words. I shall resolve this doubt, by
giving this note; which was also given upon the 3d verse, where see more.

Unless we answer home to the matter, and (as we say) hit the nail on the
head, we have given no answer. We have not answered, unless we give a
satisfactory answer. When the Respondent in Schools acquits himself well, The
Moderator brings him off honorably, saying, Thy Answers suffice. Jobs friends
had been answering long, and they made many long answers, but Elihu, the
Moderator was forced to tell them, ye have not answered sufficiently.

Lastly, Elihu having heard all their answers, and finding that they did not
reach a proof against Job, nor answer his reasonings and replies, he speaks
himself.

Hence note.

When we have weighed all duly, and find that others have not done the deed,
we must not dissemble our judgments, nor flatter them in their faulty answers.
Elihu would not do so, and the reason why he would not, is laid down in the
next words.

Verse. 13. Lest ye should say, we have found out wisdom; God thrusts him
down not man.
In the former verse Elihu showed his own disappoyntment, while he waited upon
others; I attended unto you (says he to Jobs three friends) and behold, there
was none of you that convinced Job, or that answered his words; Then follows,
Lest ye should say, we have found out wisdom, etc. In which words Elihu
proceeds with his Preface, that he might the more fairly fall into discourse
with Job; for having told Jobs friends that he had waited in vain, for
satisfaction from their answers or replies, they having not convinced him,
either by solid reason, or by Authentic Authority and testimony, that he was
so bad as they judged him to be; He adds, this I affirm.

Lost ye should say, we have found out wisdom. That is, lest ye should say it
boastingly, and cry victory against his afflicted man. The word is often used
in Scripture to signify saying with boasting, or speaking in pride of spirit.
The Baptist ( Math. 3.9.) tells the Pharisees, Think not to say within your
selves, we have Abraham to our father; his meaning is, do not speak of your
pedigree boastingly nor proudly: that ye are Abraham's children will do you no
good, unless ye are good, like your father Abraham, and do as he did. So
here, Rem acu tetimu^ and ipsum cardinum in quo tota controversia vertitur de
Jobo. Drus:
Lest ye should (proudly) say, we have found out wisdom; we have found the
mystery of the whole matter, we have found out the key, which unlocks this
secret, or as Mr Calvin's translater wittily as well as truly expresses, We
have found out the bean in the Cake, we say, Lest ye should say, we have found
out wisdom; That is, that which will surely prove us wise men, and gain us
the reputation of wisdom among all wise and knowing men. What their special
resolve was, which they counted widome, follows in the close of the verse
according to our reading, God thrusts him down not man. But before I deal
with that conclusion, I shall briefly note two things from those words, Lest ye
should say, we have found out wisdom.

First, Man is very apt to speak boastingly, to have high thoughts, and then
to utter great words of himself. Man is a proud piece of flesh, and a small
matter will make him show his pride, and spread his plumes (like that
naturally-painted bird) if not explicitly in words, yet his spirit will swell,
and be puffed up with towering conceits of himself. The Prophet Habakkuk
describes this temper ( Chap. 2.4.) He that is lifted up, his spirit is not
upright in him; A proud spirit is always a false spirit. They who think
highly of themselves, think themselves higher then they are. And it is a great
argument that man is naturally very proud, because God has given so many stops
and checks to his pride, or has made so many provisions against it. The very
contrivance of the work of Redemption in that way by the hand of Jesus Christ,
had this great design in it; For as the chief design in reference to man was
his salvation (that was the ultimate end as to man) so there was another
design in it, why God would save man that way, which the Apostle lays down
(1 Cor: 1.29.) That no flesh should glory in his sight; While God intended to
give man glory, he took a course to cut off all glorying from man. God would
not set up man again to work is own salvation, lest he should be proud of
his works. Though we are now called to work out our own salvation (Phil.
2.12.) yet it is wholly wrought by another; and we are there commanded to work
out our own salvation with fear and trembling, not with presumption and
boasting.

Again, How apt is man to boast of any good he does? seeing he is not ashamed
to boast sometimes when he does evil, and of that which is evil, even of the
lusts and lustings of his evil heart. ( Psalm. 10.3.) The wicked boasts of
his hearts desire. And what good is there in the desire of a wicked man's heart?
He (as such) can desire nothing, but what is worse then nothing, sin or vanity,
and yet he boasts of it.

Yea, man is ready to boast, not only of evil done, but of his ability to do
evil; They in the Prophet boasted that they were mighty to drink wine, and
men of strength to mingle strong drink, (Isa. 5.22.) How do some please
themselves that they are in power, only, because that gives them an advantage
to oppress whom they please, or all those with whom they are displeased. David
saw that spirit ruling and raging in spirefull Doeg whom he therefore checks, (
Psalm. 52.1.) Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? The
Apostle found those ( Phil. 3.19.) who gloried in their shame; That is, in
sinful practices (even making their belly their God) whereof they ought to be
ashamed. The Prophet spoke of their like long before, ( Isa. 3.9.) They declare
their sin as Sodom, they hide it not; As if it had been their ornament and
their honor, their beauty and bravery to be wicked.

But especially if bad men do that which is good, they boast of it. A carnal
man may for the matter do good; yea, he may have a zeal for God. Jehu said,
Come see my zeal for the Lord, (2 Kings 10.16.) But Jehu desired more to have
his zeal for the Lord seen, then to be zealous for the Lord. And so his was
indeed zeal for himself, not for the Lord. The Pharisees did many good
things, but they could not fo^beare boasting in the good they did; They do all
(says Christ, who knew not only what they did, but with what heart) to be
seen of men, or to have praise with men. Yea, not only are evil men ready to
boast of the good they do, but the temptation lies hard also upon godly men to
do so, their hearts are often unduely transported, as with the thoughts of
their gifts, parts, and graces, so with what they do through the gift of
grace. Our very graces, much more our outward privileges, may be an occasion
of boasting. Pride and boasting are weeds which grow up from the best and
richest soil. It Is rare to see any man rich in gifts and graces, and poor in
spirit; poverty of spirit is the purest and truest riches of grace.

Secondly, As to the particular here spoken of, Lest ye should say, we have
found but wisdom.

Note.

Man is very prone to make boast of or glory in that which he calls wisdom.
When he has found out (though but supposed) wisdom, he cannot contain, he
must cry it up. Archimedes.
It is said of the old Mathematician, when (after long study and beating his
brains) he had found out a Conclusion in Geometry, he ran about the City (as
if transported) or ravished with this loud outcry, I have found it, I have
found it; and thus Jobs friends were ready to cry out, they had found, they had
found out wisdom. There is indeed a very great temptation in the finding out
or attaining of wisdom, to puff man up, and to make him vainglorious. We
have great cause to be humbled, that we have so little wisdom; and they that
have any store (as they think) more then their neighbors, are in great danger
of being proud of it. Knowledge puffs up, (1 Cor: 8.1.) When the head is
full, the heart grows high. Yet this is to be understood of literal knowledge,
not of spiritual, or of knowledge when and where it is alone without grace,
not of gracious knowledge. The more a gracious man knows, the more humbl^ he
is, because his knowledge shows him his own vileness and emptiness; but the
more a carnal man knows, the more proud he is, became (while such) whatsoever
or how much soever he knows, he knows not himself, nor does he know any
thing as he ought to know it, as the Apostle speaks there at the second verse.
And as mere natural men, so they who are but smatterers, or beginners in the
ways of godliness, are also very ready to be transported with an opinion of
their parts and knowledge. And therefore, the same Apostle gives it in charge
to Timothy (1 Timothy 3.6.) that he who is called and received unto Office in the
Church, should not be a novice; he means it not so much of one that is young in
years, as of one that is young in the faith, a new plant in the Church, or one
newly converted. And he gives this as a reason, Lest being puffed up (with pride
he means) by being in such a function, or by having such reputation for
wisdom and knowledge, as is requisite to a Go^pel Minister, he (which is a sad
fall, if not a downfall into utter ruin) fall into the condemnation of the
devil. Not that the devil will condemn him for his pride, no, the more proud
men are, the more the devil approves of them; nor is it the devils office to
condemn, it is his office to execute; he is the executioner, not the Judge;
and what ever he condemns any man for, he will not condemn him for pride, no
nor for any sin. So that when the Apostle says, Lest he fall into the
condemnation of the devil, it is as if he had said, Lest he be condemned for
the same sin that the devil was condemned for, which was pride: And it was
pride (for he is the right father of the Gnostics) arising out of a high
opinion, or conceit of his own wisdom, and knowledge. Zophar said ( Job
11.12.) Vain man would be wise. But is it an argument of a man's vanity that he
would be wise? it is a man's duty to be wise, that is a good desire; why then
does he say, Vain man would be wise? The meaning is, Vain man would be in
account for wisdom, he would be reckoned among wise men, or he desires more to
be thought wise, then to be wise. A vain man, indeed, cannot desire any good,
but in reference to some evil that cleaves to it; and upon that account he may
desire to be wise. The first sin came into the world by an attempt to get
wisdom, or by a proud thought in the hopes of attaining farther wisdom. The
wisdom which our first parents sought for, was not wisdom to know God, for
that is the most excellent wisdom, It is eternal life to know God; So then it
was not wisdom to know God, but it was wisdom to be knowing as God which they
affected, they would be high and lifted up above the rate of a creature in
knowledge, and that was their ruin. And I shall show (in two things) why there
is such a temptation in wisdom, or the reason why when we have found out that
which has a show of wisdom in it, we are so forward to applaud our selves,
and boast in it.

First, It Is so, because wisdom is no common Commodity, as I may say; wisdom
is but in few hands, if you consider the multitude of men in the world. Now
that which few have, all who have it are ready to be proud of. No man is proud
of that which is every man's; no man is proud that he is a man, or proud that he
has reason, because that is common to all men; but all men are not wise, all
men are not learned, all men have not an improved wisdom, reason and
understanding; that has a peculiarity in it, and therefore of that many are
proud.

Secondly, Wisdom is not only rare, but very useful, and (which reaches this
point more fully) very ornamentall; and how apt are we to be proud of our
ornaments? A man is not proud of his ordinary Clothes, nor a woman of her
every-day dress, but when a man or woman have their ornaments and Jewels on,
their Gay-cloathing and rich apparel on, then they are apt to be proud and
lifted up, so it is in this case; Wisdom is like Gay-cloathing, it is a
Jewel, an ornament, and therefore man is under a temptation when he has any
thing of wisdom, especially any eminency of wisdom about him, to be lifted up
and despise others: yea, to arrogate great things to himself, and to presume
that he can do no small matters with his brain, or the engine of his
understanding. It is a great attainment to be full of knowledge, and full of
humility, high in parts, and lowly in spirit; Lest ye should say, we have found
out wisdom.

God thrusts him down not man; or as others read, God has cast him down
not man. The Omnipotent does Toss him not man, says Mr. Broughton The word
signifies to toss a man (as it were) in a blanket, That is, to toss him as we
please far enough from his pleasure, or to toss him in open view. As if they
had said, see how the omnipotent tosseth this man; The Omnipotent tosseth him
not man. There are two references of these words given by Expositers.

First, Some expound them as the words of Elihu. Secondly, Others as the words
of Jobs three friends.

First, Lest ye should say, we have found out wisdom. I (says Elihu) say, God
shall thrust him down not man. That Is the principle by which I will deal with
Job, and so thrust him down from that opinion which he has of himself, and
humble him, (that is the sense of the words (thrust him down) according to this
interpretation) God shall do it and not man. Some of the learned insist much
upon this interpretation; Non est hoc opus ullius hominis ut Iobum depellat a
sua sententia, sed divina plane virtute opus est. Cum tamen deus humano
ministerio utatur gratiose ad perficiendas. res hujusmodi absit ut mihi
arrogarem, quod deus sermon meo effecturus est. Iun:
wherein Elihu is supposed making a great discovery of his humility, as not
daring to undertake Job himself, but going about it in the strength and power
of God; As if he had said, It Is a work above or too hard for man to put Job
off from that opinion wherein he is settled. To do this is a work worthy of
God, nor can it be done by any power, but that which is properly divine. And
seeing God is graciously pleased to use the ministry of man for the bringing
about such works of Grace; far be it from me that I should arrogate and
assume that to my self which God is pleased to work by my word. We may parallel
this speech of Elihu with two other places of Scripture, which will give light
to it. First, ( Genesis 42.16.) And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in
me, but God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace. When Pharaoh proposed to him
his Dreams of the seven lean kine, and of the seven thin ears of Corn,
Joseph professed it was not in him to expound them, but only in God; and that
God would do it he wa^ confident; God shall give to Pharaoh an answer of
peace. I own no wisdom in or of my self, enabling me to resolve this
question, or to open this secret; If ever I do it, it is God who does it, not
I; unless he reveal the secret unto me, I cannot reveal it unto thee. Thus
also spoke Daniel, (Dan: 2.27.) When all the wise men of Babylon were foyld,
and gravelled at the Kings proposal; The secret which the King has demanded,
cannot the wise men, the Astrologers, the Magicians, and the South-sayers show
unto the King. They cannot do it; it is not put by way of interrogation,
cannot they do it? but they cannot, by way of negative assertion; how then can
it be done? or who can do it? He answers, But there is a God in heaven that
reveals secrets, and makes known to the King Nebuchadnezzar what shall be
in the latter days. As if he had said, As thy Magicians cannot, so I will not
undertake to reveal the secret, but God both can and will, He will surely do
it, yea, he is now doing it; the text speaks as of a present act, He makes
known to the King, etc. Thus (according to the exposition before us) Elihu sai
h here, Lest ye should say, we have found out wisdom; I tell you plainly, I
will not undertake him, and I am much assured ye cannot, therefore Let God
thrust him down, let God deal with him, and conquer him, not I, not you, not
man, not any man. If God will use me as a poor instrument to do it, I am
ready, but the whole efficacy and power must be from himself. This carries a
profitable and a holy sense; every good man ascribes the effect of all that he
speaks in persuading others for good to the power of God. God must convert the
sinner, not man, not the preacher; God must humble the proud, not man, God must
cast him down from his high thoughts or cast down the high thoughts that are
in him, not man; God must soften and break the hard heart, not man; in a word,
it is God who both thrusts man down by a gracious work of repentance and
selfe-abhorrence, and rayseth him up by a powerful work of faith and holy
confidence in Jesus Christ: when man has done his best, he can do nothing
effectually, only God can. Whatsoever good man does, God does it in him and by
him. Hence those creature-abasing and Christ-exalting questions (1 Cor: 3.5.)
Who is Paul? and who is Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the
Lord gave to every man. Paul puts a slight upon himself, and a slight upon all
instruments, that the whole power might be of God, as he concludes ( v. 7.) So
then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God
that gives the increase. God only thrusts man down from his vain and carnal
state, God only lifts him up unto a blessed and a heavenly state. This, you
see, is an improveable interpretation, as the words are supposed spoken by
Elihu.

But, I rather refer them to Jobs friends, being collected or gathered up by
Elihu, as the issue of their whole discourse with Job. God thrusts him down,
and not man. This is it, that you mean (says Elihu) this is the top of your
wisdom, the flower and Cream, the sum and substance of all your arguments.
All that ye have said is reducible to this one position, God thrusheth him
down, not man, and therefore he is a wicked man; This is the wisdom which ye
glory to have found.

Now though we take the words as the sum of what Jobs friends had spoken,
collected and drawn together by Elihu, yet there is some variety in opening
the sense of them; I will but touch a little at what is offered by several
Interpreters, and stay upon that which I conceive most proper to the place.

First, Some conceive that in these words an account is given why Jobs friends
gave over speaking, or why they stood silent, either resolving to speak no
more, or presuming they had spoken all; Elihu de amicorum Jobi silentio
conquerenti, sic respondent. Fecimus de industria, non oportet hominem
exagitare Jobum: setis est quod a deo exagitetur. Vatabl: Cum deus propellat
eum nihil ultra necesse est ut ab homine impugnetur; ut afflicto insuper
addaturafflictio; quia satis est qu^d deus eum ob sua peccata persequatur. Rab:
Levi.
As if they had said, We have found out and concluded among our selves, that
it is most advisable for us, or our wisest way to say no more; you possibly
think we can say no more, but we do industriously forbear to say any more;
why should we trouble him any further; God troubles and vexes him enough God
thrusts him down, therefore let not man; And therefore we think it our
wisdom (having said this) to forbear and give him over, for we will not add
affliction any longer to the afflicted. So that as the Apostle speaks
concerning the repenting Corinthian (1 Epist. Cor. 2.6, 7.) Sufficient to such
a man is this punishment which was inflicted of many, so that contrariwise ye
ought rather to forgive him and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be
swallowed up with overmuch sorrow; so Jobs friends (according to this
Exposition) are brought in speaking the same sense; Sufficient to him is that
punishment which has been inflicted on him by one, even by God, so that
contrariwise we ought rather to comfort him, lest he should be swallowed up
with evermuch sorrow.

Secondly, Others give their meaning thus rigidly; We think it our wisdom to
say no more, but to remit or give him up to God, as a man that is obstinate and
will not be convinced. Elihu told them a little before that none had convinced
Job; and here they are represented, saying, we indeed have left him to God, as
unconvincible by us, and therefore, God must thrust him down, not man; there
is a truth in this. Some men are so obstinate in their ways, though evil, and
sti^fe in their opinions, though grossest errors, that there is no more dealing
with them, such as these are past man's skill to recall or reclaim, Ista animi
obfirmatio omne amplius loquendi desiderium adimit cum eo homine, quum nemo
homo poterit, sed deus solus de ista animi pertinacia depellere. Iun:
they must be left to God. As in extreme dangerous cases of travel in
childbirth, the good women sigh and give over, saying, This is not woman's
work, we must leave her to the man; So in dealing with some men, after long
labor and no success, we must even say, This is not man's work, he must be
left to God, who alone can thrust him down, man cannot.

Thirdly, That which is, I conceive, chiefly intended, take thus; I (says
Elihu) have undertaken after long waiting and expectance to show mine opinion,
Lest ye should say, we have found out wisdom; That is, an argument so strongly
concluding Job a wicked man, Cum Job affligatur and inusitato modo affligatur,
idque adeo justo, qui nec fallere nec falli potest in suo judicio, consequitur
plane Jobum esse improbu^. Aquin: Drus: Merc:
that no wise man can object against it. But what was that irreftagable
argument, by which Jobs friends hoped to conclude him, and stop his mouth for
ever? Surely that which follows in this verse, God thrusts him down, not
man; That Jobs friends laid the maine groundwork of their hard opinion
concerning him in the dealings of God with him, is evident by what has been
showed from many passages quite through the Book; All which may be resolved
into the sense, now given, of this one, God thrusts him down, not man, and
therefore he is a wicked man,

Hence observe.

First, The afflictions and thrustings down of some men are ominently from the
hand of God. Every affliction is from God, but some are more from God. As God
is more visibly seen in the lifting up of some men, so in the casting down of
others. Every man that is lifted up, is lifted up by the hand of God; It Is the
most High, who one way or other, sets any man on high; but in setting up
some men on high, his workings are so high, that every man may see them and
say, The finger of God is there, the hand of God has done it. It Is thus also
in thrusting men down; every affliction, every thrusting down, is from God,
there is a hand of God in it; for as Eliphaz spoke ( Chap. 5.6.) Affliction
comes not forth of the dust, nor does trouble spring out of the ground. Whence
then are troubles? Surely they drop down from heaven; they are from the earth
as to the contracting of them, but from heaven as to the contriving of them.
Yet there are some troubles which fall from heaven more apparently then others
do; That is, there is more of God, more of the hand of God in such a
dispensation, then there is in others, though there be a hand of God in every
one: therefore say Jobs friends, God thrusts him down, and not man; this man's
afflictions are mighty strokes from heaven. For though God has raised up and
used instruments against him, yet himself has appeared most against him.

Secondly, Observe.

Those afflictions wherein God does eminently appear against a man, se^^^ to
bear the greatest witness against him of his sinfulness or wickedness. That
was the scope of Jobs friends, This is, say they, an undeniable argument, that
the man is wicked, because there is such an eminent hand of God upon him. This
was the foundation upon which they built all their several censures of him,
yea, their hardest sentences against him. And there is a fair probability in
this way of arguing upon sour Considerations.

First, It may be urged, thus; God is just, (men indeed are often unjust and
unrighteous in the evil which they bring upon others; but God is just) and
therefore he would not lay his hand upon any man in this manner, unless he
were a wicked man. Surely his iniquity has found him out, whom the hand of God
has thus found out.

Secondly, God is merciful, he is gracious, ( Lament. 3.33.) He does not
afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men. Now, if God has declared
himself so unwilling to grieve the Children of men, surely, when we see him so
willingly grieve a man, as he has grieved this or that man, may we not say, he
is a wicked man? Judgment is called Gods strange work, but in judging some he
acts as if judgment were his proper work, as if he were in his Element when
he is laying heavy strokes on their backs; therefore may we not conclude such
among the wicked?

Thirdly, God is wise; he cannot be deceived concerning any man; therefore
there is some great reason why he afflicts, and what reason can more probably
be given of a great affliction, then some great sin? As God is so true that he
will not deceive any man, so he is so wise that he cannot be deceived in any
man. He cannot miss his mark, nor fall upon a wrong subject in his
dispensations; therefore we have fair warrant to say, that a man against whom
God appears so much, appears very foul to him, what ever fair appearances
he may have among men.

Fourthly, Take this Consideration also, when men afflict their brethren, they
often do it either out of resolved malice, or in heat of revenge; but God
cannot do it with such a spirit, nor from such principles; The highest acts of
revenge in God, are but the awards of Justice. Again, Men will afflict others
out of envy, or to ease themselves; as the Apostle speaks of parents chastning
their children ( Heb: 12.9, 10.) We have had fathers of our flesh, which have
corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much more be in
subjection to the father of spirits and live? For they verily for a few days
chastned us after their own pleasure, or (as that text may more clearly be
rendered out of the original Greek) as it seemed good to them, (...). pro ut
ipsis videbatur. Bez^:
or as they thought good; As if he had said, They will do it upon their
natural prerogative, or the right of paternity, without giving any account;
Yea, a father will afflict and chasten his child sometimes (in another sense)
for his pleasure; That is, to vent his passion, and ease himself: but God
never chastneth us in passion, no^ ever purely upon prerogative, but with a
respect also to our spiritual (which is the best) profit, and for our good.
Now among the good things which God aymeth at in afflicting any man, this is
nor the least, the purging out of his evils. And therefore when we cannot
ascribe the chastisement of man to man, but to God alone, it is a witness
against him, at least, it draws a suspicion upon him of some great sinfulness
lodged in him, or sinful ways walked in by him.

Thirdly, Observe.

It is no Concluding argument against any man that he is wicked, because God
afflicts him immediately; or, how much soever the hand of God appears in an
affliction, it is no concluding argument against the afflicted. It Is one
principal scope intended by Elihu in this discourse, to show that there were
other causes and reasons of Gods afflicting Job, or any man else besides him.
And that we should not make Conclusions, that the greatest sufferers, are the
greatest sinners. For first, though indeed God threatens to punish the wicked,
who wilfully transgress his Law, yet he afflicts many, without respect to
wickedness. Secondly, though God threatens the wicked only or chiefly at
least, yet he reserves a liberty to try the innocent; yea, as Job says in the
9th Chapter, He laughs at the trial of the innocent; And therefore the most
innocent are most tried. I have had occasion more then once to show why they
are most or so much tried. First, for the exercise of their faith; Secondly,
for the improvement of their patience; thirdly, to humble them; Fourthly,
sometimes to set them up for examples to others; as the Apostle James speaks (
Chap. 5.10.) Take my Brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of the
Lord, for an example of suffering affliction and of patience. The Prophets have
suffered affliction, and God has let them suffer, that they might be patterns
of suffering; and it is so in many other instances; Fifthly, God does it to
mortify their corruptions; Sixthly, to prevent future transgressions, he
hedgeth up their way with thorns; Seventhly, to discover or gain a testimony
of their sincerity. They serve Christ to purpose, who can suffer while they
serve, and bleed under his cross, while they sweat under his yoke. Surely
then, there is no concluding against any man that he is a son of Behal, or has
cast off the yoke of Christ, because Christ burdeneth him with his cross. Yet
this was the great Maxim, which Jobs friends insisted upon, He must needs be a
wicked man, because the Lord had thrust him down, not man.

But when we see good men thrust down by the hand of God, there is a better
use to be made of it, then to judge them, and that is to be watchful over our
selves, lest we put a rod into the hand of God to chasten us, or a sword into
his hand to wound us. For as Christ spoke ( Luke 23.33.) If it be thus done to
the green tree, what shall be done to the dry? If Christ suffered so much, who
was a green flourishing fruit-bearing tree, what may we who are dry and barren
trees? Or take the mere sons of men, some of them comparatively to others, are
as green trees flourishing in grace and holiness, who yet are under sore
affliction; and if this be done to a green tree, what shall be done to those
who are but dry barren fruitless trees, yea, trees that bring forth evil
fruit. The Apostle (1 Pet. 4.17.) gives a suitable caution; If Judgment begin
at the house of God (he does not say at the Temple of Idols, But if it begin
at the house of God) what will the end be of those that obey not the Gospel!
Let others look to it when they see God afflicting his people, when they see
God bringing such troubles into his own house, what troubles may they expect,
who are indeed but a den of thieves, and whose houses are, yea who themselves
are as a Cage of unclean birds? Thus we see the great argument disproved,
which Jobs friends used to prove him wicked, because God did thrust him down,
not man. And, says Elihu, this is it you say and boast of, as your wisdom;
but indeed you have not convinced Job, no not by this. What you have taken for
a demonstration, is but a fallacy. And though I might wave mine own trouble in
showing that it is so, because I am not the man (but ye are the men) to whom
Job has shaped his whole discourse, yet I cannot forbear to do it, only I
promise you, I will not tread in your steps, nor take up your method in doing
it. That Is the sum of the words which follow.

Verse. 14. Now he has not directed his words against me, neineither will I
answer him with your speeches.
In this verse Elihu speaks Negatively in two things; First, He tells us, that
Job had not spoken professedly, nor directly to him. Secondly, he tells us, how
he would not deal with Job; that is, not as his friends before had done.

Now he has not directed his words against me. As if Elihu had said, I
confess I have not been at all spoken to all this while, unless in common
with all the Auditory, and therefore might well enough look upon my self as
unconcerned in this matter.

The word here used to direct, has a great elegancy in it, and may be an
allusion; First, to an Archer who aims at, or directs his arrow to the mark.
Secondly, to a Warrier, especially a Commander in war, who sets his men in
battle array against the enemy; As if Elihu had said, Job has not aimed at me,
(...) digessit disposint, ordinavit, verbum bellicum de acie ordinanda dicitur.
Merc:
nor has he ordered or set his words in order to opprsse me. Job has not
drawn up his forces, nor set himself in array against me, but against you;
And so perhaps that hate and bitterness of spirit, which you have contracted by
this long-continued debate with Job, has given you occasion prudently to
withdraw, and forbear the entertainment of any further discourse with him.
Yea; possibly ye are now fallen into a deep contempt of him, as a man forsaken
of God, and therefore to be no more dealt with by man. But there is not the
like reason for me to forbear speaking with him; seeing as he has not at all
opposed me, so I am not at all disturbed in my own thoughts about him, nor is
my spirit imbittered with any unidictive motions against him; and shall
therefore enter the lists of this disputation, with a peaceable and quiet
mind; or rather I shall (being a person every way unprejudiced) do my best
endeavor to moderate and compose this great difference between you. Now he
has not directed his words against me, etc.

Hence note.

First, Our words should be well ordered. They should be drawn up like a well
disciplined Army, in rank and file. Confusion in words is as bad as confusion
in things; Some heap up words, but they do not rightly dispose nor order
them; all they speak is out of joint or frame. As a multitude or rout of men,
does not make an Army; we may see ten thousand men together, and yet no Army;
why? because they are not in order or method, they are not under Discipline,
and so they are but a confused throng, not an Host of men. And thus a great
many words hudled and thronged together, are of no more force nor use, then a
number of men without order; Method is very good in every thing we do,
especially in what we speak; A speech rightly ordered, is like an Army rightly
marshaled. A word fitly spoken, fitly as to the season of it, and fitly as to
the joynting and disposing of it (we may take in both in that place of Solomon,
A word fitly spoken) is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.

Vult ostendere quod non loquitur quasi provocatus. Aquin:
There is another thing considerable in this former part of the verse, Elihu (as
was lately intimated) spoke thus to show he came to the dispute unprovoked; He
has not directed his words against me; he has not touched me. Ye indeed have
been provoked by his words, he has touched you often and often to the quick,
and this has made you touchy, angry and passionate, and you have grown into
heats; but because he has not directed his speech against me, therefore I
shall come upon the stage, and enter this dispute with much coolness and
temper. In a word, I bring no passion against his person, as you (being stung
by his words) have done.

Hence note, Secondly.

They who are not provoked, have no reason to speak provokingly. That Is it
which Elihu would have Job persuaded of; we use to say, Speak when you are
spoken to. Then surely we are not to speak otherwise, then we are spoken to;
we must not give railing for railing, much less may we rail when railing is
not given.

He has not directed his words against me. Superbi quae ad co^munem omnium
utilitatem dicuntur nunquam sibi dicta e^istimant. Gregor.
One of the Ancients Commenting upon this text, says, Elihu discovers pride in
this speech, He has not directed his speech against me; As if Elihu disdained
to take notice of what was spoken to them; which (says he) is the humor of a
proud man; who looks not upon himself as engaged by any thing spoken, unless
you speak personally and directly to him; whereas Christ speaking personally to
his Disciples only, would yet have all men see themselves spoken to ( Mark
13.34.) What I say to you, I say to all, watch. Elihu should have taken what
Job spoke to his three friends, as spoken to all that were present, and so
might well enough have spared this complement, as my Author conceives. But I
pass that as a curiosity; Especially because it appears plainly enough, that
Elihu, though the words were not spoken directly to him, yet did take himself
to be much concerned; and therefore rises up as a Moderator in this
Controversy between Job and his three friends. He has not directed his words
against me.

Neither will I answer him with your speeches. I will not go your way, Mihi
integrum est respondere and quidem long, aliter and ex alio fundamento, licet
me direct Jobus non oppugnaverit. Scult: Non sequur vias vestrasin
respondendo, sed alias efficaciores inveniam. Aquin:
nor follow your example in this undertaking; I shall proceed upon other
principles, and use other medium's then ye have done; such, I hope, as will be
found much more effectual, and attain their end. We may take these words;

I will not answer him with your speeches, two ways; First, as their speeches
had too little light of reason in them; Secondly, as their speeches had too
much fire of passion in them. As if he had said, I will use milder words and
stronger arguments; I utterly disapprove the course you have taken with him;
and therefore I will neither insist upon your theme to condemn him for an
hypocrite, nor use your argument to prove it, because God has thus sorely
afflicted him; for I hold that a mere Sophisme. I will not answer him with
your speeches; That is, with speeches which have so much passion, and so little
true reason in them, as to the point in hand. For though Jobs friends had
spoken many things of much weight and reason considered abstractly, or in
Thesi, yet when it came to the hypothesis, as appliable to Jobs special case,
then their speeches had little or no weight in them. So that in this profession
Elihu seems to promise these two things.

First, That he would use stronger arguments then they had done; I will not use
yours, that is, weak ones, I purpose to come better prepared to the Combat
then you; For though Elihu does sometimes use such arguments as they, yet he
does not use them to their end to prove that Job acted rebelliously, or like a
wicked man against God, as they did: but to show, that he carried himself too
highly, or over-confidently toward God. And this (as it appears by the issue)
took more upon Job then all his friends hard suspicions, charges, and
accusations. This humbled him, this silenced him; he had nothing to return,
but sat down convinced; and therefore Elihu dealt with him in more strength
of reason and divine authority then they had done.

Secondly, When Elihu says, I will not answer him with your speeches, he
seems to engage that he would deal mildly, with him, or without passion; he
would not use bitter words, but debate and argue the matter gently and meekly.
For though Elihu gave Job many severe reproves, yet always in a more friendly
manner, not to prove that he had done wickedly, but to convince him that he had
spoken overboldly; or that while he was so zealous to defend his own innocence,
he sometimes intrencht upon the sovereignty of God, in his eager and earnest
desire of pleading his cause before him. And surely it was but need that Job
should have a man of a milder temper sent in to speak to him, else his spirit
might have been quite overwhelmed and sunk. Nor was it without the special
hand of God, that after this poor afflicted soul had been so hardly used, and
so grievously censured by those rigid disputants, he should at last mere with
a man more meek and compassionate, in some measure, to mittigate and allay his
sorrow.

First, In that Elihu says, I will not answer him with your speeches.

Observe.

It is not good to imitate others in any thing they do or speak which is not
good. We must not either act or speak by example, but by rule, or by example
only so far as it answers the rule. It Is dangerous treading in their steps
who tread awry. When Paul found that Peter did not go right, he was resolved
not only not to follow him, but to reprove him ( Gal. 2.14.) Thus says Elihu,
here I will not write after your Copy, nor take up directions from what you
have done, for I see you have gone and done amiss.

Again, When Elihu says, I will not answer him with your speeches.

Note Secondly.

What we speak should be our own sense, not the sense of others, unless
their sense, either of things or persons, be the same with ours. Some pin their
opinion upon the sleeves of others, and they will be just of the judgment of
such a man; what he says, they will say. As some expect that every one should
be of their Judgment, and say as they say; they are many Masters (which the
Apostle James forbids, My Brethren, be not many Masters, do not take upon you
to give the rule to all others, some are proud at this rate, they think
themselves able to give the rule to all men) so not a few are so easy, that
presently they will take up any thing as a rule from any Master; whereas we
should not be so apt to follow, but labor to have the Judgment or reason of
things in our selves, rather then to take it up upon trust. When Luther was
much troubled about the dealings of God in the world, to see how matters went,
and was saying within himself, Surely it were better things were carried thus
and thus; while Luther (I say) was thus troubled, he thought he heard this word
of reproof from God; O Martin, Martin, Martine, Martine, in valde sapis, sed
ego non sum deus sequax.
I see thou art very wise, thou can give rules, even to God himself, but I
am not a God easy to be led by men. I will not take thy Counsel, though I see
thou have an honest heart in what thou counsellest. I have a way of my own,
and I will have my own way, though the world, yea, though good men, and my
own faithful servants are grieved and mourn at it. Man would appoint to God
himself, but God will not model matters by man's wisdom, nor in his way. Thus
in the present case (I only allude) it is not good for us when we hear what
others say, presently to receive it, or take the impression from them; and so
answer in their words, or vote their opinions, though they are wise and good
men; Elihu takes the liberty to dissent, as in his opinion, so in his Method of
proceeding with Job, I will answer, but it shall not be with your speeches, I
will take my own course.

Thirdly, Note.

The faylings and mistakes of others, should be our warnings not to do the
like. Elihu observed where they missed as to the matter in hand, he observed
also wherein they missed, as to the manner of proceeding; and he observed both
well, and wisely to avoid the like inconveniences; and thereupon professed, I
will not answer him with your speeches.

Fourthly, Note.

We should answer to every point and person with reason and sweetness, not
with passion and bitterness. There is no convincing others with wrath; The
wrath of man (says the Apostle) works not the righteousness of God, (James
1.20.) That is, wrath will never bring about nor effect those righteous things,
or ends, which God would have us aim at. The wrath of man puts him quite out
of the way of righteousness, both out of the way of right speaking, and of
right acting. To show much reason, and little passion, is our wisdom. So the
Apostle gives the rule (2 Timothy: 2.26.) The servant of the Lord must not strive;
he does not mean it of bodily striving; As if he had said, he must not be a
fighter. As when the Apostle says (1 Timothy: 3.3.) A Minister must not be a
striker; It can hardly be thought he should intend only, if at all, that
Ministers should not be like grossly boisterous men, who are not so much as
Civil in their behavior; surely such are far enough off from a fitness to
be received into the Ministry; therefore some expound the Apostle to the point
in hand, he must be no striker with his tongue in passion, anger, and wrath, no
word-striker. There is great striking, yea, wounding with words. Though
Ministers must strike and wound with the authority of God, yet not with their
own animosities. They must wound the consciences of sinners, with the Word and
Spirit of God, but not with their own wrathful spirits; such strikers they may
not be, nor may the servant of the Lord strive thus, but be gentle to all men,
apt to teach, yea, patient in teaching. It is a great exercise of patience to
teach, with line upon line, precept upon precept; When we see little received
or heeded, yet to insist upon it, this is patience; In meekness instructing
such as oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give repentance to the
acknowledgement of the truth. As the Apostle James exhorts ( Chap. 1.21.) to
receive the word with meekness; that is a most necessary rule in hearing the
word; for many times the hearer is in a passion, there is such a storm in his
bowels that he cannot hear to purpose, therefore if any would receive the
ingraffed word, they must receive it with meekness. I say also the word should
be given out or spoken in meekness, though not with coldness; I do not say
with coldness or with a slightness of spirit, but with meekness. And the
truth is, mild speaking or meekness of speech (as to the spirit and
conscience of the hearer) is not only most comfortable, but most prevailing.
Meekness should be showed, even where there is the greatest zeal; and zeal
then prevails most, when there is most meekness in it. The Apostle Jude
says, Of some have compassion, making a difference, others save with fear;
That is, save them by preaching that which may make them afraid, scare them out
of their sins; but yet still this is to be done in a spirit of meekness. (
Gal. 6.1.) If any one be over-taken in a fault (what then? rail on him, rage
against him, and revile him, no, but says the Apostle) ye that are spiritual,
restore such a one with the spirit of meekness; considering thy self, lest
thou also be tempted. Bones must be set (to that the word which we translate
restore alludes) with a tender hand. Those three things which are required in a
good Surgeon, or Bone-setter, are as necessary in a reprover, or in him that
would reduce another from the error of his way. First, He must have an Eagles
eye, to discern where the fault or failing is. Secondly, A Lions heart, to
deal freely with the faulty, how great soever they are. Thirdly, A Ladies
hand, to use them gently and tenderly. All which will more fully appear, while

Lastly, From the example of Elihu, we collect and learn, that a good
Moderator or composer of differences, must avoid five things. First, slightness
of spirit and of speech. It is not good to speak lightly of little things, but
it is a shame to speak lightly of great things. Weighty matters must be
handled weightily, and we should put not a little finger, but our shoulders to
them! Secondly, passionateness of spirit and of speech, must be avoided. That
which hinders reason, had need be shut out while we are reasoning. What a
contradiction in the adjunct is it, to hear of an angry moderator? or to see a
man set himself to compose differences between others with a discomposed
spirit of his own. Thirdly, partiality in speaking, or the favoring of a
party must be laid aside; for as Elihu did not spare to tell Jobs friends their
own, so neither did he spare to tell Job his own, he was not partial on
either side. What can be imagined more uncomely, then that he who stands
between two should lean to any one? or that he who comes to be an umpire or a
Judge, should make himself a party or an Advocate. Fourthly, he must avoid
timorousness, and not be daunted with what man shall say or can do against
him, while he is doing his duty. The fear of man is a snare (says Solomon)
That man had not need be in a snare himself, whose business it is to bring
others out of the snares of error, whether in opinion or in practice. Fifthly,
he must beware of an easiness to be drawn aside, either by the persuasions or
applauses of men. A Judge between others must keep his own standing.

Thus far concerning these two verses, wherein Elihu is still carrying on his
Preface, to prepare Job to receive attentively what he had to say. In the next
place, Elihu turning to the standers by, signifies to them in what condition he
found Jobs friends.

JOB. Chap. 32. Verse. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. They were amazed, they answered
no more, they left off speaking.

When I had waited, (for they spoke not, but stood still, and answered no more)

I said, I will answer also my part, I also will show mine opinion.

For I am full of matter, the spirit within me constrains me.

Behold, my belly is as wine which has no vent, it is ready to burst like new
bottles.

I will speak, that I may be refreshed: I will open my lips and answer.


ELihu had spoken of his friends silence before, and here he returns to it
again, with a further addition and aggravation.

Verse. 15. They were amazed, they answered no more, they left off speaking,
etc.
There are two opinions concerning the person who spoke these words. First,
Some refer them to the writer or penman of this Book, but I rather take them
as the words of Elihu himself.

They were amazed. The root signifies to be affected with a very passionate and
strong fear, (...) cum pavorem affert, quo affici solent, qui ab host
potentissimo superantur.
even such a fear as they are arrested with who flee or fall before their
Enemies in battle. So the word is used ( Jer: 50.26.) A sword is upon her
mighty men, and they shall be dismayed. Dismay or amazement, is the displacing,
at least the disturbing of reason it self; Elihu shows how unable and unfit
Jobs friends were to argue with him any further, seeing upon the matter, they
had lost the use of their reason, and were as men crack-brain'd, or broken in
their understanding. They were amazed.

They answered no more, they left off speaking, or Speech was departed from
them; there is a twofold Exposition of that speech (they left off speaking)
Some understand it passively, (...) q.d ab illis ablata sunt verba.
like that ( Luke 12.20.) This night shall thy soul be required, or taken from
thee; thou shall not freely deliver it up, but it shall be snatched from thee;
So here, their speech was taken from them; or by an unanswerable conviction,
silence was imposed upon them. Mr Broughton renders; They do speak no more,
speeches be departed from them. How can they speak from whom speech is
departed.

We translate actively, they left off speaking, as implying a voluntary act,
they gave a stop to themselves; either they were not able, or it was not fit
for them to say any more. The Hebrew is, They removed speech from themselves,
and so became as silent as if they could not speak at all. They were as mure
as fishes. The following verse being of the same sense, I shall open that
before I give the observations from this.

Verse. 16. When I had waited (for they spoke not but stood still, and answered
no more)
Job waited hoping they would speak somewhat worthy of themselves, worthy of
that opinion and reputation which they had in the world for wisdom, Stare pro
tacere.
but they deceived his expectation, He could not have nor hear a word more
from them. This Elihu puts into a parenthesis (for they spoke not, but stood
still, and answered no more) He uses many words to the same purpose, to show
that there was somewhat extraordinary in their silence; They spoke not, their
tongues stood still. As speech is the image of the mind, and from the
abundance of the heart, so it is by the motion of the tongue. If the tongue
stand still, discourse is stayed. Their mouths were stopped, as being either
unable or ashamed to urge their accusations and arguments any further. They
stood still and answered no more. It is said of those forward accusers of the
women taken in adultery ( John 8.9.) That being Convicted by their own
Conscience, they went away one by one; they shrunk away, having not a word to
reply; And so did Jobs friends, who while they stood still, carried it as men
unwilling to be heard or seen any more upon the place. They were amazed, etc.

First, Hence note.

Amazement unfits us for argument. Where wondering begins, disputing ends. They
were amazed, they answered no more.

Secondly, Note.

The same men are sometimes so changed, that they can scarcely be known to be
the same men. Eliphaz said ( Chap: 4.2.) Who can withhold himself from
speaking? He was so forward that he could not be kept from words, but now he
had not a word in his keeping, speech was withheld, or departed.

Thirdly, Note.

False grounds or positions, cannot be always maintained. God will supply both
matter and form, arguments and words, to confirm his own truth; they who are
in the right, shall not want reason to back it: but they who are in the wrong,
may quickly find a stop, and have no more to say. The Apostles were weak,
because unwilling in a bad cause (2 Cor: 13.8.) We can do nothing against the
truth, but for the truth; and they who are willing to be against the truth,
shall be weak and not able long to do any thing against it (They spoke no
more) As God gives a banner, (that is, outward power) to them that fear him,
that it may be displayed, because of the truth (Psalm: 60.4.) So he gives
wisdom and understanding (that is, inward power) for the maintaining of the
truth. In thy majesty ride prosperously because of the truth (Psalm: 45.4.) As
Christ who is truth, and the giver forth of truth, so they who are undertakers
for truth, shall ride and prosper. Truth may be borne down by power, and
out-fac'd by impudence, but it cannot be overcome. Never fear to undertake a
good Cause; and ever fear to undertake a bad one, for it will be slur'd at
last. Truth may be opposed, but truth-defenders shall never be ashamed, nor
want a tongue to speak for it. Christ ( Math: 10.17.) warnes his Disciples
what entertainment they were like to find in the world; They shall deliver you
up to Rulers, ye shall be brought before Governors and Kings for my sake; But
he withal encourages them; Take no thought what ye shall speak, or what ye
shall answer. For some might say, What if we should be called in question for
the truths of the Gospel? we are willing to burn for them (as that Martyr
said) b^t we fear we cannot dispute for them. Well, says Christ, take no
thought what you shall speak, for it shall be given you in the same hour. God
himself by his Spirit will prompt you, he will whisper such things into your
ears, as all your opposers shall not be able to gainsay. Indeed we see some
men of corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the truth (as the Apostle gives
their Character) who have courage enough to set forth lies, and slander the
truth, who strain their wits to the utmost, and (as the Prophet speaks, (
Jer: 9.3.) bend their tongues like their bow for lies. But let them remember
what the Apostle said of such as they (2 Timothy: 3.8.) Now as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth; but ( v. 9.) they shall
proceed no further, for their folly shall be made manifest to all men; That is,
shortly all shall see that these men have but played the fools: we may say of
all those who hold wild taunting opinions, they shall proceed no further,
though they act highly against the truth now, yet stay but a while, and they
will have nothing to answer or return, they will have emptied their quiver,
and quite spent their powder, you shall hear no more of them.

From that 16th verse, where Elihu adds, I waited (for they spoke not but
stood still, and answered no more)

Observe, First.

It is our wisdom and our duty to stay our time before we put our selves out
upon business. It is good to wait; God himself is not hasty upon us, he waits
to be gracious, and we must wait our season to be serviceable; Elihu did not
presently engage. The providence of God, and the Exigency of things, must put
us on, we must not put our selves on. Christ tells us ( Math: 9.38.) The
harvest is great, and the laborers few, pray therefore the Lord of the harvest
that he would thrust forth laborers into his harvest; he does not say, pray
that laborers would thrust forth themselves into the harvest, or run into it
before they are sent, but pray the Lord of the harvest that he would thrust
forth laborers; that is, that he would powerfully incline their hearts to the
work, whom he has fitted and prepared for it. And as until we are, at least,
both competently prepared, and fairly inclined to that or any other good
work, it is best for us to wait; so when once we are prepared and inclined,
it is best for us, without delay, to set upon the work; Elihu did so, as
appears in the next verse.

Verse. 17. I said also I will answer my part, I will show my opinion.
Now Elihu addresseth to his work, his duty; and in this with the verses
following to the end of the Chapter, we have, first, his resolvednesse to
speak, I said I will answer for my part, etc. Secondly, his ability, readiness
and furniture to speak ( v. 18.) For I am full of matter, etc. Thirdly, we
have the motives that pressed him to speak, or that he was exceedingly pressed to
it in the latter end of the 18th verse, as also v. 19, 20. My spirit within me
Constrains me. Behold my belly is as wine which has no vent, etc. I will
speak that I may be refreshed. Fourthly, in the two last verses, he tells us
what caution, yea what conscience he meant to use in speaking ( v. 20.) Let me
not I pray you accept any man's person: neither let me give flattering titles
unto man, etc.

I said I will answer for my part, etc. Now you have done, I will begin; those
words, I said, are not in the Hebrew text explicitly, yet are well understood.
I will answer for my part, that is, (as some conceive, the force of the phrase)
I will answer with my strength, and might, I will put my shoulders to it; but
better Grammarians conclude, Illud quod aliqui partem interpretantur pro mea
virili part aut pro viribus, latin potius dictum est, quam ad germanant vocis
significationem. Pined:
that the word imports, A man's share or portion in any work to be done, rather
then the strength which the workman uses or puts forth in doing it. And so the
sense is plain, as if Elihu had said, they have done their part, they have
gone to the utmost of their line; now I see it falls to my turn to speak, and
I will do what falls to my turn, I will answer also for my part.

I also will show my opinion. We had these words in the negative at the 6th
verse; There Elihu said, I was afraid and durst not show you my opinion; But
here, as also before ( v. 10.) Elihu had taken courage and was resolved to show
his opinion. I shall not stay upon any opening of this clause, only I shall
note two or three things briefly from it; as connected with the former verse.
There we had Elihu waiting, here we have him purposing to speak.

Hence note.

They who consider and wait before they speak, speak most prevailingly, most
weightily. It was long ere Elihu ventured to speak, but when he did, he did it
to purpose and with full effect. That which comes from our own heart, is most
like to take upon the hearts of others; they speak as much from their hearts
as with their tongues, whom we see long waiting before we hear them speaking.
And therefore, it is not good, no not for good speakers, to be speaking before
they have been waiting; many through have bring forth untimely births, and
unripe fruit; Elihu could say, I have waited, before he said, I will answer for
my part.

Secondly, Note.

We ought to observe order in speaking, and act our proper part. I will answer
for my part (says Elihu) or my turn is come to answer. The Apostle Paul gives
this rule at large (1 Cor: 14.28, 29, 30.) He would have no Interruption, no
confusion in Church-meetings, or Church-speakings.

Thirdly, When he says, I will answer also for my part, I also will show mine
opinion.

Note.

He that has received a gift or talent, should make use of it, and not hide
it. It is good to be doing our part, and showing our opinion where we may be
useful. Some love to act other men's parts rather then their own, and to
intrude into Provinces which are not theirs. But whatsoever our hand finds to
do (as Solomon speaks, Eccl: 9.10.) that is, whatsoever is, as Elihu here
calls it, our part, that we should do with all our might. More was given about
using our talent and showing our opinion at the 10th verse of this Chapter,
whether I refer the reader.

Fourthly, Elihu was here but an auditor, not a disputant, not a party, he came
in only upon the by; yet having received a word he utters it.

Hence note.

Every man should think himself Concerned to speak for the truth, when it is
wronged, and do his best to right it. Or we should take all occasions and
seasons of doing good by our words as well as by our works. As it is not good
to out^un providence, so to neglect or foreslow it is not good.

Lastly, Observe.

What others fail in, we should labor to supply in the cause of God, and for
his truth. It is a proverbiall speech among the Hebrews; Vbi non est vir, tu
vir esto.
Where there is not a man, there be thou a man; That is, if we see any unable
to carry on and go thorow-stitch with the work before them, we should lend a
hand to help and supply them; thus says Elihu, I will answer for my part, I
also will show mine opinion. And it seems (by that which follows) Elihu did
so, not only to answer his duty, but to empty and ease his spirit. For

In the 18th, 19th, and 20th verses, he gives us that further account of his
interposition about this controversy.

Verse. 18. For I am full of matter.
Yea I am under a mighty Constraint; there is a kind of force upon me, The
Spirit within me Constrains me.

I am full of matter. The Original is, I am full of words; yet of more then
words, as appears in the following part of this Chapter; therefore we
translate, I am full of matter; that is, I am full of such words as are
material; words of truth, words of soberness: I am full of such words as will
carry with them a Conviction home to thy Conscience O Job, and silence all thy
complaints. Cum ait se plenum, amicorum impiam notare videtur. Pined:
Or as if Elihu had said to Job's friends, Though ye have spent your store upon
Job, yet I have store and plenty by me to spend upon him. Thus he reflects upon
them as scanty and short in their undertaking; your Lamps have spent their
oil, you have emptied your vessels; so have not I, I am full of matter.

The Spirit within me Constrains me. (...) in Hiphil anxit, angustovit
pressit.
The text is; My spirit in my belly Constrains me. Master Broughton renders,
My bellyes spirit does press me: The Seventy render, The spirit of my belly
destroys me. A Greek translater says, My spirit within me sets me on fire,
or, I am all in a flame. (...) comburit. Sym.
The word which we render Constrain, signifies to press very sore ( Judges
14.17.) And it came to pass the seventh day, that he told her, because she lay
sore upon him, or constrained him.

It may be questioned, whose spirit, or what spirit it was that Constrained
Elihu?

Some Expound it of the Spirit of God; he dictates both words and matter to me.
Master Calvin seems to Comply with this Exposition; God has printed such a
mark in the doctrine of Elihu, that the heavenly Spirit is apparent in his
mouth; God (says Elihu) has put his Seal to what I have to say, therefore
do not receive it as the word of a mortal man, the Spirit of God Constraines
me. Paul uses a word in the Greek of like significancy (2 Cor. 5.14.) The
love of Christ Constrains me, it presses and overbeareth me; I am not able
to get out of the power of it.

Again, Others understand it of his own spirit, yet acted by the Spirit of
God ( Prove: 29.11.) A fool utters all his spirit; we translate, all his
mind; the spirit pressing Elihu was his mind carried strongly or resolvedly
bent upon this business. The strong inclination or disposition of a man's mind
to any thing good or bad, is in Scripture language called his Spirit. The
Spirit within me. The Hebrew is,

The spirit of my belly; Which form of speech notes only that which is most
internal, Spiritus ventris est (...) and alacritas urgens and existimulans ad
loquendum. Coc:
or lies closest within us. Solomon says of the words of wisdom ( Prove:
22.18.) It is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee; The Original is,
in thy belly. (John 7.38.) Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water;
That is, out of his inward man; there shall be a spirit in his spirit (for this
Christ spoke of the Spirit which should be given) and the same word is used of
the wicked man ( Job 15.35.) His belly (that is, his mind or understanding)
prepares deceit. And Solomon (Cant: 7.2.) speaking of the Church, says, Her
belly is like an heap of wheat set about with lillies; That is, she is big with
holy thoughts and conceptions, as a woman great with child, ready to be
delivered. A gracious heart is continually meditating and conceiving holy
things, which it brings forth, and is as it were delivered of, upon any good
occasion. The spirit within me Constrains me.

What Elihu had thus spoken in plain terms by way of assertion in this verse,
he illustrates by way of similitude or allusion in the next.

Verse. 19. Behold, my belly is as wine which has no vent, (...) vinum novum
vel mustum, cui non est ademptum obthuraculum ut exhalet. Iun:
it is ready to burst like new bottles.
Elihu prosecutes the same thing in another way; and to show how troublesome it
was to refrain speaking any longer, his thoughts being not only too many, but
too working to be enclosed in so narrow a room as his own breast, he compares
them to wine, or to new wine, which will either find or make its way out.

The whole similitude is exceeding elegant, First, he compares his thoughts, or
the matter he had in his mind to wine. Secondly, he compares his soul or
spirit to bottles, his inward man was the vessel that held this wine. Thirdly,
he compares his long silence to the stople or Cork of the bottle. Fourthly, he
compares that trouble and grief of mind which this forbearance to speak
brought upon him, to the working which is in a bottle so stopped, or having no
vent. Fifthly, he compares his intended speaking to the opening of the bottle
which gives it vent.

Behold, my belly is as wine; that is, the thoughts of my belly are as wine.
The Chaldee Paraphrase says, as new wine, which is full of spirits, and being
stopped is ready to break the bottle; which shows the mighty force which Elihu's
thoughts had upon him, they would out, there was no stopping of them. Christ
says, ( Math: 9.17.) No man puts new wine into old bottles, but men put new
wine into new bottles; why? because they are stronger, and so more fit to
preserve the wine; My belly is as wine.

It is ready to burst like new bottles. (...) pro utre non alibi reperitur,
saepe pro pythone; quod qui hoc ariola^di genere uterentur velut ex utribus
vocem emitterent. Vn^e a Grecis (...) dicuntur. Merc:
The word which we render bottles, is never used in Scripture elsewhere in this
sense, but it is often used to signify Wizards, or such as have familiar
Spirits ( Isa: 8.19. Isa: 29.4.) because they who used those hellish arts by
compact with the Devil, did speak out of their belly, and so as it were, out
of a bottle. Now, says Elihu, My belly is as new wine that has no vent, and
it is ready to burst like new bottles; even new bottles will break, unless the
new wine have some vent. And because though new bottles be stronger then old to
keep in wine, yet the wine may be so strong as to break them, therefore Elihu
here-by shows that his desire or necessity of speaking was so urgent upon him,
that though he should strengthen himself, yea strive with himself as much as
he could to refrain from speaking, yet speak he must.

I am full of matter, etc. Observe, First.

A man should not speak, especially in weighty matters, till himself be well
stored with matter. Secondly, Observe.

When some vessels are drawn quite dry, and instruments spent and worn to
the stumps, when they can neither do nor say any more, then God fills up and
furnishes others for his purpose. There was not a drop more to be squeezed out
of Jobs friends; but Elihu was a full bottle ( Mal: 2.15.) there is a residue
of the Spirit; God has more Spirit or spiritual abilities to dispose of, and
bestow then he has yet disposed of to, or bestowed upon any one or all the
sons of men.

Thirdly, Note.

God can furnish Instruments with proper gifts for the work which he Calls
them to. Here was a man Cut out on purpose for this work, he was Clothed with
a spirit of prudence and courage, as well as with a spirit of discerning. We
have a wonderful Example of this in Luther, who came forth against all the
powers of the papacy. What a spirit had he? his was a spirit of might, his
spirit Constrained him, his belly was like a bottle full of new wine, there was
no stopping of it. Others would have been daunted and cowed down with the
tenth of that opposition which he met with, but he was bold as a Lion, who
turns not aside.

Again, Why did Elihu come forth? why did his spirit constrain him? what made
his belly like wine? Some charge him with pride and arrogance of spirit, as if
he did it out of vain ostentation, to show his parts and gifts, to set
himself above those other Worthyes who had dealt and discoursed with Job
before. But we have reason enough (considering what he spoke, and what the
issue of his speaking was) to determine, that he was moved with a zeal for
God, and to do good to Job, not with a spirit of pride, to show his learning,
wit or wisdom among men; and therefore we find that when the whole matter was
brought to an issue, and God himself came to deal with Job and his three
friends, God commends Job, and reproves his three friends, but there is no
reproof upon Elihu. Now for as much as God himself does not charge him, what
has man to do to charge him? Not only charity but reason and judgment
command us to think his design honest, and his aims sincere, while he
professes under so vehement an impulse or impression upon his spirit to engage
and speak in this matter.

Hence note, Thirdly.

To see truth ill handled, should fill our spirits with much zeal for God. That
was it which drew Elihu to this engagement, he saw those men (though good men)
had put a disguise upon the things and dealings of God; and if men disguise the
truth, and maintain error, if they deface the doctrines of faith and pure
worship, with their own phansies and false glosses, it should kindle a holy
fire and fervor of spirit in us, to assert and vindicate the truth. Our spirit
within us (in all such cases) should Constrain us.

Fifthly: In that Elihu was so Constrained and pressed in spirit, as wine which
has no vent, or as a woman with Child ready to travel.

Note.

It is a pain not to speak when we have much to utter, and much mind to
utter it. When El^hu was full he had a Constraint upon him to vent his opinion.
David says ( Psalm: 39.1, 2, 3.) I held my peace, even from good words; (he did
not only forbear idle and evil discourse, but refrained from good) but it was
a trouble to him not to speak, especially not to speak good words; therefore he
adds, My heart waxed hot within me. Jeremy found it no easy work to keep in
words; yea, he describes himself as much pained by not delivering his mind,
as a woman is when not delivered in childbirth ( Jer: 20.9.) Then said I, I
will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name, but his word was
in my heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with
forbearing, and I could not stay. There was wine, new wine in his belly, yea
there was a fire within him; as we may be weary with speaking, so with not
speaking, or forbearing to speak, ( Jer: 4.19.) My bowels, my bowels, I am
pained at the very heart, my heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my
peace. Read him in the like trouble upon the same occasion ( Jer: 6.11.)
Eliphaz (Chap: 4.2.) was thus pressed, Who can withhold himself from speaking?
It Is a great pain, to be mind-bound, or not to deliver our mind, when our
minds are full and we full of desire to deliver it.

Sixthly, When he says, I am Constrained, I am like a bottle ready to burst,
It teaches us.

The Spirit of God does so overpower some men, that they cannot contain. The
Pharisees and high Priests, thought to stop up the Apostles, those bottles full
of the new wine of the mysteries of Christ, and therefore gave them Counsel,
yea a command to speak no more in his name. At the 10th verse, they said of
some in a common sense, These men are full of new wine, that is, they are
drunken; but the truth was, they were full of the Spirit, full of
Gospel Truths, and like bottles full of new wine they could not hold. And when
the Pharisees and high Priests would have stopped up those bottles, and charged
them that they should speak no more in the name of Jesus; they answered,
Whether it be meet to obey God or man judge ye; for we cannot but speak the
things that we have seen and heard: you may cut out our tongues if ye will,
take away the organs of speech ye may, but otherwise we cannot but speak. As it
is said of Christ, they could not resist the Spirit by which he spoke; so they
were not able to resist the Spirir by which the Apostles spoke. Some have such
Impulses from the Devil upon them, that they cannot but speak boldly as well
as wickedly and blasphemously; it is strange to see what some both old and new
Impostors have done, their bellyes have been like bottles full of new wine,
they have even burst to vent their wicked opinions. Esuris and suit auditores
quibus omne quod sentit effundat, quibus qual^ and quantus sit innotescat. Non
curat te docere vel a te doceri quod nescit, sed ut scire sciatur quod scit.
Bernard:
Bernard discoursing of such an Opinionist in his time, says, He hungers and
thirsts for Auditors, into whose bosoms he might empty himself, and power out
all his sentiments, that he might appear who and how great a man he was. He
cares not to teach thee what thou know not, nor to be taught by thee what
he does not know; but that himself may be known to know what he knows. Now
if there be such pressures upon the spirits of vain men to be delivered of
their false and ayery concep^ions: How much more when a man has strong
impressions from the Spirit of God ('it is discernable by the matter that comes
out of the bottle, whether it be the wine of Sod^me, or of Sion) is he unable
to contain himself? Such a man must speak not only to instruct and refresh
others, but (as it follows in the next verse) to ease and refresh himself.

Verse. 20. I will speak that I may be refreshed.
The Hebrew is, That I may breath, or, I may have room. (...) latus dilatatus,
recreatu^ loquar and mihi latum erit. i. e. erit mihi dilatio recreatio. Merc:
Per verba evaporata interiorem fervorem and ab anxietate ^esiderij requiescam..
Aquin:
The word properly signifies, that which is enlarged or widened; when a vessel
is full, and you draw some of the liquor out of it, then there is room; So
says Elihu, I will speak, that I may be refreshed, or have room.

I will open my lips, and answer. To open the lips is a preparation to
speaking; Christ opened his mouth and spoke; speaking is begun with opening the
mouth; a man may open his lips for other ends then for speaking, and a dumb
man opens his lips who cannot speak, yet no man can speak without opening his
lips: and why did Elihu open his lips? it was to refresh himself.

Hence note.

He that speaks his mind, eases his mind. It Is good to speak to refresh our
selves, but it is much better to speak for the refreshing of others; yea, we
should speak. (though to our own pain) that we may refresh others, and speak
away their pain ( Isa: 50.4.) Thou have given me the tongue of the learned, to
speak a word in season to him that is weary; They are good words indeed which
refresh both the speaker, and the hearers. But the design of speaking is
rather for the refreshing of hearers, then of the speaker. How vainly then do
they spend their breath in speaking, who speak without any design of good, or
of refreshing, either to themselves or others, who speak only to be applauded
and taken notice of, to be cried up and commended for eloquent speakers. These
are sad designs of speaking; better be a stammerer, then such an Orator,
better be dumb and not able to speak, then to speak for such ends, with
greatest ability. Unless we speak, that others may be informed, converted,
comforted, edified, saved, some way or other bettered, we were as good hold our
peace and say nothing. The holy Apostle professed (1 Cor: 14.19.) I had rather
speak five words with my understanding, that I might teach others also, then
ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. To speak strange words in an unknown
tongue, may gain us a name among men; But neither are any souls gained, nor
does any soul gain the worth of one farthing in spiritual knowledge by
hearing thousands and ten thousands of words spoken in an unknown tongue. We
should think all those words even as lost to us, by which we have not, at
least, intended the gain and good of others. But suppose, while we sincerely
intend the good of others in speaking, they get no good by what is spoken; yet
it shall not be without good to us: for as Elihu here hoped, so may we to be
refreshed by it; for when a man has discharged his duty to God and man, in
speaking his mind, it cannot but be a great ease to his mind. Elihu had a
great duty upon him, to moderate and set this business right between Job and
his friends, to take down that height of spirit that was in Job, and to allay
that sharpness and bitterness of spirit that was in his friends. When we have
in sincerity discharged our duty to all others, and done that which our
Consciences charge upon us, how does it quiet and refresh our minds? and how
many have been burdened and disquieted in their spirits for neglecting this
duty: They (I say) who neglecting to speak when it was incumbent upon them to
speak, and the cause of God required it, have found it a burden upon them long
after. When Mordecai had acquainted Queen Ester with the sad condition of the
Jews, (whose destruction Haman had plotted) and advised the messenger to
charge her, that she should go in unto the King to make supplication unto him,
and to make request before him for her people (Est: 4.8.) She returned him
answer by the same messenger, that she could not do this without running the
hazard of her own life ( v. 10, 11.) yet Mordecai replied ( v. 14.) If thou
Altogether holdst thy peace (let the danger be what it will) at this time, then
shall their enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place,
but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed: and who knows whether thou
art come to the kingdom for such a time as this? As if he had said, It is thy
duty to speak for thy people at such a time as this, and therefore if thou
do not break through all difficulties to speak, thy silence will cost thee
dear, probably thou will loose thy own life by it, or if not, then certainly
thy conscience will trouble and vex thee for it as long as thou live. Many
offend in speaking, and we may in many cases offend both God and man, yea our
selves too (when we see our opportunities lost) by neglecting to speak.

JOB. Chap. 32. Verse. 21, 22. Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person:
neither let me give flattering titles unto man.

For I know not to give flattering titles: in so doing, my Maker would soon
take me away.


IN these two verses Elihu concludes (in which he had continued long) the
Preface to his following discourse and procedure with Job; Here also he
acquaints us in what manner he meant to proceed with him; about which we may
consider two things.

First, His resolvednesse or the setlednesse of his purpose what course to
take. Secondly, the reasons which moved him to it. The former he expresses
negatively in the 21th verse, and that in two points.

First, He would not accept any man's person.

Secondly, He would not give flattering titles unto man.

These two negatives (as the negative precepts in the Law of God) are to be
understood with their affirmatives! I will not accept any man's person, is, I
will have and give an equal, or neither a more nor less (to the best of my
understanding) then a due regard to every man's person. And, I will not give
flattering titles; that is, I purpose to speak plainly, I will not complement
men, but do my best to accomplish the matter. And as he assures us how he will
proceed in this 11th verse, so

Secondly, He gives us the reasons of this his intended impartial, plain, and
downright proceeding in the 22d. These reasons are twofold.

First, He would not do otherwise, because he could not with any content to
himself. It was against the very grain of his spirit to do otherwise; his
disposition lay a quite contrary way, he was a man of another genius or temper,
a man of another mould and make, then to do such low and unworthy things, as
accepting the persons of, or giving flattering titles unto men. He is express
in this ( v. 22.) I know not to give flattering titles.

Secondly, He would not because he durst not give flattering titles, nor accept
the persons of men. The danger and damage he should incur by doing so, kept
him from doing so, as well as his own indisposition to it. He should lay
himself open and obnoxious to the wrath of God by such seeking the favor of
men; as appears in the close of the verse; In so doing my Maker would soon
take me away.

Thus you have the parts and purpose of these words; I shall now give a more
distinct explication and account of them.

Verse. 21. Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person; or, let me not now.
So that particle is rendered ( Job 5.1.) Call now, (...) adverbium seu
particula obsecrantis, seu ad horiandi, ut fades, amabo, latinis.
if there be any that will answer thee; yet it is an Adverb of beseeching or
entreating; and therefore we render well, Let me not, I pray you; which rendering
seems to have in it these two things. As if Elihu had said,

First, Expect not that I should, nor believe that I will do any such thing,
as the accepting of persons, or the giving of flattering titles.

Secondly, Be not offended if I do not, be not angry with me, if I deal
plainly with you; pray give me leave to use my own freedom and liberty when I
am speaking; for I am resolved to do it, and not to accept the persons of men,
nor to give them flattering titles. The words may be rendered also in a direct
negation, Verily I will not accept any man's person. Non accipiam, ut sit (...)
pro (...) quae enallage insolens non est. Drus:
But I shall keep to our reading.

Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person. The Hebrew is, Let me not lift
up any man's person; or (which the Apostle forbids) Let me not have any man's
person in admiration; I will not over-reverence any man, nor give him a respect
beyond himself. The word which we render person, (...)
is in Hebrew, face, Let me not lift up the face of a man, or wonder at any
man's face, as the Septuagint often render this phrase. And it is usual to put
the face, or the countenance for the person, because the face declares the
person and shows who the man's is; and it is elegantly expressed by the face,
because accepting of persons, imports a respect to others for their outside,
or in consideration of some external glory. Let me not accept the face of any
man, or person, let him be who he will. The original word ish, most properly
signifies an eminent, or honorable man, a learned or wise man. As if Elihu
had said, I will not accept or lift up the face of a man, though he be (ish) a
man never so much lifted up, and exalted above his brethren. To accept the
person of a man, is not a fault in it self; for as our persons are accepted of
God, so ought our persons to be accepted with one another; yea, it is a duty to
accept the person of a man; that is, to give him favor, honor, and due
respect. Not only civility and humanity, but religion it self calls us to give
outward reverence to them who excel, and are superior, either to others of our
selves. God himself is said to accept the persons of his people first, and
th^^ their sacrifices or services. And we ought to accept the persons of men
according to their differences in place and power, especially according to
those gifts and Graces, which shine in them. Therefore when Elihu says, Let me
not, I pray you, accept any man's person, his meaning is, let me not do it in
prejudice to the cause or truth that is before us. Then we are properly and
strictly said to accept persons, when in any matter, business, or point of
controversy, our eyes are so dazel'd or blinded by external appearances, that
we have respect rather to the person of the man, then to the matter, or the
truth of the cause in hand. So then, this sin of accepting persons, is always
committed when we are more swayed by, or when there is more attributed to
persons then to things, that is, when the man's worth is more looked to then the
wo^th or merit of his cause; or further, when something in a person which has
no respect to the goodness, or badnes of his cause, moves us to give him more or
less then is meet, this is sinfully to accept or respect a person. Thus Elihu
acquits himself from all those bonds and blinds which his respect to those
worthy persons before him, might lay upon him. They were ancient and grave men,
they were wise and good men, he had a great respect for them, he owed much
reverence to them, considering their age and gravity, their degree and dignity;
yet he owed a greater respect to God, and to the truth, then to their persons,
and was thereupon resolved, (though he had many and great temptations to do
it,) not to accept the persons of men.

Hence note.

To accept persons in prejudice to the cause or truth before us, is a high
offense both to God and good men. It Is so in a double notion; First, in the act
of it, because we do that which in it self is not right, nor according to the
mind of God. Secondly, in the issue, consequence or effects of it, because by
respecting persons, we are endangered to many other sins. While Solomon only
says ( Prove: 28.21.) To have respect of persons is not good; his meaning is,
it is very evil, it is stark naught. And the reason which he gives of the evil
of it, is not only because the act in it self is evil, but because the issue
and consequence of it is worse; For, (says that Scripture) for a piece of
bread that man will transgress; That is, he that respects persons, will turn
aside from Justice, for his own advantage, though it be very small, even for a
piece of bread. The Prophet complains of those ( Amos 2.6.) who sold the
righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes. They who have sold or
given up themselves to this crooked Spirit of respecting persons, will not
stick to sell both the persons of the righteous, and the most righteous
causes, not only (as the Prophet says) for a pair of shoes, but (as we say)
for a pair of shoe-buckles. They will soon judge, amiss of things, who have
respect to persons, and they always look beside the cause, who look too much
upon the face; nothing should weigh with us in judgment, but truth or right,
and that in a five-fold opposition.

First, Truth and right must weigh with us in opposition to relation. When a
Brother, or a near kinsman be in the cause, we must not decline, nor be
biassed from the truth, yea though it be on his side to whom we have no
relation, but that of man.

Secondly, We must keep to the truth, and do justice in opposition to
friendship. Though he be my friend, my old friend, and my fathers friend, I
must not respect him, if truth stand upon the other side, upon the side of the
meerest stranger. It was anciently said, Socrates is my friend, and Plato is my
friend, Amicus Socrates, Amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas.
but truth is more my friend, and therefore I will stick to that.

Thirdly, We must hold to truth, in opposition to or notwithstanding the hatred
of men; suppose a man bears us ill will, yea in other things has wronged us,
yet if his present cause be righteous, we must do him right: We may not bring
in our particular wrongs or quarrels upon any cause, but that about which the
wrong or quarrel rises. They show the purest love to righteousness, who act
righteously toward those that hate them, and will not wrong those who have
attempted to oppress and ruin them. A true lover of Justice will do to others
as himself would have others do to him, yea though they have not done to him,
as they would be done to.

Fourthly, We must stand to truth in opposition to riches and worldly
abundance; riches usually find more friends and favorers, then righteousness
does. And it is usual to favor the rich more then the righteous. How often is
truth on the poor man's side over-ballanced by his adversaries purse. But O how
poor are they in spiritualls and morals, who thus respect the persons of the
rich!

Fifthly, We must judge for truth in opposition to worldly greatness and power;
and that in a twofold consideration.

First, Though men have a power to reward, and prefer us, to do great things
for us, yet this should not draw us aside; woe to those who respect the
greatness of the person instead of the goodness of the cause: yet how many
are there who care not how bad a great man's cause is, if he will but engage to
do them good: yea some great men look upon themselves as much undervalued, if
they be not favored in their cause (how bad soever it be) because they are
able to do them good who favor it. Balak took it very ill at Balaams hands,
when he seemed unmoved by his ability to advance and reward him. Did not I
earnestly send for thee, to call thee? Wherefore came thou not to me, am I
not able indeed to promote thee to honor? (Numb: 22.37.) And wilt not thou
serve my interest, when I have such a power to advance thine? Thus also Saul
thought all must cleave to him, and forsake the cause of David, because he was
great and could prefer them (1 Samuel: 22.7.) Will the son of Jesse give every
one of you fields, and vineyards, and make you all Captains of thousands, and
Captains of hundreds? Has he any great places to bestow, and honors to give?
Why then do ye seem to adhere to him and his party. Hope of reward makes a
great bias upon some men's spirits, and carries them quite off from truth.

There is a second consideration prevailing much with many in this matter; for
though they are unmoved by rewards, and will not bite at the bayte of
selfe-advancement; yet, say they, O he is a great man, and has great power, he
may do me a shrewd turn, he may vex me and undo me, he may sit upon my skirts
hereafter and ruin me. Thus where hope does not, fear may carry a man from
respect to right to the respect of persons. But know, That be a man never so
great, and able to do me a mischief, yet truth must be maintained and Justice
be done, though we should be quite undone by appearing for it. It has been
said of old, Let justice be done, though heaven fall; much more should it be
done, though we for doing and abetting it fall to the earth. Moses gave that
charge more then once ( Levit. 19.15. Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17.) Thou shall not respect
the person of the poor, nor honor the mighty, but in righteousness shall
thou judge thy neighbor. Again, Ye shall not respect persons in Judgment,
but ye shall hear the small as well as the great, you shall not be afraid of
the face of man, for the judgment is Gods; neither undue pity to the poor,
nor carnal fear of the great (which two often do) ought to put any check or
stop to the execution of Justice. So in that excellent model of instructions
which Jehoshaphat gave his Judges (2 Chronicles: 19.7.) Wherefore now let the fear
of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and do it; for there is no iniquity with
the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. As if he had
said, Do not you respect persons, for God respects no persons; he is no
gift-taker, therefore be ye no gift-takers; your duty is to give every one his
due. That which is right to one man is right to another, either in the same, or
in any parallel case; That which is the rich man's right in his cause, is the
right of the poor man in his cause; Quod uni aequum est, non debet alteri in
eodem casu esse iniquum.
yea it is as sinful not to have a due respect to the rich man in his case, as
not to have respect to the poor man in his. Then all sorts and degrees of men
are judged righteously, when there is no regard had or notice taken in
Judgment, of what sort or degree any man is. Judges are called gods, and
therefore should act like God without respect to men.

And as this is a truth in all those cases of judgment, where Magistrates sit
in the place of God, so it is as true in all the private judgments and
determinations of brethren concerning persons or things, which (by way of
distinction from the former) is commonly called the putting or referring of a
matter in difference to men. We must take heed in private judgments, that we
be not swayed according to the condition of persons, nor must we make the fault
great or less, the cause better or worse, because the person is greater or
less, friend or stranger to us. The Apostle gives this counsel and caution to
the Churches ( James 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.) My Brethren, have not the faith (that
is, the doctrine of faith or profession) of our Lord Jesus, the Lord of glory,
with respect of persons; For if there come into your assembly a man with a gold
ring, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment, and you have respect
to him that wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, sit thou here in a good
place, and say to the poor, stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool:
are ye not then partial in your selves, and are become judges of evil
thoughts. In administering the things of God which are spiritual, we must
observe no civil difference, no distinction among men. Christ has given
himself alike and equally to rich and poor, bond and free, and therefore, as
to Church Priviledges and enjoyments, they must all be alike, and equal unto
us. No man is to be known after the flesh in the things of the Spirit (2 Cor:
5.16.) that is, no man is to be valued merely, upon natural or worldly
accounts; if we do, then (as the Apostle James concludes in the place last
before mentioned) are we not partial in our selves? that is (as some also
translate that reproving question) Have we not made a difference, a groundless
difference, or a difference grounded upon carnal respects, rather then upon any
solid reason; and so as it follows in the close of the verse, are become judges
of evil thoughts, that is, have made our judgment of those persons, according
to the dictate of our own evil and corrupt thoughts, not according to the
rule of the word.

Further, this sin of respecting persons, is found also in the ordinary
converse of men; For when we cast favors upon those that are ill deserving,
and commend those (as we say) to the skies, who should rather fall under our
severest censure, and are led to do all this also, because the person is a
kinsman or a friend; for though ( eaeteris paribus, other qualifications and
circumstances being equal) we are to respect friends and kindred, who are our
own flesh, before strangers, yet virtue and worth should outweigh relations,
and (as Levi in doing Justice, Deuteronomy: 33.9.) so we in bestowing rewards, should
not acknowledge our Brethren, nor know our own children; but let such have our
rewards who best deserve them.

I may add this also, To take up this or that form of religion, because such
and such persons are in it, and to reject another, though better, because none
but a few that are despised and contemned are in it, is a most dangerous way of
respecting persons. This was the meaning of that question ( John 7.48.) Have
any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees, believed on him? As if certainly that
must always be the best way and rule of believing, which is professed by the
rulers? Or as if it were ground enough to reject a way of religion because the
common people or the poor are mostly found in it. Thus, it is storied of a
Great Prince that was converted to the Christian faith, and resolved to be
baptized, that seeing a great many poor men in his way as he went, he asked to
whom they belonged; it was answered they were Christians, and of that religion
which he was entering into; what, does Christ keep his servants so poor? (said
he) I will not serve such a Master, and so drew back, even while he was but
setting his face toward Christ. I might instance the sinfullness of accepting
persons in many other particular cases, as well as these, but these may suffice
for a taste. Let me not (says Elihu) accept any man's person, Neither let me
give flattering titles unto man.

In the former part of the verse it was Ish, here it is Adam; Graeciverteum
(...) cognominandi per (...) reverori, et (...), mirari persona in reddiderunt.
Merc: Et deum homini non aequabo. Vulg:
I will not respect the person of the greatest men, nor will I flatter any
earthly, any mortal man. Mr Broughton renders, That I respect an earthly man.
The vulgar latin translates the whole verse thus; I will not accept any man's
persons, and I will not equal God to man; As if he had said, I will not
measure God by man, in his dealings and proceedings with man; As my purpose is
to speak truth, and spare no man, so I will not wrong God by drawing him down
to the rules of men. What is man that he should compare with God? But, though
this be a truth, yet because it departs so far from the Original text, I will
not stay upon it. Our reading is clear.

I will not give flattering titles. There are several other readings of these
words, which I shall propose and pass to our own. Apud hominem Praefatione
non utar. Jun: Et apud hominem ne permutem nomina. Coc: Et ad hominem non
nutato nomine loquar. Merc: Ego non ingratiam ejus tectis verbis utar occulte
eum designans and nomen proprium immutans. Verbum (...) significat aliquem
occulte designare. Merc: (...) est mutatis rerum nominibus agere, ut non possis
nisi obscure quid sentiatur intelligi. Cujus contrarium est aperire os, et
(...) appellare. Coc:
First, I will not use a preface, or, I will not stand prefacing with man.
Flatteries are usually set forth in affected Prefaces and Apologies. Secondly,
Let me not change names before men; or, let me not speak to man under a
borrowed name; That is, let me speak plainly and clearly without ambages and
fetches; let me speak to every man, and about every thing by its own name,
and not with covered words, as if I were unwilling to touch those to whom I
speak. Our translation is yet more clear to the scope and tendency of this
place; I will not give flattering titles.

This sentence is but two words in the Hebrew; The verb signifies (say the
Rabbis) to hide, or conceal, or to carry a matter closely and obscurely; and
they give the reason of it, because in flattering there is a hiding of what men
are, and a showing of what they are not. The word signifies also to give a
nicke name or a by-name, and so the sense is; I will not give secret
reflections, nor gird at any man upon the by; Jobs friends had done so
sometimes, though they after spoke explicitly and directly enough. Further,
the word signifies the giving of any additionall title. Thus I find it used in
the Prophet ( Isa: 44.5.) One shall say, I am the Lords: (speaking how persons
shall flow into the Church) and another shall call himself by the name of
Jacob: and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname
himself by the name of Israel: He shall surname himself; that is the word here
used, he shall take up that title, that illustrious title, he shall list or
enroll himself among the people of God, and think it his honor and glory to
surname himself by the name of Israel. The word is so used again ( Isa:
45.4.) For Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called
thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me. It is
spoken of Cyrus, I have given thee a glorious title; God did not only name
Cyrus, but gave him a surname, he called him, Cyrus my servant, and Cyrus mine
anointed. Thus the word signifies to give a title, or a surname; now there are
sirnames or titles of two sorts; First, disgraceful and reviling ones, justly
given to, but commonly by vile men. Secondly, Honorable and advancing ones. And
these are of two sorts.

First, Such as are true and well deserved, many by the great acts which they
have done, have purchased sirnames; Alexander King of Greece, for his Warlike
valor and successes, was called The Great; And among The Romans Scipio after
his victories over the Carthaginians in Africa, was surnamed Africanus. The
Roman Histories supply sundry examples of this kind. And when in Scripture
Paul is called an Apostle, Peter an Apostle, They well deserved these honorable
Titles, because as they were merely of Grace, immediately called and sent of
God, to publish and plant the Gospel all the world over, so they labored
abundantly in it, and by their ministry subdued and conquered the world to
the faith and obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, There are also titles and sirnames, which are mere pieces of
flattery, there being no worth in the person that may justly deserve them. It Is
not sinful to give titles, but as we translate to give flattering titles unto
men. We should call men as they are, and as they deserve; I will call a spade a
spade, (says Elihu) he that is good I will call him good, and he that is bad I
will call him bad; and that which is ill done I will say it is ill done; Let me
not give flattering titles unto men.

Hence observe.

Flattery is iniquity: to give flattering titles unto men is to transgress the
Law of God. Some will not give true and due Titles to any man; The most truly
honorable persons and highest Magistrates, shall have nothing from them but
Thou and Thee. Jacob a holy and a plain man, yet called his own brother, My
Lord Esau, (Genesis 32.4. Gen: 33.8.) Luke The Evangelist called Theophilus, Most
excellent (Luke 1.3.) And Paul styled Festus, Most Noble (Acts 26.25.) Now as
they err upon one extreme, who will not give true titles, so do they on the
other, who give (which Elihu here disclaimes) flattering titles. There is a
twofold flattery.

First, In promises. Secondly, In praises.
Some are full of flattery in promises, they will tell you of great matters
which they will do for you, yet mean no such thing. Thus ( Psalm. 78.36.) The
children of Israel dealt with God, when in the time of their straights and
calamities they promised to do great and good things, they would turn to the
Lord and serve him; Nevertheless (says the text) they did flatter him with
their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues; for their heart was not
right with him, etc. Thus many upon their sick-beds, or in a day of trouble,
what promises will they make? How deeply will they engage for duty, if God will
restore them? how holy and zealous and upright will they be? they will leave
their former ill courses, and yet all is but flattery, they really intend it
not. It Is flattery in promises to God, when there is not a purpose in the heart
to do what we say, but only to get our ends upon him; And we deal no better
many times by one another; men in streights will promise any thing, and when
they have gained enlargement, perform nothing.

Secondly, There is a flattery in praises, and that is here professed against.
This flattery in praising has a double respect.

First, To the actions of men. It Is flattery to call that act good that is
naught, Multi sunt qui vitia virtutibus vicinis honestare contendunt and vitium
omne palliant adumbrata nomenclatura e vicino subjectae virtutis. Basil: in
Psalm: 61.
that just that is unrighteous; To put titles of virtue upon those things that
are vicious, to call that which is indeed a covetous act, a thrifty one, and to
call that act which is cruel, just, at most but strict or severe, this is to
flatter men in what they do.

Secondly, There is a flattery of persons, as to what they have and are, when
we speak more of them then is in them, when we speak highly of them, who are
low in all abilities and seize. How grossly do they give flattering
titles, who blow up very Ideors with a conceit of their learning, who extol
fools for wisdom, and commend the wicked as virtuous, yea recommend them as
patterns of virtue.

We should give honor to all men to whom it belongs; but we are not to flatter
any man, for that belongs to no man. ( Rom: 13.7.) Render therefore to all
their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to
whom fear, honor to whom honor. There is an honor that belongs to men with
respect to their degrees, when none belongs to them with respect to their
qualities. He that is very honorable as to his place, may not deserve any
honor as to his worth, yet he must be honored as much as his place comes to.
And as there is an honor due to those that are above us, so there is an honor
due to those that are our equals, yea to those that are our inferiors, and
below us. The Apostle gives that direction more then once; we have it first (
Rom: 12.10.) Be kindly affectionate one to another, in honor preferring one
another. The people of God should be so far from an ambitious affectation of
pre-eminence above others, that they should f^eely and really (not as many do
complementally) give others the pre-eminence, and offer them the upper place or
hand; The grace of humility, does not only forbid us to exalt our selves above
our betters, but it also (in many cases) bids us set our selves below those
whose betters we are. One of the Ancients has made three degrees of this kind
of humility. The first is, when we make our selves inferior to our equals; The
second, when we make our selves but equal to our inferiors; The third, when we
make our selves inferior even to our inferiors, and less then those who are
lesser then we. Of this third sort of humility, the Apostle speaks again in
that serious admonition to the Church ( Phil: 2.3.) Let nothing be done through
strife, or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind; Let each esteem other
better then himself. As it is good to judge (according to truth) the worst of
our selves, and the best of others, so it is good to have a better opinion of
others then of our selves.

So then, the point lies not against giving honor to any man, or to men of
all sorts, but only against the giving of undue honor to any. Of that the
Apostle speaks ( Gal: 1.10.) If I yet please men, I should not be the servant
of Christ; that is, if I should please men by flattery, smoothing them up in
their sins or errors, I could not be the servant of Christ. They that were the
strick observers of Christ, could not but observe this in him, that though he
came to save man, yet he was far enough from pleasing, that is, humoring any
man. ( Luke 20.21.) And they asked him, saying, Master, we know that thou
say and teach rightly, neither acceptest thou the person of any, but
teach the way of God truly.

Yet caution is to be used here. For some go so far to the other hand, that
while they think they ought not to flatter or plea^e, they care not how they
slight or disrespect the persons of men; and in stead of so: bearing (as they
ought) to give undue titles, they will not (as was touched before) give so much
as those that are due; that is a sin in defect, as the other is in excess. And
they sin much more who while they refuse to give flattering titles, a^e free to
give reviling titles. There are these two great tongue-evills among men; Some
give flattering titles, others give reviling titles, detracting, calumniating,
and biting titles; it is as dangerous not to forbear the one, as to be free
and forward in giving the other, and therefore we should take heed of both
these extremes, that our speech may have an equal respect to truth, both
while we praise, and while we reprove.

Verse. 22. For I know not how to give flattering titles.
Nescio cognominare; i. e. Blendiri. Bez:
It seems to have little virtue in it, or matter of commendation, not to give
flattering titles, when we are not able, or know not how to give them; To hear
one that is (as we speak) a mere Countryman, or a clown say, I will not give
flattering titles, speaks not his praise at all, because it is supposed he at
most can but speak sense, or true English; but to hear a learned man, or some
Great Courtier say, I will not give flattering titles, this is something, this
shows that his honesty masters his ability, and that his conscience is too
strong for his parts. How is it then that Elihu says, I know not to give
flattering titles? Had not Elihu wit and skill, words and language at command
to give them? Was he so coursely bred that he could not reach them?

I answer, Those words, I know not, may have a threefold interpretation.

First, I know not, is, I have not made that piece of knowledge my study, I
have not set my self to learn the art of flattery, nor to gain the skill of
carnal Courtship. Thus I know not to do it, is, I have not set my self to do
it, I have not made it my business, or my aim to do it; A good man has, or
at least desires no skill in that which is evil, or not his duty; how much
soever any man knows to flatter, yet we may say he knows not to flatter who
abhors flattery; And can say (as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians: 4.20.) He has
not so learned Christ; that is, he has heard no such lessons, nor received any
such instruction in the school of Christ.

Thus Elihu says, I know not to give flattering titles. And doubtless, it is
best being an Idiot, or a bungler at the doing of that which is not good, or
(as the Apostle says, some are to every good work) to be reprobate to every
evil work, and word. How knowing are they, who can say in truth, they know not
how to lie, or flatter, etc. I dare not say (with the Papists) that ignorance
is, but I am sure this nescience is not only the mother of devotion, but a
great point of devotion it self. And, in this sense every godly man, and only
a godly man knows not how to do evil.

For as the wicked may have the Theory of good works, and know what it is to
pray, what it is to hear the word of God, yet they have no skill, they are not
studied, nor fitted for the practice of those works; So a godly man may know
in speculation what it is to do wickedly, and how to do it as well as the
most wicked man in the world, yet he is not at all disposed nor ready for the
practice of any wickedness. As nature makes us reprobate to good, so grace to
evil works. The Prophet says of a bad sort of men, ( Jer: 4.22.) They are
wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge. Were they an
ignorant people? No, the meaning is, they had not set themselves to learn the
doing of that good which they knew; theirs were not sins of ignorance, but of
wilfulness, and perverseness. So on the other hand, it is the commendation of
the people of God, They are wise to do good, but to do evil they have no
knowledge. I know not to give flattering titles.

Secondly, As to know a thing or person, imports the allowance and approbation
of it. ( Psalm: 1.6.) The Lord knows the way of the righteous; that is, he
approves it. ( Psalm: 101.4.) I will not know a wicked person; that is, I like
him not, I regard him not, I will never give him testimony, he shall neither
have my hand, nor my heart. So, not to know a thing or person, notes our
disallowance and distaste of either; in this sense Christ will say to those
great knowing professors ( Luke 13.27.) I tell you, I know you not whence you
are, depart from me, etc. Thus, here when Elihu professes, I know not to give
flattering titles; his meaning is, I like not, yea, I cannot abide to do it. I
may be as much skilled as any man to speak high words, possibly I could Court
it as well as others, but I have no heart to do it, yea it is the abhorrence
of my soul to do it. A good man does not approve the doing of evil, and
therefore though he know well enough how to do evil, yet he is truly said
not to know how to do it.

Thirdly, Not to know a thing, is not to be accustomed, or practiced in it.
Thus when Elihu says, I know not to give flattering titles; he seems to say,
It is not my manner, I have not been used to flatter. As use does not only make
fitness, but increases our knowledge, so disuse does at once unfit us to do
a thing, and diminishes our knowledge how to do it. And therefore what we use
not to do, we are rightly said not to know to do. I know not to give
flattering titles.

Hence note.

The spirit of a good man is set against all that is evil, he cannot close nor
comply with it. His understanding assenteth not to it, his will chooses it not,
his conscience cannot swallow it, though not a camel, but a gnat, the least of
sin-evils, much less does he give himself up to the free and customary
practice of great sins. A good man may well be said, not to know to sin,
because though he knows the nature of all sins, yet he knowingly declines the
doing of every sin. I know not to give flattering titles, In so doing my Maker
would soon take me away.

Those words, in so doing, are not expressed in the Original, but supplied to
make up the sense; and yet we may very well read the text without them; I know
not to give flattering titles, my Maker would soon take me away, or as Mr
Broughton renders, my Maker would be my taker away.

My Maker. Elihu expresses God, by the work of creation, or by his relation to
God as a creator; Elihu does but include himself in the number of those whom
God has made, he does not exclude others from being made by God, as much as
himself, while he says, My Maker. God is the maker of every man, and is so in
a threefold consideration.

First, He is the maker of every man, in his natural constitution, as he is a
man, consisting of a reasonable soul and body. I am fearfully and wonderfully
made, said David, with respect to both, ( Psalm: 119.14.)

Secondly, God is every man's maker, in his civil state, as well as in his
natural; he forms us up into such and such a condition, as rich, or as
poor, as high, or as low, as Governors or as governed, according to the
pleasure of his own will. ( Prove. 22.2.) The rich and the poor meet
together, the Lord is the maker of them both; he means it not only, if at all
in that place, that the Lord has made them both as men, but he has made the
one a rich man, and the other a poor man. Thus the Lord is the maker of them
both. And as the Lord makes men rich, so Great and honorable. ( Psalm: 75.6.)
Promotion comes not from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South; It
comes from none of these parts or points of earth or heaven, it comes from
nothing under heaven, but from the God of heaven; God is the Judge, he puts
down one, and sets up another.

Thirdly, The Lord is the maker of every man in his spiritual state, as good,
and holy, and gracious. ( Ephesians. 2.10.) We are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works; till we are wrought by God, we can do none of
Gods work, nor have we any mind to do it. Now when Elihu says, My Maker
would soon take me away, we may understand it in all these three senses; he
that made me this body and soul, when I came into the world, he that ordered
my way and state all this while that I have been in this world, he that formed
me up into a new life, the life of Grace, and has made me a new man in this
and for another world. This my Maker would soon take me away.

Hence note.

It is good to remember God as our maker. Man would not make such ill work in
the world, if he remembered God his maker, or that himself is the work of God.
We should remember God our maker; First, as to our being, as from him we
receive life and breath. Secondly, as to our well-being, as from him we receive
all good things, both for this life and a better. ( Eccles: 12.1.) Remember now
thy creator (not only that God is a creator, but thy creator, remember this) in
the days of thy youth; And surely if thou remembrest him well, thou will not
forget thy self so much as to forget the duty which thou owe him. Think
often upon thy maker, and then this thought will be upon thee always, If I owe
my self wholly unto God for making me in nature, how much more do I owe my
self unto God, for making me a new creature. We ought to live wholly to him
from whom we have received our lives. He that has made us should have the use
of us. He has made all things for himself, ( Prove: 16.4.) chiefly man, who
is the chief of all visibles which he has made. Those two memento's, That we
are made by the power of God, and that the price by which we are redeemed is
the blood of God, should constrain us at all times and in all things to be at
the call and command of God. My Maker Would soon take me away.

Invoce (...) tolleret me, alludit ad praecedens (...).q. d. Si capiam faciem
me capiet. Coc:
We had the same word in the former verse, there it is used for accepting a
person; here for taking away a person. The Learned Hebricians take notice of an
elegant flower of Rhetoric in this expression; If I take persons, God will
take away my person; so we may translate the Text; If I take men, my God will
take me away. Yea my maker would not only take me away at last, or (as we say)
first or last, but he would make dispatch, and be quick with me, My maker
would Soon take me away.

Some render, He would take me away as a little thing; But the mind of our
translation is, he would take me away in a little time. The original word
bears either signification, (...)
and so may the scope of the text; My Maker would take me away as a little
thing, he would blow me away as a feather, or as dust, and crush me as a moth;
and he would do it in a moment, in a little time; all the men of the world,
yea the whole world is but a little thing before God, and he can quickly take
both away. ( Isa: 40.15.) Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and
are counted as the small dust of the Balance; Behold, he takes up the Islands
as a very little thing. Now if Whole Islands, if all nations are such little
things as drops and dusts, then, what is any one particular man, how big soever
he be? And how soon can God take him away! Little things are taken away in a
little time. So the word is used in the second Psalm ( v. 12.) If his wrath be
kindled but a little, or but, as a little thing; if the wrath of Christ be
kindled only so far that you see but a spark of it, blessed are they that
trust in him; There is no standing before the least wrath of the great God, by
the greatest of the sons of men.

We translate, He would soon take me away, or he would do it in a little
time, my ruin needs not be long in working, he would rid his hands of me
presently; to take or snatch a man away, notes three things.

First, A violent death, or a violence in death.

Secondly, A speedy or sudden death, a quick dispatch. When the fire was
kindled and the word sent out against Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, their maker
soon took them away; he bid the earth open, and it took them away in the
twinkling of an eye; they went down quick into hell. It is said of a wicked
man in this book ( Chap: 27.21.) The East wind carries him away; there also
this word is used, that is, judgment like some fierce impetuous wind, shall
blow him from his standing, and blast all his glory.

Some give the sense by the effect of fire, Sunt qui (...) tolleret me,
exponant, combureret me, ut aliquando sumitur hoc verbum a flamma, quae in
sublimi tollitur. Merc:
My Maker would soon burn or consume me. The word in the Hebrew signifies to
burn, as well as to take away, and we know the burning of a thing is the
taking of it quite away; fire makes clean riddance. And again Fire or flame
rises up (as a thing that is taken up) into the air, and that which is burned
in the fire may be said to be taken up with it. Thus also it is translated (2 Samuel: 5.20, 21.) David came unto Baal-perazim, and David smote them there, etc.
and there they left their Images, and David and his men burnt them; we put in
the margin, and David and his men took them away; which is the translation
here in Job. Either of the readings is clear and full to the purpose; God has
fire, he has hellfire unquenchable for sinners, their maker can quickly
consume and burn them up. ( Isa: 27.4.) Who would set the briars and thorns in
battle against me, I would pass through them and burn them up together. How
quickly can the Lord burn wicked men, who like briars and thorns scratch and
tear the innocent? wicked men can no more stand before the wrath of God, then
briars and thorns can stand before a flaming fire. That Is a good reading; ours
comes to the same sense, my Maker would soon take me away.

Hence observe.

First, As flattery and accepting of persons are great, so they are very
dangerous sins, they are wrath-provoking sins. If we flatter men, God will not
flatter us, he will deal plainly with us. To receive flattery, or to suffer
our selves to be flattered, is very dangerous, as we see in the example of
Herod (Acts 12.22, 23.) who having made a very eloquent Oration, The people
gave a shout, saying, it is the voice of a God, and not of a man; They gave him
flattering titles, or (as some render the former part of this verse) they
wondered at his person. But what was the issue of it? Presently (says the
text) the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory, and
he was eaten up with worms, and gave up the ghost. Thus his Maker took him
soon away, for taking that glory to himself. O take heed of entertaining
flatteries when given, we should put them back from us, as we would a poisonous
cup. High commendations of Sermons given to the Preacher, may have a sad
consequence. When men give much glory to men, it is hard for men to give the
glory back again to God. Herod was so pleased and tickled with the glory which
the people gave him, that he could not part with it, and so lost himself.
Because he forgot that he was a worm, he was destroyed by worms. The
translation given us by the Septuagint of this text in Job, (...), et me tineae
edent. Sept:
complyes fully with that dreadful example in the Acts; I know not how to give
flattering titles, for in so doing the worms or moths will eat me up. The
words of Elihu thus rendered in Job are a threatening assertion, That the worms
shall eat those that give flatteries; and the judgment which fell upon Herod,
is an example threatening all those that receive flattering titiles, with that
dreadful doom of being eaten up by worms. And doubtless, if not that, yet
either some other corporal and visible judgment, or (which is much worse) some
spiritual and invisible judgment, will overtake those who love either to
flatter others, or to be flattered themselves. And as that example shows how
dangerous it is to receive flatteries; so to give flatteries, has in it a
double danger.

First, It is dangerous to others. When Parasites flatter Princes, when
Ministers flatter the people, how does it ensnare their souls? It Is hell and
death to flatter sinners, and not to deal plainly with them; to give lenitives
instead of corosives; to give oil where vinegar should be given; to heal the
hurt of the soul deceitfully, is the greatest hurt and wounding to the soul.
Flatteries are those pillows spoken of in the Prophet ( Ezekiel: 13.18.) sowed to
the Arme-holes or elbowes of wicked men, upon which many sleep without fear,
till they dye without hope; yea these flatteries as well as any falsities and
errors of doctrine, whether respecting faith or worship, are that untempered
mortar, of and against which the Prophet speaks in the same Chapter ( v.
10.15.) wherewith some daubed that wall of vain confidence which others built,
while they seduced the people, saying, peace, and there was no peace. How often
do the true Prophets warn the people against these flatteries of the false
Prophets. And how sadly does the Prophet Jeremy bewail them ( Lam: 2.14.) Thy
Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee, and they have not
discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity, but have seen for thee
false burdens, and causes of banishment; that is, the visions which they have
seen, they pretend, at least, to have had from God, but they are their own
dreams and brainsick phansies, and so the cause of thy banishment; they have
undone thee with these deceits, soothing thee up in those thy sins, which
procured thy banishment, and caused the Lord to thrust thee out, and send thee
far away from thine own Land. They have fed, yea, filled thee with false
hopes, till thy condition was hopeless. How many thousands have been destroyed
by flatteries both for here and for ever. And if flattery be so dangerous to
the receiver, then

Secondly, It must needs be much more dangerous to the giver. It is no small
sin to palliate or cover the sins of others; Non leve scelus est veritatem
palliare. Merc:
But it is a far greater sin to commend the sins of others, or to commend
others in their sin. And we may take the measure of this sin by the punishment
of it. When we hear the Lord threatening flatterers with sudden destruction,
does it not proclaim to all the world, that their sin is full of provocation?
The Lord bears long with many sorts of sinners, but not with sinners of this
sort. My maker would soon take me away.

Whence note, Secondly.

God can make quick dispatch with sinners. As the grace of God toward
sinners, Nescit tarda molimina spiritus sancti gratia.
so his wrath needs no long time in preparations. When we design great
actions, we must take time to fit our selves. Princes must have time to set out
an Army or a Navy, when they would either defend themselves against, or revenge
themselves upon their enemies; But God can presently proceed to action, yea to
execution. He that made all with a word speaking, can destroy the wicked as
soon as speak the word; he can do it in the twinkling of an eye, with the
turning of a hand. My Maker would soon take me away.

Thirdly, Because Elihu, being about to speak in that great cause, sets God
before him, and God in his judgments, in case he should speak or do amiss.

Note, Thirdly.

They that do or speak evil, have reason to expect evil at the hand of God.
If I should flatter (says Elihu) my Maker would soon take me away. I have
reason to fear he will; not that God takes away every sinner as soon as he
sins, (God rarely uses Martial Law, or executes men upon the place, we should
live and walk more by sense then by faith if he should do so) but any sinner
may expect it, God (I say) is very patient and long-suffering, he does not
often take sinners away, either in the act, or immediately after the act of
sin. Yet there is no sinner but has cause to fear, lest as soon as he has
done any evil, God should make him feel evil, and instantly take him away.
David prays ( Psalm: 28.3.) Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the
workers of iniquity. There is a twofold drawing away with the workers of
iniquity. First, to do as they do; that is, wickedly. Thus many are drawn
away with the workers of iniquity; and it is a good and most necessary part of
prayer, to beg that God would not thus draw us away with the workers of
iniquity, that is, that he would not suffer the workers of iniquity to draw us
away into their lewd and sinful courses. Secondly, there is a drawing away to
punishment, and execution. In that sense (I conceive) David prayed, Lord draw
me not away with the workers of iniquity, who are taken away by some sudden
stroke of judgment; though I may have provoked thee, yet let not forth thy
wrath upon me, as thou sometimes do upon the workers of iniquity: do not
draw me out as cattle out of the pasture where they have been fed and fatted,
for the slaughter. Every worker of iniquity is in danger of present death, and
may look that God will be a swift witness against him: though most are
reprieved, yet no man is sure of that.

Again, In that Elihu represents God to himself ready to take him away, in
case of flattery and prevarication in that cause.

Note, Fourthly.

It is good for us to overawe our souls with the remembrance of the
judgments and terrors of God. It Is profitable sometimes to converse with the
threatenings, as well as with the promises; it is profitable to remember what God
is able to do against us, as well as to remember what God is able to do for us;
Even believers should go into the dreadful treasuries of wrath, into the
thunders and lightnings of divine displeasure, as well as into the delightful
treasuries of mercy, of love and compassion; it is good for a good man to
think God may take me away, as well as to think God will save and deliver me;
we need even these meditations of God, to keep down our corruptions, and to
fright our lusts. Though it be the more Gospel way to make use of love, yet the
Gospel it self teaches us to make use of wrath, (2 Cor: 5.11.) Knowing the
terror of the Lord we persuade men.

Lastly, Note.

When we go about any great work, when we are either to speak or do in any
weighty matter, it is good for us to set God before our eyes, to think of and
remember our Maker. As in great undertakings we should remember our Maker,
waiting for and depending upon his assistance, strength, and blessing, in what
we do or go about; so we should remember him to keep our hearts right. And
to remember seriously, believingly and spiritually, that God beholds and sees
us in all our ways and works, and that according to the frame of our hearts,
and the way that we take in every action, such will the reward and the issue
be, cannot but have a mighty command, and an answerable effect upon us. We can
hardly do amiss with ^od in our eye. And therefore as it is said of a wicked
man ( Psalm: 10.4.) that through the pride of his countenance he will not seek
after God, God is not in all his thoughts. So David said of himself (though in
that Psalm he speaks chiefly as a type of Christ) and so in proportion or as
to sincerity every godly man says like David, Psalm: 16.8.) I have set the Lord
always before me: because he is at my right hand, therefore I shall not be
moved; that is, as I shall not be utterly overthrown by any evil of trouble,
so I shall not be overcome by any evil of temptation: or I shall not be moved
either in a way of discouragement by the troubles I meet with, or in a way of
enticement by the temptations I meet with. How steadfast, how unmovable are
they in the work of the Lord, how do they keep off from every evil work,
who set the Lord always before them, and have him at their right hand! Could
we but set the Lord before us, either in his mercies or in his terrors, we
should not be moved from doing our duty in whatsoever we are called to do.

Thus far Elihu has drawn out his speech, in a way of preface, preparing
himself for his great undertaking with Job; He has now fully showed the
grounds why he undertook to deal with him, and what method he would use in
that undertaking. In the next Chapter, and so forward to the end of the 37th,
we have what he said, and how he managed the whole matter.

JOB, Chap. 33. Verse. 1, 2, 3. Wherefore, Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches,
and hearken to all my words.

Behold now I have opened my mouth, my tongue has spoken in my mouth.

My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart: and my lips shall utter
knowledge clearly.


ELihu having spent the whole former Chapter in prefacing to Jobs friends,
directs his speech now to Job himself; yet not without a renewed Preface, as
will appear in opening this Chapter. Wherein we may take notice of four heads
of his discourse.

First, We have his Preface in the seven former verses of the Chapter.

Secondly, A proposition of the matter to be debated, or of the things that
Elihu had observed in Job's speech about this Controversy, from the 7th verse
to the 12th.

Thirdly, We have his confutation of what Job had affirmed, from the 12th verse
to the 31th.

Lastly, We have his conclusion, exciting Job to make answer to what he had
spoken, else to hear him speaking, further in the three last verses of the
Chapter.

Elihu in his Preface, moves Job about two things; First, to attend what he was
about to say.

Secondly, To make reply to and answer what he should say.

Elihu moves Job to the former duty several ways.

First, By a mild Entreaty and sweet Insinuation in the first verse; Wherefore,
Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to my words. As if he had
said, I do not come authoritatively and rigorously upon thee, to command or
demand thy attention, but as a faithful friend I desire thee to attend unto my
speech, and hearken to my voice.

Secondly, He moves him to hear, by professing his own readiness and
preparedness to speak, in the 2d verse; Behold now I have opened my mouth, my
tongue has spoken in my mouth; that is, I have been (as it were) tuning my
instrument, and fitting my self for discourse, let me not loose my labor nor
my study.

Thirdly, He moves him to attend from the sincerity and gracious Ingenuity of
his heart in that which he had to say to him. This he lays before him in the
3d verse; My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart, and my lips shall
utter knowledge clearly. What better Encouragement to hear! And

Fourthly, Elihu moves him to hear from the Consideration of his present
state, as a man, not only made by God, but by him instructed for the work which
he had undertaken, the former of which is Expressed, the latter Employed in the
4th verse; The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has
given me life. Thus Elihu Calls out Job to hear. And

Secondly, As he invites him to hear what he had to say, so he provokes him to
answer what he should say, verse. 5. If thou can answer me, set thy words in
order before me, stand up. As if he had said, Be not discouraged, take heart
man, do thy best to defend thy self, and make good thy own cause against
what I shall say; Spare me not; Do thy best, thy utmost.

Having thus encouraged him in General to answer, he proceeds to give him two
special Motives.

First, From their Common state or Condition, in the 6th verse; Behold, I am
according to thy wish in Gods stead; I also am formed out of the clay. As if he
had said; You have often desired to plead with God, or that God would hear
your plea; now consider, I am in Gods stead, though a man like your self.

Secondly, He encourages him from the tenderness of his spirit toward him,
respecting his present Condition, promising to deal with, or treat him
fairly, gently, in the 7th verse; Behold, my terror shall not make thee
afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee. That favor Job h^d asked of
God, in the 9th Chapter^; Let not thy terror make me afraid. Now says Elihu,
tha^ which thou did fear from God, thou need not at all fear in dealing
with me, My terror shall not make thee afraid, etc. Thus Elihu begins with Job,
that he might lead him to receive fairly, or answer fully what he had to say.

The three first verses of the Chapter, Contain the first part of the Preface,
wherein Elihu excites and calls forth Jobs attention by those four
Considerations already distinctly proposed, the first whereof is laid down,

Verse. 1. Wherefore, Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, and heerken to all my
words.
Elihu begins very mildly, sweetly, insinuatingly, even entreatingly, and
beseechingly, Wherefore I pray thee.

The word which we translate, I pray thee, (...) adhortartis vel excitantis tum
etiam obsecran^^.
is in the Hebrew language a monasyllable adverb of obsecration or exhortation.
I pray thee.

Hence note.

It Is good to use gentleness toward those with whom we have to deal,
especially with those who are either outwardly afflicted, or troubled in
spirit. Entreaties have great power; and therefore though the Prophets and
Apostles speak sometimes in a threatening way, and command attention upon
utmost peril, yet for the most part they bespeake it with Entreaties, (2 Cor:
5.20.) Now then we as Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by
us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. The Apostles went
about a begging, as it were, with this message, with the best message that ever
was carried forth to the world, Reconciliation unto God; we pray you. And
again (2 Cor: 6.1.) We then as workers together with him, beseech you also
that you receive not the grace of God in vain; that is, the doctrine of the
Gospel holding forth the grace and favor of God freely in Jesus Christ, (1
These: 4.1.) Furthermore, we beseech you brethren, that as ye have received of
us how ye ought to walk and to please God, so ye would abound more and more.
As he did beseech them not to receive the grace of God in vain, so he did
beseech them to a progress in and an Improvement of that grace. Again (1 These:
2.7.) We were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her Children; how
tender is a nurse to the infant hanging at her breast, or dandled on her knee.
Speak ye Comfortably to Jerusalem, was the Lords direction when she was in her
warfare; that is, in a troubled and afflicted condition. ( Isa. 40.2.) The
Hebrew is, Speak to her heart; speak such words as may revive her heart, and
add fresh spirits and life to her. The Apostles rule for the restoring of
those that are fallen, is, that they should be kindly treated ( Gal: 6.1.)
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye that are spiritual restore such
an one with the spirit of meekness. It is a great point of holy skill so to
order a reproof as not to provoke; so to speak as to speak open, or pick the
lock of the heart; Affectionate Entreaties are blessed pick-locks, which do
not strain the wards, but effectually lift up the holders and shoot the bolt
of the heart, causing it to stand wide open to receive and take in the truth of
promises, counsels and reproves. Meek words meeken the spirit. It Is hard to
refuse what we perceive spoken in love; and if any thing will soften a hard
heart, soft language is most likely to do it. When Abigail came out and met
David upon his way, hot upon revenge, yea having (upon the matter) sworn
revenge against Nabal and his house, yet her Entreaties and mild words overcame
that mighty warrior, at least, took off the edge of his spirit, and of all his
party, (1 Samuel: 25.33.) Nor did he only accept of or submit to her counsel, but
gave thanks both to God and her for it; Blessed be the Lord, and blessed be thy
advice, which have kept me this day from shedding-blood. Gentle words, like
gentle rain, soake deep, and make the soul, like a fruitful tree, bud and
blossom. For as passion in the speaker, begets passion in the hearer, and
heat brings forth heat, so kind and kindly words, are not only most useful,
but most powerful. There is a rebuking, and that Cuttingly, or a speaking of
cutting words, useful in some cases, then especially, when sinners have not
only done evil, but are settled and resolved in it. But in case of affliction,
specially of inward affliction, or trouble of spirit, soft words are best and
do best. Hear, I pray thee, says Elihu.

And hearken to all my words. Here Is hearing, and hearkening, to hearken is
more then to hear; to hear is barely to receive the sound of words; but to
hearken is to take up the sense of them, or as it were to suck out the strength
and sweetness of them; to hearken is to weigh or ponder every tittle spoken,
and take the value of it. The word in the text, which signifies to hearken,
has a singular elegancy in it. One of the Rabbis renders, Ear my words;
hear my words and Ear them. The same word which in the verb signifies to
hearken, which is the work of the ear, signifies also the ear, or instrument
of that work in the noune. To ear words, notes the most diligent attention,
as to eye a thing, notes the most accurate inspection. The word signifies also
the beam of a balance, because by the ear, or by the two ears (as by a
balance) words are tried and poysed, whether they are weighty and solid, or
light and chaffy; when Elihu says, hearken to, or weigh my words, he intimates
that he meant to speak words which had worth in them, or that he meant to speak
matter more then words. And therefore he would not have a word lost, Hearken,
says he, To all my words.

To all, not to this or that only, but to all; As if he had said, I intend not,
and I hope I shall not speak one needless or unusefull words; not a word
beside the business. Therefore hearken to all my words.

Hence note; First.

They who speak to instruction, admonition or exhortation, should not use one
word more then is useful, not a word more then is to the purpose. Seeing,
every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account for it in the day
of Judgment, (Math: 12.36.) How should every man take heed of speaking an idle
word, a word of which he can give no good account for any good it is likely to
do. Idle words will make sad work one day, and words of no value or account,
will turn to a heavy account in the great day. That Is an idle word, which does
neither work the heart for good, nor strengthen the hand to or in a good
work. And if we should be careful not to speak one idle word, or not one
word unworthy to be heard, how should we avoid evil words, or words which
corrupt the hearers.

Secondly, As the words refer to that duty which Elihu minds Job of, and
moved him to, Harkening to all his words.

Note.

They who hear, especially about holy things and soule-matters, should hear
all. One word should not be lost, when every word is precious. We gather up the
filings and least dusts of Gold. The ear should gather all that truth which
the mouth scatters, and the heart should lay it up as treasure. We may charge
many sorts of men with deficiency at eare-worke. And surely if men will not
hear all that they ought to believe and do, they can neither do nor believe
any thing that they hear.

First, Some will not hear the word at all, they are like the deaf Adder
stopping their ears at the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely to
them.

Secondly, Others think that there is not a word more to be heard, but what
they have heard already, who can speak what they know not?

Thirdly, There are few who hearken to any word that is spoken; that is, who
make it their business to hear, who hear with diligence, and labor at it.
As it is a great labor to speak, so I assure you, it is no small nor easy
labor to hear, if you hear indeed and as you should. To hear the word is
the exercise of the whole soul. Among many hearers, there are but few
hearkeners, such I mean as weigh and consider what they hear.

Fourthly, There are very few who hear and hearken to all the words of
righteousness and salvation. As some though they hear all, yet hearken to
halves, so others will hear but half, or only so much as pleases them of
what is spoken. When the King of Judah (Jer: 36.23.) had the Role brought to
him which Baruch had written from the mouth of Jeremiah, he heard three or
four leaves of it read to him as he sat by the fire, and then he caused it to
be cut with a penknife and cast into the fire; He did not read it out, he had
enough of it, he had (as we say) his belly full, but his heart was altogether
empty, he was very angry and vexed at the word, but not at all humbled nor
affected with it; and therefore would not hear all those words.

Again, To hearken is to obey, to submit and yield up our selves to the truth
we hear. Samuel tells Saul (1 Samuel: 15.22.) To obey is better then sacrifice,
and to hearken then the fat of Rams; to obey and to hearken is the same thing;
the obedient ear is the hearkening ear. Mine ear have thou opened (says
Christ, Psalm: 40.6.) This opening or digging of his ear (as we put in the
Margin) signified his readiness to obey, as it is expressed ( v. 7, 8.) Then
said I lo I come; I delight to do thy will O my God. And in reference to this
he had said before ( v: 6.) Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire,
burnt-offering and sin-offering have thou not required; that is, for
themselves, or comparatively to that, which in the volume of thy book is
written of me, that I should do. Which clearly expounds and is almost the
same in terms with that of Samuel; To obey is better then sacrifice, and to
hearken, then the fat of Rams. Thus Elihu presses Job to hearken to all his
words obedientially, or to hearken with a purpose to obey. Take a few
Considerations, why we should both hear and hearken to, that is, obey, the
whole mind of God, all those words which have the stamp of divine authority
upon them.

First, All the words of God are alike holy and true, pure and precious. Though
some truths are more necessary to be known and believed then others, yet all
are necessary; nor can we be discharged from the duty of hearing and obeying
any one of them, if called.

Secondly, There is a like or the same power and authority in all the words of
God; so that to neglect or slight any one word, is to put a slight upon the
authority of God himself. There is but one Lawgiver and word-sender.

Thirdly, Not to submit to any one word (though it be supposed we hearken to
all others) draws upon us the guilt of non-submission or disobedience to the
whole word of God. That Is the Apostles conclusion ( James 2.12. ver.) Whosoever
shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all;
for though in many things we offend all, yet there is a Gospel-sence wherein we
are said to keep the whole Law of God. And so the Apostles meaning is, that
whosoever shall give himself a loose or a liberty, whosoever shall dispense or
indulge himself in breaking any one Command of God, he breaks all, that is,
he declares himself ready to break all, if he had a like occasion or
temptation.

Fourthly, We would have all our words hearkened to by God, we would have God
grant all our Petitions, all our requests, and supplications, and shall not we
hearken to and obey all the precepts of God? Shall we not receive and believe
all his promises and threatenings?

Fifthly, As we desire God would, so God has promised to hear all our words,
even all the requests of his people which are according to his will. Christ
speaks without restriction ( Math: 21.22.) All things whatsoever ye ask in my
name, believing ye shall receive. And again ( John 14.13, 14.) Whatsoever ye
shall ask in my name, that will I do, etc. Nor are there any restrictions
upon the promises of God in granting and doing what we ask, but only these
two; First, that we ask right things; Secondly, that we ask aright. Now if
the Lord has promised to hearken to all our words, not to this or that, but to
all our words which are according to his will, (we have no liberty to ask
beyond the will of God, beyond the rule of Scripture, nor can we ask any thing
beyond that, but it is to our hurt and damage, now if God (I say) will hearken
to all our words) should not we hearken to all his?

Lastly, The condition upon which God has promised to hear all our words, is,
that we should be ready to hear and hearken to all his words, (1 John 3.22.)
Whatsoever we ask we receive, because we keep his Commandments, and do the
things that please him. It were not confidence, but highest and most hateful
impudence, to expect that God should please us by giving us what we ask, while
we refuse (which is the condition of that promise) to do the things that
please him. Thus Elihu would have Job hearken to all his words, he being about
to speak, not his own, but the words of God. And that Job might ^ot delay the
opening of his ear to hear, Elihu tells him further in the next verse, that
himself had already opened his mouth to speak.

Verse. 2. Behold now I have opened my mouth, my tongue has spoken in my mouth.
This phrase of opening the mouth, imports four things.

First, That a man has been long silent; they that are full of talk, and
speak out of season, may be said to have their mouth always open, rather then
at any time to open their mouths. But Elihu professed in the former Chapter
that he had waited as a Disciple to hear and to learn, and had waited with
utmost patience; therefore he might well say, Behold now I have opened my
mouth, and taken upon me to speak. So ( Chap: 3.1.) after Job had sat silent
a great while, it is said, Then Job opened his mouth, and cursed the day of his
birth; Thus to open the mouth, intimates much silence or forbearance of speech,
and long expectation of a season or opportunity to speak.

Secondly, Opening the mouth, implies as speaking after much silence, so with
much prudence. A fools mouth is therefore said to be always open, because
whenever he speaks, he is found speaking imprudently and impertinently. Os
aperire dicuntur apud Hebraeos, qui instituunt sermonem serium et de re gravi.
Pisc:
But a wise man will not speak, unless he may speak to purpose, and so opens
his mouth to speak. Solomon says, ( Prove. 24.7.) Wisdom is too high for a
fool, he opens not his mouth in the gate; that is, he is unfit to speak in
the presence of wise and judicious men, he may open his mouth in the streets,
and in common Company, but he opens not his mouth in the gate, where the Elders
and Magistrates used to meet and judge the weightiest matters. There is a
fourfold Consideration to be had, as to the due opening of the mouth, (And
it is no small matter to open the mouth with those Considerations.)

First, Consideration is to be had of the place and Company where, and to whom
we speak. We must not cast pearls before swine, nor give strong meat to
children.

Secondly, The time and season wherein we speak must be considered; every
truth is not fit for every time. Christ would not speak all at once to his
Disciples, for this reason, ( John 16.12.) I have many things to say unto you,
but ye cannot bear them now; and because ye cannot bear them now, therefore I
will not say them now.

Thirdly, Consideration is to be had how and in what way to speak, whether
inst^uctingly, or exhortingly, reprovingly, or Comfortably, we should always
labor to divide the word of God, and what we speak from it aright, giving
every one his proper part and portion. Then a man opens his mouth to speak,
when he Considers how to sort his speech according to the state of things and
persons before him.

Fourthly, Consideration is to be had of the end or tendency of speech, what
our aim and mark is; we say, a fools bolt is soon shot, he Considers not his
aim and mark in speaking; he that opens his mouth, looks to his mark, and
drives a design, or has a purpose in every word that passes from him.

Inde videtur dici (...) pytho, quod obsessi vel uti utres inflati turgescant
and spiritus immundus ex illorum ventre respondeat.
Thirdly, This phrase of opening the mouth, notes liberty of speech, or
boldness in speaking; when a man does not speak in his throat, as untaught
children do, nor in his belly, or in a bottle, as Witches and Sorcerers are
said to do, that peep and mutter ( Isa: 8.19.) When a man (I say) does not
speak any of these covert ways, but freely and liberally, then indeed he opens
his mouth to speak. We have that Expression in the promise, ( Ezekiel. 29.21.) In
that day will I cause the horn of the house of Israel to bud forth, and I will
give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of them, and they shall know
that I am the Lord; That is, I will give thee boldness, and liberty of speech:
time was when thou did not dare to ^peake a word for God, or of God, of his
praise, name and worship, or if thou did it was but in a Corner, or whisperd
in secret; but the time shall come when I will give thee the opening of the
mouth; thou shall speak my truth and praises boldly: and the Enemy shall know
that I the Lord have procured thee this liberty. It Is a great mercy when God
gives his people the opening of the mouth, or liberty of speech, to speak
boldly, no man hindering, no nor so much as discouraging them. The Prophet makes
that the character of an evil time, when the prudent keep silence, (Amos
5.13.) As in evil or calamitous times, it becomes the Godly prudent to be
willingly silent, adoring the justice of Gods severest dispensations toward
them with patience and without murmuring at his hand. So in some evil times
they are forced to keep silence, (though as David spoke, Psalm: 39.2.) their
sorrows be stirred) either lest by speaking, even nothing but truth and reason,
they draw further sorrows upon themselves; or because they see it but lost
labor to speak to a people obstinate and resolved on their way.

Fourthly, This phrase of opening the mouth to speak, notes the things spoken
to be of very great worth, such as have been long concocted and digested, and
at last ready to be brought forth, as out of the treasury of an honest and
understanding heart. Os aperire est been discussa et praemeditata habere
dicenda. Bold:
The heart is the treasury of words, there they are stored up: and from thence
issued forth; as Christ says, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. As there is a stock of evil words in the hearts of evil men, so of
good and gracious words in the hearts of Godly men, and when they open their
mouths (according to this notion) it is to bring forth the treasures, and
riches of their hearts, to bring forth the gold and silver and precious things
stored up there; all these are very useful interpretations of this phrase; and
I might give distinct observations from them, but it may suffice to have named
them. I shall only add that the last is conceived by some to be chiefly
intended in the latter branch of this verse.

My tongue has spoken in my mouth. This seems a strange Expression; where
should the tongue speak but in the mouth? when the tongue is out of the mouth,
can it speak? as the mouth cannot speak without the tongue, so the tongue
cannot speak out of the mouth: why then does he say; My tongue has spoken in
my mouth?

The Hebrew is, In my palate, the palate being a part of the mouth, and one
special Instrument of speech (Naturalists reckon five, The lips, the tongue,
the teeth, the palate, and the throat) it is put for all; but there is more in
it then so, for every man speaks in his mouth, Palatum ^ris coelum est. Drus:
Praemeditata et quasi intelligentiae meae palato praegustata sum prolaturus.
Bez: Been sapui verba mea antequam illa efferendo tibi aliisque sapienda et
gustanda traderem. Bold: Non sequarverba aliorum, sed propries conceptus
enunciabo. Aquin:
or by the palate which is the heaven, roof or cieling of the mouth. Therefore
when Elihu says, My tongue has spoken in my mouth, or in my palate; The
palate may be considered as the instrument of tasting as well as of speaking.
We say such a thing is very savory to the palate; And we call that Palate wine,
which is quick and lively, brisk and pleasant to the taste. Thus when Elihu
says here, My tongue has spoken in my mouth or palate; His meaning is; I have
uttered only that which I have well considered, what my tongue has spoken to
you, I have tasted my self; I have put every word to my palate; For as a man
that that tastes wine or any other sapid thing, must have it upon his palate,
before he can make a Judgment, whether it be sweet or sharp, quick or flat:
so faith Elihu, my mouth has spoken in my palate, I tasted my words before I
spoke them.

Hence note.

Judicious and wise men will taste and try what they intend to speak before
they utter it. The speaker presents his words to the taste of the hearer; For as
this Scripture has it at the 3d verse of the next Chapter, The ear tries
words, as the mouth tastes meat; now he that ventures his words to the taste
and censure of others, had need take a taste of them before he does it. My
tongue has spoken in my mouth.

Secondly, From the scope of Elihu in adding this, namely, to gain attention,

Note.

There is great reason we should hear that carefully, which the speaker has
prepared with care. They who regard not what they speak, deserve no regard
when they speak; but a weighing speaker, should have a weighing hearer. And
what any man's tongue (in the sense of Elihu) has spoken in his mouth, that we
should hear, not only with our ear, but with our heart. This a strong
argument to quicken attention, yet Elihu gives in another, and a stronger in
the next verse.

Verse. 3. My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart, my lips shall
utter knowledge clearly.
In the former verse Elihu called for an open ear, because he opened his
mouth, and was about to speak, or had spoken what he had well tasted. In this
verse he presses the same duty, by professing all manner of Ingenuity and
Integrity in what he was about to speak. He would speak not only seriously,
but honestly, not only from his understanding, but his conscience.

My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart, etc. The meaning is not,
that the uprightness of his heart should be the subject upon which he would
treat, though that be a blessed and most useful subject, yet it was not the
point he intended to discuss: but when he says, My words shall be of the
uprightness of my heart, his meaning is, my words shall flow from the
uprightness of my heart, I will speak in the uprightness of my heart, or
according to the uprightness of my heart; my words shall be upright as my
heart is; the plain truth is this, Sincere et absque ullo suco proferam animi
mei sensa. Bez;
I will speak truth plainly, I Will speak as I think, you may see the Image of
my heart upon every word, I will speak without dawbing, without either
simulation or dissimulation. Some conceive this to be a secret reproof of, or
reflection upon Jobs friends, as if Elihu had suspected them to have spoken
worse of Job, then they could think him to be in their hearts. But as we
cannot judge men's hearts directly, so there is no reason why we should judge so
of their hearts conjecturally. It is enough to the purpose, that Elihu asserts
his own uprightness without reflecting upon or suspecting the uprightness of
those, who had dealt with Job before; My words shall be in the uprightness of
my heart.

This uprightness of his heart may have a threefold Opposition. First, to
passion; Some speak in the heat and fire of their hearts, rather then in the
uprightness of them; it is good to speak with the heat and fire of zeal in our
hearts; but take heed of the heat and fire of passion, I will not speak in the
heat, but in the uprightness of my heart, says Elihu.

Secondly, This uprightness may be opposed to partiality, I will not spare
when there is cause to speak home, nor press, nor load thee with any thing
where there is not cause for it.

Thirdly, This uprightness in speaking, Non loquar ad calumniendum vel ad
rid^ndum, sed simplici animo ad veritatem manifestandam. Aquin:
may also be opposed to speaking without clear ground or proof. And it is
supposed that Elihu aimed more specially at this, Jobs friends having been so
high in his reproof, charging him with diverse things for which they had no
proof, but only a vehement suspicion. The words of Eliphaz are full ( Chap:
22. 5.) Is not thy wickedness great, and thine iniquities infinite? for thou
have taken a pledge from thy brother for naught, and stripped the naked of
their Clothing: Thou have sent widows empty away, and the arms of the
fatherless have been broken: Surely Eliphaz could not speak this in the
uprightness of his heart, knowing it to be so, though he spoke it in this
uprightness of his heart, that he really thought it to be so. Which kind of
uprightness Paul had in persecuting the Saints, ( Acts 26.9.) I verily thought
with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth. Thus Jobs friends verily thought he had done many Gross things
contrary to the Law of God, but they only thought so, they could not prove it;
This is a lame kind of uprightness, and in opposition to this Elihu might now
say, I will not charge or burden thee with any thing but what I know to be
true, and had even from thy own mouth. My words shall be of the uprightness of
my heart.

I shall not stay to give particular notes from these words, according to this
threefold opposition; The reader may improve them in that, as he has
occasion; Only in General Observe.

The heart and tongue should go together. The tongue should always be the
hearts Interpreter, and the heart should always be the tongues suggester; what
is spoken with the tongue should be first stamped upon the heart, and wrought
off from it. Thus it should be in all our Communications and exhortations,
especially when we speak or exhort about the things of God, and dispense the
mysteries of heaven. David spoke from his heart while he spoke from his faith (
Psalm: 116.10.) I believed, therefore have I spoken. Believing is an act of the
heart, with the heart man believes; so that to say, I believed, therefore have
I spoken; Is as if he had said, I would never have spoken these things, if my
heart had not been clear and upright in them. The Apostle takes up that very
protestation from David (2 Cor: 4.13.) According as it is written, I believed,
therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak; that is, we
moved others to believe nothing but what we believed, yea, were fully assured
of, our selves, as the next words of the Apostle import, Knowing, that he which
raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us
with you. To speak what we in our hearts believe, is to speak in the
uprightness of our hearts.

Some speak without their hearts, that is, coldly, they have no heart at all in
speaking; as some hear without their hearts, only with their ears; so some
speak without the heart, only with the tongue.

Secondly, Others speak what was never in their hearts; They have no
experience in themselves of what they say to others. They throw out their words
at a venture. It is sad to speak that as a truth, or a Comfort to others, which
we have not found in our selves, that is, have not felt the operation of it
upon our own hearts. How are they to be lamented, who speak of the things of
God as a Stage Player, who acts the part of, or Personates a Prince, being
himself but a poor plebeian. It is bad to speak without our hearts, or
coldly, but it is worse to speak what was never in our hearts, or hypocritically.

Thirdly, Not a few speak quite against their hearts; these are at farthest
distance from speaking in the uprightness of their heart; they speak with a
false and malicious heart, they speak with a deceitful and double heart, with a
heart and a heart. There are three ways wherein men speak against their own
hearts and Consciences.

First, In the profession which they make of themselves, ( Rev: 2.9.) Christ
writing to the Church of Smyrna, says, I know thy faith and patience, etc. and
the Blasphemy of them who say they are Jews and are not, but lie, etc. And so
at the 9th verse of the 3d Chapter, Which say they are Jews and are not, but
do lie. We are not to understand it strictly, that they professed themselves
to be of the Nation of the Jews, the Children of Abraham. A Jew there is, any
one that holds out a profession of the faith of Christ. Old Testament words
are often applied to the New Testament, or Gospel state; they say they are
Jews, that is, true believers, but they are not, and do lie; to lie, is to
go against a man's mind, against his Conscience; they make a great profession
of godliness and holiness, of Christ and his ways, and they lie at every
word; for indeed they are the Synagogue of Satan. Thus at this day some make
profession before the Church of God, and by such profession get admittance into
the Church of God, who yet belong to the Synagogue of Satan. The Apostle John
speaks of such, (1 Ep: Joh: 2.19.) They went out from us, but they were not of
us; that is, they were not truly of us, though they once desired to come in and
join themselves to us, and for a time walked with us.

Secondly, The tongue speaks against the heart many times in the promises which
men make to others of what they will do. O what Courtesies and friendships
will some men profess! they will tell you aloud how they love you, and how
much they are your servants, while there is nothing in their hearts, but deceit
and guile, yea possibly nothing but wrath and revenge to death. Thus Ishmael
went out weeping all along as he went (Jer: 41.6.) and said, Come to Gedaliah,
the son of Ahikam, yet he invited them into the City as poor birds into a
snare, to destroy them presently; He was seemingly troubled at their affliction
and wept, but his were Crocodiles tears, he murdered them as soon as he had
them in his power.

Thirdly, Some speak against their hearts doctrinally or in the Doctrines
which they propound and teach. There are three sorts who speak amiss
doctrinally.

First, Some speak that which is not right in the uprightness of their hearts;
or, I may say, they speak that which is false with a true heart; that is, they
think it to be a truth which they utter, when it is an error, and will be found
so at last. When ever we see different opinions stiffly maintained among honest
and godly men, (which though it be a very sad sight, yet it is too often seen,
in that case I say) one side always speaks that which is false with a true
heart, and utters error uprightly. The truth is, some men defend an error with
better and more honest hearts, then some others defend the truth. For

Secondly, There are such as speak right without any uprightness of heart, or
they speak truth with a false heart; this Elihu specially professes against;
he would not only speak that which was right, but with uprightness. The
Apostle found several teachers of this second sort ( Phil: 1.16, 17, 18.) Some
preach Christ, that is, the Gospel, yea the truth of Christ in the Gospel,
(else the Apostle would not have rejoiced in it, as he professes he did at the
18th verse, I therein do rejoice, yea and will rejoice.) Yet these men did not
preach in the uprightness of their own hearts; for, says he, Some Preach
Christ out of envy and strife, and some out of good will, (they preached
Christ, pure Gospel, yet not with pure hearts, for, he adds, they did it)
supposing to add affliction to my bonds; They preached to oppose the Apostles
more then to set up Christ, and though they preached the truth, yet they did it
more in pretense then in truth; as it is said at the 18th verse. The same
Apostle speaks of others, (2 Cor: 11.13, 14.) who preached what was true for
the matter, and yet he calls them false Apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and no marvel, for Satan
himself is transformed into an Angel of light. They formed and shaped
themselves into Angels of light, and took up the doctrine of the faithful
Apostles of Jesus Christ in some things, yet they did it not in the
uprightness of their hearts, but that they might weaken the estimation of the
true Apostles in the hearts of the people, and set up themselves there, that so
in other things they might with greater efficacy or more effectually, mis-lead
them or draw them into error. Thus some are found speaking lies in the truth of
their hearts, and others speaking truth in the falsenesse of their hearts.

Thirdly, Many speak that which is false with a false heart; This is the height
of wickedness. The Apostle prophesies of such (1 Timothy: 4.2.) Who shall speak
lies in hypocrisy: the matter they speak is a lie, and they speak it with a
base and false heart too. And therefore he says of these in the same verse,
Their consciences are seared with a hot iron; that is, they are insencible both
of the mischief they do, and of the misery they must suffer.

Elihu professes himself to be none of all these; He spoke that which was
right and true in the uprightness and truth of his heart. Such a one the
Apostle directs the Gospel Deacon to be, (1 Timothy: 3.9.) Holding the mystery of
faith in a pure Conscience, which is the same with an upright heart. And he
tells us (1 These: 2.4, 5.) That himself did not use any guile in the
ministration of the Gospel. He had truth on his side, and he had truth in his
heart, as he also professed to his Brethren the Jews, (Rom: 9.1, 2.) I speak
the truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me witness in the
holy Ghost, etc. And again, (2 Cor: 2.17.) We are not of those that Corrupt
the truth; we speak the truth, and speak it truly. He is a better speaker that
speaks with an upright heart, then he that speaks with an eloquent tongue; He
is the happy speaker, who speaks more with his heart then with his tongue,
that can say with Elihu to Job, My words shall be of the uprightness of my
heart. Words spoken of that subject, and words flowing from that subject, are
lovely words. Of this latter sort says Elihu to Job, My words shall be.

And my lips shall utter knowledge clearly. Job had charged his three friends (
Chap: 13. 4.) that they were forgers of lies. Quia tribus amicis Jobus
imposherat, quod essent fabricatures menda^ij, hoc a se ex^l^dit dicens and
sententiam labia mea puram loquentur. Aquin: (...) purum planum perspicuum, a
fuco alienum sincerum and ab omni scoria doli aut mendacij purgatorem. Merc:
This Elihu engages against, while he says, My lips shall utter knowledge
clearly.

The word here translated Clearly, is rendered two ways.

First, As an Adjective. Secondly, As an Adverb.
Many render it as an Adjective, My lips shall utter clear knowledge, or
distinct knowledge; clear as to the matter; pure, plain, without any
adulteration, deceit, or guile, as to the manner. So the word is often used, I
might give you many Scriptures for it. The Prophet speaking in the person of
Christ ( Isa: 49.2.) says, He has made me a polished shaft, the Hebrew is, a
pure shaft, a glittering, shining shaft. ( Jer: 5.11.) He made bright his
arrows, there this word is used. It is applied also to Chief men (1 Chronicles:
7.48.) These were Choice men, pure men. So says Elihu (My lips shall utter
clear shining pure knowledge.)

Hence note.

We should speak clear truth. Truth without mixture, truth well winnowed,
doctrine well refined. The commandment of the Lord is a pure word, ( Psalm:
19.8.) There Is not any dross at all in it, it is like silver tried seven times
in the fire ( Psalm: 12.6.) The Prophet among other blessings which God
promises to his Church and people, has this ( Isa: 30.24.) The Oxen likewise
and the young Asses that ear the ground shall eat clean Provender, free from
the straw, and chaff, dust and darnel. But may we not here renew the Apostles
question, (1 Cor: 9.9, 10.) Does God take care for oxen? or says he it
altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt it is written; That the mouth
of the ox treading out the corn, should not be muzzl'd, was written for the
Ministers sake, to assure them, that while they labor in the Gospel to feed
souls, their bodies should be fed. And that the oxen and young asses shall eat
clean provender, was written for the peoples sake, to assure them, that Christ
would send them such Ministers as should feed them with pure holy wholesome
doctrine, not with the chafe of unwritten traditions, nor with the mixtures of
humane i^^entions. They should be taught clear knowledge, as Elihu here
speaks. This mercy was also prophesied ( Zeph: 3.9.) Then will I turn to the
people a pure language, or a Clean lip: it is this word, that is, what they
speak, shall be pure truth. Their language shall be, not only Grammatically
pure, proper and genuine, but Theologically pure, without any tincture of error
in it.

Secondly, As the word is taken (according to our translation) Adverbially.

Note.

We ought to speak truth clearly. Some speak clear truths, who yet do not
speak them clearly. They speak great truths, yet obscure them in their own way
of expressions; they who wrap up sound doctrine in hard uncouth words, or
deliver it in an unnecessary multitude of words, do rather puzzle and confound
their Auditors, then inform or instruct them. And they who speak not knowledge
clearly, are like those who mud the waters, or raise a dust in the air, which
will not let others see distinctly what they hold or put in either. Speaking in
dark words and strange notions, is like speaking in a strange language. They
only speak profitably, who speak clearly. We commonly say, Truth seeks no
corners, truth would not be hid. What are obscure and ambiguous words, words of
a doubtful construction and interpretation, but corners, wherein many hide
truth, while they pretend to speak and publish it. Such speakers as well as they
who speak in an unknown language, are Barbarians to their hearers. And
therefore as the Apostle in reference to an unknown tongue, so should we say
in reference to any covert or obscure way of speaking in our own mother
tongue, We had rather speak five words that others may be edified, then ten
thousand words in hard and strange expressions. Though we speak in a known
language, yet doubtful words hinder edifying as much as an unknown language
does; yea such are as a forreiner to their hearers, while they speak in their
own Country tongue: It Is a special gift of God, to speak knowledge clearly.
The Apostle has left that excellent advice with all who are called to speak
the great things of eternal life, (1 Pet. 4.11.) If any man speak (that is, if
he speak about the things of God, divine things) let him speak as the Oracles
of God. What are they? The oracles of God are the known word of God. But how
are those oracles to be known? Surely as God spoke them, plainly and clearly;
The oracles of God were spoken without ambiguity, therefore let no man speak
them as the oracles of the devil were spoken, or as the devil spoke his
oracles, that is, ambiguously and doubtfully; The devil of old gave out all
his answers and oracles doubtfully and darkly to his dark and blinded
votaries; what he said might bear several Constructions. And he spoke so on
purpose, that whatsoever the event or issue proved to be, he (though the father
of lies) might have the reputation of speaking truth. Croesus Halym penetrans
magnam perver^et opum vin.
The Devils oracle gave Croesus such an answer as he might Interpret either of
a great success, or of a great overthrow, when he asked counsel about his
wars. And when Saul came to Enquire of the Witch of Endor, that is, of the
Devil, (1 Samuel: 28.11.) he gave him a doubtful resolve; To morrow shall thou
and thy Sons be with me (v. 19.) Which ambiguous answer might be understood as
of the next day following, so indefinitely of any day near approaching. Satan
loves not to speak knowledge clearly. But the servants and messengers of
Christ, must use great plainness of speech while they are treating of and
giving out the mind of God to his people; and be careful that as the doctrine
is sound which they deliver, so there may be a clearness in their delivering of
it. Their lips (as Elihu engaged his should) ought to utter knowledge clarely.

JOB. Chap. 33. Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. The Spirit of God has formed me, and the
breath of the Almighty has given me life.

If thou can answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand up.

Behold, I am according to thy wish in Gods stead: I also am formed out of the
clay.

Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy
upon thee.


IN these four verses, Elihu still prosecutes a discreet praefatory
insinuation both of himself and of his intended discourse into the heart of
Job, that both might find welcome, and good entertainment there. Elihu had
assured him at the third verse, that he would speak in the uprightness of his
heart, or that he would deal heartily, and clearly with him. That was a strong
argument to gain attention. And in this fourth verse, he argues with and
urges Job, to give him attention, because he was a man of Gods making, as Job
also was. The same hand wrought them both, and therefore, why should there be a
strangeness between them? or an unwillingness to give or receive counsel and
help from one another?

Verse. 4. The spirit of God has formed me, and the breath of the Almighty has
given me life.
I shall open these words two ways.

First, As a direct proposition, or assertion.

Secondly, In their connection and dependence, as they are here used, for an
argument of persuasion.

First, Consider the Text, as an assertion; The spirit of God has made me,
etc. The word does not signify barely to make, (...) faciendi verbum
artificiosam and elaboratam agendi rationem affert. Pined:
or to clap up a work any how, but to make with art, to make skilfully, to
compose and fashion a thing with exactest grace, comeliness, and beauty. Thus
are we made by the Spirit of God. Man is an excellent piece of work, yea man
is the Masterpiece of all the visible works of God. The Spirit of God has
made me.

There are two things here to be enquired; First, what we are to understand by
the Spirit of God, to whom Elihu attributes his making. Secondly, Why does
Elihu attribute his making to the Spirit of God? To the former question, I
answer; First, negatively, that by the Spirit of God we are not to understand a
power or virtue put forth by God, in which sense we sometimes read the Spirit
of God in Scripture. But by the Spirit of God here, we are to understand God
the Spirit. In which sense we read ( Gen: 1.2.) The Spirit of God moved upon
the face of the waters. As also ( Math: 3.16.) He saw the Spirit of God
descending like a dove, and lighting upon him; that is, upon Jesus Christ,
baptized by John in Jordan.

The second question is, Why does Elihu attribute his making to the Spirit of
God? Regeneration or our new-making is properly the work of the Spirit, but is
Creation, or our natural constitution his work also? Says not Moses? (Gen:
2.7.) The Lord God formed man out of the dust of the earth; Jehovah Elohim
formed man. And if we look into the first of John ver: 2, 3. we read thus; In
the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God;
the same was in the beginning with God, all things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made, that was made. There our maker (for the
making of all things is attributed to him) is the Son, the second person in the
holy Trinity, or the Word, who (as it follows in that Chapter) was made
flesh. Why then does Elihu here ascribe his making to the Spirit? And how are
these Scriptures reconciled?

I answer, By that received Maxim in Divinity, The works of the holy Trinity
toward the creature are undevided. So that, while this Scripture ascribes the
making of man to the Spirit or Third person in the Trinity, it does not at all
cross those which ascribe it to the first or second, the Father or the Son.
The Spirit of God has made me.

Hence note.

First, Man as to his bodily making, or the making of his body, is the
workmanship of God. As we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good
(or holy) works, (Ephesians: 2.10.) so we are his workmanship created to common and
natural works. We have heard of that divine consultation or resolution rather
( Gen: 1.26.) Let us make man: The Father made man, and the Son made man, and
the holy Spirit made man; The Father by the Son, through the holy Spirit made
man. What a glorious, what a mighty power is put forth for the production of
such a poor creature as man is! And this is true, not only of the first man in
his creation, but of every man since the creation, there is a concurrence of a
divine power and workmanship in the setting up of man as man. ( Psalm: 100.3.)
It is he that made us, and not we our selves; God does not only make us holy
men, but he makes us men. Hence David (Psalm: 13.9-14.) I am fearfully, and
wonderfully made. He speaks there of the frame of his body, though that be much
more true in reference to the admirable frame of the new creature which is set
up in the soul; so, indeed we are fearfully and wonderfully made. ( Isa:
27.11.) This is a people of no understanding (But did God ever make a people
without natural understanding? Surely no, but they were a people without
spiritual understanding, they did not understand what the mind, and meaning of
God was, and what their own duty was; Such are a people of no understanding,
how wise soever they are in their own eyes, or in the eyes of the world, what
follows) Therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that
formed them will show them no favor; That is, God who made and formed them,
both in their natural capacity as men, as also in their civil and spiritual
capacity as a Church and Nation, or as a National Church (understanding it of
the Jews) will not have mercy on them, will not favor them. We read the same
Church at once looking to God as their maker and most earnestly moving and
imploring his pity upon the same account. ( Isa: 64.8, 9.) But now O Lord, thou
art our father, we are the clay, and thou our potter, and we all are the work
of thy hand; As if they had said, Thou O Lord, have molded us as thy
creatures, and fashioned us as thy Church, when we were but a rude mass or
heap without form or comeliness, therefore do not mar thy own work, do
not break the vessels of thine own making, or as it follows in the same
Chapter, Be not wroth very sore O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever,
behold, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.

Hence consider.

First, That, we owe not only our well-being, but our very being unto God. And
therefore

Secondly, No man ought to look upon himself as his own; So the Apostle
argues (1 Cor: 6.19.) Know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy
Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own; No man
is his own, he is Gods, who has made him. Saints and believers especially are
not their own in that repsect; as also because their bodies are the temple of
the holy Ghost; that is, the holy Ghost has sanctified them for himself, for
his peculiar service, and for his habitation. Now as the bodies of Saints are
the temple of the holy Ghost, because he does sanctify them; so they are the
temple of the holy Ghost, because he has reared them up, and built them. That
consideration should urge us to duty; our bodies are temples built, as well as
temples sanctified by the holy Ghost; And therefore we are not our own at all,
nor in any respect; and if we are not our own at all, but the Lords, then we
ought to be always for the Lord.

Hence, Thirdly, Has the Spirit of God made us? (as Elihu says) then let the
Spirit use us; how sad is it, that when the Spirit of God has made our bodies
and souls, we should let the wicked spirit use either (as he does both the
bodies and souls of carnal men) to his base services. The evil spirit did
neither make your bodies nor your souls, why should he have the command of
either? Therefore as your members have been weapons of unrighteousness to sin,
so let them be instruments of righteousness unto God. Seeing the holy Spirit
has made us, let not the evil spirit use so much as a little finger of us;
for, he has not made not only so much as a little finger of our hand, but so
much as the least hair of our heads (as Christ says we our selves cannot,
Math: 5.36.) white or black. And therefore let not the evil spirit make use
of one hair of our heads white or black, as a flagge of pride and vanity, or
to be an occasion of sin to others. He that makes the house ought to have the
possession and service of it, either to dwell in it himself, or to receive
rent and profit from him that dwells in it. The spirit having made us, should
not only have the rent and revenue, but the full possession of us for ever.
That which is of God should be for God, for him always, and only for him.

Secondly, In that the making of man is attributed to the Spirit.

Observe.

The Spirit of God is God. The holy Ghost is not only a power of God, or a word
gone out from God, but the holy Ghost is God. This is clear from the
efficiency of the holy Spirit; The Spirit of God has made me. The work of
creation is attributable to none but God. That power which at first set up man
in his creation, continues him to this day; this power and great prerogative
is given to the Spirit; therefore the Spirit is God. ( Psalm: 33.6.) By the word
of the Lord (his substantial Word or Son) were the heavens made, and all the
host of them, by the breath (or Spirit) of his mouth; that is, Jehovah by his
Eternal Son and Spirit made all things. The heavens and their host, are there
expressed by a Synecdoche of the part, for the whole creation, or, for all
creatures both in heaven and in earth. Again ( Psalm: 104.30.) Thou sendest
forth thy Spirit, they are created; The Spirit of God creates every day; what
is it that continues things in their created being, but providence? That Is a
true axiom in Divinity; Providence is creation continued; Now the Spirit of
God who created at first, creates to this day; Thou sendest forth thy Spirit,
they are created. The work of creation was finished in the first six days of
the world, but the work of creation is renewed every day, and so continued to
the end of the world. Successive providentiall creation as well as original
creation is ascribed to the Spirit.

The Scripture is full of arguments to prove that the holy Ghost is God; Which
(because this fundamental truth is blasphemously spoken against) I shall a
little touch upon.

First, As the Spirit creates and makes the natural man consisting of body
and soul, so he regenerateth (which is a greater creation) the whole into a
spiritual man; therefore he is God. ( John 3.5.) Except a man be borne again
of water, and of the Spirit (that is, of the Spirit who is as water) he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God. The holy Ghost is also called, The sanctifier;
sanctification is regeneration in progress, and motion; regeneration is
sanctification begun, and sanctification is regeneration perfecting from day to
day. (2 These: 2.13.) We are bound to give thanks to God for you, brethren,
beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to
salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth. And
the Apostle Peter writes to the Elect (1 Pet: 1, 2.) according to the
foreknowledge of God the father, through sanctification of the Spirit. Now, who
can do these great things but God? who can regenerate, or give a new nature,
who can sanctify or perfect that new nature but God alone? Men and Angels must
let these works alone for ever, or (as we translate, Psalm: 49.8.) these acts
cease for ever from men and Angels, as much as the redemption of man from the
grave, or from hell, from corruption, or condemnation.

Secondly, The Spirit is omniscient, He knows all things, (1 Cor: 1.12. 2
10.19.) The Spirit knows all things, yea the deep things of God. He is not
only acquainted with, and privy to the surface and outside of things, but he
searches things to the bottom of them. Nor does he search only the deep or
bottom things of common men, or of the chiefest of men, Kings and Princes,
(whose hearts are usually as much deeper then other men's, as their persons and
places are higher) but the Spirit searches the deep things, the bottom things
of God, the things of God that lie lowest, and most out of sight, the Spirit
understands; therefore the Spirit is God. For (as the Apostle argues, 1 Cor:
2.11.) No man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man that is in
him; even so the things of God knows no man but the Spirit of God, or, he
that is God; if the spirit that is in man, were not man, or the intellectual
power in man, it could never know the things of man; and if the Spirit of God
were not God, he could never search and know the deep, the deepest things of
God.

Thirdly, As the Spirit of God knows all things, as he searches the deep
things, even all the secrets, and mysteries of God; so he teaches all things,
even all those secrets and mysteries of God, which it is needful or useful for
man to know. The Spirit is a teacher, and he teaches effectually ( Joh:
16.13.) When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: for
he shall not speak of himself (that is, he shall not teach you a private
doctrine, or that which is contrary to what ye have learned of me) but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show you things to
come. Which last words are

A fourth argument that he is God. As the Spirit teaches, so he foretells
all things (1 Timothy: 4.1.) Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and
doctrines of devils. The Spirit of God clearly foreseeth and infallibly
foretells what shall be, before it is, therefore he is God. The Lord by his
holy Prophet ( Isa: 41.23.) challenges all the false Idol gods of the Heathen
to give that proof of their Divinity; Show the things that are to come
hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods. As if he had said, Do that and
we will yield the cause. Men and Devils may guess at, but none can indeed
show things to come but God.

Fifthly, The Spirit appoints to himself officers and ministers in the Church,
therefore he is God, ( Acts 13.2.) The holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas
and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.

Sixthly, The holy Ghost furnishes those Officers whom he calls with power
and gifts, as he pleases, that they may be fit for the work or ministry of
the Gospel (1 Cor: 12.8.11.) To one is given by the Spirit, the word of
wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, etc. But all
these works that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man
severally as he will. Now, who can give wisdom and knowledge, who can give
them prerogatively, following in this distribution, or division of gifts, no
rule, nor giving any other reason of it but his own will, except God only?

Seventhly, The holy Ghost is sinned against; therefore he is God. Some,
possibly may object and say, This is not a convincing or demonstrative
argument, that the holy Ghost is God, because he is sinned against; For man may
sin against man. All second table sins are sins against our Neighbor; and the
Apostle tells the Corinthians (1 Ep: 8.12.) that while they used their lawful
liberty in eating with offense, they sinned against the Brethren. I answer,
Whosoever is properly sinned against is God, because God is the Lawgiver. And,
though many actions of men are direct wrongs to man, yet in every wrong done to
man, God also is wronged, and, in strict sense, he only is sinned against by
man. For the reason why any action is a wrong to man, is because it is against
some Law of God. And if to be sinned against in strict sense, be proper to God
only; then the argument stands good, that the Holy Spirit is God, because he is
sinned against; especially, if we consider, that there is such an Emphasis put
upon sinning against the holy Ghost in the holy Scripture (more if possible
then upon sinning against the Father, or the Son) ( Math: 12.31.) Wherefore, I
say unto you (says Christ) All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men, but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto
men; As if he had said, Though you sin against the Father, and the Son, it
shall be forgiven you, but if you sin against the holy Ghost it shall not be
forgiven either in this world or in the world to come; that is, it shall never
be forgiven. Seeing then there is more in sinning against the holy Ghost then
against the Father, or the Son, who are God, the holy Ghost must needs be God.
For though there is no degree or graduall difference in the deity, each person
being coeternall, coequall, and consubstantiall; yet the Scripture attributes
more in that case, as to the point of sinning against the holy Ghost, then to
sinning against the Father, or the Son; therefore certainly the holy Ghost is
God.

Lastly, The holy Ghost is the object of divine worship; are not we baptized in
the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost? Is the Father, and the Son God,
and the holy Ghost not God, who is joined with them in the same honor? Shall a
creature come in competition with God? And does not the Scripture or word of
God, direct us to pray for grace from the Spirit as well as from the Father or
the Son? (2 Cor: 13.13. Rev: 1.4.) Thus we see how full the Scripture is in
giving the glory of the same works upon us, and of the same worship from us to
the Spirit, as to the Father and the Son: And therefore from all these premises
we may conclude, That the Holy Ghost with the Father and the Son, is God
blessed and to be glorified for evermore. The Spirit of God has made me, And
the breath of the Almighty has given me life.

(...) Spiritus ex ore egregiens, halitus flatus anima proprie significat
halitem, p^r metonymiam effecti, animam; per synechdo^hen membri animal. Pisc:
in Deuteronomy: 10.16.
The words carry an allusion (as Interpreters generally agree) to that of Moses
describing the creation of man ( Gen: 2.7.) And the Lord God formed man out of
the dust of the earth, and breathed into his nostrills the breath of life, and
man became a living soul. Elihu speaks near in the same form, fully to the
same effect; The breath of the Almighty has given me life, or, enlivened me;
As if he had said, That soul which the Lord has breathed into me, has made
me live. The soul of man may be called the breath of the Almighty, because the
Almighty is expressed infusing it into man at first by breathing. And therefore
the word Neshamah, which properly signifies the breath, does also by a
Metonymie of the effect signify the soul it self which causes breathing.
Thus our translaters render it ( Isa: 57.16.) I (says the Lord) will not
contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, for the spirit should fail
before me, and the souls which I have made. As the soul of man was breathed
in by God, so the soul is that by which man breathes. Breath and soul come
and go together. Some comparing the original word (Shamaijm) for the heavens,
with this word (Neshamah) which here we translate breath, take notice of their
near affinity, intimating that the soul of man is of a heavenly pedigree, or
comes from heaven; yea the latin word (men's) signifying the mind, is of the
same consonant letters with the Hebrew Neshamah, and, as some conceive, is
derived from it.

So then, I take these words, The breath of the Almighty, as a description of
that part of man which is opposed to his body; The Spirit of God has made me;
that is, has set me up as a man, in humane shape, And the breath of the
Almighty has given me life; that is, this soul which the Almighty has
breathed into me, has made me a living man, ready for any humane act, or (as
Moses speaks) God breathing into my nostrills the breath of life, I became a
living soul.

Hence observe.

First, The soul of man flows immediately from God. It Is the breath of God;
not that God lives by breathing; the way of his life is infinitely above our
apprehension; But it is clear in Scripture, That the Almighty breathed into man
the powers of life. And therefore he is called (by way of Eminence) The father
of spirits, (Heb: 12.9.) For though the Almighty is rightly entitled the
Father of the whole man, though both body and soul are the work of God, yet
he is in a further sense, the father of our spirits, or souls, then of our
bodies. And here Solomon showing how man is disposed of when these two are
separated by death, says ( Eccl: 12.7.) Then shall the dust (that is, the
body) return to the earth as it was, and the spirit (that is, the soul) shall
return to God who gave it. The body is the gift of God, but the body is not
the breath of God, it is not such an immediate gift of God as the soul is;
when the body of man was made at first, God took the dust of the earth and
formed his body out of it, but when he gave him a soul, he breathed that from
himself; it was an immediate effect of Gods power, not dealing with, nor
working upon any prae-existing matter. The spirit or soul of man is purely of
God, solely of God. And hence we may infer.

First, Then the soul is not a vapor, arising from the crasis or temperament
of the body, as the life of a beast is.

Secondly, Then the soul of man is not traduced from the parents in
generation, as many learned men affirm, especially, to ease themselves of
those difficulties about the conveyance of original sin or defilement into the
soul.

Thirdly, We may hence also infer, then the soul is not corruptible; it is
an immortal substance. How can that be corruptible or mortal, which has its
rise (as I may say) immediately from God, or is breathed in by the Almighty,
who is altogether incorruptible and immortal. And whereas there is a twofold
incorruptibility; First, by divine ordination, that is, God appoynts such a
thing shall not corrupt, and therefore it does not; so the body of man in it is
first creation was incorruptible, for though it were in it self corruptible,
being made out of the earth, yet by the appointment of God, if man had
continued in his integrity he had not dyed. And therefore it is said, By sin
came death; yea doubtless if God should command and appoint the meanest worm
that moves upon the earth to live for ever, or the most fading flower that
grows out of the earth to flourish for ever, both the one and the other would
do so. Secondly, there is an incorruptibility in some things, not merely by a
law or appointment of God, but as from that intrinsecall nature, which God has
bestowed upon them, and implanted in them. Thus the Angels are immortal, they
have an incorruptible nature, and likewise the soul of man, being breathed
from the Almighty, is in it is own nature incorruptible; it has naturally no
seeds of dissolution in it, because no contrariety, no contrary qualities in
it, as all bodies or corporeal substances have. I know the Apostle says (1 Timothy: 6.16.) God only has immortality; it is true, he only has it in himself
independently, originally; but he derives and gives it as a talent to some
creatures in a way of dependence upon himself.

Secondly, Observe.

The soul brings in the life of the body, The life of man. What is the body
without the soul, but a lump of clay; As soon as ever the soul departs,
life departs, man dies and becomes a putrefying carcass; yet such is the
folly of most men, that all their care is for the life of the body, which is
(at best) a dying life, they utterly neglect the soul, which, as it is the
life of the body, so it self never dies. The soul is the Jewel, the body is
but the Cabinet, the soul is the kernel, the body is but the shell. Will you
be sollicitous, about a Cabinet, and a shell, and slight the Jewel, or throw
away the kernel? Will you take care of that which lives, the body, and will
you not take care of that which holds your life, the soul?

Again, Note.

Life is the gift of God. If the soul which is the cause of life in man, be of
God, then the life of man is of God also. The cause of the cause is the cause
of the effect or thing caused. But we need not argue it from Logic rules,
Scripture testimony being so abundant in this thing. ( Acts 17.25.) He gives
to all, life and breath, and all things. And ( v. 28.) In him we live and move
and have our being. Spiritual and eternal life, are the gift of God, so also
is natural life. And if so, Then

First, Live to God; Secondly, Seeing God gives us life, we should be willing
to give our lives to God. Yea Thirdly, We should therefore be ready to give up,
or rather to lay down our lives for God. And as we should give up our lives to
God when he calls for them by natural death, so we should give up our lives for
God, when he calls us to bear witness to his name and truth by violent death.

I shall yet take notice of one thing further, before I pass from this verse;
The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has given me
life.

Some, upon good grounds, refer the first clause; The Spirit of God has made
me, to the creation both of soul and body; and the second or latter clause,
the breath of the Almighty has given me life, to that quickening which we
receive by the Spirit to the duties whereinto we are called in this life. The
breath of the Almighty has given me life; that is, has fitted and prepared me
for the several offices and services of life. As if Elihu had said, The Spirit
of God has not only made me a man, but a man for work, yea the Spirit of God
has quickened me to the present work and business I am come about. Thus, life
imports not only spiritual life in the being of it, but all the furniture,
ornaments, and abilities of a spiritual life. The Septuagint render this
profession made by Elihu expressly, (...). Spiratio omnipotentis est quae
docet me. Sept: Haud me latet non a meipso, sed a deo hunc prudentiae sensum me
accepisse. Nicet:
to this sense, holding out a strong assurance which Elihu had, that God had
both called and prepared him for the service he was come about and engaged in.
The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has instructed
me. Another of the Greek Interpreters speaks as much; I am not ignorant, that
of my self I am able to do nothing, but I have received this power from God;
As if Elihu had said, The Spirit of the Almighty has quickened me to this work
I am now upon, and taught me what both to say and do in thy case, O Job.

Hence note.

God gives not only the life of nature unto men, but he fits them for all the
duties, and services of this life. We, indeed, are scarcely to be reckoned
among the living, if we have no more but a natural life; what is it to be able
to eat and drink, to hear, and see, and speak; unless we have more then
this, we deserve not to be numbered or written among the living; we are upon the
matter, but dead lumps, and clods of clay. It is the breath of the Almighty
that quickens us and superadds ability to do good, that frames, fashions, and
fits us for every good word, and work; This is the life of man; when a man is
fitted for duty, and service, when he is furnished for employment, to stand
God, and his Brethren in some stead while he is in this world, then he lives.
The motions, impulses and influences, the teachings and guidings of the Spirit
of God, are the life of our lives. We can do nothing of our selves, till the
Almighty bestows a new life upon us; and as we can do nothing at all in
spiritualls, till he gives us a new life, so we can do nothing to purpose till
the Spirit acts and stirs up that life in us. It is the Spirit who first
bestows; Secondly, increases; Thirdly, excites our spiritual life, and puts
the new creature into motion. All our good thoughts and holy actings, all our
uprightness and sincerity, all our strength and ability flow from the Spirit;
until the holy Spirit works in us, we sit still; and when the Spirit works,
we must not sit still; I (says the Apostle, Rom: 15.18.) will not dare to
speak of any of those things, which Christ has not wrought by me, to make the
Gentiles obedient by word, and deed; As if he had said, My own works are not
worth the naming, I will not so much as mention any thing that Christ has not
wrought in me by the Spirit; That was a mighty work which he was enabled to
do, to make the Gentiles obedient in word, and deed. Christ did not leave him
to do it in his own power. The breath of the Almighty enabled him; and so he
does all those that are able and willing, ready for and successful in any
such holy work.

Let us therefore ascribe all to his working and quickening; let us set down
our several Items of receipt in our account-books, confessing that we have
nothing of our own. This gift, that grace, that ability to do, to speak, to
suffer, to act, we have received from him. Let the whole Inventory of our
souls riches, have Gods name written upon it, and ascribed to his praise
alone. And if we thus uncloath our selves, by giving God the glory of all, we
shall loose nothing by it, for God will apparel and furnish us, deck and
adorn us better every day. The poorer we are in our selves, the richer will he
make us. To be thus diminish't is the best way to our increase. It Is the breath
of the Almighty that teaches us, and if we can but humbly enough, that is,
heattily acknowledge it, we shall be taught and learn enough.

So much of these words as they are a direct assertion. I shall consider them a
little in their connection, and reference both to what went before, and to that
which follows after; which was the second consideration of this verse at first
proposed,

First, This verse may be connected with the three former verses, and then the
sense appears thus; As if Elihu had said, O Job, I have moved thee to hear
me patiently, and attentively, and let it not seem grievous to thee to do
so; For, though I am thy inferior in age, and degree, yet I am a man as well
as thou, and I have a soul and body like thine, yea the Spirit of God that
made me, has also furnished me; I have rceeived ability from God as thou have,
I stand upon even ground, or equal terms with thee, as to creation, and I am
not altogether void of instruction; and therefore as a man I have a possibility
to understand reason; and as a man endowed by the Spirit of God, I have a
capability to direct thee about the ways of God, or how to understand and
comport with his providence toward thee. Thou have been long under the hand
of God, and long in the hands of men, who have rather entangled and troubled
thy mind then eased it; who knows but that I, who all this while have been but
a looker on, may see somewhat in thy case, which has hitherto been hid from
thy former undertakers. Therefore pray favor me (it may prove in the issue a
favor to thy self) with an hour or two of patient attention. Take this note
from it.

The consideration of our common original, that we have all one maker, or are
all come out of the hand of God, should make us willing to hear, and learn of
one another. Thus Elihu argues; Hear me; why? Because the Spirit of God has
made me, as well as thee; do not despise what I have to say, as if you were a
man of another mould, or pedigree, the same God, out of the same matter, by the
same Word, and Spirit, has formed us both. Some pictures are more highly
prized then others of the same person, because drawn by a better hand, by An
Apelles, or A Michael Angelo. The fame of the Artist or workman puts a value
upon the work; And the title of the Author does sometimes commend a piece
more then, in truth, either the form or matter. But come among the sons of
men, all their faces and features are drawn by one hand; The same most exact
hand of God has wrought and fashioned them all, both as to their outside, and
inside, both as to the form of these houses of clay, and as to all the
ornaments and beautifyings of them. As we all walk upon the same earth, drink
out of the same water, breath in the same air, as we are all covered with the
same Canopy of heaven, and lighted with the same Sun, so we are all made with
the same hand; The Spirit of God has made one as well as another; This man
has not had a better pencill nor a more skillful Limner then that. Thus we may
argue from the common condition of man in nature, to a mutual condiscension
among men. Indeed Christians, who have higher principles, have also higher
topics and arguments then that, why they should condescend one to another; and
(as the Apostle directs, Ephesians: 4.4, 5, 6.) Keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace. Saints should be lowly and meek with long-suffering, forbearing
one another in love, (as the Apostle there exhorts) not only because one hand
has made all their bodies, but because they are one body; though they are many
natural bodies, yet one mystical body; There is one body, and one spirit; As
one Spirit has made them, so they are made one spirit; There is also (as it
follows) one hope, one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God, and father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. How should all Saints
be one, who are comprehended and united under this sevenfold oneness. That we
have all one maker in nature, is a very moving argument to meekness, love, and
unity, but that all believers are made one by Grace, is a much more moving
argument.

Again, We may consider these words in connection with the three following
verses, and then, as in connection with the former, they are a prevention of
Job's pride, so in this, they are a prevention of his fear, or an
encouragement of him to a cheerful hearing of what Elihu had to say. Job had
been dealt severely with by his three friends, and the terror of God was upon
him, he was under much dispondency of spirit. Now (says Elihu) Answer me if
thou can, stand up, set thy words in order before me, for the Spirit of God
has made me, and given me life; I am a creature, and I am but a creature, I am
no more then thou art, I am made of God, and thou art made of God as well as I,
I was made out of the dust, as thou art; I am not God to terrify thee, but I
am sent of God, to counsel and comfort thee; my hand shall not be heavy upon
thee, I promise to deal tenderly with thee, I am such a one as thy self, as I
am not worse, so I am not better, we stand alike together in this dispute;
therefore thou may freely come forth, and answer me, who am but a poor
creature, as thy self is. Thus Elihu bespeaks Job in the sixth and seventh
verses; If thou can answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand up,
Behold, I am according to thy wish. Speak freely, and clear thy self, if
thou art able, thou have free leave for me.

Verse. 5. If thou can answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand up.
This verse may have a fourfold respect.

First, To the insufficiency, or incompetency of Job's parts and intellectuals
to deal with Elihu in this matter; as if they were a daring challenge, Answer
me if thou can, do thy worst. And hence some of the Ancients charge Elihu,
as if he came upon Job boastingly, and spoke thus in the pride of his own
spirit, and in the disdain of Job, at once to show and slight his weakness,
If thou can answer me. As if (like some irrefragable Doctor) he had said; I
shall speak such reason, as I know thou can not answer; do what thou can,
set all thy wits aworke, and beat thy brains as much as thou will, thou will
but loose thy labor, and weary thy self in vain. Thus the meaning of, Answer
me if thou can, is, Thou can not answer. But I suppose Elihu, (though hot
spirited enough) was yet of a better spirit and temper then to speak either
thus proudly of himself, or despisingly of so worthy a man as he had before
him; nor did Elihu look upon Job as such a puny to him, or so much his
underling as that he durst not hold up the Bucklers in dispute against him.
Elihu knew Job was an old experienced Soldier, well versed in the ways and
things of God. And therefore

Secondly, (If thou can) may rather refer to the weakness and soarenesse
of Job's body, to the wounds or troubles which he had received and felt from
the Almighty in his spirit, then to any inability of his mind for argument. As
if Elihu had said; I consider how it is with thee, thou art a man diseased and
distempered in thy body, fitter to lie upon or keep thy bed, then to stand up
to a dispute, fitter for a hospital then for the Schools. Thou also have a
troubled and an afflicted spirit, I doubt thou art not in case to answer me, or
to stand up longer in a way of dispute; but this I say, if thou can answer
me, pray do: set thy words in order before me. I will not lay this burden upon
thee, unless thou art willing to take it, unless thou find thou have
strength and spirit to bear and carry it through. Answer me if thou can,
otherwise I will speak my thoughts out, and make what use of it thou please.

Thirdly, I conceive Elihu might here intend to let Job understand, that he was
resolved to put him to the utmost, that he was resolved to bring the strongest
arguments, and use the quickest way of reasoning for his conviction that he
could; and that therefore he also advises Job to do the like, to do his
best, to buckle himself to the business with all his might, for he was not
come to dally with him: he would have him set his shoulders to the work, and
gather all the forces of his soul to the battle, he bids him bring forth
even his horsemen for his defense (as I may speak in allusion to that in the
12th of Jeremy; If thou have run with footmen, and they have wearied thee, how
shall thou contend with horses) Elihu was purposed and resolved to bring out
his greatest strength, his horsemen to the battle, and therefore wishes Job
do so too. Thus he gives him fair warning, If thou can, answer me; do thy
utmost, I am ready for thee.

Fourthly, While Elihu says, If thou can, answer me, set thy words in order
before me, stand up. We may take his words as a gentle and sweet invitation to
the work; As if he had said, If thou have spirits enough left to hold discourse
with me, or to reply upon me, come friend, spare me not, set thy words in order
before me, I will not be a terror to thee. Or there may be this condescending
sense in these words of Elihu; Do not think (O Job) because I begin to speak,
that therefore I mean to speak all, or to have all the discourse my self;
assure thy self, I have no purpose to hinder thee in any defense, which thou
art able to make for thy self: No, though I am come with my best preparations
to urge thee, and reply upon thee, as to all that has past between thee and
thy friends, yet I am as willing that thou should answer, as I am ready
prepared and pressed to speak; thou have free leave to make thy Apology, to say
what thou can for thy self, I intend not to impose upon thee, nor by any
Authority to compel thee to stand to my sentence, as if I were thy Master, or
would Lord it over thee; Do and speak thy best for thy own vindication, I am
ready to receive it from thee, and give thee a fair account of my thoughts
about it. If thou can, answer me, Set thy words in order before me.

It Is a metaphorical speech, (...)
often and most properly used for the marshalling of an Army; and so is
elegantly applied here in this matter of controversy, or polemicall discourse.
Set thy words, thy reasons, thy arguments, as it were in battle array against
me; we had the word in the former Chapter at the 14th verse. It is applied also
to the exactness of the heart in prayer, not an affected exactness or curiosity
about words, or to word it with God, but it notes exactness or spirituallness
rather in meditating and disposing the strongest Scripture reasonings, to
prevail with God in prayer. Prayer is, as it were, a battle fought in
heaven, not in wroth or revenge, but with faith and holy submission. Thus did
Jacob when he wrastled with the Angel, ( Gen: 32.) And thus David speaks (
Psalm: 5.3.) In the morning I will direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up,
or, I will marshall my prayer, I will bring up petition after petition,
pleading after pleading, even till I am become like Jacob a Prince with God,
till I have won the field, and got the day. Thus the word is applied by a
metaphor both to disputations with men, and supplications to God. Further, we
may take the meaning plainly without any strain of rhetorique, Set thy words
in order before me. Method is good in every thing, either an express or a
covert method. Sometimes it is the best of art to cover it; in speaking there
is a special use of method; for, though, as one said very well (speaking of
those who are more curious about method, then serious about matter) Method
never converted any man; yet method and the ordering of words, is very
useful. Our speeches should not be heaps of words, but words bound up, not a
throng of words, but words set in array, or, as it were, in rank and file. The
Prophet ( Joel 2.5.) describes a terrible Judgment of God by a strong people
set in battle array. In pursuance of which sense, Mr Broughton renders the
next words, not (as we) stand up, but stand to it, as Commanders say to their
Soldiers, stand to it; and the Italian translation thus; Set thy words in
order before me, present thy self to the Combat. Thus he continues the
metaphor; As if he had said; Choose thy ground, St^ quasi in acie, ad pugnandum
contra me and convincendum me rationibus. Drus:
and maintain it like a valiant Champion; I do not desire thou should yield
me an inch of ground, yield to nothing but the truth, dispute every patch with
me, stand up, stand to it; stand as if thou were to fight a battle, not only
for thy honor, but for thy life. The Apostle (1 Cor: 16.13.) speaks in that
language about our spiritual war; Watch ye, stand fast, (...) viriliter
agire.
quit your selves like men; man it, be strong. There is such a sense in Elihu's
exhortation here to Job; Set thy words in order before me, stand up.

Now, in that Elihu when he was thus bent to speak, and was so full of matter
to speak, that as he tells us in the former chapter, He was like bottles of
wine, and that he could not hold, yet gave Job fair law, and bids him answer,
if he could.

Note First.

In all matters of difference we should be as willing to hear what others can
answer, as we are desirous that others should hear what we can object. If thou
can, answer me. It is good to speak in a right cause, especially to speak
rightly, and it is very good to learn what can be answered.

Note.

Secondly, Elihu looking upon Job as a man in a weak condition, speaks
incouragingly, stand up; as much as to say, Take heart.

It is our duty to refresh those that are troubled, or to comfort those that
are weak, whether in body or in mind. We should do our best to put strength
and infuse spirits into sinking hearts and fainting spirits. Thus God dwells
(Isa: 57.51. and so should we) with him that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the
contrite ones.

Thirdly, As these words, If thou can, answer me, import that as Elihu
intended to put Job to the utmost, so he would have Job bestirre himself to
the utmost.

Hence note.

Every man should do his best for the clearing or maintaining of a good and
righteous cause. It Is sinful to be slight in matters of moment. Whatsoever thy
hand finds to do, do it with all thy might (says Solomon, Eccles: 9.10.)
we should especially do these two things with all our might; First, maintain
the truth of God; Secondly, our own integrity. The former of these was
chiefly upon the hand of Elihu in this undertaking, the latter upon the hand
of Job. To betray the truth of God, is the worst kind both of cowardice and
treachery; and to betray our own Integrity is next to that. There is nothing
more unworthy a man, much more a Christian, then to leave either truth, or our
own integrity to sink or swim, to shift for themselves. Thus Elihu provokes
Job to the combat, and sends him a friendly challenge, which lest he should
refuse or not accept, he gives him a comfortable account (as a cordial) what
manner of man he should find him to be, even a man molded and modeled to his
own heart, or minted to his mind, as will appear in the next verse.

Verse. 6. Behold, I am according to thy wish in Gods stead, etc.
Here we have a very winning argument (as was showed in opening the whole
Context) to encourage Job both to hear and answer. If ever a man will speak
when he comes to a business, it is when things and persons are according to
his wish. Job had oftentimes wished that he might be mildly heard by God, and
not so harshly dealt with by man; his friends having been so over-severe and
rigorous toward him, that he was even compelled in the bitterness of his
soul, to cry out, He that is afflicted, should have pity from his friends.
Yea, when Job wished to be heard by God, he, with much earnestness deprecated
his severity, ( Chap: 9. 34. and Chap: 13. 24.) Let not thy dread make me
afraid. Thus, Job had wished for a mild and gentle treatment from all hands. In
answer to which desire Elihu presents himself to him.

Behold, I am according to thy wish in Gods stead. Those words (According to
thy wish) may have a twofold interpretation; First, as we render, according to
thy wish, is, according to what thou have heretofore spoken or drawn out in
wishes; thou have thy vote, thy wish, and what would thou have more. As if he
had said; O Job, I have heard thee wishing such wishes, that thou might be
more tenderly handled; that God would not oppress thee with his Majesty, nor
thy friends with their severity. Now thou have thy desire, I do here promise
my self such a one to thee as thou have desired; For as I will be a faithful
advocate for God, so, I, who am in Gods stead, will not (as thou have prayed
God would not at the hearing of thy case) be terrible nor dreadful to thee; I
doubt not but to carry the matter with thee to thy hearts content. I am
according to thy wish.

Hence note.

We should labor as much as in us lies to answer the desires and wishes of
others in all things lawful, especially when they are weak and laboring under
sore burdens of affliction and infirmity. It is not good to be crosse-grain'd
at any time to our brethren, much less at such a time; some love (as it were)
to lie thwart in every business, nor is any thing more desirable to them,
then to oppose another man's desire. The sweetness and ingenuity of these
words, I am according to your wish, in what I safely may, is seldom heard
among brethren. Some indeed are too forward to be according to the wish of
others in things that are sinful. When thieves and murderers say to them,
Come, come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the
innocent without cause, etc. Cast in your lot among us, let us all have one
purse; They say, we are according to your wish, we will go with you. When the
profane say, come run with us into all excess of riot, to drunkenness and
uncleanness, they answer, we are according to your wish, we are for you. It is
good to lie cross to the sinful desires of men; but to comply with their
honest desires, and to answer every good wish of their souls, is a great part
of our goodness, and of our fulfilling the law of love: we should strive in
that sense, to fall in with every ones wish, and to become all things to all
men, both for their edification and consolation. Behold, I am according to thy
wish.

Secondly, (...) secundum os tuum. i. e. sicut tu.
These words are rendered strictly out of the Original thus, I am according to
thy mouth, or measure; I am in the same condition and state as thou art. Thus
also they are words of encouragement to Job, assuring him that he should not be
overpowered, nor borne down by force. This form of speaking is used
frequently in Scripture, to note the sutablenesse or proportion of things. The
Israelites (Exodus: 16.21.) gathered Manna every morning, Every man according to
his eating. Juxta os edere sui. Heb:
The Hebrew is, Every one did gather to the mouth of his eating, that is,
according to the measure of his eating, such was the measure of his gathering.
The Nazarite was to offer according to the vow which he vowed (Numb: 6.21.
Juxta os voti sui. Heb: Juxta os servitij. Heb:
) The Hebrew is, according to the mouth of his vow. Again it is said ( Numb:
7.5.) Moses was to give the offerings of the Princes of Israel to the Levites,
to every man according to his service, or, according to the mouth (that is, the
condition and degree) of his service. Once more, Solomon (Prove: 22.6.) pressing
the good and genuine education of children, Super os viae suae. Heb:
expresses it thus; Train up a child in the way that he should go; The
Original upon the mouth of his way; that is, in such a way as is not only good
and honest in it self, but most proper and congeniall to the spirit,
disposition, and capacity of the child. As children are to be fed with such
meats, so to be taught in such a manner as they can most easily and profitably
digest. After this manner, or to this sense, Elihu speaks to Job, Stand up, I
am according to thy mouth or measure; As if he had said; God indeed is
infinitely above thy measure, But I, who am come to deal with thee in Gods
stead, am according to thy mouth or measure, therefore take courage; one man is
like another, the measure of one man is the measure of another. There are I
grant, several differences among men, both as to civils and spiritualls; there
are several graduall and personal differences, but no specificall difference
among men; every man is according ^os the mouth or measure of any other man: in
that God only transcends the measure of all men; My thoughts are not as your
thoughts, nor my ways as your ways; but look as the heavens are high above
the earth, so my thoughts are above your thoughts, and my ways above your
ways, says the Lord ( Isa. 55.8, 9.) But the ways of one man are like the
ways of other men, and the thoughts of one man are like the thoughts of other
men; There is no such transcendency among men; They are all (as men) of one
measure, that is, not only finite, but they are all short and narrow, even they
who carry the greatest length and breadth among the sons of men. If we consider
man with man, as to his sinful condition, so one man is perfectly like
another; one man is of the same measure with another; as Solomon expresses it
( Prove: 27.19.) As in water face answers face, so the heart of man to man. If
man look down into the water, that face which he sees in the water is like
that face which sees the water. Thus the hearts of the children of men answer
one another, heart answers heart, as face answers face: And as man answers man
fully, as to natural sinfulness, so mostly as to natural abilities, as for
those which are acquired, though the difference may be so great that one man
may be clearly discerned to excel another, yet that man who excells most, does
not exceed man; and therefore may be compassed by man. It is said ( Rev:
21.17.) That the wall of the new Jerusalem was measured according to the
measure of a man, that is, of the Angel. There is one measure of an Angel, and
there is another measure of a man; Angels have a measure above men; why then
does he say according to the measure of a man, that is, of the Angel? I answer,
he speaks so because the Angel appeared in the shape of a man, to do that
work. Now as the measure (that is, the Ability) of an Angel is above man's; So
God has a measure infinitely above both men and Angels. But men are of a
measure. I am according to thy mouth or measure.

Hence note.

First, Man and man are of a measure. Let us not make a God of any man, no nor
an Angel. The Apostle Jude reproves those who had the persons of men in
admiration. Men will be less to us then was expected, if we expect too much
from them, or more from them, then is meet. For though one man may have a
little more height and largeness of parts and gifts, in that which is either
acquired or infused, then his neighbor, yet what man is there in the world,
but has his match, and shall find his measure in some other men; yea, though
some men exceedingly out-goe others, yet their equals may be found among men,
no man out-goes all men: The best of men have but the measure of a man.

Secondly, Take this Caution from it; Let no man make a God of himself, or
look upon himself as if he were in his measure beyond all other men. We are
very apt to do so. And if we have but little more then some others, we are
ready to think we have more then all others, or to look upon our selves as if
we transcended the measure of mankind, and so swell presently with pride and
self-conceit; then which nothing is more uncomely or unmanly. Not a few
esteem themselves so unparalleled in the parts and beauty of their bodies,
that they despise others, and many do it in reference to the endowments and
abilities of their minds; they have such a quickness of understanding, such a
strength of memory, such a fluency of speech, such a depth of reason, such
power of arguing, as they suppose none can match them or measure with them. All
such have forgotten that they are but men. Therefore as no man should admire
another, so let him not think highly of himself, let him rather think that
though possibly there are some below him, yet there may be many, yea a great
many more above him, and enough that are upon the same level with him. I am
according to thy wish or measure, says Elihu.

(...)
In Gods stead. Pro deo; erga deum.
But how came Elihu to be in Gods stead? had he a Commission from God to
undertake Job? was he, as I may say, Gods Delegate or Ambassador? did God send
him out upon this errand? if not, why did he take so much to himself, as to
say, I am according to thy wish in Gods stead?

Non quod se dei loco illi aut deum illi futurum aut esse dicat, sed quod dei
parts and causam sit contra illum defensurus. Vt quia ille cum deo ob ejus
majestatem congredi verebatur, offerat se Jobo dei loco illi futurum. Merc: Ego
juxta os tuum deo. i. e. pro deo, est enim dativus favoris. Bold:
I cannot say, that Elihu had any formal Commission to come out, and appear in
Gods stead, as an Atturny appears in stead of his Client, or as an Ambassador
in the stead of his Prince; But doubtless Elihu had an equivalent or virtuall
Commssion, even a mighty impression upon his spirit, by the Spirit of God to
do so; his heart was drawn out secretly, but strongly to stand up and
undertake for God, toward the determination of this long continued dispute. I
am (says he) in Gods stead or place; in that place which if God himself
should supply, he would be a dread and a terror to thee. But I a man of like
passions as thy self, and being here in Gods behalf, and by his authority, in
his name and for his glory to speak unto thee, I shall yet speak according to
the measure of a man, and therefore, thou need not fear that my terror
should make thee afraid, I am in Gods stead.

Hence note.

They who speak to others about the things of God, should speak as God, or as
put in Gods place and stead. It Is enough to make all the Ministers of Christ
tremble and cry out in the Apostles words, Who is sufficient for these things?
to remember that when they speak to men, they speak in Gods stead. We (says
the same Apostle, 2 Cor: 5.20.) are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Thus
spoke he who had indeed an immediate call and commission from God; and they who
have not such an immediate call and commission as he had, yet speaking of or
about the things of God; and coming in the name of God, they should speak as
placed in Gods stead. And if the Ministers of Christ ought to speak as in Gods
stead, then surely they that hear, should hear them as speaking in Gods
stead. The Apostle testifies of the Galathians (Gal: 4.14.) My temptation which
was in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected, but received me as an Angel of
God, even as Christ Jesus. Ye received me not only as an Angel or messenger of
Christ, but as if Christ had been there in person, so did ye receive me. He
gives the same testimony of the Thessalonians (1 These: 2.13.) For this cause
also thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the word of God,
which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of man, but (as it is in
truth) the word of God, which effectually works also in you that believe. I
do not say, that what every man speaks about the things of God, is presently
to be taken for the word of God, or as if God spoke it. But if that be his
scope and purpose, if that be his Theme and his business, if that be the
subject matter and substance of his speech, Then he (as to the body of his
speech) is to be looked upon as uttering the word and mind of God in Gods
stead. It Is a very great means to advance our profit in hearing the word, when
they who speak it are looked upon as speaking in Gods stead, and not bringing an
errand of their own.

Before I pass from this first clause of the verse, I shall briefly touch two
other readings and interpretations of it.

First, thus; Behold, I am, as if thy mouth were to God; that is, Ecc^ ego
quasi esset os tuum ad deum. Coc:
thou need not as thou have wished to go or address to God himself for
the laying open of thy cause, the matter may be done between me and thee, even
as if thou had spoken to God himself.

Secondly, Some render those latter words not in Gods stead as we, But, in
respect of God. As if he had said, In respect of God, I stand in the same
proportion, or upon the same terms with thy self, for he is the God of us
both, nor did God make me of any better or more excellent matter then thou art
made of; which he fully expresses in the close of the verse, as it follows.

I also am formed out of the Clay. These words are another argument (as was
showed when I gave the prospect of the whole Context) why Job should hear
Elihu; I am in Gods stead indeed, but I am a poor creature, molded out of the
dust, made up of earth, as thou art; I also am formed out of the Clay;
therefore stand up, answer me, and fear not; answer me and spare not. The
highest and holiest that ever dispensed the mind of God, in Gods stead, to his
Church and people here on earth, were made of earth, and were formed out of
Clay. The Apostle makes that humble confession of himself and fellow-Apostles
(2 Cor: 4.6.) We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of
the power might be of God. The weakness of the instrument lifts up the glory of
the superior agent. They who by commission are the Ministers of God, and so in
Gods stead, are yet but, as other men, in their natural structure and
constitution. ( Acts 10.26.) when Cornelius gave too much respect, a kind of
Adoration to Peter, he forbad him, saying, Stand up, I also am a man. As if he
had said with Elihu, I am formed out of the clay as well as thee. There is a
respect due to the persons of men, and much more to the Messengers of God, yet
too much may soon be given; I will none of that, says Peter; I also am a man.
So Paul and Barnabas (Acts 14.15.) when the people were so hightned in their
ignorant respects, that they would have sacrificed to them, as Gods, They rent
their clothes (as in case of blasphemy) and ran in among the people, crying
out and saying, Sirs, why do ye these things? We also are men subject to like
passions with you, etc.

(...) Excisus.
I am also [formed] or as the Hebrew signifies, Cut out of the Clay. As the
potter cuts off a rude lump of clay from the whole mass of clay before him, to
make a vessel of it; so man is cut out of that mass of mankind; for though
the birth and original of man is now by another way, then the first man's was,
yet we may all look upon our selves as having the same original; we are cut
out of the clay, and formed out of the dust.

Hence note.

For the matter all men have one original. I also am formed out of Clay. I
have heretofore met with this point, and therefore pass it here.

Secondly, From the scope of Elihu,

Note.

The consideration of our common condition, should fit us with compassion one
to another; much more should it keep us from insulting over one another. Elihu
used this expression, to assure Job that he would deal very tenderly with him;
What, do thou think, that I who am a piece of clay will insult over thee, who
art as good a piece of clay as I? why should one earthen vessel dash hard upon
another? When we are tempted to pride in our selves, let us remember that we
are clay, when we are provoked to anger against our brethren, or to any harsh
and rigorous dealing with them, let us remember that we also are clay, that our
pedigree and our stock is from the dust as well as others. If our feet be but a
little fouled, we think our selves somewhat humbled by it, if but a little dirt
stick to our shoes, or hang about our clothes, we are somewhat ashamed of our
selves, yet the truth is, we are all dust, all clay, all mire, we are nothing
as to our bodies, but a little living dust and breathing clay, why then should
we be lifted up in high thoughts of our selves? I might hence also give a third
note; It Is a common Theme, but of important usefulness.

Man is a very frail creature, he is clay. But having had occasion to speak to
this also heretofore, I shall not stay upon it. Only consider, that, as man is
clay, so he is returning to clay, yea turning into clay. We are but a little
well compacted and compounded dust, and we shall ere long crumble into dust. We
are every day going back, and shall shortly be gone back to what at first we
were. These considerations should wither and nip the buddings of
selfe-confidence, and bring down the height of man's spirit; I also am formed
out of the clay.

We may take notice of one thing farther, Elihu speaking here of his own
natural formation, gives it in this style; I also am formed out of the clay.
This is a peculiar Scripture-expression, or the proper phrase of the holy
Ghost, not of a heathen Author, Poet, or Orator. They at best had only some
rude notions about this mystery of man's original, His formation by the power
of God out of the earth. Which may inform us, that the Saints and people of
God in those elder and darker times, were familiarly acquainted with the
doctrine of the creation, Gentes enim hoc de primi hominis facta a deo
plasmatione and ex terraformatione mysterium penitus ignorarunt. Bold:
and knew well how to speak in a Scripture language, though they had not then
the written word or Scriptures; For it is a question whether these transactions
were before the giving of the Law or after; However, they were versed in
Scripture truths, and in those forms of speech by which God gave out his mind
to their forefathers. Here Is Scripture phrase, I also am formed out of the
clay. And therefore Elihu, as sencible of another frailty by the experience
which he had of his own, subjoynes this Assurance of his respect to Job's
weakness in what he should further say.

Verse. 7. Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand
be heavy upon thee.
Elihu had given Job much security already that he would deal fairly with
him; and here he gives him a promise for it; As if he had said; I give thee my
hand, I plight thee my truth, that my terror shall not make thee afraid, nor
shall my hand be heavy upon thee. Veruntamen miraculum meum te non terreat.
Vulg:
The vulgar translation reads, my miracles (or what I will do in any strange
and unusual way) shall not terrify thee. Indeed miracles have a kind of
terror in them; But we need not put such a strain upon the Text. The word
which we translate terror, signifies that which is most terrible and dreadful
to man, even the Magistrates throne, Vox (...) terrorem denotat and saepe
illum, qui in facie regis, judicis, principis elucet.
the presence of great Princes; of which Solomon says ( Pro: 20.28.) The King
sitting upon the throne, scatters all evil with his eyes; that is, with the
terrible looks of Majesty which God has stamped upon him. The Prophet ( Jer:
50.38.) uses this word to express idols or false Gods by; and he c^lls them
so either in a holy scorn; O these dumb idols which have eyes and see not,
ears and hear not, feet and walk not, are doubtless very shrewd and
terrible things, are they not? have we not great reason to fear what these
doughty Gods will say or do, who can neither say nor do any thing? Thus he
might call them in a way of scorn: or he calls those Idols terrible things
Jehim, from the event, because foolish, vain, ignorant men, did exceedingly
fear them, or were much terrified by them, and God left them to their own
fears and terrors, as he spoke by the Prophet ( Isa: 66.4.) I also will choose
their delusions, and bring their fears upon them. As if he had said, Because
they being vainly deluded, have chosen to fear that which was not to be
feared, therefore I also will make this my choice to bring that upon them which
they feared, and hoped to avoid by following and worshipping Idols, or by
their Idolatrous worship. Now whereas Job was afraid of the terror of the true
God, Elihu, who presented himself in Gods stead, tells him, my terror shall
not make thee afraid. And we may well conceive, that Elihu spoke this
ironically concerning himself; for having said before, I am but a piece of
clay, surely then my terror cannot make thee afraid. What terribleness is there
in a piece of clay, Terror minime potest esse in massa luti, qualis est omnis
homo.
in a clod of earth? What are the most terrible of the sons of men, that they
should be a terror to us? we ought not to trust in the mightiest among men, why
then should we fear them, or what need we fear them? Who art thou (says the
Prophet, Isa: 51.1^, 13.) that thou should be afraid of a man that shall
dye, and of the son of man that shall be made as Grass? and forgettest the
Lord thy maker. We never fear men unduely, till we do one of or both these
things, either first forget God who made us, or secondly, forget of what other
men are made. I am but a piece of clay (says Elihu) what matter of terror can
I be to thee I wonder?

In that Elihu gives Job such a promise, Behold, my terror shall not make thee
afraid.

Note.

Man should show himself fair and meek to men, especially to a man in
affliction. It is possible for a man, though he be but clay, as another man is,
yet to cloth himself, as it were, with terror, yea as the neck of the horse
is said to be clothed (Job 39.19.) with thunder. He may put on a kind of
dreadfulnesse as a Garment, and appear very formidable to his brother. Some
men indeed appear to men as a Wolf to a poor sheep, or as a Bear and Lion
to a Lamb. Though but clay, yet how scaringly do some men look and Lord it
over their brethren! they will rore upon them like a Lion, and rend them like a
Bear; clouds and darkness are in their faces, and storm sits upon their
brows. There is a terriblenesse of man to man. Thus the holy Prophet ( Isa:
25.2.) says, The blast of the terrible one is like a storm against the wall.
Yea, some men are not only dreadful, like savage beasts, but like devils,
they even act or play the devil with their brethren. How far have they
departed from their duty, and broken all the laws of love, which command us to
be as God one to another, in kindness, in mercy and compassion? I grant,
Magistrates by their place and office are said to be terrible, yea a terror,
but it is to evil doers (Rom: 13.3.) Rulers are not a terror to good works,
but to the evil; that is, not to those whose works are good, but to evil
workers. And to them they ought to be a terror; For they do not bear the
sword in vain; that is, to hold it in their hands, or let it rust in the
scabbard, and never strike with it; As they are Ministers of God, so avengers
toward men, to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Again,
Gospel Ministers in some cases are to be terrible, they may be Boanergesses,
sons of thunder to the obstinate and rebellious, to the proud and presumptuous
sinner; they must cut him out a portion to his condition, and save him (if it
may be) with fear. But the general temper and carriage of the Ministers of
the Gospel is meekness and gentleness, they should be full of love and of
compassion, instructing even those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure
will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth. (2 Timothy: 2.25,
26.) The Ministers of Christ must not deal out terror, till there be a
necessity of it: And always they who do well, or are humbled for the evil
which they have done, must be handled tenderly. My terror shall not make thee
afraid, Neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee.

Onus meum super te non erit grave. Targ: Quidam vocem (...) ita sumunt quasi
veniat ab (...) quod est incurvare. q.d. opus meum quod tibi imponam non erit
tale, ut sub eo incurveris. Bold: Inflexit se super eum os suum. Mont:
My Burden shall not be heavy upon thee, says the Chaldee Paraphrase, and so
some translate out of the Hebrew, taking the derivation of the word from a
root which signifies to bow down the back, as we do when a burden is laid
upon us. So the word is rendered ( Prove: 16.26.) He that labors, labors for
himself, for his mouth craveth it of him, that is our reading; and we put in
the Margent, and his mouth boweth unto him. The mouth of a laboring man boweth
to him, as begging that he would get and give it something to eat, and
satisfy the craving of his hungry stomach. It Is sad to see some poor men so
given to Idleness, that they had rather starve then work, and when (according
to the propriety of this text in the Proverbs) their mouth boweth to them, that
they would take pains to get a little bread to eat, they had rather endure
the burden of hunger, then the burden of labor; But I instance this place
only for that word which signifies a burden, or to burden. Those dreadful
Prophecies which mere published against any people in Scripture, are called
Burdens. The Burden of Duma; the burden of Damascus; the burden of Babylon;
that is, a prophecy which had a burden of calamity in it, able to break the
backs of the strongest Nations. So says Elihu according to this translation;
My burden shall not be heavy upon thee.

Others render it thus, Eloquentia mea non erit tibi gravis. Vulg:
My Eloquence shall not be heavy upon thee; that is far from the text; yet
there is a truth in the thing; As if Elihu had said, Though I am about to
speak, and have much to speak, yet I would not speak such words, nor so many
(I hope) as shall be burdensome to thee. I would not burden thee with
Eloquence; that is, either with affected Eloquence, or the over-flowings of
Eloquence. Multiplicity of expression is very burdensome; nor is any thing in
speech more grievous to a wise man, then an unnecessary heap of words. They
who have a fluency of speech, are usually more pleased to hear themselves
speak, then others are to hear them. Elihu (according to this reading) spoke
discreetly, and to the purpose, while he thus engages to Job; I will not
burden thee with my Eloquence. But I pass that also.

We translate fully and clearly to the text; (...) pro (...) vota mea. i. e.
manus plaga, ut Aleph sit addititium sive Hermanticum. Drus:
My hand shall not be heavy upon thee. The hand is taken two ways; properly,
and improperly; it is not to be taken properly here; we cannot suspect Elihu of
any such rude behavior, that he would lay a violent hand on Job. Improperly
the hand signifies any act of a man toward man; so a man's words may be his
hand; A man's hand may be heavy on him, whom he never touched or came near,
yea, a man's hand may be heavy upon him whom he never saw. Our hand is heavy
upon others, not only by outward violence upon the body, but by any pressure
upon the mind or inward man; our vexing or troubling another, whether by doing
or saying that which afflicts him, is the laying of a heavy hand upon him.
That Is the meaning of Elihu; My hand shall not be heavy upon thee; that is, I
will do nothing, nor will I say any thing, which (in it self) shall be
grievous and vexatious to thee. We find David complaining ( Psalm: 32.4.) that
the hand of God was heavy upon him day and night; that is, God appeared as
displeased with him, he could not get evidence of his love in the pardon of his
sin; This pressed his soul like an intolerable burden. Great afflictions of
any kind are a heavy hand upon us. Elihu who saw the heavy hand of God upon
Job already, gives him this comfortable promise, That he would not add grief
to his sorrow; My hand shall not be heavy upon thee; I know thou have thy load
already. These latter words are of the same general importance with the
former; And we may Note further from them.

Meekness and gentle dealing becomes us while we would reduce others from their
error, or reprove them for it. My hand shall not be heavy upon thee. The
Apostle called God to record concerning the Corinthians (2 Cor: 1.23, 24.) that
it was to spare them that he had not come as then to Corinth. As if he had
said, I was loath to lay so heavy a hand upon you, or deal with such severity,
as your case required. And yet he adds, what severity soever I or others shall
use toward you, we shall use it, Not for that we have dominion over your
faith, but as helpers of your Joy. We shall not come with Lordly power upon
you, we purpose not to carry it by mere authority and command, but of entreaty
and love; we will not Lord it over your consciences, but only regulate them,
that your comforts may flow in more freely. Hard words are oftentimes more
pressing then the hardest blows. Words may weigh much more upon the spirit,
then a heavy burden upon the back. I grant a heavy hand must be laid upon
some, there is no other way to deal with them. The word is a hammer and a
fire. But as I intimated before, we must distinguish of persons and of causes,
and accordingly lay our hand. God has not made his Ministers Lions to scare
his flock, nor Bulls to gore them, but Shepherds to feed them and watch over
them. And especially when the hand of God is upon any, our hand should not.

For conclusion, take here the laws of a just disputation. Elihu in this
Preface (I have yet gone no farther) gives Job free leave to answer, and set
himself to the battle with him, and promises to deal with him in the
fairest and in the meetest way he could wish or desire. It is the observation
of a modern Expositer upon this place, considering the equanimity and
gentleness with which Elihu engaged himself to manage this dispute. If such
a spirit (says he) could be found as here Elihu professes in this
controversy with Job, Levaterus.
how soon might all our controversies be ended; but we see most men every
where magisterially imposing one upon another, yea magistratically. If they
cannot impose magesterially, and make others believe what they say, because
they say it, then they will impose magistratically, the Magistrates sword shall
make way, if strength of argument cannot. And (says he) when they have
disputed a while and answer is made, they will not receive answer, but tell of
prisons, of sword and fire. Thus he taxed the Popish Magistrates of those
times, who laid indeed a most heavy hand upon all who submitted not to the
Babylonish yoke. And it were well if there were not something of such a spirit,
a bitter spirit, an imposing spirit, a spirit of dominion over the faith of
others remaining at this day; but that we could with sweetness and gentleness
treat about our differencies, and say as this man did (though a man full of
zeal for truth) to our dissenters, we will not terrify you with the
Magistrates sword, nor will we deal by subtleness; we will not persuade you by
bonds and prisons; Our terror shall not make you afraid, nor our hand be heavy
upon you, neither will we provoke other hands to be heavy on you; we will
carry all things fairly, amicably, Christianly, waiting in the use of proper
means, counsels, convictions, and prayers, till God shall make way into every
man's spirit to receive the truth.

Thus far Elihu has (like a subtle Orator) prefac'd it with Job, to prepare
him for an attentive hearing, Hactenus exordium sequitur propositio.
for a candid construction of, and a ready condiscention to what he had ready
to propose, and say.

JOB. Chap. 33. Verse. 8, 9, 10, 11. Surely thou have spoken in my hearing, and
I have heard the voice of thy words, saying,

I am clean without transgression, I am innocent, neither is there iniquity in
me.

Behold, he finds occasions against me, he counts me for his enemy.

He puts my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my paths.


ELihu having ended his sweet ingenuous and insinuating Preface, falls roundly
to his business, and begins a very sharp charge. Bitter pills will hardly
down, unless gilded over and wrapped in sugar; nor will any man's stomach
receive and digest them, unless well prepared. Elihu was wise enough to
consider this; He knew well, what he had to say, and with whom to do, and
therefore laid his business accordingly.

In this charge (to give a brief of the parts of it) Elihu tells Job; first,
he had heard him speak ( v: 8.) Secondly, he tells him what he has heard him
speak: And that may fall under these two heads; First, that he had heard him
justifying himself, ( v: 9.) I have heard thee, saying, I am clean without
transgression, I am innocent, neither is there iniquity in me. Secondly, He had
heard him unduely reflecting upon God, and that two ways; First, as
over-severely observing him, as it were, to gather up matter against him, in
the beginning of the 10th verse, and in the latter end of the 11th. Behold, he
finds occasion against me, and marketh all my paths. That Is one reflection,
and a very sore one upon God. Secondly, Elihu charge him with reflecting upon
God, as over-severely dealing with him. That we have ( v: 10th and 11th) He
counts me for his enemy, he puts my feet in the stocks, etc. These things
(says Elihu) I have heard thee, saying; And having said all this, he had
indeed said enough to make him blameworthy.

Verse. 8. Surely thou have spoken in my hearing, and I have heard the voice of
thy words, saying.
There is nothing difficult in this verse. That which we render, Thou have
spoken in my hearing, is in the text; Thou have spoken in mine ear; that is, I
have not gathered up what I bring against thee upon uncertain reports, But
have been an eare-witnesse of them. I have been one of thine hearers, I have
stood by thee attentively, while thou have been complaining so bitterly. Surely
thou have spoken in mine ear, And I have heard the voice of thy words, saying.

Thus and thus, as it follows in the next words. As if Elihu had said; O Job,
while I consider thy present suffering condition, I deny not that thy
affliction is great, and thy cross heavy; I deny not that thy afflictions are
many, and of long continuance; I deny not that in the debate held with thy
friends, thou have spoken many things well, and have insisted upon very
profitable and remarkable truths: nevertheless, I cannot dissemble my dislike
of some things thou have spoken, and must tell thee plainly wherein either
through passion, or want of information, thou have been much mistaken. And yet
thou shall see that I will not impose my sense upon thy words, nor strain nor
torture them by undue and odious inferences to thy disadvantage; But shall
recollect and fairly represent some passages which have fallen from thee, and
show thee the error of them. I know thou can not deny that thou have said the
things which I am offended with; and I believe when thou have heard me a while,
and considered better of them, thou will not undertake to defend them. Surely
thou have spoken in my hearing, and I have heard the voice of thy words,
saying, I am clean, etc.

First, In that Elihu coming to charge Job about what he had spoken, professes
he had been a serious hearer of him, while he was speaking.

Observe.

What we object against others, we should have good evidence and proof of it
our selves. There are two infallible witnesses, or they may be so; First,
eyewitnesses, such as have seen that which they say; the witness of the eye
is surest as to what is done. Secondly, Eare-witnesses, and they are the surest
as to what is spoken. We should not take up accusations by hearsay, but be
able to say, we have heard the accused say it. Thus said Elihu, I have not
taken up this matter by the way, from those I met with, But I have been upon
the place my self; I stood by thee and heard while these words dropped from
thy mouth. Many report what they never heard, they report upon report; as those
accusers in the Prophet, ( Jer: 20.10.) Report (say they) and we will report
it. They cannot say, as Elihu, You have spoken it in our hearing, and we have
heard the voice of your words, but we hear you have spoken it; or you are
famed for speaking it. How many transgress the rules of charity, and break the
bonds not only of civil friendship, but of Christian love, upon reports of
what others report. It Is dangerous to report more of others, then we have heard
them say, till (at least) we are sure the reporters heard them say it.

Again, When Elihu says, Thou have spoken in my hearing, and I have heard the
voice of thy words; He would convince Job to the utmost.

Hence note.

To accuse or condemn any man out of his own mouth, must needs stop his
mouth. Or, To be condemned out of our own mouth, is an unanswerable
condemnation. When our own sayings are brought against us, what have we to
say? Christ told the evil and unprofitable servant, who would needs put in a
plea for his idleness, and excuse himself for hideing his Lords talent in a
napkin (that is, for not using or improving his gift) ( Luk: 19.22.) Out of
thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant; I will go no further
then thy own words. And we see, as that evil servant had done nothing before,
so then he could say nothing, because judged out of his own mouth. When the
offenders tongue condemns him, who can acquit him? ( Psalm: 64.8.) So they
shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves. The tongues of some men
have fallen upon them, and crushed them like a mountain, and they have been
pressed down, yea irrecoverably oppressed with the weight of their own words.
The Apostle Jude tells us what the Lord will do when he comes to Judgment, in
that great and solemn day of his second Appearing, ( v: 15.) He shall convince
all that are ungodly, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him. He shall say to them, are not these your words? can you deny them?
or have you any plea for them? Have you not spoken these things in my hearing?
And have I not heard the voice of your words, speaking thus and thus
reproachfully of my ways, ordinances, and servants? This is like wounding a
man with his own weapon, it is like the act of David in cutting off the head of
Goliath with his own sword. He that is condemned by his own saying, dies by
his own sword. David says of sychophants and slanderers ( Psalm: 55.21.) Their
words were smoother then oil, yet were they drawn swords. Such draw these
swords with an intent to wound other men's reputation or good name, but they
oftenest wound their own; And as their words who slander others, rebound upon
themselves, and turn to their own disgrace, so also do theirs for the most
part, who are much in commending or possibly only (which was Jobs case) in
vindicating themselves. Surely thou have spoken in my hearing, etc.

But what had Elihu heard Job speak? the next words are an answer, or declare
the matter of his speech; and in them, as was said before in opening the
Context; Elihu first charge him with an over-zeale in justifying himself, I
have heard the voice of thy words, saying;

Verse. 9. I am clean without transgression, I am innocent, neither is there
iniquity in me.
This thou have said, and this I charge upon thee as a great iniquity. For the
clearing of these words, I shall do these four things, because upon this
charge the whole discourse of Elihu throughout the Chapter depends.

First, I shall give the sense and explication of the words as here expressed
by Elihu, and some brief notes from them.

Secondly, I shall show what matter of accusation, or of fault there is in
these words of Job, as brought by Elihu in charge against him, or how sinful a
thing it is for any man to say he is without sin.

Thirdly, I shall enquire what ground Job had given Elihu to charge him with
saying these things.

Fourthly, (which follows upon the third) I shall inquire whether Elihu dealt
rightly and fairly with Job, in bringing thy sore and severe charge against
him.

First, To open the words, as they are an assertion, Thou have said, I am
clean without transgression, I am innocent, neither is there iniquity in me.
Some distinguish the three terms used in the text, as a denial of three
several sorts of sin. First, That, by being clean without transgression, he
intends his freedom from sins against sobriety, or that he had not sinned
against himself. Secondly, that, by being innocent, his meaning is, he had not
done impiously against God. Thirdly, that, by having no iniquity in him, he
cleares himself of wrong done to man. These three sorts of sin, contain sin
in the whole latitude of it. All sin is either against our selves, strictly
called intemperance, or against God, strictly called impiety, or against man,
strictly called unrighteousness. But though this has a truth in it, as to the
distinction of sins, yet it may be over-nice to conclude Elihu had such a
distinct respect in these distinct expressions; And it may be questioned
whether the words will bear it quite through. Therefore I pass from it and
leave it to the readers Judgment.

Further as to the verse in general, we may take notice, that the same thing
is said four times; twice affirmatively, I am clean, I am innocent; And twice
negatively, I am without transgression, There is no iniquity in me.

I am clean without transgression. The word which we render clean, implies
the cleanest of cleanness; it is rightly opposed to the word transgression,
which signifies, a defection or turning off from God. Every sin in the nature
of it, is a defection from God; but some sins are an intended or resolved
defection from him. Some even throw off the sovereignty of God over them, and
his power to command them, not being willing to submit their backs to his
burden, nor their necks to his yoke. These are justly called sons of Belial,
they not only transgress the Law, but throw off the yoke of Christ from their
necks, and his burden from their shoulderS, and say (like them, Luke 19.14.) We
will not have this man reign over us. So then, when Job said, I am clean
without transgression, he may be very well understood thus; Though I have many
failings, yet I am free from defection, though I have many weaknesses, yet I am
free from rebellion and obstinacy. I still retain an entire love to God, and
am ready to submit to his will, though I often find my heart, through
corruption, rising up against my duty; I am turned aside through the strength
of temptations, but I turn not aside through the bent of my affections. This
doubtless or somewhat like this was Job's sense when ever he said, I am clean
without transgression.

Hence note.

First, Transgression is a pollution, or, Sin is a defilement. If once men step
over or besides the line and rule of holiness the Law of God (which to do is
transgression) they become unholy. Job supposed himself unclean, if guilty of
transgression. Sin is an unclean thing, and it makes man unclean. This the
Church confessed ( Isa: 64.6.) We all are as an unclean thing, or person; As if
they had said, Time was, when there was a choice people among us, who kept
themselves pure from common defilements; But now the contagion and corruption
is so epidemicall and universal, that the whole body of our people looks like
a lump of filthiness and uncleanness. We are overspread with a loathsome
Leprosy from head to foot, from top to toe. Holiness keeps us fair, and
righteousness sweet.

Secondly, Note.

A sinlesse person is a clean person. When we arrive at perfect freedom from
sin, we shall be clean indeed, perfectly clean. And according to the degree
or proportion of our freedom from sin in this world, is our cleanness in this
unclean world.

Secondly, Thou have said, I am innocent; so we read; There are two
significations given by the learned, which are of very useful consideration
for the clearing up of this text. First, (...) a (...) Tegere and pretegere
unde (...) portus, in quo naves sunt tectae et ^^iae a vento. Merc:
the Hebrew word which we translate innocent, is derived from a root which
signifies to hide, to cover, or protect; And that two ways; First, to protect
actively, or to defend others; Secondly, It notes protection passively, or to
be protected by another. Some conceive that Elihu here intended it of Job in an
active signification, whereas we say, I am innocent, they say, I protect, and
so refer to him, as a Magistrate I have protected the oppressed, I have
protected those whom the sons of violence have prosecuted. Indeed Job speaks
his practice much in that ( Chap: 29. 12.) I delivered the poor that cried,
and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him; The blessing of him
that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to sing
for joy. Job had been a great Protector of the poor; And by this word the
Hebrews express an haven or harbor for Ships; Because harbors or havens are
places of protection to Ships; First, they are places of protection to Ships
from winds and storms, they are safe places from rocks, shelfs and sands; a
Ship in harbor is under protection from the dangers of the Sea. Secondly, A
Ship in harbor is under protection from enemies and Pirates; while she is
abroad at Sea, if enemies come she must shift for her self, she must run or
fight, but in the harbor she is under the protection of the State or Country
where she arriveth. Thus all Magistrates are or should be, a just Magistrate is
a good harbor for all that are in danger of the winds and storms, of the
rocks and rage of wicked men. Good Governors are an harbor, and oppressors
like storms and rocks. That Is one sense of the word in the active
signification. And taking it in this sense Job asserts highly for his own
honor, while he says, I have been a protector of the oppressed, I have been
a harbor or a haven to the weather-beaten poor.

Secondly, Others take this protection passively, I have been protected. Job
was once protected from all outward evil, from the invasion of devils and
evil men. God made such an hedge about him, that Satan could not touch him.
But the sense given of this protection here intended is spiritual, I have been
protected from the evil of the world, or from the evil world, I have been
kept from that pollution and corruption, which (as the Apostle Peter speaks) is
in the world through lust. And that is a blessed, yea the best part of a Saints
protection, he is kept through the power of God through faith unto salvation;
He is not given up to the defilements and apostasy of times or places, the Lord
preserves his spirit and his ways pure and clean. Our translation, I am
innocent, compared with this, I have been kept or protected from sin. The one
is a very good exposition and illustration of the other; For innocence is our
safety, and integrity our best keeper. Innocence is our fair haven, and safest
harbor. When the winds are highest, and the Seas most rough and angry, there;
if any where, we may shelter and anchor our selves from the storm and tempest.
Thus David prayed ( Psalm: 25.21.) Let integrity and uprightness preserve me;
that is, let me be preserved in mine integrity and uprightness. And that he had
been so preserved, he tells us ( Ps: 41.12.) As for me thou upholdest me in
mine integrity. He that can say, I am innocent, shall have cause to say, I am
protected; the innocent person is under covert; God protecteth the innocent,
yea makes innocence their protection. Man is never so well sheltered, as by
the righteousness of Christ, and by his own innocence. It Is guilt which leaves
our breast naked to every dart and thrust.

Again to come a little nearer to our translation (though this be very
significant) I am innocent; It Is a negative, I have done no hurt, or I have no
guilt upon me. The Rabbis tell us, (...) ex Rabinico verbo (...) exponunt quod
significat pectere and se mundare. Lotus ego. Targ: Tersus ego sum. Coc:
the word comes from a root which signifies to wash, and so the Chaldee
Paraphrase renders, I am washed; Others thus, I am brushed or combed; Mr
Broughton, I am neat, like a man that has put on his apparel decently; some
are in a slovenly habit, or their clothes are foul; but Job could say as to
his better part and spiritual clothing, I am innocent, washed, brushed,
combed. I have no filth in my skirts, nor foulness in my hands. I go not in
the nasty habit of sin, but in the lovely, comely, beautiful dress of Grace.
Thus various is the sense of the word which we translate innocent. Job's
conversation was so well ordered, that it had not a plight nor an hair (common
infirmities excepted) amiss or out of order. Our translation gives in his mind
fully, yet it is not unprofitable to take in this plenty and copiousness of
elegant metaphors rising out of the original words, here rendered, I am
innocent. But if we take the word strictly, then to be innocent, is to do or
to have done no hurt, to be harmless, and so guiltless of the hurt or harm
of any.

Hence note.

Sin is an hurtful thing. It hurts, first our selves; Secondly, it hurts
others in whose sight it is committed, either first by the ill example given
them, or, secondly, by injury done to them; either first in their credit, or,
secondly, in their estates. Yea, thirdly, sin hurts God himself; It hurts God
in his honor. Innocence is properly that which does no hurt; Innocent persons
are harmless persons; no man ever hurt himself, or others, much less the
name and honor of God, while he holds his innocence.

Job's last assertion is; Neither is there iniquity in me.

(...), pravitas est rectitudini opposita.
Iniquity is that pravity either of spirit or action which is contrary to all
that righteousness or rectitude which the rule of Gods word requires. It
comprehends both the irregularity of our actions, and the irregularity of our
thoughts or conceptions. It Is a departure from the way in which, and from the
scope and mark, to which we should direct our whole course. Iniquity is an
unequal an undue or crooked thing. It turns others from their right, and is
it self a continual swerving from it. So much for the opening of these words,
as they are a proposition containing a charge brought against Job, I have heard
the voice of thy words, saying, I am clean from transgression, I am innocent,
neither is there iniquity in me.

The second point proposed was, to consider what matter of accusation there is
in these words. Matters of accusation arise from our evil deeds; That we are
not clean from transgression, that we are not innocent, that there is much
iniquity in us; these are properly matter of accusation. But here Elihu makes
it matter of accusation, that Job said, he was clean from transgression, that
he was innocent, that there was no iniquity in him. And indeed, to be charged
with the greatest transgression, is not more then this, to be charged with
saying, we are clean from transgression. To say we have no sin, is very
sinful, to say we are without iniquity, is a saying full of iniquity, (1 John
1.8.) If we say we have no sin (Here is Job saying so, as Elihu charge him)
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. And ( v: 10.) If any man
say, he has no sin, he makes God a liar, and his word is not in him. Now what
greater sin can there be, if we consider the force of these two verses, then
for any man to say he has no sin? How extremely sinful this is, may be showed
in four things.

First, It is extreme pride for any man to say; I have no sin; What is pride?
but an over-reckoning of our selves. When we value our selves, it is best to do
it at an under rate, and to say less of our selves (if it may be) then we are,
as Paul did, who called himself less then the least of all Saints; Pride
always over-reckons and casts us up more then we are worth. Some reckon their
temporal and many more their spiritual estates at many thousands (as I may
say) when upon a true account they are worse then nothing. So did the Church of
Laodicea (Rev: 3.17.) Thou say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked. They who are soule-blind, cannot see either how
bad they are, or what good they want; Nothing hinders the sight of our wants so
much as a conceit that we are full.

Secondly, It is the greatest deceit, even selfe-deceit, to say or suppose that
we are (in this sense) clean without transgression; so says that text of the
Apostle ( v: 8.) He that says he has no sin, deceives himself. It is bad
enough to deceive others, and woe to them that do so; but how bad is their
condition who deceive themselves! He is in an ill condition who is deceived by
others; But if a man deceive himself, where shall he have his amends?
Selfe-admirers, and selfe-flatterers, are the Greatest selfe-deceivers. And who
or what shall be true to that man, who is false to himself?

Thirdly, It is a lie and the greatest lie, (that is more then a bare deceit)
for it is such a lie as leaves no truth at all in us. He that says he has no
sin in him, has no truth in him; what has he in him then, but a lie? Every
sin is a lie, and he that says he has no sin in him, has nothing of truth in
him; what has he then in him, or what is he, but a lie? ( v: 10.) The word of
God is not in him, which is the treasury of all truth; and therefore he has no
truth in him, nor can have, till he has repented of that lie.

Fourthly, (that ye may see there is exceeding much in this charge) To say so,
is blasphemy, and the highest blasphemy; Why? Because it makes God a liar, ^e
that says he has no sin, does not only deceive himself, but as much as in
him lies, he makes God a liar ( v: 10.) To deceive with a lie, is the worst
sort of deceivings; and what lie is worse then, or so bad as that which makes
the God of truth a liar, and turns the truth of God into a lie. Lay these
four considerations together, and then it will appear how heavy a charge is
contained in these words, when Elihu says he had heard Job say, he was clean
without transgression, he was innocent, and no iniquity in him.

Therefore, thirdly, consider a little further, what occasion had Job given
Elihu to say that he had said, I am clean from transgression, etc.

I answer, There are several passages upon which Elihu might pitch this
charge; I will only name four texts, out of which, possibly this might arise.
First, ( Chap: 10. 7.) where Job speaking to God himself says; Thou know
that I am not wicked. He appealed to the knowledge of God himself in the
thing. The second may be collected from ( Chap: 16. 17.) Not for any injustice
in my hand, also my prayer is pure. The third, from ( Chap: 23. 10.) But he
knows the way that I take, when he has tried me I shall come forth as gold;
My foot has held his steps, his way have I kept and not declined. In the
fourth place Elihu might take those words ( Chap: 27. 5.) God forbid that I
should justify you, till I die I will not remove my integrity from me. My
righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go, my heart shall not reproach
me as long as I live. All these are Job's assertions concerning his own
innocence, And these or such like passages as these, Elihu ('it is likely) being
an attentive hearer, had observed and picked up as the matter of this first
part of his charge, Job's self-justification.

Fourthly, and lastly, let us consider whether Elihu did rightly bring this
charge against Job from these sayings? or whether he dealt so ingenuously with
Job as he promised, while from these or the like passages he says, Job had
said, I am clean without transgression, etc.

For answer, first, take notice that Elihu was not the first that had charged
Job thus; he had been thus charged by his three friends before. Zophar said (
Chap: 11. 4.) Thou have said my doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine
eyes; that is, in the eyes of God. Eliphaz seem^s to say as much ( Chap: 15.
14.) What is man that he should be clean? and he which is borne of a woman that
he should be righteous? While Eliphaz put these questions, he intimated that
Job had made such affirmations. Bildad likewise was upon the same strain with
him ( Chap: 25. 4.) How then can man be justified with God? or how can he be
clean that is borne of a woman? We see then, this was not the first time by
three, that Job had heard this charge, and had made answer for himself. And as
these charges, so Job's answers have been opened heretofore upon those former
passages, and therefore I shall not stay much upon the point here. Yet because
Elihu reassumes this argument, yea makes it his strongest argument against Job,
I shall a little consider whether he did rightly or no in this thing.

To clear (which we must remember) that Job's innocence had received a
threefold testimony in this book.

First, He received a testimony from God himself, and that a very notable and
glorious one ( Chap: 1. 8.) Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is
none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man.

Secondly, He received a further testimony from the penman of this book, who
having recorded the several afflictions of Job, and his behavior under them,
repeats it twice ( Chap: 1. 21. Chap: 2. 10.) In all this Job sinned not, nor
charged God foolishly. The testimony which God gave him, referred to his former
actions or conversation before his affliction. The testimony which the writer
gave him, referred specially to his latter words or speeches under his
affliction. Besides these testimonies which are not at all questioned nor can
be; we find a third testimony, and that he gives of himself. Now though Elihu
did highly reverence the testimony which God had given (if we may suppose he
had notice of it) and would also the testimony of the penman of the book, had
it then been written; yet he questioned the testimony which Job gave of
himself. Now, that there was some severity in this charge upon that suspicion,
may appear by considering it in a few particulars.

First, It must be said on Job's part, or in favor of him, according to truth,
that he never affirmed, he was not a sinner. Nay we shall find him more then
once, twice, or thrice, confessing the sinfulness of his nature, and the sins
of his life. We find him also confessing that notwithstanding all the
righteousness and integrity in him, yet he would own none of it before God;
and that if he should justify himself, his own clothes would abhor him.
Therefore Job was far from saying he had no sin in him, in a strict sense.

Secondly, Most of those passages wherein he speaks of himself as clean and
righteous, may be understood of his imputative cleanness and righteousness, as
a person justified in the redeemer, of whom he spoke with such a Gospel spirit
and full assurance of faith, that he might well assert this of himself, I know
that being justified, I am clean and without sin. It is no fault for a
believer to say, I am clean without transgression, through free Grace, in the
righteousness of Jesus Christ. Much of what Job spoke in this matter is to be
taken that way.

Thirdly, When Job affirms these things of himself, we may say this in favor
of him, he means it of great transgressions. The words in the text note
defection and wilful swerving from the right way. His friends charged him with
hypocrisy, with oppression, with taking the pledge for naught, with stripping
the naked of their clothing. Thine iniquity is great (said Eliphaz) and thy sin
is infinite. Now says Job, I am clean, I have no such transgressions. And he
might well answer his friends charge of impiety against God, and iniquity
toward men, with a flat denial, yea with an affirmation of the contrary;
There is no such iniquity in me, prove it if you can. He was unblameable in the
sight of man.

Fourthly, In favor of Job this may be said; what he spoke of himself and of
his own righteousness, was upon much provocation, of when his spirit was
heated by his friends, who so constantly urged these crimes against him. In
these heats he spoke highly of himself, and though it does not excuse any man's
sin when he has spoken sinfully, to say I was provoked; yet it does abate the
greatness of the sin. Good Moses (who was the meekest man upon the earth) when
through provocation he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, felt the smart of it,
and God reckoned sorely with him for it: Yet to speak amiss upon provocation,
is not so much amiss, as to speak so in cold blood, or unprovoked.

Fifthly, Elihu might have put a fairer interpretation and construction upon
these sayings of Job; He might have taken them in the best sense, as Job meant
them, that he was righteous, clean and innocent in all his transactions with
men, and had not wickedly at any time departed from God. And then there had not
been such matter of fault in what he said, as was broughe against him.

Yet, in vindication of Elihu, it must be granted, Job gave him occasion to
rebuke and blame what he had said, and that chiefly upon these three accounts.

First, Because he spoke many things of himself which had an appearance of
boasting, and so of vain speaking. A little truly said of our selves, or in
our own commendation, may be thought too much, how much more, when we say much.

Secondly, He spoke such things as carried a show of overboldness with God. He
did not observe his distance, as he ought, when he so earnestly pressed for a
hearing to plead his cause before God; especially, when he so often complained
of the severity of Gods proceedure with him, with which Elihu taxes him
directly in the two verses following. Upon both these grounds Elihu thought
(and was no doubt guided in it by the Spirit of God) to cut him to the quick,
that Job might learn to speak more humbly of himself, and more temperately
to God. And therefore

Thirdly, The Lord did righteously, yea and graciously let out the spirit of
Elihu upon him in another way then his friends before had done. He did not
charge him with wickedness in fact, but dealt with him about the unwariness of
his words. Job could not say he had never spoken such words, for such words he
did speak, though he did not speak them as Elihu took them. When words are
out they must stand to the mercy of the hearers, and abide such a judgment as
may, with truth be made of them, though possibly, besides the purpose of the
speaker. A man (in that case) is not wronged, he should learn to speak more
warily, and not give occasion of offense. Doubtless the Lord had a gracious
intent upon Job, in stirring the spirit of Elihu to represent his words in the
hardest sense, that he might humble him. Job's spirit was yet too high and not
broken enough, as it was afterward. Nor does Job reply or retort upon Elihu
for this; And when the Lord himself began to deal with him, he says, Who is
this that darkeneth council by words without knowledge (Chap: 38. 2.) and Job
himself being brought upon his knees confesses ( Chap: 42. 3.) I have uttered
that I understood not, things too wonderful for me, which I knew not: I have
been too bold I confess. Though it was not Jobs purpose or meaning to speak
so (he had integrity in what he spoke) yet his words did bear such a
construction. And the Lord suffered Elihu to urge them upon him to the utmost.

Yet, notwithstanding all that has been said, I do conceive, that Elihu had
not the least imagination, that the meaning of Job in those assertions
concerning himself, was, that he had not sinned at all, or that there was no
sin in him; But taking his words in the best and fairest construction they
could bear, he yet saw cause to check and reprove him, for saying so much, in
that condition, about his innocence; whereas he should have been chiefly taken
up in glorifying God, and humbling himself under his mighty hand. So much for
the answer to the fourth query, what reason Elihu had to charge Job thus? It
has been showed wha^ may be said in favor of Job; And also, that Elihu might
without breach of charity charge him with these sayings.

To shut up this verse, take only two brief notes from the whole.

First, The best of men have their failings, and are apt to over-report
themselves. Our most deliberate actions and speeches have some tincture of the
flesh, how much more those which pass us in a passion. Though Job spoke what
was true, yet he spoke more then was meet. And they that heard him might take
just occasion of offense, not knowing his spirit and the strain of his heart in
speaking so. The Apostle James says ( James 3. 2.) If any man offend not in
word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body. He
has a mighty command over his spirit, that can command his tongue; especially
when he is provoked. It is a real part of perfection, not to offend in word.
This good man spoke many things well, yet all was not well spoken.

Again, In that Job spoke thus, under the pressure of affliction. Observe.

In times of affliction it is better to be much in bewailing of sin, then in
making reports wherein we have not sinned. There will no hurt come of that; but
while we are reporting our innocence, and good deeds, though what we speak be
true, yet it is subject to construction, and lays us open to reproof.

Lastly, We may learn from the dealing of Elihu with Job, That in all
disputations, and matters of controversy with others, we should take heed,
that we fasten no uncharitable interpretation upon the words of our adversary,
nor add any thing of our own to them, nor wrest them besides their
grammatical and genuine construction; yet even those speeches which are true
in some respect, if they exceed the bounds of modesty, may freely be
reprehended. For we ought not only to do that which is good, and speak that
which is true for the matter, but we ought to do and speak in a good or
becoming manner. Thus far of the first fault which Elihu found and reproved
in Job, his over-confidence in saying he was not faulty, or in justifying
himself. In the two next verses, he blames him with reflecting over-boldly and
unduely upon the dealings of God; The particulars whereof were expressed before
in opening the whole Context, and come now to be further opened.

Verse. 10. Behold, he finds occasions against me, Quaerit adversum me et
invenit confractiones, i.e. ut confringat et irrita faciat omnia mea studia,
instituta et conatu^, ut nihil ossequar eorum, quae quaero et instituo. Merc:
Ecce confractiones adversum me invenit. Bez: (...) confractiones, contritiones
et quasi abolitiones. Sunt qui reddunt occasiones, quasi esset (...) literis
transpositis, alij querelas. Radix (...) inde Hiphit (...) fregit, confregit
irritum fecit. Merc:
and counts me for his enemy.
These words contain the first part of the second charge. For the clearing of
which I shall first explicate the words, and then by way of observation, show
what matter of charge or evil there is in them.

Behold, he finds occasions against me. I have heretofore showed the emphasis
of that word, Behold; And therefore, I pass it here; Behold, He (that is, God)
finds occasions against me, or, (strictly from the Hebrew) he finds
breaches.

The verb is translated Break (Psalm: 141.5.) It imports such a breaking as is
also a bringing to naught ( Psalm: 33.10.) It Is likewise applied to the breaking
of the heart by discouragements ( Numb: 32.7.) And it is significantly enough
translated here, He finds breaches against me; that is, something or other to
make a breach upon me, something to complain of against me. The word is
rendered in these three senses; First, An occasion; Secondly, A Breach; Thirdly
(as the Septuagint) a complaint or accusation. We may join all three together;
for a complaint or accusation is commonly an occasion of breaches among men;
(...). Accusationem autem adversum me invenit. Sept: Qui querelas am^t, quaerit
occasiones unde illas excitat. Bold: Deus studiose quaesivit ansam me
persequendi.
he that loves breaches will seek, and seldom misseth occasions of complaint.
We say of a man that is of a troublesome spirit, and given to contention (which
is also Mr Broughtons translation) Behold, he picketh a quarrel against me;
though I give him no just matter of offense, yet he either finds or makes
one. Thus most of the Hebrew writers carry it; he f^nde^h occasions to alter
his former course with me, to cast me off, to lay his hand upon me, even to
ruin and break me to pieces.

Hence observe.

To seek occasions against another is hard and uncharitable dealing. Joseph's
brethren were very suspicious of this ( Gen: 43.18.) The men were afraid
because they were brought to Joseph's house, and they said, because of the money
that was found in our sacks mouth the first time, are we brought in that he may
seek occasion against us; As if they had said, we well perceive he would gladly
have some matter to accuse us, and so to detain us upon that occasion. Thus
said the King of Israel (2 Kings 5.7.) when Naman came to him with a message
from his Prince to desire him that he would heal him of his Leprosy; The King
of Israel began presently to startle, and thought it was nothing but a mere
trick and a device to bring on some further design, what? said he, Am I God to
kill and make alive, that this man is come to me, wherefore consider I pray
you, and see how he seeks a quarrel against me. They may be judged to watch
for a discourtesie who desire courtesies of us beyond our power. This made the
King of Israel jealous, that the King of Syria being confident of future
success, by his former successes against Israel, was by this device only
seeking an occasion to renew the war. We have an eminent Scripture to this
purpose ( Dan: 6.4, 5.) Daniel being advanced high at Court, it drew a great
deal of envy upon him among the Princes and Presidents; and therefore they
resolved to try their utmost to pull him down; And hereupon (says the text)
they sought occasions against Daniel concerning the kingdom; that is, they
enquired narrowly into his proceedings as to the mannagement of that great
power and trust which the King had committed to him in civil things, but they
could find no occasion, nor fault; forasmuch as he was faithful. They could
not pick a hole in his coat (as we say) neither was there any error or fault
found in him. When this would not do, then they would needs go another way to
work (envy is restless) and because they were disappointed in their first
attempt about civills, they proceeded to matters of religion; Then said those
men we shall not find occasion against this Daniel, except we find it in
regard of the Law of his God. And we see in the following parts of the Chapter,
what occasion they found against him. This is hard dealing indeed, and it is
quite contrary to the Law of Love in all the actings of it. The Apostle assures
us (1 Cor: 13.7.) Love bears all things, Love has strong shoulders to bear
wrongs and injuries, and Love believes all things; not that a believer is a
vain credulous person, giving out his faith he knows not how, or to he knows
not what; but he believes all things to the utmost line of truth and reality,
as also of appearance and probability; he that loves is very willing to believe
that things are meant as they are spoken, and that they are intended as they
are done. Thus he that loves much, believes all things, and further, charity
hops all things; it hopes the best, and puts the fairest interpretation that
may be upon those things and doings which carry in them at least some color of
suspicion; this is the Genius of Charity, the Character of Love. It bears all
things, it believes all things, it hops all things. All which stand in
direct opposition to the seeking of occasions against our neighbor. And I
shall briefly show how much such practices militate against and contradict the
royal Law of love, by seven steps.

First, It Is against the Law of love, to be ready to take an occasion when it
is given; we should be very slow and backward, in case of offense, to embrace
or admit what is offered: though indeed, it is with the heart of man, I mean
with the flesh in his heart in this point of the Law, as it is with the flesh
(that is, sinful corruption) in the heart, as to the whole Law of God; Of
which the Apostle says ( Rom: 7.8.) Sin taking occasion by the Commandment,
wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. And again ( v: 11.) Sin taking
occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me: Sin took occasion
by the Law; The Law gave sin no occasion to work concupisc^nce in Paul. The Law
is far enough from being the cause of sin, but it is (by accident not of it
self) the occasion of sin; yea, sin presently takes occasion when it has not
indeed the show of any just occasion. The Law by its prohibition, by the stop
and check which it puts upon the flesh, by the discoveries which it makes of
the contrariety of our corruptions to the holiness of it, does many times
provoke and irritate, yea enrage and inflame them, but it affords not the least
countenance or encouragement to our corruptions. Now this (I say) is the
wickedness of the heart of man, with respect to sin in General, that it takes
occasion by the commandment, to bend it self against the commandment: and so
as to any particular act against a brother, to take an occasion to do him a
mischief, is wickedness, and a work of the flesh.

Secondly, It is sinful to use our Christian liberty, when it may be an
occasion of sin, or the laying of a stumbling block before others, though we
use it not with an intent or purpose to make them stumble or fall into sin. The
Apostle earnestly cautions the Romans to take heed of this ( Rom: 14.13.) Let
us not therefore judge one another any more; but judge this rather, that no man
put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brothers way. St Paul is
there speaking about the observation of days commanded, and the use of meats
forbidden by the ceremonial Law. Now though some had a liberty in their
consciences, to observe the one, and use the other, yet he would not have them
do either with offense to weaker brethren: our care should be, either first to
keep our brother from falling, or to raise him up when fallen. Is it not then
very sinful not to forbear those things (which are no absolute duties) by
which another may fall? And if it be so sinful to do many things which in
themselves are not sinful, when we know they may be an offense or occasion of
falling to others, though we intend it not; then how extremely sinful is it to
do any thing with an intent to make them fall! This is properly the devils
trade, and woe to those who take it out of his hand, or join partners with him
in it.

Thirdly, When any shall desire and even hunger after an occasion of accusing
others, this is a very great height of wickedness. The Apostle speaks of such
(2 Cor: 11.9, 12.) where he tells us that he did forbear his own right, not
receiving maintenance for preaching the Gospel; When (says he, v: 9.) I was
present with you and wanted, I was chargeable to no man. But why? he answers (
v: 12.) What I do I will do, that I may cut off occasion from them which
desire occasion. Some did, it seems, desire an occasion to charge him with
covetousness and worldly mindedness, that he preached the Gospel for filthy
lucre; therefore, says he, I will do this, that I may cut off occasion from
them that desire occasion to charge me with. The heart of man is full of evil
desires, and this is one of the worst of them, to desire another might be found
doing that, which might minister an advantage to render him odious or
blameworthy.

Fourthly, Which is yet higher, some even pursue and hunt for occasions to
calumniate and slander their brethren. The good Prophet Jeremie had store of
these ill neighbors ( Jer: 20.10.) I have heard the defaming of many; fear is
on every side; report, say they, and we will report it; all my familiars
watched for my halting, saying, peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall
prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him. As if he had said,
How glad would not only my open familiars, but close enemies be, of an occasion
against me, it would make them leap for joy to see me halt. By his halting
they meant his sinning, his doing that which was uncomely, or not suitable to
his profession; they watched, they lay at catch for his halting, not to hold
him up, but to cast him down. They said, report, and we will report it; we
will make something or other of it, though in truth there be nothing. They had
(which may be a fifth step of this wickedness, a secret hope that he would
halt and give them occasion of insulting. Peradventure (say they) he will be
enticed, peradventure we shall catch him in this snare; this was their hope,
and, if attained, their joy.

Which makes a 6th step of this wickedness; For so David describes his enemies
( Psalm: 38.16, 17.) They rejoice when my foot slippeth; for I am ready to halt,
or (as we put in the margin) for halting. There is a double halting, a halting
by transgression, and a halting by affliction; that I conceive David chiefly
spoke of in that place, because he presently adds in the close of the 17th
verse, And my sorrow is continually before me. He shows his enemies possessed
with the same evil spirit, and in the same posture ( Psalm: 35.15.) In mine
adversity, or, in my halting, they rejoiced. The same word is used in this
Psalm for adversity which we had in the 38th for halting. This is as true of
evil men, as halting is taken in the other notion, for sinning. The wicked are
as, if not more, ready to rejoice at falls, or halts, by sinning, as at falls
or halts by suffering. In both these cases (as David found in this 35th Psalm,
v. 15.) the very abjects will tear the best of men (as they did David) and not
cease. But what do they tear? their flesh if they can; but to be sure (and so
it is meant there) their good names and reputation by slanders and accusations.
O how contrary is this practice and that joy to the spirit of the Gospel! The
Apostle tells us, the Grace of charity utterly abhorres it (1 Cor: 13.6.)
Charity rejoices not in iniquity. It neither rejoices in doing iniquity it
self, nor to charge others with iniquity.

Seventhly, (which is the highest step) Some rather then fail will form and
frame occasions against others; they will forge or fancy them in their own
brain, and then accuse their brethren, as if they had been acting, what
themselves have been imagining. Such the Apostle Peter speaks of (1 Pet: 3.16.)
where admonishing Saints to much strictness and exactness in walking, he
gives this account, why they should do so, That whereas they speak evil of
you as evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good
conversation in Christ. They who have not so much as a shadow of truth, will
make something out of a lie; they will falsely accuse, and strongly impeach,
knowing that if they do so, some of the dirt (at least) will disfigure the
faces, and stick upon the skirts of those who are impeached. Thus I have given
seven degrees of this wickedness, every one of which plainly discover, and all
put together, mightily aggravate the sinfullness of this sin, the seeking of
occasions against any man whosoever, much more against any good man. And
therefore (which was the second point proposed for the clearing of this truth)
you see how great a matter of charge was brought by Elihu against Job, when he
says, Job has said, He, (that is, God) seeks occasions against me.

Hence note, Secondly.

To charge the Lord with a willingness to break with us, either upon no
occasion, or to seek an occasion that he may, is exceeding sinful, and
dishonorable to his Majesty, near to Blasphemy. How sinful is it, that we
who give the Lord so many occasions against us, that he needs not seek any,
should yet say he seeks occasions against us? The people of Israel (as it
appears) intimated, at least, that God had broken with them, or sought
occasion to do it (this word is used in that text, Numb: 14.34.) while the
Lord to show how ill he resented such thoughts and jealousies of him, tells
them, According to the number of the days in which ye searched the Land, even
forty days (each day for a year) shall ye bear your iniquities, even forty
years, and ye shall know my breach of promise, or (as read in the margin) my
Altering of my purpose. As if he had said, Ye shall know whether I have sought
occasion against you, Cognoscetis confractionem meam; si dici possit latin
irritationem; non a verbo irrito sed ab adjectivo irritus, q.d. videbitis ut
ego omnia a^^a vestra per hos quadraginta annos irrita faciam, and conatus ac
instituto impediam. Merc:
whether I have frustrated your hopes and endeavors, these forty years in the
wilderness or no; ye shall know whether I have done any thing to break and
entangle you, or whether all this has nor proceeded from your own frowardness
and unbelief. The Lord who searched their hearts, and saw the utmost scope of
their complaints, found this evil thought lying at the bottom of all, that he
surely had put them upon all those difficulties, or brought them into those
straites on purpose to break with them. And therefore, he says, Ye shall know
my breach of promise; Ye shall see one day, or at last, whether I have kept
covenant, and stood to my engagement or you, whether I have sought an occasion
against you, or you have given me occasion to deal with you as I have done. So
that when the Lord said, Ye shall know my breach of promise; his meaning was,
ye shall know that I have kept my promise to you exactly, or to a tittle, and
that ye only have been the promise-breakers. It Is infinitely below the nature
of God, to seek occasions against the creature; And it is strange that the
Jews had any the remotest suspicion of him as doing so, after they had heard
of those glorious styles and titles in which he proclaimed his name ( Exodus:
34.6.) The Lord, the Lord God, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, abundant
in goodness and in truth, pardoning iniquity, transgression, and sin. What can
be speld out of this name that should yield the least shadow of a jealousy,
that the Lord would seek occasions against them. A good Prince desires to
find many good subjects who deserve to be rewarded, but it troubles him to
find any who deserve to be punished, or whom he is necessitated to punish; Now
what is the goodness of the most benign and gracious Princes in the world, to
the graciousnesse and benignity of God! Again, his precious promises evidence
the unworthiness of such a surmise; all which are full of mercy, and
goodness, and patience, and pardon, and tenderness to poor sinners: so far
is the Lord from seeking occasions to charge any one with what is not, that he
seeks all the ways and occasions he can to do good, and to extend compassion
to those who have done amiss. He even labors to deliver poor souls from
their dangers, and from their sins. How far is he then from desiring to find
them tripping and sinning, or from urging sin hardly harshly or causlesly upon
them? yea all the experiences of Saints bring in witness against this
blasphemous apprehension. They will tell us from what they have found and felt,
that when they have given the Lord occasion to destroy them, when they have put
a sword into his hand to smite them, when by their unbelief, and pride, and
neglect of known duties, they have laid themselves open to ruin and
destruction, even then he has held his hand and spared them. Is it not then a
great, a gross sin, to charge the Lord, that he seeks occasions against us?
Yea indeed (as was touched before) the Lord needs not seek occasion against any
man, for as much as the best of men give him too much occasion, and too often.
He needs not stand to spy advantages against us, we lay our selves too open and
naked to him continually. As in Fenceing, when two that are very expert at that
art are engaged, there is watching for an occasion or advantage to get the
mastery; but if an expert Master of Defense be to deal with an ignorant fellow
that knows not his postures, nor how to use his weapon, he needs not seek
occasion, he may have him here and there and every where. It is so with the
best of Saints, when they have to do with God; He needs not watch for an
occasion where to hit, or smite them, for they through their ignorance and
folly, lay their naked breasts open to his strokes every day. Were he not
infinite in mercy to cover our sins, Ecce invenit in me vacillationes. Scult:
(...) vocat ea quae pij faciunt praeter rectum, sed citra animum a deo aversum,
etc. Coc:
and to pardon our transgressions, we must needs perish under his justice.

Again, The word is rendered, Infirmities, faylings, or lesser sins; that is
another translation of the text, and it is a useful one; For as the former
supposes the Lord taking occasion, where none at all was given; so this
supposes him to take the least occasion. As if Elihu supposed Job saying,
Behold, he seeks out my little faults, Quaesivit deus parva quaedam, imo pene
nulla peccata propter quae, velut si nefanda crimina commisissem, atroci me
sententia condemnavit. Bold:
my vacillations, my trippings, my stumblings, in a word, my infirmities. We
may take them two ways; First, for his youthful sins, the slips of his youth.
Secondly, for his daily sins, commonly called faylings. As if Job had said,
Though I can charge my self, and freely do with many sins and weaknesses, yet
I am not a man chargeable with any crimes nor wickednesses, mine are no black
nor bloody sins, no crimson, no skarlet sins; I have not sinned presumptuously,
or with a high hand, I have not given scope to my lusts, nor indulged my
corruptions. I have not pleased my self with displeasing God; nor has the
bent of my soul been to break his commandments, as bonds, yoakes, or shakles
put upon me by an enemy; I have not rejected his dominion or rule over me in
any wilful defection or departure from his word. Yet notwithstanding God
finds out my infirmities and faylings, and urges them sorely against me, yea
he deals with me as if I were his enemy, even for those sins which I have
committed through inadvertency or mere humane frailty: Some Interpreters
insist most upon this signification of the word, as if the matter which Elihu
charged Job with, were that he should say God carried it toward him as an
enemy for small faults or lesser sins. Nor do I see any thing which hinders
the joining of this and the former reading together; for surely he seeks
occasions to punish and vex another, who insists upon his lesser sins and
imperfections, as if they were great and grievous crimes. From this la^ter or
second sense of the word, Observe, First, in General.

To take strict notice of the faylings, infirmities, or lesser sins of others,
is a point of very great severity. Some are pleased with nothing more then to
hear and discourse of other men's faylings. It Is a great fault to be picking up
the lesser faults of others; yet how many are there, who if they can but see,
as it were, any bare place, they will be charging at it; if they see but the
least scratch or sore, they as the fly, love to be feeding upon it, or raking
in it. It Is our holiness to take notice of the least sin in our selves, and
the more holy any man is, the more quick-sighted and quick-sented he is in
taking notice of his lesser sins (when the least neglect of duty and of the
least negligence in performance of duty, any ill frame of heart, any vain
thought, any idle word, any undue carriage, any uncomelinesse, is taken notice
of and corrected, this shows an excellent frame of spirit, and a great measure
of Grace) but it is not good to do so by others, yea it is an argument we are
very much wanting and failing in holiness our selves, when we are so apt to
take notice of and aggravate every want and failing in our brethren. Yea, when
as Christ says ( Math: 7.3.) We see a m^te in our brothers eye, we seldom see
the beam in our own. And it is an argument men have beams in their own
eyes, when they are so quick-sighted in looking after motes in their brothers
eye. I grant, it is a duty to be watchful over one another as brethren, and to
take notice, for right ends, of the least faylings and faults of any. This is a
duty if we do it with a purpose to pray for them, that they may walk more
circumspectly; or that we may lovingly reprove, admonish, and counsel them; as
also that we may consider our selves and our own ways, lest we fall as they
have done. Thus to take notice of the least faylings of others, is a great
Gospel duty. But to take notice of men's faults, to censure or defame their
persons, to insult over them, or accuse them, this is the spirit of a Cham, who
mocked at his fathers nakedness. And thus to be critticall about the faults of
others, argues that we are careless of our own.

Secondly, As to the particular case in the text, for which Job is taxed by
Elihu, that he said thus of God.

Observe.

To say or think of the Lord that he takes a strict and severe notice of our
infirmities to reckon with us riggedly for them is very sinful. Such thoughts
are a great derogation from the goodness and mercy of God. The Lord does not
willingly see the faults of his people; Though he sees them, yet he does not
willingly see them; he is glad when it is with his people, as it was at that
time with Israel (Numb: 23.21.) He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither
has he seen perverseness in Israel. But was there no sin to be seen in Jacob?
Was Israel altogether innocent at that time? Surely they, even they, and even
then were a sinful people, and had their faults, neither few nor small, but
because there was no iniquity, no perverseness nor prevarication against God
found among them at that time, therefore he over-looked all their ordinary
faylings and transgressions. As the Lord is so holy and of such pure eyes that
he cannot behold any sin, the least iniquity to approve of it ( Habak. 1.13.)
so the Lord is so gracious and so full of compassion, that he does not severely
take notice of, nor look upon the lesser sins of his people. David exalts the
name and glory of God at large for this ( Psalm: 103.8, 9, 10.) The Lord is
merciful and gracious, slow to anger, plenteous in mercy, he will not always
chide. They are always chideing, that are always spying faults in children,
servants or relations; they who take notice of every little fault, shall find
chiding-worke enough in a family. But the Lord will not always chide; neither
will he keep his anger for ever; He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor
rewarded us according to our iniquities: Like as a father pittieth his
children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. A father does not enquire
into, much less punish every neglect of his child. I will spare them (says
the Lord) ( Mal: 3.17.) as a father spares a son that serves him. If a father
sees or is well persuaded that his son has a heart to serve him, he will not
curiously spy out the faults of his service, but says to his child, It is well
done, or at least, I take that well which thou have done. Yea the Lord is so
far from a strict inquiry after such faults, that he passes by great
transgressions ( Mic: 7.18.) Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons
iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his people; he
retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. Though Asa (1
Kings 15.14.) was not through in the reformation; the high places were not
removed, yet the Lord did not charge this upon him, for presently it follows
in the sacred Story; Nevertheless, the heart of Asa was perfect with God all
his days. Yea; though Asa did fall into several sins afterward, imprisoning
one of the Prophets, and oppressing some of the people, and in his sickness
seeking to the Physicians, and not to the Lord, yet the Lord did not charge
these acts upon him; He was so far from a strict inquiry after his lesser
sins, that he took no notice of those greater sins, but says, His heart was
perfect all his days. So in the case of David, the Lord would not see many of
his sins, he would not blot David, nor burden his own memory with them, but
passed an Act of Oblivion upon them for ever. Sarah (Gen: 18.12. (spoke very
unhandsomely when the Angel came to her and told her she should have a son; yet
the Apostle (1 Pet: 3.6.) referring to that story, gives Sarah a very high
testimony or commendation for one good word that was mingled with a great many
ill or undue ones, yea and actions too; for she laughed; Notwithstanding all
which, Peter sets her as a pattern for all good women professing the Gospel to
imitate: He would have them be in subjection unto their own husbands; even as
Sarah obeyed Abraham calling him Lord, whose daughters ye are (says he) as
long as ye do that which is well. That one word which she spoke well, is
recorded, yea reported to her praise, and all that were ill are buried in
silence, forgotten and covered. The Lord has respect to a little pure gold,
though mingled with a great deal of dross, and ownes a little good Corn,
though a great deal of chafe be in the same floor or heap. Surely then he
will not bring our infirmities and slips to account against us, while our
hearts are upright with him.

Thus you see what matter of charge there was in these words, when Job said,
God sought occasion against him, when he had given none, or that he had only
given some smaller occasion, and yet God dealt with him as an enemy.

But did Job ever say, That God sought occasions against him, or took notice
of his lesser sins so severely?

I answer, Though some acquit Job wholly of this charge, and recriminate Elihu
with this accusation as a slander, yet Job had spoken words which might give
occasion to charge him thus, (as was showed also concerning those former
speeches, I am clean from transgression, I am innocent, there is no iniquity
in me) though Job had not spoken these or such like words, with that scope and
spirit as Elihu might seem to allege them; yet he had given Elihu cause
enough to say so, while he spoke more of himself then came to his share,
considering that he was a sinful man, and more then did become him in his
condition, being an afflicted man. Upon both which accounts, it had better
becom'd him to have been much in humbling himself, rather then at all in
justifying himself. Now as Job had spoken words which might bear out Elihu in
his former charge, Secundum veritatem neutru^ diuit Job in sensu quem imponit
in Elihu.
so we find several speeches or complaints concerning God, which may justify
him in this. As for instance ( Chap: 14.16, 17.) For now thou numbrest (or
numbering thou numbrest) my steps; do thou not watch over my sins? As if he
had said, thou watchest me so strictly, so narrowly, that I cannot (in the
least) step awry, but presently I am observed and shall be sure to hear of it;
Yea, my transgress^on is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up mine iniquity;
that is, thou keep the memory of my sins, thou do not pass them by, but
have them ready by thee. When chaste Joseps wanton mistress disappoynted in her
lust, was resolved to seek an occasion of revenge, she laid up his garment by
her until her Lord came home (Gen: 39.16.) To lay up the evil deed of
another, presageth ill to him. And therefore when Elihu heard Job speaking
thus, might he not say, Job has said, God seeks occasions against me, yea,
(which is more) as it follows in the verse under hand; And counts me for
his enemy.

These words having been insisted upon somewhat largely from other passages of
this Book ( Chap: 13.24. and 19.11. and Chap. 30.21. In all which places Job
spoke this complaint sometimes expressly, always Equivalently) I shall not
here stay upon the explication of them, only for as much as Job having said,
That God took hold of small occasions given, or sought occasions not given, is
presently charged further by Elihu, with saying, He counts me for his enemy.
From this Connection of the former with the latter part of the verse.

Note.

To seek or take easy occasions against another, is an argument that we bear
no good will to him, or, It is a sign we look upon a man as an enemy, when we
are apt and ready to seek or take occasions against him. There are two things
which we are very ready to do toward those we bear no good will un^o, or
whom we account our enemies. First, to diminish the good which they do, to
speak lightly of, and under-value their most prayse-worthy deeds. Ill will
never spoke well either of persons or actions. Secondly, whom we love not as
friends, especially whom we hate as enemies, we are prone to highten their
faults, and double their faylings; we (mostly) look on the evil deeds of an
enemy in a multiplying, or in a magnifying glass; we make one fault many, and a
little one great. A true friend will speak the most of what is well done, and
the least he can, with truth, of what is ill; He is so far from seeking
occasions against whom he loves, that he will hardly see them, when finds them
unsought. A noble enemy will not seek occasions against a man, much less will
a cordial friend. It is no wonder when Job is taxed with saying, God sought
occasions against him, that he should also say, He counts me for his enemy.

From the matter of these words, He counts me for his enemy, take these two
notes.

First, Even good men when they are sorely grieved under the afflicting hand of
God, are tempted to have hard apprehensions of God, at least to suspect and
fear that God is no friend to them. And this comes to pass upon a double
consideration; First, Nature when pinched will show it self; Now, man
naturally, has not only hard thoughts of God, but an enmity against him. And
when nature is pinched, all the corruptions working in man, work this way,
unless overpowered and checked by grace. Secondly, when it is hard with us from
the hand of God, then Satan takes his time to prompt us with hard thoughts of
God, and to foment that enmity to the uttermost, of which our corrupt nature
has such store. What? will Satan say, Does God love thee, and starve thee?
What? Does God pretend kindness to thee, and deal thus with thee? is God thy
friend, who takes away thy friends? is God thy friend, who leaves thee in the
hand of enemies? does he pity thee, and yet keep thee in these pains? is
this his kindness to his friend? How can he say he loves thee? And have not
thou cause enough yet to say, He counts thee for his enemy. Thus Satan takes
his time to provoke nature, which is forward enough of it self to think and
speak hardly of God, if at any time he is pleased and sees it fit to deal
hardly with us. And how great a combat has many a gracious soul both with
Satan and his own heart, to get and keep up good and honorable thoughts of
God in a suffering condition, or under dark and (to sense) dismal
dispensations.

Secondly, Note.

Whatsoever God does to or with a godly man, he should maintain good thoughts,
and speak well of God, or, when God deals most strictly and severely with his
people, they should not look upon it as an argument of any enmity or ill will
against them, or that he counts them his enemies. Let us take heed of such
thoughts; David professed ( Psalm: 73.1.) Truly God is good to Israel, even to
them that are of a clean heart. He is good to them (that is David's intent
there) not only when he does them good, (as to outward things I mean, and to
sencible appearances, for all is good in the issue to the Israel of God; now, I
say, God is good to his people, not only when he in that sense does them good)
but when he afflicts them, and lays many outward evils upon them. When, as
it is said after in that Psalm ( v. 14.) He plagueth them (that word imports
sorest troubles) all the day long, and chasteneth them every morning; when he
gives them their breakfast in sour herbs, or with severest whippings, yet
then, even then he is good to them, and means them no harm at all. Therefore
how hardly soever God deals with us, let us not think he counts us enemies.
The Temptation was strong upon David to take up hard thoughts of God in that
case, yea it prevailed so far upon him, that he concluded ( v. 13.) Verily I
have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence. As if he had
said, A man has little privilege from the worst of outward evils by his
godliness; But the Temptation did not prevail long, he soon recovered
himself ( v: 15.) If I say I will speak thus, (that is, that I have cleansed
my heart in vain) Behold, I should offend against the generation of thy
children; that is, I should wrong the whole kind or race of godly men
throughout the world, as if hypocrites, or as if God did not love them, or were
not good to them, for who is there among all thy children whom either thou have
not or may not chasten as much as thou have chastned me. As no man can know
the love of God by that which is before him, how prosperous soever it is; so it
is most unsuitable for any of the children of God, to think that God is not
good to them, or does not love them, because of the evil that is before them,
how adverse or disasterous soever it is. For, God having loved his people in
Christ, he loves them for ever; when once he has broken the enmity in our
hearts toward himself, there is nothing shall ever be done by him toward us,
which may speak us his enemies, or him our enemy, though a Job in great
affliction may say, He counts me for his enemy, And handles me like one too;
as it follows.

Verse. 11. He puts my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my paths.
We had these words expressly ( Chap: 13.27.) there they have been opened
already, Thou put my feet also in the stocks, and look narrowly unto all
my paths. That which has been said as to the General sense and scope of that
text, may serve for this; And therefore I refer the reader thither. I shall
only add two or three notes from the metaphor; He put my feet in the stocks,
that is, he presses me with very close and sore afflictions.

Hence Observe.

First, To be in affliction, is to be in a painful condition; there is little
ease in the stocks. No chastning for the present seems to be joyous but
grievous (Heb: 12.11.) To be under a cross is be under a burden.

Secondly, Afflictions keep us under restraint. He has little liberty as well
as little ease that is in the stocks: afflictions hold us in, they are as a
prison to us. Afflictions are a restraint two ways; First, to our corruptions;
yea, through the grace of God, afflictions are more then restraints to
corruption, they become the death of corruption, they are appointed (among
other services) for the mortifying of corruption, that it may not live in us,
much more are they a restraint to corruption, that it may not get out, nor
work in us as before. Many times, when a good man has the world at will, his
corruptions think to have their will too; and when he is at liberty, lusts
would grow licentious: Therefore God sees it necessary to put his servants in
the stocks, that their lusts may be in the stocks too. Thus he told the Church
( Hos: 2.6.) Behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a wall that
she shall not find her paths. The thorne-hedge was as a stocks to stop them
that they should not walk disorderly, nor act inordinately as they had done.
This course God takes with many, he puts them in the stocks, that he may keep
them from the ways of sin, or give check to some unruly affection. When we
need this discipline, we may look for it, and it is a mercy to be under it.
Will you not keep order? (says God) then you shall to the stocks. Secondly,
afflictions are a restraint to our comforts, as well as to our corruptions. As
this expression notes the taking of lusts short, so the taking of us short as
to lawful liberties and enjoyments. Sickness upon the body sowres all that
this world has, to us, and will not suffer us to use much of it, how much
soever of it we possess. Many have enough to eat, who never eat in pleasure,
as Job said ( Chap: 21.25.) And when in our prosperity we run out and take
unlawful liberty, God sends an affliction, as his stocks, to hold us from our
lawful liberties. When we have had vain outgoings and excesses of spirit,
all going well with us and comfortably in the world, we may expect the stocks
next, or that things should go ill with us, yet for our good.

Thirdly, To be in the stocks is a disgraceful thing; it is not only a pain
and a restraint, but it is a reproach; He that is in the stocks, or in the
pillory, is exposed to shame, every one points at him, and many revile him.
Affliction as to the eye of the world, carries a disgrace with it, or, at
least, subjects the person afflicted to disgrace; And it has been showed from
several passages of this book, how Job's afflictions were interpreted to his
disgrace; and he looked upon, as I may say, like a vagabond in the stocks, that
God had brought him thither, and clapped him by the heels for his misdemeanors.
Though afflictions diminish no man's honor or esteem with God, or with his
people (an afflicted Saint is as precious and honorable in their eyes, as when
in the greatest prosperity; The clouds of trouble cannot eclipse the glory of
Grace, nor render the gracious contemptible to those who know them such) yet,
as to the eye and opinion of worldly men they do. Job said his afflictions
were a witness against him, as if all were not right with him, yea, as if he
had been very unrighteous. The stocks are a witness against a man, that surely
he has done some ill thing. Thus you see there is pain in affliction,
restraint in affliction, disgrace in affliction, especially in the opinion of
the world, and therefore to be in affliction is to be as in the stocks. He
puts my feet in the stocks.

He marketh all my paths. Which some expound, as if when the Lord had let him
out of the stocks, yet he was but like a prisoner with his keeper at his heels;
He marketh all my paths. I have spoken to this also before; I shall now only
Note.

There is no stepping out of the eye or sight of God. He marks all our paths,
not only our open paths, but our secret paths; not only what paths our feet
walk in, but paths our hearts walk in. He marketh what our thoughts are, what
our scope is, what our aims and ends are. He marketh not only our day-paths,
but our night-paths; He watches all our paths. Take this Caution from it; As
the Lord marks all our paths, so it will be our wisdom to mark our own paths.

If the Lords eye be so strict over all our ways, shall we be careless of our
ways? If he look upon our walkings, shall not we look to our walkings? There
are many arguments (from love, from returns of thankfulness for received
benefits) which should provoke the people of God to heed and mark their own
ways; but surely this ought to be a very cogent argument, because God marks
them, He marketh all our paths. Therefore as the Apostle gives counsel and
admonition ( Ephesians: 5.15.) See that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools but as
wise. What our wisdom is, yea whether we have any wisdom, whether we are wise
or fools will be seen by our walkings. Some can talk and discourse very
wisely, who yet walk very foolishly, and whose whole course is folly.

So much for the opening of this charge brought by Elihu against Job, his
over-justifying of himself, and his reflecting upon the goodness and love of
God. Elihu proceeds yet further to deal with and refute him, as also to answer
for God. Behold, in this thou art not just, etc. This I charge thee with and
will prove it, thou have spoken sinfully and unbecommingly of God and of thy
self in all this.

JOB. Chap. 33. Verse. 12, 13. Behold, in this thou art not just: I will answer
thee, That God is greater then man.

Why do thou strive against him? for he gives not account of any of his
matters.


IN these two verses Elihu gives the first part of his answer, wherein we may
take notice of these five things; First, He tells Job that he had erred and was
mistaken, Behold, in this thou art not just. Secondly, He shows him wherein
he had been mistaken, or what his error was; In this thou art not just, or,
Behold this, thou are not just in it. Thirdly, Elihu lays down the general
ground, upon which he intended to convince Job of his error and mistake, The
greatness of God, I will answer thee that God is greater then man. Fourthly,
from that ground he draws out a check or reproof, in the beginning of the
13th verse, Why do thou strive against him? Fifthly and lastly, He gives a
reason of that reproof, which arises also out of the former ground, the
unquestionable Sovereignty of God; For he gives not account of any of his
matters.

Verse. 12. Behold, in this, thou art not just.
Behold, he calls for serious attention, and diligent consideration; Behold
This; so the Hebrew rendered strictly; we render, Behold, in this thou art not
just; What is this? what is the antecedent to this? we may assign the
antecedent in three things, or make it threefold, according to what Elihu has
laid down before in way of charge against Job in the former Context; First,
This, that thou have boasted thy self so much of thy innocence and integrity.
Verse. 8th. Thou have spoken in my hearing, and I have heard the voice of thy
words, saying, I am clean without transgression, etc.

Behold, in this thou art not just. Secondly, In this, That is, in that thou
have complained so much of the severity of Gods dealings and proceedings with
thee, (10. and 11.) Behold, he finds occasion against me, and accounts me
for his enemy; He puts my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my paths;
Behold, in this thou art not just.

Hoc nomine justus non es, quod deum in jus provocare ausus ^s. Merc:
There is a third antecedent, which we may take up from several passages in the
former part of the Book; and that is, because thou have so often and so
importunately desired to plead with God, and have made so many suites for a
hearing with him, as if thou had somewhat to say, which might acquit thy
self and show reason, why God should not deal thus with thee; For though Job
did not desire to plead with God as having any intent to accuse him of doing
him wrong, yet he was therefore to be blamed, because he desired to plead with
him; seeing it becomes man to submit to the judgment of God without murmuring
or complaining. So then Elihu had cause to charge him with this; God indeed
passed it by, as knowing it did not proceed (as in the wicked) from malice, but
from weakness and ignorance, as Job also himself humbly confessed at last.
Behold (thou have too often called for Justice) in this thou art not just.

Mr Broughton renders, Lo here thou art not in the right. These words, in
this, or here, may also have a negative reference to what Job had been charged
with before by his friends. As if Elihu had said; I do not charge thee with
such crimes as thy friends have loaded thee with heretofore, I do not burden
thee with gross impiety, nor with hypocrisy, I do not tell thee thou have
oppressed the poor, or wronged the widow and the fatherless, I have nothing
of this sort to say against thee. But in this or here, I have somewhat to say,
wherein my judgment also is that thou art not just, nor in the right; for
however thou art otherwise, or in other things upright and righteous, however
just thou have been in thy transactions with men, and pure in thy worship
toward God, yet in this I am sure, and I dare say it openly and avowedly, thou
art no ways justifiable, much less just in that thou have cried up thy own
innocence, and spoken so much of the hard dealings of God with thee; yea, have
been so bold as to desire a day of hearing even before God himself. Let this
be the Question or matter under debate; Whether or no, Job speaking thus highly
of himself, and thus boldly of God, has done right or no? Elihu undertakes
the negative, he engages to prove that Job had not done well, or right, how
innocent soever he was, in speaking so much of his own innocence, or (how
hardly soever God dealt with him) in making so many complaints of his severity,
Elihu undertakes to prove this negative; and Job never durst undertake the
affirmative, that he had done right or well in speaking or doing so; and
therefore in the close of the business he sits down convinced, that he had
been too bold with God, and too forward in justifying himself.

His argument (which runs through this whole discourse) to make good his
negative assertion, may be formed up thus; He that speaks much of his own
righteousness, and seems to reflect upon the righteousness of God, at least
that God has been over-rigorous with him, is not just, nor justifiable in this.

But thou O Job have spoken thus of thy self, and thus of God in the extremity
of thy pain, and in the anguish of thy spirit.

Therefore in this thou art not just, nor justifiable. No man of understanding
can take thy part, or be an Advocate for thee in this matter; As for me, I must
needs be and am resolved to be an Advocate for God against thee. The Major or
first proposition is not expressed in the text, the conclusion is given in the
beginning of the 12th verse, and the assumption or 2d proposition, is collected
from Job's own mouth in several places of this Book.

Again, besides the general scope of the words, and the tendency of Elihu in
this dispute, we may consider the manner of his speech, how he deals with Job;
Behold, in this thou art not just. In this manner of treating with Job, the
sweetness of his spirit, and likewise the boldness of it are observable.
These two virtues or excellencies of an Advocate, show themselves plainly in
this one passage; Behold, in this thou art not just. For consider, First, He
expresses his reproof negatively, he does not say, Behold, in this thou art
wicked, or thou have impiously blasphemed the name of God, but he speaks at as
low a rate, as may be, Behold, in this thou art not just, or justifiable, thou
have not done right, or thou art not right; there is a great good temper of
spirit, and a mixture of much meekness in such negative expressions: it being
much less to say to a man, in this thou art not just nor justifiable; then to
say positively or directly, in this thou art unjust, and deservest to be
condemned. For though there be no difference in the thing between not being
just and being unjust, yet there is much more mildness in the words; and a man
takes less offense, when told that he is not just, then in being told that he
is unjust. The imputing of a crime to a man, is more and worse, then the
denying him a virtue, or that he is virtuous.

Hence note.

We ought to temper our reproves with much gentleness and meekness. We
should not speak cutting words, if other words will serve the turn. Thus the
Apostle directs us ( Gal: 6.1.) Brethren, if a man be overtaken with a fault,
ye which are spiritual, restore such a one with the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted; deal as gently with a fallen
brother, as thou would with a man whose bones are dislocated or broken (so
much the metaphor there used imports) There is a time indeed when we must
rebuke (as the Apostle gives direction ( Tit: 1.13.) sharply, or cuttingly; we
must go to the quick, that they may be found in the faith: but there is a
great regard to be had to the state and spirits of those with whom we have to
deal. As it is our duty to receive the word with meekness ( James 1.21. some
receive the word proudly, riggidly, in the worst sense they can, yea they
receive it rebellingly, now as we ought to receive the word with meekness) so
it is good to speak the word with meekness, with as much meekness and
tenderness as the case will bear.

Secondly, consider this manner of speaking, Behold, in this thou art not just,
Elihu tells him plainly of his faults, he reported them before, and here he
applied them home to his person; Behold, in this, thou rememberest thy own
words; Thou can not but take notice what thou have spoken; now I tell thee,
in this thing thou art not just; Elihu does not speak doubtingly nor
fearfully, nor does he tell Job what the thoughts of others were upon the
matter, but he tells him directly, categorically, plainly from himself, in
this thou art not just.

Hence note.

We are to hold out our convictions and reproves with plainness, and to lay
our finger upon the very sore; Behold, in this (or that) thou art not just. We
are to speak meekly, but not at random, not uncertainly, not flatteringly (
Pro: 29.25.) A man that flattereth his neighbor, spreads a net for his
feet; he does but entangle and ensnare him, in stead either of counselling or
comforting him. When a man is out, it is best to tell him so; how else shall he
get in again? Flattering words are insnaring words; Behold, in this thou art
not right. One of the Ancients speaking to this point, Majore supplicio dignus
est qui male agentes laudat; quam qui male agit. Chrysostom:
tells us; It is more sinful to flatter those that do evil, then to do
evil our selves. And, surely it argues a more corrupt mind, or a worser
principle to dawbe sinners with the untempered mortar of flattery, then to be
dawbed with the mire of any particular sin or iniquity. A flatterer is a dawber
and pillow-sower; A flatterer has not a true sight of sin himself, and he
does what he can to keep others from the sight of it. It is safer to make
sinners smart then itch. David invited a wound^^g rather then such a skinning
of his sore ( Psalm: 141.5.) Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness,
(that is, I will not only take it kindly, but shall find it a kindness) and let
him reprove me, and it shall be an excellent oil, which shall break my head;
that is, it shall be so far from hurting that it shall be (through Grace) a
healing to me. No man had ever any cause to repent, either the giving or
receiving of a wise and seasonable reproof.

Behold, in this thou art not just. But what is it, not to be just? I answer,
not to be just, is not to give every man his due; yet Elihu intends it chiefly,
of what Job had spoken unduely to God; Behold, in this thou art not just.

Hence note.

They who do not give God hi^ right are unjust, as well as they who do not
give men their right. Yea not to give God his right, is by so much the greater
injustice, then not to give man his right, by how much God is greater then man;
look how much God is higher and greater then man, by so much is their sin
higher and greater, who give not God his right, then theirs, who give not man
his right. Many think they are very just, very honest men, because they give
every man his due, they wrong, they defraud no man, not any neighbor, not any
b^other with whom they deal: come and charge them if you can. It Is very good,
and more then most men can truly say of themselves, when a man is able to say
he is just to his neighbor, no man can challenge him of injustice. But many
say this, who take no notice, how unjust they are to God; they are not at all
sensible, how often they have denied God his right, nor how often they have
done God wrong; they take no notice of this. They have second-table Justice,
but they have not first-table Justice; this is it that Elihu charge Job with.
His friends charged him with second-table injustice, that he was an oppressor,
etc. but Elihu charged him with first-table injustice, that he had done wrong
to God. Therefore, remember, not to give God his due fear, his due love, his
due trust and submission (these are his rights by the first Commandment) is to
be unjust; not to give God due worship accordin^ ^o his will, is to be unjust,
because in so doing you deny him his ^^ght in the second Commandment; not to
speak or think reverently of the name, of the word, ways, and ordinances of
God, is to be unjust to God, because you deny him his right in the third
Commandment. To break the Sabboath, to steal Gods time, and convert it to
your own private use, to put it in your own purses, as many do, this is
sacrilege, this is to be unjust to God, because you give him not his right,
nor that which is due to him by the fourth Commandment; so not to submit to
the rod of God, not to be quiet under the chastizings of God, not to take all
well at Gods hand whatsoever he does with us, or to us, is to be unjust to God,
because we then deny him the right of his sovereignty, and of that just power
which he has over his creatures.

Behold, in this thou art not just. Elihu proceeds to give an account,
distinctly, wherein this injustice lay.

I will answer thee, or (as Mr Broughton) I will tell thee, God is greater then
man. We render well, I will answer thee, etc. There is a fourfold way of
answering; First, by information to a Question propounded. Every Question would
have an answer. Secondly, by solution of an objection made; When any thing is
objected against what is said or held; then to untie the knot, is to answer.
Thirdly, there is an answering by confutation of a false opinion or tenet; thus
whole books that hold unsound or heterodox opinions, are to be answered;
Fourthly, there is an answer by way of reproof, or reprehension of faults or
mistakes, either in speech or practice. Elihu his answer was of this last sort.
For he observing how Job had spoken, and what his carriage and demeanor had
been, gives him a reprehensive answer, Behold, in this thou art not just, I
will answer thee. And what was his answer? Respondebo tibi et reprehendam,
idque haec plane insolubili ratione quia amplior est deus et major multis
partibus homine; (...) i. e. (...) ampli^r est. Merc:
even this, God is greater then man; or, I will answer thee, that God is more
then man; The root of the word signifies to increase or grow Great; but God is
great, not by growth or increase, but in his essence and being. He who is
infinite in greatness, can have no addition to his greatness. God is the Great
one, and he only is great. All men and things put together, are not only little
nothings, but less then nothing compared to the Great God. Further, the word
by which God is here expressed, notes the great power of God, the strength of
God; in opposition to which the word by which man is here expressed, notes his
weakness and pitiful frailty. And therefore Mr Broughton translates strictly
according to the propriety of the Original; I must tell thee the puissant is
greater then the sorrowful man; we say barely, God, he, the puissant, or the
strong, the mighty God; we say, God is greater then man, he, then sorrowful
man. There are three original words, as I have sometime noted, which express
man; Adam, importing the matter of which man was made, earth; Ish noteing his
best perfection; and Enosh, intimating that sad condition which was b^ought
upon us by the fall; Surely the puissant is greater then sorrowful man.

But is not God greater then (Ish) The wisest and most accomplished, the most
perfect and mightiest of men, as well as he is greater then (Enosh) sorrowful
or miserable man? I answer, the word Enosh is not to be taken exclusively, as
if when he says, the puissant is greater then the sorrowful man, he were not
also greater then the greatest or strongest man; but it notes, that all men, or
man considered in his best estate, is but weakness and wretchedness, when put
in the balance with the great God, or the puissant, Lord what is man (says
David, one of the best and greatest of men, a King, Psalm: 144.3.) that thou
take knowledge of him? or the son of man that thou make account of him? Now
if it be even too much that God should make any account of man, then what is
any man in account to God? O what man or Angel is able to cast up the account,
how much the great God is greater or more then man. The words are plain, only
there is somewhat yet to be added or touched upon, to clear up further the
scope of Elihu in speaking thus to Job, which I shall endeavor to clear and
make out, when I have given a note or two from the words, as they are a plain
proposition; God is greater then man.

Hence Observe.

First; God is Great. He that is greater then the Greatest, is certainly great;
he that is higher then the highest, is high. This greatness of God is every
where celebrated in Scripture. The Prophet ( Isa: 12.6.) calls the inhabitant
of Zion to cry out and shout; why? For great is the holy One of Israel in the
midst of thee; that is, the holy one of Israel who is in the midst of thee, is
both Great in himself, and declares his greatness in thee. ( Mal: 1.14.) I am
a great King, says the Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the
heathens. I need not stay to give particular Scriptures to hold forth the
attribute of Gods greatness, his greatness runs through all his attributes.
Whatsoever God is, he is great in it; He is great in power ( Psalm: 56.3. Psalm:
147.5.) he is great in all sorts of power, great in authoritative power, and
great in executative power. As God commands what he pleases to be done, so
he can do what he commands. The power of man in doing is not always
commensurate with his power in commanding; but Gods is. He needs no help, much
less any leave to execute what he wills. Again, God is great in wisdom, he
has the compass of all things in his understanding; God is so wise, that he
is called the only wise God (1 Timothy: 1.17.) The wisdom of men and Angels is
folly to his. God is great also in his goodness, so great that Christ himself
as man would not be called good, but told him that called him so by way of
rebuke, There is none good but one, that is God (Math: 19.17.) Holy David brake
out into the admiration of that goodness which God has laid up, yea of that
which he daily works for man. How much more did he and ought we to admire
that goodness which is not so much in himself as himself? ( Psalm: 31.19.) O
how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
which thou workest for them that trust upon thee before the sons of men. The
goodness which God acts and puts forth for the creature, is a great goodness
( Isa: 63.7. Neh: 9.25^) but that goodness which is the goodness of his
nature, is a goodness as great as God is, a goodness infinite in greatness.
Again, how often is God called great, yea admired for his greatness in mercy?
When David (2 Samuel: 24.14.) made choice to fall into the hands of God; he gave
this reason of it, For his mercies are great. He is also great in wrath; we
read (2 Kings 23.26.) of the fierceness of his great wrath. And how great is
his Love? First, in redeeming us by Christ ( Joh: 3.16.) God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. God loved us so much in that
gift, that no man could ever tell how much love he has given us in it.
Secondly, His love is great in quickening us with Christ ( Ephesians: 2.4.) God who is
rich in mercy, for the great Love wherewith he has loved us, even when we were
dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ. His love both in redeeming
and quickening us is so great, that while we are called to the greatest study
after the knowledge of, we are told we cannot know the greatness of it, ( Ephesians:
3.18.) That you may know the Love of God which passes knowledge. I will not
stay upon this Attribute, the Greatness of God, only take these five brief
inferences from it; God is Great. Then

First, God can do great things, the greatest things, for us; every thing is
in working as it is in being; they that are but little, can do but little; God
being great in his being, that is, in his power, in his wisdom, in his
goodness, in his mercy, how easily can he do great things! The Scripture is
abundant in showing forth the great things which God has done, and will do, 2 Samuel: 7.22, 23. Job 5.9. Psalm: 71.19. Psalm: 86.10. Psalm: 92.5. Psalm: 111.2.
Psalm: 126.2, 3. Psalm: 136.7, 17. Joel 2.21. The works of God in all ages and
in all places, have borne the stamp of and given testimony to his excellent
Greatness. We say, There is nothing great to a great mind, or to a man of a
great spirit. A Great spirited man will overcome not only great difficulties,
but seeming impossibilities, yea he is glad to meet with greatest
difficulties, because they match the greatness of his mind. Then certainly the
Great God, does nothing but great, and can do the greatest things. It Is no
matter how great the things are which we have need to be done for us, if we can
but interest the Great God in the doing of them. God can do great things in
ways of mercy for his people, and he can do great things in ways of
Judgment against his enemies. Though his enemies be Great Oaks and Cedars, he
can hew them down ( Amos 2.9.) Though his enemies be as great as the greatest
mountains, he can remove and level them; Who art thou, O great mountain
before Zorobabell, thou shall become a plain (Zech: 4.7.) that is, the great
power of God, with Zorobabell, can overthrow or overturne those powers which
oppose or stand in the way of his Church and people, though they appear as
inseparable and immovable as a Great Mountain.

Secondly, If God be Great, then he can pardon great transgressions; you that
are great sinners fear not. Were not God a great God, the least of our sins
could not be pardoned; were not he great in mercy, and great in goodness, our
hear^s would fail us, yea our faith could have no bottom to come to him for
the pardon of our great sins; But why should great sins discourage us to ask
their pardon of God, who is great in mercy? David made the greatness of his
sin his argument to move the Lord to pardon it ( Psalm: 25.11.) Pardon my sin
for it is great; who could speak thus, unless he had that upon his heart that
he spoke to the great God, who is greater in nothing, and has magnified his
greatness in nothing more then in acts of mercy to Greatest sinners?

Thirdly, If God be a great God; then he must have great services and duties;
He must have great praise ( Psalm: 48.1.) great is the Lord and greatly to be
praised; he must have great love, we must love him even with all our heart, and
with all our might. He must have great fear ( Psalm: 89.7.) Great faith ( Math:
15.28.) Great honor from all his people. When David was about to make great
preparations for the building of the Temple, he says (1 Chronicles: 29.11.) Thine O
Lord is greatness, and the power, and the glory, etc. And when Solomon was
about to build the Temple, he says (2 Chronicles: 2.5.) The house which I build is
great, for great is our God above all Gods. We see David prepared and Solomon
builded in proportion to the God for whom the one prepared and the other built
a house. Thus I may say of all you do for God or to God, let it be the
greatest your stock and ability can reach to, because he is a great God. The
Lord himself uses that argument by the Prophet to urge his people to do
their utmost in whatsoever they were called to do ( Mal: 1.14.) Cursed be the
deceiver which has a male in his flock, and voweth and sacrifices to the
Lord a corrupt thing; (that is, who when he is able to perform a greater
service to the Lord, puts him off with a lesser one) for I am a great King,
says the Lord of hosts, etc. Therefore take heed of putting me off with weak
female services, I expect a male, your best, that service which is most
spiritual and masculine.

Fourthly, If God be great, then, they who are but little themselves, having an
interest in God, may do great things too. The least creature having an
interest in the great God, is as great, yea infinitely greater then the
greatest in the world, who stand in their own strength. Moses says ( Deuteronomy:
4.38. Deuteronomy: 7.1.) that the presen^e of God with Israel was such, that by it
they overcame Nations, greater and mightier then they; their littleness did
not hinder them, because the great God was with them in their works and ways;
yea God loves to use small instruments, that his own greatness who is the
efficient may appear. That question which was twice put in the Prophet ( Amos
7.2, 5.) is very often put in that case; By whom shall Jacob arise? for he is
small. That which made it so questionable whether Jacob should rise, was his
smallness; And could we remember the Greatness of the God of Jacob, we should
either never make such questions, or easily answer them.

Fifthly, Seeing God is great, we should be always ascribing greatness to
God, we should lift him up in his greatness. Thus Moses exhorted others (
Deuteronomy: 32.3.) Because I will publish the name of the Lord, ascribe ye greatness
to our God. And David at once prophecieth the same of others, and promises it
for himself ( Psalm: 145.6.) Men shall speak of the might of thy terrible
Acts, and I will declare thy greatness.

Again, Consider these words as they are expressed comparatively, God is
greater then man; As God is great, so greater then the greatest men. God is
great above all Gods; that is, above all the Kings and Princes of the earth.
Now I know (said Jethro, Exodus: 18.11.) that God is greater then all Gods
(greater then Rharoah and his Egyptian Princes) for in the thing wherein they
dealt proudly he was above them. David challenged all the Gods on Gods behalf
( Psalm: 77.13.) Who is so great a God as our God? Let any man name him if he
can; He is a God above all Gods, that is, above the greatest powers in this
world who are called Gods. Thus Christ comforts believers with an assurance of
safety for ever ( John 10.29.) My father is greater then all, then the devil
and all.

But some may say, who knows not this that God is Great, or that he is
greater then men or devils? Job himself spoke much of this subject, yea his
friends made it their business to exalt the greatness of God, as we may see
in several passages of this Book. So that Elihu seems to say no more here,
then had been said already, and does no more then has been done already. Is
not this then a cold way of arguing to tell Job that which he knew already?

For answer to this I shall stay a while (as was promised) before I go off
from these words, to show why though for the matter this is no more then has
been said already; that, yet Elihu had reason to bring this argument for the
conviction of Job, that God is greater then man; for though the Greatness of
God has been often spoken of in the course of this disputation, between Job
and his friends, yet neither Job nor his friends did handle or improve it to
that point, or in that extent, as here intended by Elihu, as may appear by
these following Considerations.

First, When Elihu spoke of the greatness of God, we are not to understand
this greatness abstractly or alone, but concreetely or in conjunction with his
goodness and righteousness, with his mercy and faithfulness, etc. Job
confessed the greatness of God, but he seemed to intimate several things, to
the disparagement of the goodness, mercy, and righteousness of God. For
though in his frequent complainings he did not question, yet he did much darken
and obscure these Divine perfections. And therefore Elihu speaking of the
Greatness of God, urges it in conjunction with all his perfections, and
indeed they cannot be dis-joyned, except in notion or discourse.

Secondly, Elihu insisted so much upon the greatness of God, to humble Job,
and to convince him that he had done amiss, in his bold appeals to him and
complaints, about his dealing with him. Elihu does wisely to hold out the
greatness and sovereignty of God, for the keeping down and repression of his
yet, unhumbled spirit.

Thirdly, Elihu mannageth this argument for another end and purpose, then his
friends did. They used it to prove Job was wicked or had done wickedly in the
former passages of his life; He to show that Job ought to be patient under and
quietly submit to the present providence of God.

Fourthly, This argument which Elihu brings from the greatness of God, has
not at all the less force in it, because grounded upon so common and generally
received a principle, the greatness of God; yea, it has therefore the greater
force in it; for what is more unreasonable then for man to intimate any thing
which reflects upon God, or to complain of what God does; when as God, by the
common consent of all reasonable men, does infinitely surpass all men, both in
greatness, and in righteousness, both in Justice, and in goodness. When the
greatness of God appears in all these things, what can be more unreasonable
then for man to insinuate any thing complainingly concerning God. From the
consideration of this scope which Elihu had in arguing from the greatness of
God;

Note.

We may speak and believe aright, that God is great, and that he is greater
then man, and yet not answer it in our practice, nor be duly affected with it.
Elihu did not at all question whether Job thought God greater then himself;
that was not the point in controversy: but he saw this principle was not
answered in Jobs practice, or that he did not demean himself sutably to the
Greatness of God, which he had proclaimed to others, and professed himself to
believe. And thus it is with many, most of all with those under great
temptations and pressing afflictions. How apt are they to speak and act below,
yea beside those principles which they believe and hold forth in their
profession. It is an easy matter to say, and in words to acknowledge what God
has revealed himself to be, but O how hard is it to live and walk up to such
sayings and acknowledgements? Many tell us, God is greater then man, yet while
they do not fully subject themselves to God, they in effect deny that God is
greater then man. Many acknowledge fully that God is righteous, yet when they
rest not in his dealings with them, they imply some unrighteousness in God.
Many say God is wise, only wise, yet while they will be their own carvers, and
are unsatisfied with Gods allowances and providence; they make themselves
wiser then God, or at least imagine things might be ordered with Greater
wisdom then they are. Many say God is great in mercy, greater infinitely then
man, yet when they should act faith about the pardon of their sins, they act it
as if God had but the mercy of a man, or as if his thoughts were as our
thoughts, and his ways (in dispencing favors) like our ways, and so they
bring God down to their own size and scantlings. If these had been asked the
question, whether God has not greater mercy then man, they would have
answered, doubtless he has; and yet they are no more in believing, then if
the mercy of God were of the same measure with the mercies of narrow-hearted
man. Thus we modle the Great God, and our Idea's or apprehensions of him
according to what we see in our selves, not according to what he is and has
said of himself. And what are our rightest notions of God, but hoverings in
the air, till we bring them down into practice, or live up to them, till
every thing we do be an exposition of what we speak and believe of God. And
when we believe indeed that God is greater then man, we make our selves just
nothing before God: if we are any thing to our selves, or glory in any thing of
our own, be it little or great before God, we do not give God the glory of his
greatness. The Lord speaking of his own greatness by the Prophet, says, All
nations are but as the drop of the bucket to him, yea they are as a little
thing, as nothing, less then nothing; if therefore you make not every thing
little, yea nothing before God, you detract from the glory of his greatness.
Again, they only acknowledge God in his greatness, who both agree to all he
does as just, and receive it as good, yea as best, how bad soever it be to
nature, or bitter to their sense. Once more, they only acknowledge God fully in
his greatness, who though God changes and varieth his dispensations every day
with them, though he empty them never so often from vessel to vessel, yet sit
down and say, God is unchangeable to them. It is because the Lord changes not
that we are not consumed ( Mal: 3.6.) therefore what changes soever his people
meet with, his heart and thoughts toward them are not changed.

Secondly, Note.

The very reason why we do not stoop to God in silence, why we do not suffer
him quietly to do with us and dispose of us how he will, is, because we do
not lay to heart as we ought the greatness of God. Did we remember, that the
great God is great in goodness, and great in wisdom, as well as great in
power; in a word, did we, when we say God is great, and greater then any man,
know what we say, it would presently stop our mouths, and for ever silence all
our discontents and complainings, whether in reference to our personal or the
public concernments. We may pray that God would remove any affliction or evil
that is upon us (to do is so not only our liberty but our duty) but we may not
complain of any affliction, as an evil to us, nor would we ever make such a
complaint, if our hearts were taken up with this thought, that God is great in
Goodness. Why do we say, at any time, Surely we have suffered enough, or too
much already? Why do we demand so curiously wherefore God should use such
severity against us? What is the reason of all this? even this, we do not
consider enough of his greatness. All our inward troubles at our outward
troubles arise from this, because we do not enough believe or not remember who
God is. We by our ignorance and unbelief divest God (as much as in us lies)
of his great goodness and wisdom, when we fear, especially when we conclude,
things are not ordered for our good. And though every man is ready to say, he
loathes yea trembles at such thoughts, yet we may lodge many such guests before
we are aware. Whenever we are overgrieved at any affliction, our own or
others, or would (without much free submi^sion to the will of God) have things
go otherwise then they do, we, upon the matter, make our selves greater and
wiser then God. And though this be far from our purpose, yet we cannot avoid
the imputation of it. That which is not (as some distingui^h) the aim, scope,
and intendment of the speaker or actor may yet be the aim and scope of his
action, work or speech; no doubt Job was very far from the least thought of
diminishing much more of denying the greatness of God, either in his power,
wisdom, or goodness, yea (as was granted before) he spoke very highly of him
in all these his glorious and divine perfections. It was not his end when he
spoke so impatiently and complainingly, Finis operis licet non operantis.
to rob God of that honor of his greatness, yet Elihu did him no wrong when
he said his impatience and complainings did it. And if any shall be found
complaining like Job, though they do not formally deny, that God is greater
rhen man, yet that interpretation and construction may justly be put upon their
complaints.

But some may here object and say, how was Job such a mirror, such a pattern
of patience, as the Apostle James makes him ( Chap: 5.11.) if he manifested so
much impatience as might be interpreted by others, though not intended by him a
denial of the Greatness of God?

I answer, though all agree (and the testimony of the Spirit of God is enough
to confirm it, though all should not agree) that the patience of Job was
exceeding great, yet no man may say (nor does the Spirit of God, in Scripture,
say it) that his patience was perfect; his patience was such as exceeded the
most, yea (for ought that we know) the best of men, yet his was but the
patience of a man, of a man compassed about with the like passions as other
men. His patience was sincere and without hypocrisy, but his patience was not
complete nor without infirmity; or his patience (we may say) was perfect as to
the kind, but it was not perfect as to the degree. His patience deserved both
commendation and imitation; yet he showed (at times) such impatience as
deserved reproof, and should not be imitated but mortified and avoided. Good
men do not only act less in goodness sometimes, but ill and much amiss. And
while we see tallest Cedars fail (they shall not utterly fall, Job did not)
Let him that thinks he stands (that is, who has a strong opinion of his
own strength) take heed lest he fall, (as the Apostle cautions him, 1 Cor:
10.12.) for even the impatient complaints of Job in his sufferings (like those
sufferings of the Israelites for their sins spoken of in the former verses of
that Chapter) fell from him for an ensample (or type) and are written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

Thus you see the reason why Elihu took up this common principle, Quae pueris
ipsis de^antata sunt nobis in gravi lucta and perturbatione ut nova quaedam
proponenda sunt. Mert.
which every Child learnes out of a Ca^echisme, to convince this holy man with.
What was more known to Job, or to any knowing man, then this, that God is
greater then man? yet Elihu chose this as the most commodious and effectual
argument, to compose his spirit, and quiet him after all his distempered and
tumultuating complaints; nor h^th Elihu yet done arguing down the hight and
unquietness (...) Job's spirit. We have him both reproving him for it by way
of question, and giving him another unanswerable argument against it, in the
next verse.

Verse. 13. Why do thou strive against him, for he gives not account of any
of his matters?
The words are a reproving question; As if he had said, Thou do ill, very ill
to strive. There is a fourfold striving, three of which are held forth in
Scripture under the word of the text.

First, There is a striving with outward force and power, (...) contondere
pertinet ad judicialem and forensem litem ad dei tribunal instituendam^e quod
saepe pustulavit Job.
either personally man with man (properly called contention) or more generally,
nation with nation, properly called war.

Secondly, There is a legal striving, a striving by way of plea, about matters
of right and title. The word in the text chiefly imports such a judiciary
striving, a strife in law, when the adverse party or Plaintiff impleads and
commenseth his suit against the Defendant. Striving is taken in this sense and
joined with warring in the description of that contest which Jephtah had with
the King of the Children of Ammon (Judge: 11.25.) And now art thou any thing
better then Balak the son of Zippor king of Moab? did he ever strive against
Israel? or did he ever fight against them? That is, did he either make war
with Israel, or did he so much as challenge and plead his right to their land
by law? That other name which Joash Gideons father occasionally gave him (
Judge: 6.31, 32.) takes part from this word; Therefore on that day he called him
Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal plead against him, because he has thrown down
his altar. As if he had said, Let Baal come and enter his action against my Son
if he please; and let my Son alone to answer him.

Thirdly, There is a logical striving, or a striving by dint of argument and
reason. Thus disputants strive; and Books of controversy about matters of
faith and worship are called Books of Polemicall Divinity. Nor indeed has any
kind of strife been carried on with higher and hotter animosities then those
managed by tongue and pen in writing and disputing.

Foutthly, The word is applied to any angry passionate chideing and
complaining. Thus it is used in that famous history ( Exodus: 17.) where the
people of Israel (having journeyed from Sin and pitched in Rep^^^^m, v. 1.) did
chide with Moses: from which act (v: 7th) He called the place Massa and
Meribah, because of the chideing of the chidren of Israel, and because they
tempted the Lord, sayi^g, Is the Lord among us or not? Because the people of
Israel strove with Moses, or rather with God himself, Therefore to keep them
under the sense of this sin and provocation, Moses called the name of the place
Meribah, which signifies Striving. In this last sense, as striving is used by
way of chideing and complaining we are to understand it here. Why do thou
strive against him? (says Elihu) That is, why do thou chide and complain
about the dealings of God with thee? or because he will not render thee a
reason of his dealings with thee in this affliction. Job made many striving and
chideing complaints, his first were eminently such ( Chap: 3.11.) Why dyed I
not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the
belly? why did the knees prevent me, or why the breasts, that I should suck?
He chideth hard about the hardness of his condition in this life, who chideth
because he lives. Read him in the same language ( Chap: 10.18.) and in a
language not much unlike it in several other places. Yea Job does (I say not
formally yet vertually) call out or challenge God more then once to plead with
him, and make good his cause against him. Why do thou strive with him?

For he gives no account of any of his matters. (...)
The word signifies properly to answer, and so the text might well enough be
rendered here out of the original, he answers not. Mr Broughton says, He
will not speak for all his dealings. If If any man demand of God a reason of
his doings, he may choose whether he will give it him or no: He will not be
brought to a reckoning: He will not, he needs not to answer, or give an
account Of any of his matters, or, of any of his words.

(...)
It Is frequent in the Hebrew to express matters or things, by this word, which
in strictness signifies but a word. (Chap: 19.28.) Seeing the root of the
matter (the text is the root of the word) is found in me. So here, He gives
not account of any of his words or matters. Again, The original says, He
gives not account of all his matters. We translate full and right to the
sense, when we say, He gives not account of any of his matters. For the
meaning of Elihu is not that God gives an account of some (though that be a
truth) but not indeed of all his matters, he has some reserved cases and
counsels, but his meaning is, that he is not obliged to give any man an
account of so much as of any of his matters. And then, that universal is to be
taken distributively, A^l for any. So we render it ( Psalm: 147.20. (...)
) where the Psalmist showing the special privileges of Gods people, says, He
has not dealt so with all nations; We translate, more emphatically, He has
not dealt so with any nation. God was so far from giving the same privilege to
all nations, which he gave to his Israel, that he gave not the same to any
nation. As if he had said, God has honored his peculiar people with peculiar
favors, go enquire and search all the nations of the world, and ye shall not
pick out a people upon whom God has bestowed such rich and precious mercies,
as he has upon his Israel. And to this day the Israel of God in every nation
enjoy such spiritual privileges and mercies as the Nations with whom they are
civilly mingled know not of. But, to the point; Thus here, He gives not
account of all; that is, not of any of his matters.

Most of the Greek translaters render (according to the strictness of the
letter) not matters but words: Quid igitur ipsum vocas in judicium? omnes enim
sermones ejus sunt ejusmodi, quibus contradici non possit. Theod: Graeci in
prima persona (...) verbis meis, and non in tertia ut nos legimus (...) verbis
suis; quasi Elihu mimic^s verba Jobi referat, cur cum eo ausus es contendere
dicens, quia omnibus verbis meis non respondet, etc. Bold:
Why do thou strive with him? for his words are such as to which none can
answer. As if the meaning of Elihu were; when God speaks, no man is able to
reply upon him, or contradict him. His sayings are indeed irrefragable. Thus
they gloss their translation; Why do thou call him into Judgment, or strive
with him? for all his speeches are such as cannot be contradicted. If God
oppose, who can answer, and if God answer, who can oppose him? That Is a good
sense, though not a good translation.

Some others interpret the latter part of the verse as containing Job's answer
to the question put by Elihu in the first part of it; Why do thou strive with
God? (says Elihu) To which Job is supposed, replying, Because he gives me not
an account of my matters; God does not answer to my words, and therefore pardon
me if I complain or strive with him: I hope while I am thus unanswered you
will hold me excused if I move again and again, yea, even strive for an
answer. But the Grammar of the text is against this reading, the words being
plainly in the third person, his matters, not in the first, my matters; and
it is too great a boldness with the text, to make such a change in the
translation. Besides it is more agreeable to the scope of the place, to take the
latter part of the verse as a reason given by Elihu, why Job should not strive
with God, then to take it as a reason given by Job why he did.

I find a learned translater among the Modernes, who taking the latter part of
the verse as a reason given by Job of his striving with God spoken of in the
first, Quare adversus eum litigas quod de omnibus rebus suis non respondeat.
Jun:
yet keeps to the third person; Why do thou strive with him? Because he will
not give an answer (or an account) of all his matters. As if Elihu had said, I
plainly perceive the cause why thou (O Job) art so unquiet, and still
persistest striving with God, It Is even because he does not answer thy so often
repeated desire, to summon thy appearance before him, and then to give thee an
account of his proceedings with thee. But consider, man? art thou well in thy
wits? know thou what thou do, or say? will thou a poor narrow-hearted
creature take it ill at the hands of the great God, and as it were strive with
him, btcause he does not render a reason of all his matters, and expound all
his doings unto thee? The argument may be formed thus.

He is not just or right who striveth with God, because God does not give him a
reason of all his actions and administrations.

But thou seem to strive with God, because he has not given thee an account
or reason of his administrations toward thee; therefore thou art not just.

This is a fair and proper sense; yet I shall keep to our reading, and make
this latter part of the verse, as a ground or reason given by Elihu why Job
ought not to strive with God, as those two other readings make it a reason why
he did; As if Elihu had said, Why do thou strive against him? Consider as God
is greater then man, so he is absolute in his greatness, or his is a
sovereign Greatness.

For he gives not account of any of his matters. This I conceive the best and
clearest rendering of these words, which thus understood yields us several
useful observations: First, upon the whole matter, thus: Gracious men do not
always hold out the same gracious frame of spirit.

There was a time when Job was far from striving with God, far from doing or
speaking any thing which had the least shadow or savor of it. Time was, when
Job was altogether for, and in submitting to God; Let God do what he will with
him, he had not a word to say against him. After all the sad reports and
messages which were brought to him of the devastation of his whole estate in
the field, yea of the disasterous death of all his children in one day, and at
once; did Job strive with God? did he utter one word of complaint, or so much
as of any dissatisfaction? No, not one, but gave Glory by this confession; The
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. Was
not here a clear yiedling of himself up to God, to do what he would with
him? Did he not freely lay himself low, when God had laid him at the lowest?
who ever heard or read of a more perfect work of patience in a mere mortal
man? Yet in the process of the business, Job did not only speak such words as
carried a shadow of striving with God, but were real strivings and uncomely
pleadings with him. His heart did not retain that first sweet submissive frame
throughout the affliction, which appeared to admiration at the beginning of it.
The state of grace abides always, it is not (as some affirm) loseable; it is
not, like the best things of this world perishing. But though a state of Grace
abides always, yet every man's grace (if any man's) does not always abide in
the same state. A true frame of grace shall never be destroyed, but the heart
of a gracious man does not always continue in the same frame. The heat of
grace may be cooled, the hight of it abated, the strength of it weakened, and
the beauty of it faded. He that a while ago walked and acted very humbly, may
upon another temptation act very proudly, and walk as if he were above all his
brethren. He that one while has acted very self-denyingly, may at another time
act very self-seekingly. He that has acted very lovingly, (the very law of
love being stamped upon his words and works) may at another time act very
unlovely and lovelesly, and do things which are very much beside and below,
yea contrary to the fulfilling of that royal Law; He may be so far from
bearing his brothers burden, (which is the fulfilling of that law of Christ,
Gal: 6.2.) that he may be a burden to his brother. And while at one time you
might have done and spoken almost what you would to him, and he could bear it,
at another time, do what you can, or speak what you can, he is offended. Such
changes and varieties are found upon the most gracious frames of spirit, which
the best of Saints have in this world: We have only this to hold to, the state
of grace is unchangeable, and we are waiting for such a frame of grace as shall
never change. That gracious frame in which the hand of God will set us up in
the day of our resurrection to glory, shall never change, nor decline a hairs
breadth to all eternity. We shall be as pure, and as holy, and as spiritual,
and as heavenly, and as meek, and as full of the praise of God for ever, as
ever. As full to eternity as in the very first moment in which that glorious
frame shall be set up. But in this life to how great a degree of grace soever
we attain, we seldom retain the same degree, but are flowing and ebbing like
the water, waxing and waining like the Moon. Job was sound striving with God,
who a little before had so humbly submitted and was so fully resigned unto him.

Secondly, Observe.

There is a spirit in man very apt to strive with God. Do ye think (says the
Apostle, Jam: 4.5.) that the Scripture says in vain, The spirit that dwells
in us, lusts to envy, or (as the margin has it) enviously; surely no; the
Scripture does not speak this in vain, and if any think it does, their
thoughts are vain. Now, as there are lustings in men to envy against their
brethren, because of the gifts and good things of God which they enjoy; so
there are lustings in men to discontent against God, because of the evils
which themselves suffer. When God seems to contend with us, we really fall to
contending with God. The waters of Meribah will be an everlasting winess of
this; of which Moses said ( Numb: 20.13.) This is the water of Meribah, because
the children of Israel strove with the Lord, and he was sanctified in them. The
Apostle does more then intimate this readiness of man to strive with God, while
by a vehement expostulation he checks it, and reproves all men for it. (1 Cor:
10.22.) Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger then he? They
presume much upon their strength, who are forward to strive, they especially
who provoke and challenge others to strive with them. There is a spirit in man
which stouts it with God, even to a provocation of strife with him.

But you will say, When may we be said to strive with God? I answer, we do it
these four ways.

First, Man striveth with God by disobeying his commands; that is a strife with
his holiness. The laws of God bear the image or stamp of his holiness. All
disobedience is an unanswerableness to the Law, wilful disobedience is a
making void the Law. He that is resolved to sin, wishes there were no Law to
stop him from sinning, or to punish him when he has sinned. What greater
strife can be raised against the Lawgiver, then to wish he had given no such
Law?

Secondly, Men strive with God, by not believing or distrusting his promises.
That Is a strife with his faithfulness, or with his power. Unbelief is one of
the worst ways, if not the worst of all the ways of striving with God. The
reason why that place at the rock in Horeb was called Meribah (Exodus: 17.7.) was
because the people did not believe. They thought they must dye with thirst in
the wilderness when they saw no water. They fell to this sin again a second
time upon the like occasion, while they abode in Kadesh (Numb: 20.1, 2, 3.) And
as the people strove there with God by their rebellious unbelief, so also did
Moses and Aaron by their unbelief, that God would give water to such rebels,
as it follows in the same Chapter ( v. 10, 11, 12.) There is no sin so often,
or so properly called a provocation as unbelief is. Yea by unbelief we strive
so much with God, that we are said to weary him ( Isa: 7.13.) O how do they
weary God, who either think him so weak that he cannot, or so unfaithful
that he will not make good his word, or perform his promises! The first of
these is always in unbelief, the latter often.

Thirdly, We strive with God by not bearing his hand, or by our impatience
under the cross which his hand lays upon us: while we quarrel with the rod,
we quarrel with God who chasteneth us with it. This was the most special way
in which Job strove with God; and the sinfulness of it, has been several
times touched upon in this book.

Fourthly, any murmuring word about, yea any disco^tented thought with our own
condition, though not vented by words, though it be kept in, and lie close in
the bosom, is a striving with God. And so likewise is any tumultuating thought
about his providence toward others, and his stating of affairs in the world.

Now as there is such a sinful principle in man to strive with God; so
considering, as has been showed, how many ways it works (and many more ways
of its working might be showed, this, I say, being considered) we may be found
striving with God before we think of it, yea while we oppose the very thought
of it. Therefore (as Gamaliel warned the Jews, saying ( Acts 5.39.) Take heed
what ye do, lest happily ye be found even to fight against God; Those Jews did
not think their opposing the Messengers and Ministers of Christ, was a
fighting against God; But Gamaliel told them plainly it was. So in many other
cases, we may do and say that which brings us under the same charge of striving
with or against God, though we have no purpose (as Job had not) to strive with
him.

Again, As this text shows us Job striving with God, so it shows us Elihu
striving with or questioning Job about it. This question or expostulation, Why
do thou strive with him? was a chideing severe reproof of him for doing so.

Hence note.

For man to strive with God is most uncomely. Does it suite the condition, or
become the state of man to do so? it does not become man as a creature to
strive with God, much less as a new creature, as a professed servant of God,
as a Saint, as a Christian. We never act so unlike either creatures, or new
creatures, Saints, and Christians, as when we strive with God. It Is a shame for
a child to strive with his father, or for a servant to strive with his Master,
how much more for a creature to strive with his Creator, man with God?

Fourthly, The rebuke which Elihu gave Job, did not only import the
uncomelinesse of his striving with God, but the sinfulness of it.

Hence note.

To strive with God (in any of those ways before described) is a sin exceeding
sinful. How extremely sinful it is for man to strive with God, appears by
all the relative duties of man to God: Every servant and son of God, is bound,
first, to submit to God; is it not exceeding sinful to strive where we ought
to submit? Secondly, Every godly man by these relations to God, is bound to be
content with (which is more then barely to submit to) all his dealings; Do not
they sin, who in stead of being content, strive with God because he deals so
with them? Thirdly, Man ought, not only to be content, but to be well-pleased
with what God does; How far are they departed from a well-pleasednesse with
God, who strive against him, which is an act of high displeasure? It is said of
David (2 Samuel: 3.36.) Whatsoever the King did pleased all the people. The people
did not say to David their King, do what you will, we will be pleased with it;
But David was so gracious a Prince, so good a King, that he did nothing that
was justly displeasing to the people. It Is more then comes to the share of a
man, though a King to say, Let him do what he will, we will be pleased with
it, but it is certainly our duty to say to God, Do what you will, do your
pleasure with us, and to us, we will (through grace) be pleased with it. Is it
not very sinful to strive with him about any thing he does, in and with all
whose doing we ought to acquiesse, and be well pleased?

Fifthly, These words, Why do thou strive with him? import a high presumption
in those who do so.

Hence observe.

Striving with God is a presumptuous sin. The Prophet says, ( Isa: 45.9.) Woe
unto him that striveth with his maker. Let the potsherd strive with the
potsherds of the earth: Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, what
make thou? or thy work he has no hands? When the Prophet says, Let the
potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth; his meaning is, let man strive
with man, but let not any man presume to strive with his maker; for then the
potsherd striveth with the potter. In all which he does not encourage man to
strive with man, (though his match) but shows how insufferable a boldness it
is for any man (how matchless soever among men) to strive with God. The King
of Judah having sent a challenge to the King of Israel, He returned this answer
(2 Kings 14.9.) The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the Cedar that was in
Lebanon, etc. As if he had said, What a presumption is it for a thistle to
equal it self with a Cedar? and therefore he advises ( v. 10.) Thou have
indeed smitten Edom, and thy heart has lifted thee up: glory of this and tarry
at home; for why should thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou should fall,
thou and Judah with thee? As if he had said, thou can get nothing by meddling
with me but blows, and most probably, thine own ruin to boot. Now if an
earthly King shall look upon it as a presumption for another King his equal in
dignity to contend with him, how much more may the God of heaven, who is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, count it an high presumption for any man, though
the greatest King on earth, to strive with him?

Sixthly, We use to say to those who act foolishly, Why do you thus? And
therefore when Elihu says to Job, Why do thou strive against him?

We learn.

Striving with God is a foolish and a most irrational thing. Sinners are
fools, all sin is folly, irrationallity is stamped upon every sin. Striving
with God is a sin so eminently foolish as may carry away the bell, for
foolishness, from all other sins. I will give you three things, to show why it
must needs be so.

First, We cannot help our selves by striving with God. Christ argues the
folly of inordinate cares from this ground ( Math: 6.27.) Which of you by
taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature? It is not man's care, but
the presence and blessing of God which increases both the stature of man and
his estate. Cares may break our sleep, yea break our hearts, but they cannot
fill our purses, nor heighten our persons, either in a natural or in a civil
notion. Is it not then a foolish thing to take inordinate care? is it not
greater folly to strive with God? Seeing as by caring you cannot get any of the
good things of the world, so by striving with God, you cannot get off any of
those evils which he lays upon you. Secondly, Is it not a very foolish thing
to strive with God, seeing we are so far from helping our selves out of
trouble by it, that we do but increase our trouble, and the more entangle our
selves by it? What do we by struggling but straiten the bonds of our
affliction, and get weariness, in stead of expected ease? till we are quiet
with God, how can we hope that he should send us quietness? Thirdly, It is a
foolish thing to strive with God, because by striving with him in reference to
any misery that is upon us, we hinder our selves from taking comfort in any
remaining mercy. Though God takes away many mercies, yet while life remains
there is somewhat of mercy remaining. When Job was stripped to his skin, yet he
had somewhat left, which was a ground of his blessing God. The greatest loosers
have somewhat left, they escape at least (as Job said he did at worst, Chap:
19.20.) with the skin of their teeth. But while we strive with God about the
mercies we have lost, we loose the comfort of all the mercies we still enjoy.
And is it not extreme folly to deprive our selves of what we have by
complaining about what we have not? Why do thou strive? Thus much from the
emphasis of the former part of the verse, as it is put into a chideing or
reproving question, Why do thou strive against him? From the latter branch.

He gives not account of any of his matters. Observe.

First, The power and dominion of God is absolute. God is not subject to any
reckonings with man whatsoever he does. He that may do what he will, and can
do nothing but what is right, neither may nor can be brought to any account
for what he has done. He that is unaccountable is absolute in power.

Further, God needs not give man any account, upon these three grounds. First,
He owes no man any thing; He has received nothing of us, and if a man has
not received, he needs not account. They that have any trust from men, are to
give account. But what has God received from man? Man receives his all from
God. Why then should God give any account?

Secondly, Consider, the Lo^d has wronged no man, nor can he. He is infinitely
just and righteous in all his ways; He not only does just things, but things
are just because he does them. Why should he give an account of any of his
matters, who neither does nor can do any matter which is un^ust. If we knew
and were fully assured of a man (in whose hands we have trusted much) that he
were so just, that he would not (though he had opportunity) deceive us of a
farthing, we would never call him to an account. As it is said of those
treasurers in the story of the Kings (2 Kings 12.15.) They reckoned not with
the men into whose hand they delivered the money to be bestowed on workmen, for
they dealt faithfully. An example hardly to be paralleled in an age by the sons
of men. Many are more desirous of trusts, then careful to discharge them; They
love to have much treasure pass through their hands, that some of it may, in
passage, slip into their own pockets and purses. Justice and faithfulness are
rare Jewels among men, and therefore it is but need they should have a check
upon them, and be called to an account. But the holy God is altogether just and
faithful, therefore to what purpose should he be called to an account. Let us
rest quiet in this acknowledgement, That he whose will is the highest reason,
can do nothing without reason. Man was created under God, and then he returns
to the order of his creation, when he prefers the judgment of God, even when
he does not understand it, before his own.

Thirdly, There is no man, no nor Angel, that has any authority to call God to
an account. They that are accountable to others, Homo sub deo est conditus and
ad conditionis ordinem redit, quando sibi aequitatem judicis, etiam quam non
intelligit anteponit. Greg l. 13. Mor: c. 18.
are under their power, either as being in degree above them, or as having made
a compact and covenant with them (though their equals) to give them an
account. But who shall call God to an account, who is higher then the highest?
And though God has condiscended to make a covenant with man, and therein given
him assurance that he will do him good, yet God has engaged himself to give
us an account how or in what way he makes good or performs his Covenant. Man
must give an account to God how he has performed the Articles of the Covenant,
not God to man. As man is a frail dying creature, so he is an accountable
creature ( Luke 16.2.) Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no
longer Steward (Rom: 14.12.) So then every one of us shall give an account of
himself to God. God will call every man to a strict account of his receipts and
expenses, what talents of time and opportunities of parts and abilities, of
power and Authorities, have been put into his hand, as also how he has
husbanded and improved them. We, alas poor creatures, by striving with God,
call him (upon the matter) to give us an account of his matters; And in the
mean time forget the account which we must give to him of all our matters. It
is our duty and will be our wisdom to account so with our selves every day,
that we may be ready for our account in that Great and last Audit-Day; And as
to remember and prepare for our own account in that day, will keep us from
doing or saying any thing which may be interpreted a calling of God to an
account all our days: so that remembrance will make us strive how to improve
and be bettered by the afflictions and troubles wherewith we are exercised in
the world, in stead of striving with God, because he puts us upon those severer
exercises; for how we have improved our afflictions will be one part (and that
a very considerable one) of our account to God in that day.

Lastly, The two parts of this verse connected and considered together, (Why
do thou strive against him, for he gives not account of any of his matters)
The latter being a reason of the former, give us this Observation.

God being absolute in power we ought to sit down quietly under all his
dealings: Or thus, The consideration of Gods absolute Sovereignty, that he
gives not account of any of his matters, should stop all our strivings and
pleadings with or against God. Our strivings against God are of two sorts, or
in a double respect; They respect either our eternal, or our temporal estate.

First, With respect to our eternal state (for about that we are apt to call
God to account.) O what strivings are there in the hearts of men about Gods
absolute sovereignty in electing of some and rejecting of others. The Apostle
is much upon it ( Romans 9.) where having represented the Lord speaking thus by
Moses (verse. 15.) I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have
compassion on whom I will have compassion: He presently prevents an Objection,
or the strife of man with God about that saying, ( verse. 19.) Thou will say
then, why does he yet find fault? (As if men might find fault with God, if he
in that case should find fault with them?) for who has resisted his will? This
is man's plea against the sovereign will of God. But what says the Lord by the
Apostle to such a pleader? we have his reproof of him for an answer in the next
verse, Nay but O man, who art thou that replyest against God? shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? has not the
Potter power over the clay? The Apostle brings in this Argument as to man's
eternal state; he must not strive with God about that. He must not say, why
does God find fault with man? O man, who art thou that do logic it thus with
God? His absolute power is his reason why he disposes thus or thus of thee, or
any man else. He will give thee no account why it is so, but his own will to
have it so. For shame sit down, stop thy mouth for ever, speak not thus to
God. If thou art, as thou can not deny, a thing formed by God, then say not
why have thou made me thus? And as now thou strivest with God about that which
thou can not understand, so at last (though now thou do not) thou shall
understand that thou ought not to have striven with him about it. And indeed
if men have a mind to strive with God, they may find as many occasions for it
in the doctrine of his conditional decrees of foreseen faith, repentance, and
persevering obedience, as in his absolute. We shall never want matter of
quarrelling with God, till we have learned simply, that is, graciously to
submit.

Secondly, This truth should much more quiet our spirits, and stop our
strivings in reference to our temporal estate. And that,

First, As wrapped up in common with others. Did we consider the sovereign power
of God in ordering the affairs of Nations and Churches, we would glorify him
in a gracious silence however we see things go with them. The Scripture urges
us often to this fixednesse of mind in the midst of all public revolutions and
changes upon this only account. Hear David (Psalm. 46.9, 10.) Come behold the
works of the Lord, (What works? ruining works) what desolation he has made in
the earth. God made strange work in the World at that time, Those countries
which before were as the Garden of God, became like a desolate Wilderness; who
was able to bear this with patience? Yet the Spirit of God says in the next
words, it must be patiently borne; when God lets men strive and war with one
another to a common confusion, yet no man may strive with God about it; and the
reason given why no man may, is only this (which is indeed all the reason in
the world) He is God. So it follows in the Psalm, Be still and know that I am
God; As if the Lord had said, not a word, do not strive nor reply, whatever you
see, hold your peace; know that I being God I give no account of any of my
matters. Thus the Prophet cautions the whole world ( Zech. 2.13.) Be silent O
all flesh before the Lord, (do not dispute the doings of God, do not murmr
at them) for he is raised up out of his holy habitation. That is, God is going
to work (as a man raised out of his bed is) therefore do not you trouble your
selves, nor rise up against him in your words or thoughts what work soever he
makes. Like counsel is given ( Psalm. 75.5.) Lift not up your horn on high,,
speak not with a stiff neck; for promotion comes neither from the East, nor
from the West, nor from the South: But God is the Judge, he puts down one,
and sets up another. All great changes proceed from his judgment; take heed
of judging the sentence of the great Judge. Remember, That he whose name alone
is Jehovah, is the most high over all the earth. (Psalm. 83.18.)

Again, This is as true if we respect the private or personal estate of any
man. If God makes a man poor in estate or despised in the World; if he make him
sick or weak in body, he must not say unquietly, why does God thus? If he
takes away our Relations, if he empty our families we must not strive with
him. When old Ely had received one of the saddest messages that ever was sent
man. It is the Lord (said he) let him do what seems him good (1 Samuel 3.18.)
So David (Psalm. 39.9.) I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it
(Psalm. 62.1.) Truly my soul waits patiently upon God. The word is, my soul is
silent before God. And ( Psalm. 42.5.) How does David chide his soul for making
a noise? Why art thou disquieted O my soul, hope thou in God.

But you will say, May we not at all strive? what ever God does in the World,
or with us, must we sit down under it, or rest satisfied in it, and say
nothing?

I answer, First, we may and ought to be very sensible of all the dealings of
God. But we must not be unquiet under any of them. It is one thing to feel the
smart, and another thing to dispute the rod. Some are under a kind of Stoicall
stupidity; they do not strive with God, because they do not mind what God
does, they are not sensible. Others are stout, sturdy, and proud spirited, they
care not for the cross, they slight and despise rebukes. Thus or upon these
grounds not to strive with God is as bad, if not worse then that striving with
him which this point disswades and disapproves. We may, yea we ought to take
notice of every stroke we receive from God.

Secondly, As we should be sensible of the hand of God at any time upon us, so
we may pray for the removing of his hand; It Is not a sinful but a gracious
act, to strive with God by prayer for deliverance out of trouble.

Thirdly, A man under the Rod may use means to get it off, and free himself
from it, even while he is quiet under it. So then, the quietness of mind in
our afflicted condition here intended and pressed, is opposed only, first, to
fretting and repining. Secondly, to vexing and tumultuating. Thirdly, to
distracting cares. Fourthly, to desponding fears. Fifthly, to killing sorrows.
Sixthly, to uncomposednesse of spirit for our callings. Seventhly, to hard
thoughts of God. Eighthly, to the using of any unlawful means to help or
rescue our selves out of the hand of evil.

And that we may be preserved from all these strivings against God, and
unquietness of spirit under any of his saddest and darkest dispensations,
which will certainly run us upon some of, if not all those eight most dangerous
rocks, last mentioned, Let me lay down a few considerations, why we should not
strive with God in such a manner: And prescribe some preservatives to keep us
at the greatest distance from it.

First, Consider, to strive with God dishonours God and darkens his glory; for
hereby we call his wisdom and goodness, yea his truth and faithfulness to us
in question. What can be done more dishonorable to God then this? God resented
it as a great dishonor, that Moses and Aaron did not sanctify him (that is,
give glory to his name) before the children of Israel (Number: 20.12.) and
therefore told them, Ye shall not bring the children of Israel into the land
which I have given them. As if he had said, Ye have not honored me as ye ought
in this thing, and therefore I will not honor you in that. But what is it,
that Moses and Aaron did not sanctify God in? it was (says the text) in not
believing. And what is that (at best) but a striving with God, as to the truth
of his word and his faithfulness in fulfilling it?

Secondly, Such striving with God hinders the exercise of grace, and stops the
work of the new creature. He that striveth with God by way of murmuring, can
never strive with God by praying and believing.

Thirdly, Such strivings with God are the exercisings of our lusts and
corruptions. Then is the time for anger and discontent, or any evil affection
to come forth and act their part.

Fourthly, Striving with God is an argument that sin has much strength in us,
and that corruption has got a mighty hand over us.

Fifthly, Striving with God lays us open to all the temptations of Satan, to
all the fiery darts of the Devil. Our shield is gone, when once we strive with
God, who is our shield in all Satan's strivings and assaults against us; And
then we stand naked before that armed enemy.

Sixthly, Striving with God, does at once unfit us for every good duty, and
puts us further off from every desired mercy.

Seventhly, and lastly, Striving against God, makes man most like the Devil,
who is the most unquiet and discontented creature in the world, and is always
both striving with God, and vexing at his own condition. The devill's sin at
first was striving with God, and it is the sum of all his actings and workings
against man ever since. None resemble the devil more lively then
malcontents; and who are they but such as strive and struggle against the
afflictive providence of God.

Now for the preserving and keeping of our hearts from this great, this
complicated sin, a sin containing many sins in it, and disposing us to all sin.
Lay these things to heart.

First, let us consider our own nothingness in comparison of God. God is all,
and what are we? we are nothing, and shall we strive with God? shall folly
strive against wisdom, and weakness against strength? When the Prophet would
comfort the people of God against the strivings of the nations with them, he
does it upon this consideration ( Isa: 40:17.) All nations before him are as
nothing, and they are counted to him less then nothing, and vanity; To whom
will ye compare him? And surely we may by the same argument, much more deter
all men from striving with God. Shall single persons strive against him, to
whom not only they, but whole nations are nothing, yea and less then nothing?

Secondly, Do we find our selves under a cross, or in a hard condition?
remember we have deserved no better. As we are nothing, so we have deserved
nothing. Jacob to keep his spirit quiet in a time of great distress confessed
( Gen: 32.10.) Lord I am unworthy of the least of thy mercies. As if he had
said, I have no reason to complain, or be angry, to fret or vex at this
dispensation, yea though thou should let the cloud of my brothers wrath
break upon me, and swallow me up, for what am I? If we consider we have
deserved no good, we shall never strive with God about any evil that befalls
us; especially, if we consider

Thirdly, That we are ill-deserving, or such as deserve the greatest evils.
None of us suffer but what our own sin has procured, yea sin might have
procured us soarer sufferings. Every sin has a cross in the belly of it. And
shall we strive with God because of our crosses, when our sins have made them?

Fourthly, Why should we strive with God about these things? are they worth the
striving with God about? surely they are not wotth the striving with men about,
much less with God. If we were in the best outward estate that ever any man
enjoyed in this world, yet we were not then got a step beyond vanity ( Psalm:
39.5.) Every man in his best estate is altogether vanity. Suppose God should
give you a blank, and bid you sit down and write what you would have as to
your outward state, and then bestow it upon you, yet in this best estate, you
and your all are altogether vanity. And will ye strive with God for taking a
vain thing from you? Will you be so much dissatisfied for the taking away or
want of that which could not satisfy you when you had it, nor can when you
have it again? If a man had all these comforts which he strives for, they
could not make him happy, why then should he strive because they are removed
from him? But as they are vanity, because unable to satisfy when we have them,
so they are vanity, because of our uncertainty to hold them. Yea suppose we
hold them as long as we can have them, it is but a while. And shall we strive
with God about loosing that which at longest we cannot keep long? To be sure
these things are not necessary for us: Christ said to Martha, There is one
thing necessary (Luke 10.42.) But a worldly comfort of any kind is not the
nece^^^^y thing which Christ there intends; And shall we strive with God about
unnecessaries?

Fifthly, Know, afflictions are the portion of the people of God in this life.
They are the corrections of a father, and there is no son but has his
correction, or may have it. And shall we strive with God for sending us our
portion, our son-like, child-like portion?

Sixthly, I would say this to believers, Why will ye strive with God about any
of your afflictions? they are for your good and benefit. And will ye strive
with God, because he is doing you good? let your afflictions be never so sad,
never so sore, and to sense never so bad, yet God is doing you good by them; be
not angry with your own good?

Lastly, Why do we strive with God under our afflictions; He loves us as much
under affliction, as in a prosperous condition. God is tender to his in their
troubles, and shall they be harsh to him, when he is so tender toward them? A
parent that has but nature, will tender his child most when sick and weak, and
will not God? Let us take heed we be not found striving with, or having hard
thoughts of God while the bowels of his most tender compassions are moving
toward us.

To shut up this whole point. As Christ when he saw his Disciples in danger to
be carried away with the fear of man, says to them ( Luke 12.4, 5.) Be not
afraid of them that can kill the body, and after that have no more that they
can do, But I will forewarne you, whom you shall fear; fear him, which after
he has killed has power to cast into hell, yea I say unto you, fear him.
Now, as because men are apt to fear, yea mostly to fear that which they
should not, Christ shows them whom to fear. So (as has been showed) because
men are very apt to strive, but they commonly strive with those, and about
those things, which they should not. Therefore I will tell you with whom and
with what ye should strive. If ye will needs be striving, pray

First, Strive with the sin in your own bosoms, strive with your own lusts
and corruptions. One of the great Gospel duties which we are called to, is to
mortify our earthly members. To strive with all inordinate affections, with
pride, with envy, with love of the world, and with uncharitableness to the
death, is our duty, if ye will needs strive, strive with these.

Secondly, If you will needs be striving, then strive with the sins of others
in a gracious and zealous manner, as Nehemiah did, who contended with the
Nobles for their profanation of the Sabbath, and their unlawful marriages (
Neh: 13.17. and 25.) we should strive with on^ another to hinder that which is
evil. Gideon broke down Baals altar, he st^ove with Baal, and was therefore
surnamed Jerubbaal (Judge: 6.32.) So let us strive with the corrupt practices,
courses, and customs of the times, we live in, not d^lly and comply with them
as many do. The Apostle says. ( Heb: 12.4.) Ye have not yet resisted unto
blood, striving against sin. That is, either the sin of others, or the sin
which others would force you to. Though we should strive against our own sins
especially, yet it is good to strive against sin in whomsoever we see it.

Thirdly, If you will be striving, then strive with Satan, The Adversary;
Submit to God, and resist the Devil, contain the whole duty of man, ( James
4.7.) Our business is not to strive with God, but to submit to him; And our
business is not to submit to the Devil, but to strive with him. How do most
run a contrary course? They resist God, and submit to the Devil. O sad! Here Is
a threefold blessed strife; First, Strive with the lusts and corruptions of
your own hearts; Secondly, Strive with the sins of others, and their
solicitations of you to sin: Thirdly, Strive with the Devil and his
temptations. Do not strive with God, why should we strive with God at any
time, or in any thing, whom at all times, and in all things, we ought to serve,
honor and obey? So much of this chideing question, in which Elihu reproves
Job, and he had given but too much occasion for it. Why do thou strive with
him, he gives not account of any of his matters.

JOB. Chap. 33. Verse. 14. For God speaks once, yea, twice, yet man perceives
it not.


IN this verse and the context following, Elihu begins his second answer to
Job, which is also continued to the end of the Chapter. His answer is laid
down.

First, In general at the 14th verse.

Secondly, In particulars by way of instance, from the 15 verse to the 29th.

Thirdly, He sums up or recapitulates the whole of his discourse, in the 29th
and 30th verses.

Fourthly, Concludes, seriously inviting Job to answer what he had said, as
also, what he had yet to say, verse. 31, 32, 33.

This 14th verse has some difficulty in it; And though the cross and various
thoughts of Interpreters about it have made it more difficult, yet there is one
thing wherein all Center and agree; That, Elihu in this 14th verse and so
forward propounds certain ways by which God is pleased to reveal and
manifest himself unto man. First, to humble and bring man to a true sense of
himself; Secondly, to work in him an acknowledgement of his great goodness
and righteousness in all his dealings with the children of men. For having
said at the 13th verse, God gives not account of any of his matters; He is
above all reckonings and days of Audit (having thus, I say, asserted the
absolute sovereignty of God over man) he adds, to mittigate and allay the
seeming severity of this assertion, That although God be so high and great,
Deus nomini rationem reddere tenetur. Tanto tamen amore nos complectitur ut
saepius judicioru^ suorum rations aperire dignetur, etsi id non semper
observamus. Lavat:
that he is not at all obliged to give any account of himself or of his ways
to the creature, nor will allow any man to be so bold as to strive with him
about, or question any of his matters, yet he is pleased freely and graciously
to condescend unto man many ways; and not only once but often, not only often
in one way, but by several ways to give him clear intimations what his will
is, what he requires of him, and calls unto him for, if man had but will and
understanding to perceive it; for he speaks once, yea, twice, yet man
perceives it not. So then, man has no reason to complain (as Job sometimes
had done, and many others in like distresses do) that he is in the dark, and
does not perceive the mind of God toward him, why he is so afflicted, and why
God contendeth with him; for God does give touches, hints, and admonitions,
sometimes more privately, sometimes more openly, and if man does not perceive
them, it is his own fault.

Verse. 14. For he speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not.
We render the first word of this verse by that causall particle, For; yet
because the text does not strictly carry a reason in it of what was said
before, but is rather an explication or an accommodation of it; therefore some
begin the verse, not with that causall particle For, but with an adverb of
time, When. So Mr Broughton, When the omnipotent speaks once, etc. And the
reason of it is, because we find another adverb of time answering this at the
16th verse, When God speaks once or twice, and man perceives it not, etc.
then he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction. As if Elihu had
said; If speaking will not do it, somewhat else shall; or when God having
spoken once or twice, yet finds man unattentive and unsencible, he takes
another course; then he opens the ears of men, and seals up their
instruction. If they understand not his meaning by dreams and visions, he will
awaken them to purpose. We say, For God speaks.

As if here a reason were given why God should not be called at all (as being
so great he ought not) to give man an account of any of his matters, for he
speaks once or twice, he is aforehand with man.

For God speaks. To speak, in strict sense, as speaking is the forming up of
words by an articulate voice, is proper to man; yet in Scripture God is said to
speak, when or howsoever he makes known his mind to man. Which he always
does in such a way, as is most suitable to his own greatness, with respect to
man's weakness. When God gives us any intimation of his own will, and of our
duty, of what he will do for us, or of what he would have us do, then he is
said to speak to us. ( Heb: 1.1.) God who at sundry times and in diverse
manners spoke in time past unto the fathers by the Prophets, has in these last
days spoken to us by his Son. God spoke to the old fathers, as at many times,
or by many parts, so in diverse ways and manners; he delivered his mind unto
the people usually by the Prophets, Dei admonitio vocu et sermonis saepe loco
est, etsi non semper ipse et loquatur ut saepo veteribus patribus loqui solebat
quocunque tandem modo admonear. Merc:
and to the Prophets in dreams and visions. The speaking of God was either
immediate from himself in those dreams and visions to the Prophets, or
mediate by the Prophets. And though now God does not speak to us immediately
as he did to the Prophets before Christ came in the flesh, and to the Apostles
after he was come in the flesh, yet All the Prophetical and Apostolical
writings are the speakings of God to us, besides what he daily speaks to us
(answerable to what is written) both inwardly by the workings of his Spirit,
and outwardly by the works of his providence. For he speaks once, etc.

Hence note.

In what way soever God reveals his mind unto man, he speaks unto him. Every
manifestation of the will of God to us is a Sermon; what, man speaks to us
according to the word of God, is to be received as the word of God. For as God
speaks to us, though not formally, yet expressly in the holy Scriptures,
which are his word, so he speaks to us vertually, though not expressly by
his works. And that, First, by his works of creation; by them God is
continually opening and manifesting himself to man in his wisdom, power, and
goodness. He speaks to us, Secondly, by his works of providence, whether
first they be works of mercy (every mercy has a voice in it, every blessing a
speech) or secondly, whether they be works of judgment ( Micah 6.9.) The Lords
voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall see thy name; hear
ye the rod, and who has appointed it. Sicknesses and losses, the crosses and
troubles that we meet with in the world, cry aloud to us, especially when they
make us (as they often do) cry aloud. As the heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament shows his handy work, day unto day utters speech, and
night unto night shows knowledge (Psalm: 19.1, 2.) so those things that are
done and acted night and day, utter the mind and speak out the heart of God
unto man.

For God speaks once, yea twice. (...) in una pro (...) in una vice.
The Hebrew is, in once, that is, for one Turn or Time, or by one means or
way. The word once, has a threefold signification in Scripture, all which are
applyable to the text in hand.

First, Once, is as much as surely, certainly, verily, irrevocably. Thus (
Psalm: 89.35.) Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto
David; That is, I have surely sworn, certainly sworn, irrevocably sworn, my
word, yea my oath is out, and it is immutable; That which God (in this sense)
once says, it is always said, or it is said for ever; how much more that which
he swareth? Thus the Apostle argues ( Heb: 6.17, 18.) God willing more
abundantly (or more then needed as to him and the truth of the thing in it
self) to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel
confirmed it by an oath, that by two immutable things, in which it is
impossible for God to lie (namely, his promise and his oath) we might have
strong consolation, etc. In like notion we may expound that once, which we
find ( Heb: 9.27.) And as it is appointed unto men once to die (or to dye
once) and after that comes the judgment. Some refer, once, to dye, as if
the meaning were, it is appointed unto men to dye once, that is, men must
expect to dye a natural death, which happens but once, and once (at least
equivalently) will and must happen to all men. Others refer the once to
appointed in the sense of this present exposition; It is appointed once; that
is, God has certainly and firmly appointed established and decreed this thing,
he has ratified it in heaven, that men must dye; This statute is irrevocable;
The thing is appointed, and there is no reversing or revoking of that
appointment. This is a good sense, and suitable enough to the scope of Elihu;
God speaks once, that is, what he speaks is a sure and certain word, an
infallible word; the word settled for ever in heaven (Psalm: 119.89.) his promise
is not only sure but most sure. As the Apostle speaks (2 Pet. 1.18, 19.) And
this voice which came from heaven we heard when we were with him in the holy
Mount. We have also a more sure (the Comparative imports the Superlative, a
most sure) word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a
light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne and the day star
arise in your hearts. As the whole prophetical, so the whole historical and
doctrinall word of God is most sure, being once spoken it is spoken for ever,
And written as with a pen of iron, and the point of a Diamond, and that upon a
rock which cannot be removed. That which was vaine-gloriously, and beyond the
line of man, said of the Law of the Medes and Persians, (Dan: 6.8.) is only
true of the word of God, it alters not.

Secondly, This once speaking, Semel loquitur deus, et secundo id ipsum non
repetet. Vulg: Quia quod sufficienter factum est iterare superfluum est. Aq:
notes the speaking of a thing so sufficiently or fully, that there is enough
said at once, and so no more needs be said. The vulgar translation takes up
this sense, God has spoken once (that is, he has spoken fully or sufficiently
for man's instruction and admonition at once, and therefore he translates the
latter part of the verse, thus; And he does not repeat it the second time.
That which is done at once sufficiently, needs not be done a second time; This
is a truth; There is a sufficiency and a fulness in the word of God once
spoken, there needs nothing to be added; or as others expound this translation.
When once God speaks, that is, resolves and determines a thing, he does not
(as man who often repents of what he has purposed) bring it into a second
consideration, for he cannot err, and therefore he needs decree but once. But
though this be a truth, yet I do not conceive it to be the meaning of this
place, because it does not well agree with what goes before, and less with
that which follows at the 29th verse; Lo all these things works God
oftentimes, or (as our Margin has it) twice and thrice with man. And therefore
here Elihu rather intimates the variety of those ways by which God reveals
himself to man, then the sufficiency of any one of them. For though we grant
any one of them sufficient, yet God out of his abundant goodness is pleased to
reveal himself more ways then one, and more times then once.

Thirdly, This once, may be taken exclusively; so i^ Scripture, once is once
and no more, once and not again; or as we say, once for all, and so it is
opposed to the repeating and acting over of the same thing. Thus Abisha said to
David (1 Samuel: 26.8.) God has delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day,
now therefore l^^ me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear, even to the earth
at once, and I will not smite him the second time. Once smiting is there
opposed to smiting more then once; As if he had said, I will pay him home, or
dispatch him at once, there will be no need to fetch another blow. Thus when
the Apostle had said in the Epistle to the Hebrews (Chap: 9.27.) It is
appointed unto men once to dye, and after this the judgment, presently he
adds, So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; there also once
is opposed to twice, or a second time, excluding all repetition of the
sacrifice of Christ. As it is said ( Heb: 10.10.) By the which will we are
sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. And
therefore the same Apostle in the same Chapter ( v. 26.) terrifieth Apostates
with this dreadful doom; If we sin wilfully after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins; that is,
neither will Christ give up himself to be a sacrifice again for such as have
(after light received about it, and some seeming closings with it) cast off
that his sacrifice, nor can any other sacrifice be given. In this sense also
sometimes God speaks, once, He speaks once and will speak no more, once and
not a second time; though we have a twice here in the text, yet, I say, in some
cases and unto some persons, God speaks once and will not speak again.
Whence take this observation or Admonition rather.

It is dangerous refusing the first call, the first Word of God. Possibly, you
may never hear more of him or from him, once may be all. God may speak in thy
case, not only once, that is firmly and certainly, not only once that is
sufficiently, but once (that is exclusively, once) and no more for ever. That
moving caution of the Apostle is grounded upon such a sad possibillity as this
( Heb. 3.7.) Wherefore as the holy Ghost says, to day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts; and again ( verse. 13.) Exhort one another daily,
while it is called, to day, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfullnesse of sin. As if it had been said; hear to day, hear this hour of
the day, for you know not, first, whether there will be a morrow or another day
for you; secondly, if you have a morrow, yet you know not whether you shall
have a word to morrow; both time and season, days and opportunities are in the
hand of God; and he that neglects the season of one day, has no assurance of
another day, much less of a season with the day. Wh^ knows whether the cock
shall crow twice or no? possibly the cock may crow but once; in what a
condition had Peter been if it had been so with him, for after he had (as
Christ notwithstanding all his confidence to the contrary, told him ( Mark
14.30.) denied his Master thrice, he never called to mind the words of Christ,
nor had any thought of humbling himself for what he had done, till (as it is
said, verse. 72.) The second time the Cock crew. Every one has not a promise
(as Peter equivalently had) that the cock shall crow twice, or that God will
affoard him means a second time to awaken him out of his sin. That which the
Lord spoke of affliction, to show the fulness of it, may also be fullfilled
concerning his warnings and admonitions ( Nahum 1.9.) I will make an utter end,
affliction shall not rise up the second time: We should hear at first speaking,
lest it should prove that when the Lord has spoken once, he should make an
utter end, and say, instruction and admonition shall not rise up a second time.
And to be sure, as Abraham after he had interceded for Sodom and Gomorrah
several times, said at last ( Genesis 18.32.) O let not the Lord he angry, and I
will speak yet but this once. So the Lord when he has spoken often to sinners
and is not heard grows so angry, that he comes at last and says, I will speak
yet but this once. God will at last come to his, but once more to all men; and
with some he is at his once at first and no more for ever. There is a time when
every man shall hear his last word, and God will speak but that once; and
sometimes it is but once in all that God will speak. Therefore take heed, it is
dangerous deferrings if God speaks once, if he call and knock once, it is our
sin and folly too, that we do not hearken to, and open at his first call and
knock, though the Lord does (I grant) usually and mostly exercise much patience
toward sinners, calling and knocking once and again, as it follows in the
text, He speaks once, Tea twice, or a second time.

Several of the Jewish writers interpret this twice of the two sorts or ways
of divine revelation which are spoken of in the following parts of this
context; God speaks to man by visions and dreams, and God speaks to man by
diseases and sicknesses, as we shall see afterward. But I rather take it more
generally, not only as to the diverse manner and distinct ways of his speaking,
but as to the diverse times, or reiteration of his speaking; he speaks once,
yea twice: As he speaks several ways, so several times, twice or thrice,
possibly, in the same way; twice by visions, twice by dreams, twice by
sicknesses, and often by his Ministers; He speaks once, In ditabus et sc:
vicibus. i. e. bis quod uno verbo dicunt (...) aut secundo i. e. iterum semel
iterumque loquitur deus una admonitione non semper contentus. Drus.
Yea twice.

I shall consider this twice three ways, and give a brief note from each.

First, consider twice as to number; twice strictly taken is more then once.
One is no number, but two is.

Hence note.

God is so gracious that he speaks once and again, once and a second time to
sinners. Who is there among us that has not had experience of Gods speaking to
him more then once? And that not only with respect to the various ways of
speaking, but with respect to various times of speaking. He speaks more then
once by his word, more then once by his works, whether of judgment, or of
mercy. Some sinners are consumed in a moment or at once, (as it is said of
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with their confederates ( Numb. 16.21.) others dye of
a lingering consumption. God waits to be gracious, and therefore he rarely
speaks his all or strikes his all at once. He gives precept upon precept,
line upon line, he sends sorrow upon sorrow, cross upon cross, that sinners
may at last remember themselves, return and live.

Secondly, As twice notes a number, so it may be considered as a small number,
yea as the smallest number; twice or two is the first number, the first step
into number. They that do a thing more then once cannot do it less then
twice, nor can that number which is more then one be less then two. When the
woman in the book of Kings told the Prophet (1 Kings 17.12.) I am going to
gather two sticks. Her meaning was, a very few sticks, only now to make a
little fire to bake a Cake with. And when the Spirit of God would show how few,
comparatively to the rout of the World, they are and will be that bear witness
to the truths of Jesus Christ, he calls them two Witnesses ( Rev. 11.3.) they
are a number, yet expressed by the lest number, that we should not have our eyes
upon the multitude, or think, that is not the truth which is not followed by
great numbers, or the most of the World. The train of Christ is not large, nor
are his ways thronged, few there be that find them. As they whom he calls
forth to be eminently his witnesses are not many, therefore called two; so they
that receive their witness are not many; The world wonders after the beast.
Thus as two or twice imply a small number; so in Scripture language, that which
is done more then twice is supposed done often or many times (2 Kings 6.10.)
When the Prophet had told the King of Israel where the forces of the King of
Assyria would come, and by that means defeated him of his purpose; it is said,
And the King of Israel sent unto the place which the man of God told him, and
warned him of, and saved himself there, not once, nor twice; that is, many
times, which made the King of Syria wonder how it came to pass that he was so
often defeated; he thought he had laid his plots so wisely and closely that the
King of Israel could not escape, but he saved himself not once, nor twice; more
then twice is many, but bare twice is the narrowest compass of number
imaginable.

Hence note.

God has not given us any ground to presume upon frequent warnings or
speakings. Though he speak more then once, yet it may be but twice, possibly
but twice precisely, probably but twice restrainedly taken. The Lord would not
have us build upon the hope of future speakings, to the neglect of what is
presently spoken. Though God be very patient and long-suffering to sinful men,
yet he has not given any man, the least occasion, no not by a promise of
speaking a second day, to continue one day much less to continue long in sin.
When God spoke (as I may say) at the largest rate of his patience to sinners,
he said ( Genesis 6.3.) My spirit shall not always strive with man; not always,
that is, though it strive long, yet it shall not strive very long, and that he
may know it, I will give him a day, yet his days shall be an hundred and
twenty years. This was somewhat a long day indeed; But remember this hundred
and twenty years, was all the time that was granted to all the men of that
world, there was not so much granted to every particular man of that world,
possibly the Spirit of God did not strive a day longer with many a one among
them. Therefore take heed of presuming. When the Lord speaks once, do not
say, I will stay till he speaks a second time, and if he condescend to speak
twice, do not believe that he will always speak.

Thirdly, Twice, may be considered as a small certain number, put for a small
uncertain number. It Is frequent in Scripture, to put a certain number of any
kind, for an uncertain; Sometimes a certain great number, for an uncertain
great number; and sometimes a small certain number, for a small uncertain
number. As twice is not to be tied up strictly to the smallest number; so not
to any number whether small or great.

Hence note.

No man knows how often he shall be warned or spoken unto by God. God does not
put an absolute stint upon any of his actions. Beware of neglecting the least
twice, the first twice, which is the lowest twice; for though we cannot bind
God up strictly to twice, it may prove three times or four times, yet whether
it shall be so many, or how many it shall be, no man nor Angel knows. Twice
cannot be very often, and it is uncertain how often. Therefore if you hearken
not when God has spoken once (take it strictly) do not stop your ears at the
second speaking. It is said, Moses smote the rock twice (that was twice beyond
his Commission, for he should not have smitten it at all) and the matter came
out abundantly. How many rocks, that is, hard hearts, has God smitten by his
word and his works twice, and yet we see not the waters of Godly sorrow
flowing out; the rocks are smitten more then twice with the rod of God, with
the rod of his mouth in the ministry of his word, they are smitten with
admonition upon admonition, with reproof upon reproof, with threatening upon
threatening, and yet the waters came not out abundantly, yea scarce at all. May
not they fear that they shall have poenall sorrow upon sorrow ( Paul took
notice of the goodness of God to him, that he did not let him have afflictive
sorrow upon sorrow ( Phil: 2.27.) but, I say, may not they fear they shall
have poenall sorrow upon sorrow) that is, everlasting floods of sorrow, who
after the Lords speaking upon speaking, and reproving upon reproving, give no
proof of their godly p^enitentiall sorrow? O how angry was the Lord with
Solomon, because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had
appeared to him twice (1 Kings 11.9.) God appeared to him in Gibeon (1 Kings
3.5.) when he was first made King, putting him to his choice, or giving him a
blanke to ask what he would, and he chose well, he chose wisdom and had it.
God appeared to him a second time after the building and dedication of the
Temple (1 Kings 9.2.) And said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and thy
supplication, that thou have made before me, etc. Thus the Lord appeared
solemnly unto Solomon twice, and but twice for any thing that appears upon
record in that solemn manner. Now when notwithstanding these two appearings of
the Lord to Solomon, the heart of Solomon was turned away from the Lord God of
Israel, his anger was kindled against Solomon, and the Lord smote him once, yea
twice, renting his kingdom, and pulling away ten tribes at once, from his son
and successor. O do not refuse God speaking to you twice, or the renewed
speaking of God; to do so is very sinful, and therefore very dangerous. For
as it is a sign of a holy heart, of a gracious frame of spirit, to hear twice
at once speaking; as David professed he did ( Psalm: 62.11.) God has spoken
once, twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto God: also unto thee O
Lord belongs mercy. There are several rendrings and interpretations of those
words; But that which to me seems most intended by our rendering is, I heard
what was once spoken twice at once, that is, I heard it speedily, and I heard
it believingly; as soon as ever the word came to me I received it, and I
received it not only with my ear, but with my heart. That Is a blessed way of
hearing, and they who hear so, at first speaking, may well be said to hear
that twice which God speaks once. But how sad is it that God should speak
twice, thrice, yea four times, and yet not be heard so much as once! When Job
was brought upon his knees ( Chap: 40.5.) he said, Once have I spoken, but I
will not answer: yea twice but I will proceed no further. Job began to be
sensible of that which Elihu was working him to, that he had been too forward,
yea too forward with God; Job began to see his error, and recanted it; I have
spoken once, yea twice, but I will proceed no further. It Is good, that after
once or twice sinning or failing, we yet say we will proceed no further. O how
deplorable is man's condition, when the Lord shall say, I have spoken once, yea
twice, but now I will proceed no further, I will speak no more! And this
usually comes to pass, when men are dull and slow of heart to understand what
he speaks, which as natural men always, so godly men often are, as it
follows in this text; He speaks once, yea twice, Yet man perceives it not.

That is, apprehends not sometimes that God is speaking to him, and he
seldom understands what God is speaking to him.

There is a little variety in the exposition of this latter clause of the
verse; The word man not being expressly in the Hebrew (and therefore we find
it put by our translaters in a distinct character) the text runs only thus; God
speaks once, yea twice, he perceives it not. This has occasioned the vulgar
latin interpreter to refer this last clause of the verse to God also; giving
out the sense thus; God speaks once, and a second time he does not repeat
it; Semel loquitur deus et secundo id ipsum non repetit. Vulg.
As if here were a warning given, that all should attend the very first motion
of Gods voice to them; For he speaks once, and does not repeat the same. But
I shall not stay upon that, because I see not how the Hebrew word by us rendered
to perceive, can with any tolerable significancy be rendered to repeat: (...) a
radice intendit oculos prosperit, animadvertis, viderit. Semel loquitur deus et
secundo illud non considerat. Scult:
yet, there is a second rendering of the text in the same tenor, giving a
genuine sense of that word, which is very profitable and proper enough to the
scope of the place, God speaks once, and he does not consider upon it a
second time; That is, when God speaks or decrees to give forth any thing, he
does not take it into consideration again or review and bring it about upon
second thoughts, as men often do; yea it is their duty (though it be a duty
arising from their frailty) so to do. Men ought to consider often and review
their own words as well as their works. But (says Elihu, according to this
reading) God speaks once, and does not consider of it again; for he has the
measure and compass of all things so fully in himself, that he needs not
turn back his thoughts upon any of his determinations, as if there could be a
mistake, or any error in them. This is a very glorious truth, highly advancing
the name of God above every name among the best of the children of men. And it
arises clearly from the text, leaving out the suppliment which we make of the
word man. Yet according to the opinion of the most and best expositers, yea
according to the clearest scope and tendency of the text, that word man is
rather to be supplied, God speaks once, yea twice, And man perceives it not.

It Is common in Scripture to leave such words unexpressed, as must necessarily
be understood. And therefore I shall only insist upon our own translation.

Yet before I proceed to that, I shall touch upon another reading of these
words, as referring unto man, which does not so much carry a reproof of man's
dullness, as a commendation of Gods goodness, thus; God speaks once, yea
twice, Loquitur deus semel et duabus (vicibus) ad eum qui non consideravit eam.
Pisc:
if man perceives it not. As if he had said, If man be so weak and dark, so
dull and slow of apprehension, as not to perceive Gods mind at his first
speaking, yet God is usually so gracious and condescending as to speak twice,
or a second time, even to that man. This reading does exceedingly exalt and set
forth the goodness and graciousnesse of God; and we have frequent experience
of it, that when God speaks once, and finds creatures dull of hearing, he
speaks a second time.

Our reading gives in these words as a charge of man's darkness and slownesse
to apprehend the meaning of God speaking to us either in his word or works. God
speaks once, yea twice, Yet man perceives it not.

The Hebrew is, man sees it not. (...) Non viderit illud, sc: homo quod deus
loquitur. Verbo hoc (...) Elihu utitur sexies Job ter Zophar semel; Videtur
isto verbo diligens et clara significari speculatio et observatio curiosa. Coc.
There is an eye in the understanding, the mind of man heholdeth the sense of
words, even as his bodily eye beholds the colors, and dimensions of any
material object: Yet the eye of man's mind is so bleared and dim-sighted that
though God speak once, yea twice, he sees, he perceives it not. That is, he
does not clearly perceive it. Elihu makes use of this word six times, Job
thrice, Zophar once, in all which places, they intend an exact observation and
through speculation of the matter which they treat upon, either in the
affirmative or in the negative; here as a rebuke to man Elihu makes use of it
in the negative, man perceives it not.

Hence note.

Man of himself cannot perceive the mind of God in spiritual speakings, or God
speak^ng about spiritual things. The prophetical Sermons are called visions;
The vision of Isaiah the son of Amos, which he saw (Isa. 1.1.) yet when they
preached them to the people, many of them saw nothing; their visions were to
the people as parables or dark sayings. Man in general falls under a twofold
consideration; first, as unconverted or carnal; and in that state he
perceives not at all, when God speaks once and twice, yea thrice, he
perceives nothing. And that proceeds from a double ground.

First, from the natural pravity of his heart, and the blindness of his mind.
Of such the Apostle says ( Ephesians. 4.18.) They have their understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart. And hence he concludes (1 Cor. 2.14.)
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned; spiritual objects must have a spiritual eye to see them.

Secondly, this comes to pass sometimes from the judgment of God upon carnal
men; who as in mercy he causes the blind to see, so in wrath he strikes those
that have no mind to see with greater blindness, and punishes their former
rebellion and obstinacy against the word received with an impotency to perceive
it. Yea God does not only leave such in the blindness of their mind and
dullness of their understanding, but gives them up to it. The Prophet Isaiah
was a Gospel Preacher, he held out the light clearly, yet his hearers were
under such a doom, that the very light which he held out blinded them; so that
the more he spoke the less they perceived ( Isa. 6.10.) And he said, go and
tell this people, hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but
perceive not: make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy,
and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed. This is a
dreadful Scripture; The Lord is highly provoked indeed, when he judicially
shuts up the eyes of men, and hardens their hearts against his own messages,
not that he infuseth any hardness or instilleth any ignorance into them; but
gives them up to that ignorance hardness and darkness which already
possesses them. And then though God speak once or twice, or a hundred times,
they perceive it not: They that harden their hearts, shall have them hardened
by that which is the ordinary means to soften and melt them; and they that
shut their eyes against any truth, are in danger of having them shut against
all truth, even by that means which usually opens eyes. Thus we see that this
first sort of men, mere carnal men, cannot see ot perceive when God speaks,
and why it is so.

Secondly, (which I conceive rather to be the meaning of Elihu here) Man may be
considered in his spiritual state. That is, as converted and renewed in
spirit, by the mighty working of the Spirit. Now to men in this estate God
speaks once, yea twice, and they perceive it not. They that are spiritual do
not always perceive spiritual things. For

First, they have much corruption in them. Though they are renewed, yet they
are renewed but in part; we see in part and but darkly, yea sometimes Saints
can hardly see at all, especially as to some dispensations and manifestations
of God! he may speak once, yea twice and thrice to them in such a thing, or to
such a purpose, and they take little or no notice of it. He may point unto them
by such providence, and by such Sermons, and yet they look upon themselves as
un-concerned, not making any home-application of what they outwardly hear or
see, yea feel and smart under; and all this by reason of some prevailing
corruption.

Secondly, this may proceed from their negligence and slothfullnesse; good men
are not always careful as they should, much less critical and wisely
curious to observe every providence of God, and to consider why or for what end
such or such a word is sent to them. As carnal men thrust the word from them,
so godly men fail much at all times, and at some times wholly neglect to lay
the word to heart. They do not compare themselves, that is, their lives and
consciences; their thoughts and ways with the word, and then no wonder if they
perceive not what is spoken to them. Even a Job may be hindered by his own
indulgence from perceiving what God says unto him. The Prophet complained of
the people of God for not striving to take hold of him. (Isa. 64.7.) There is
none that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold on thee.
And may we not complain that few stir up themselves either to take hold of
the word of God, or that the word may take hold of them? Paul exhorted Timothy
(2 Timothy 1.6.) to stir up the Gift of God that was in him. They that have
received both gifts and grace may be much wanting to themselves in stirring
them up. Though we deny man's natural power, yet persons converted have a
spiritual power, which they often neglect to stir up. When the servants of
Benhadad (1 Kings 20.32, 33.) came to Ahab upon that message to beg his life,
it is said, The men did dilligently observe whether any thing would come from
him that they might take hold of, and urge it in favor of their Master; and as
soon as Ahab had dropped that word, he is my Brother, as soon as they had that
word, they did hastily catch it and applied it for their present purpose. So
they that are godly should observe what is spoken unto them, what corruption is
smitten by the word or by the rod of God, and as soon as ever such a word is
spoken, they should take it up and apply it to themselves.

Thirdly, those many lusts that are in the heart of a godly man, not yet fully
mortified, as secret pride, self-love, and unbelief, these hinder him from
understanding the mind of God. And therefore we are counseled by the Apostle
James (Chap. 1.21.) to lay aside (that is, to get subdued and mortified) all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and (so) receive with meekness the
engraffed word which is able to save our souls. As if he had said, we can
neither perceive nor receive the word savingly, unless our lusts are cast out
and cast off. How much any man neglects this duty of mortifying his lusts, by
so much is he rendered both unable to perceive the word, and unfit to profit by
it.

Lastly, Mr. Broughton renders the words thus, God speaks once, yea twice, and
man will not mark it. We say, man perceives it not; he says, man will not
mark it. As our reading shows the weakness and imperfections, or the negligence
and slothfullnesse of man, when he does not perceive what God speaks; so his
shows the obstinacy of man. The will of man is as perverse, as his
understanding is blind. Man has not only a wound or a weakness in his will
unto that which is good, but he has a rebellion in his will against that which
is good, and that not by some occasional disgust or sudden gust of passion,
but he is naturally set and resolved against that which is good. Man will not
mark what God speaks in his word and works. Christ upbraids the Jews (Joh.
5.40.) Ye will not come unto me that ye may have life; he charge the fault
upon their wills. It Is certain man has a will not to come to Christ for life;
yet that is a forced and far fetched inference which some make from it, that
man has therefore power and will to come. Sure enough man has a will not to
come, he has not only an inabillity, but an enmity and an opposition in his
will against Christ: he will not come to Christ that he may be saved, but would
take up his salvation somewhere else; he would be his own Savior, or let any
one save him, rather then be saved by Christ; all things considered, especially
this, that he must deny himself, and neither be found trusting to his own
righteousness, nor acting any unrighteousness, if he desires to be saved by
Christ. And as there is a resistance in the will of man against the true
dispensation of Gospel grace; so against any other dispensation whereby God
speaks to him. The unchanged will of man rises up against the will of God
manifested in his works, as much as against his will manifested in his word (
Isa. 26.11.) Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they will not see. If his hand be
lifted up in public judgments they will not see it, if in family or personal
judgments and afflictions they will not see it, but shut their eyes and
hoodwink their own understandings. Yea, they are oftentimes so wilfully, or
rather so madly blind, that they had rather say it is the hand of blind
Fortune, then the hand of the Allmighty and All-seeing God. Now who is so blind
as they that will not see? Till this rebellion against the holy will of God
with which the will of man is filled be cast out and subdued, let him speak
once, yea twice, let him speak by word or works, by promises or by
threatenings, by good or evil, yet man will not mark it. Thus much in general
of Gods revealing himself to man; In the next words we have the distinct ways
set down by and in which he reveals himself: In a dream etc.

JOB. Chap. 33. Verse. 15, 16, 17, 18. In a dream, in a vision of the night,
when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumberings upon the bed:

Then he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction.

That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.

He keeps back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the
sword.


ELihu having said in the former verse, that, God speaks once, yea twice, yet
man perceives it not; proceeds to give instance of those several ways by
which God speaks to man. His first Instance is given ( v. 15.) where he
brings in God speaking to man in dreams and visions. And as he shows us God
speaking in dreams and visions, so he sets down his aims or ends in doing so,
and they are threefold.

First, God aims at man's instruction ( v. 16.) Then he opens the ears of
men, and seals their instruction.

The second aim of God in such dispensations, is repentance and humiliation (
v. 17.) That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.

The third and last end here expressed why God speaks by dreams and visions, is
man's salvation ( v. 18.) He keeps back his soul from the pit, and his life
from perishing by the sword. These are the parts and specialties considerable
in this context.

Verse. 15. In a dream, in a vision of the might, etc.
(...) pinguis grossus, ex vaporibus crassis provenit somnus, quem somnia
consequun^ur.
The root of the word rendered a dream, signifies that which is thick, gross
or fat, and by a metaphor a dream, because dreams are naturally caused by
gross and thick vapors, arising from the stomach and fuming up into the head.
Sleep is caused immediately by vapors and dreams are our work in sleep. A
dream is an Imagination which the mind frames and forms, or which is formed
and framed in the mind while we sleep; or, A dream is the work of the soul,
while the body is asleep. Sleep is the binding up of the outward senses,
hearing, seeing, feeling, etc. yet then the inward senses, fantasy and memory
are at liberty and free to work. The fantasy is very quick and nimble, when
the body lies as a logge and stirs not. The fantasy (as we say) builds
Castles in the air, and makes strange Chimera's in the brain by day, much
more by night. In Dreams, there is an image of things or persons represented to
us. When Pharaoh dreamed, he saw seven lean kine, and seven thin ears, as also
seven fat kine and seven full ears of corn. Jacob saw a ladder in his dream
reaching up to heaven, and the Angels of God ascending and descending. Joseph
saw his brethrens sheaves doing obeisance to his sheafe, he saw also the Sun
and Moon and eleven Stars, doing obeisance to him. Nebuchadnezzar dreaming
saw an Image with the head of gold, with shoulders and breast of silver, with
belly and thighs of brass, and legs of Iron, etc. These dreamers had images as
clearly represented to their minds, as any thing can be to the most waking
and wakefull eye of the body. And though in many dreams there are no such
formal similitudes presented to the mind, but only a voice heard speaking, yet
nothing can be declared to us in a dream without forming in our mind some kind
of likeness. When it is said that God came to Abimelech (Gen: 20. and to Laban
Gen: 31.) and an Angel of the Lord to Joseph (Math: 1.) speaking to them in
dreams, they had such things exhibited to and impressed upon them, as gave the
former two assurance that God spoke to them, and the third that he was spoken
to by an Angel of God.

Further, We may distinguish of dreams; First, some are mere natural
dreams; and they arise four ways; First, from the temperature of the body,
Melancholy and flegmaticke persons, have their special dreams, and so have
men of a sanguine and of a choleric complexion. The first incline to dream
of sad, the second of sottish, the third of pleasant things, and the last of
wrathful wranglings and contendings. Secondly, Natural dreams are caused by
the diet or food which we eat, special meat inclining to special thoughts
and imaginations. Thirdly, Mere natural dreams flow from the buisiness or
special work wherein we have been engaged in the day; as Solomon speaks (
Eccles: 5.3.) a dream comes through the multitude of buisiness; that is, a man
dreams at night of what he has been doing in the day. Fourthly, Natural
dreams arise from vehement affections to or desires of what we want, and would
have. Thus ( Isa: 29.7.) The hungry man dreams he eats, and the thirsty man
dreams he drinks; For being pincht with hunger, and parcht with thirst, his
appetite is not only strong, but fierce and violent after meat and drink.
These and such like are natural dreams. I call them so because the rise or
reason of them is seated in nature, and they are such as have no other cause
but what is common and natural to man. Nature let alone or left under such
outward accidents will produce such dreams.

Seconldy, There are diabolical dreams; the devil knows how to stir the
humors and work upon the fantasies of the children of men. Satan is skillful
and diligent in soliciting our lusts and corruptions both day and night, and
they being once solicited or moved to work, cannot but work in us both
sleeping and waking. Yea the devil can inspire false doctrines and opinions by
dreams, as well as provoke to wicked practices. Of such dreamers we read (
Deuteronomy: 13.1, 3.) If there be among you a false Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams.
False Prophets had many dreams ( Jer: 23.25.) Such were wont to say, I have
dreamed, I have dreamed. Because the holy Prophets had their dreams from God,
the Devil would give his unholy Prophets dreams too, which were lies and
vanity, deceits and errors, leading them out of the way of God, whether we
respect truth of doctrine, or purity of worship. We may reduce all diabolical
dreams to these two heads; They are either, First, false dreams, that is,
dreams of falsehood, for he is the father and former of lies; or, Secondly,
they are filthy defiling dreams; for he is an unclean spirit, and the
feweller of all filthy fires and uncleanness, whether corporal or spiritual.

Thirdly, There are divine dreams, so called, First, because immediately sent
by God; Secondly, because the subject matter of them is divine and heavenly, or
some manifestation of the holy will of God to man. There are five special
Messages upon which dreams are sent from God.

First, To reprove or admonish; Thus God dealt with Abimelech in a dream, that
he should not meddle with Sarah (Gen: 20.3.) and with Laban, that he should not
hurt Jacob, nor hinder him in his journey back to his fathers house ( Gen: 31.
24.) whereupon Jacob told him, God rebuked thee yester night. That dream of
Pilates wife ( Math: 27.19.) was sent to admonish Pilate about giving Judgment
against Christ.

Secondly, God sends dreams to instruct, and inform; There are teaching
dreams, that of Joseph (Math: 1.21.) was not only to show him what to do about
Mary his espoused wife, but to instruct him about that Great mystery of God
manifested in the flesh, to save lost man.

Thirdly, Dreams are sent for support and consolation in a time of trouble (
Gen: 28.12.) God comforted Jacob by that dream, when he was in a desolate
condition, and assured him of his presence.

Fourthly, Some dreams are sent of God upon a sad message to afflict and
terrify; Job bemoaned his sufferings and sorrows by such dreams ( Chap: 7.13,
14.) When I say my bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint, then
thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me with visions.

Fifthly, God foresheweth what shall come to pass, he reveals his own
counsels, as to future providence, by dreams and visions. The seven years of
famine were revealed to Pharaoh in a dream. And the great things of the
Church, and of the world too, were revealed to Daniel in a dream, and in
visions of his head upon his bed ( Dan: 7.1.) The message of the dream in the
text was for instruction and admonition, as will appear at the sixteenth
verse; God speaks in a dream; and further In a vision of the night.

Some take vision here as a second way of divine revelation. And it is true, the
Scripture speaks of dreams and visions distinctly ( Numb: 12.6.) Others make
visions to be only appurtenances to dreams; For though there have been visions
without dreams, yet dreams are seldom, if at all, without some kind of vision.
This seems the intendment of this text, In a dream, in a vision of the night;
That is, in a dream with a vision of the night, as making the vision to be
nothing else, but either a representation of the matter dreamed of, or of the
manner wherein it was represented to the dreamer. And I conceive, that Elihu in
this verse is speaking only of one, not of two ways of Gods revealing himself
to man; or rather of one then two. Yet whether we take the vision distinctly
from or jointly with the dream, the scope of Elihu in this text is equally
answered and fulfilled.

Further, Elihu does not only report the way of Gods discovering himself, that
is, in a dream, in a vision, but he declares the time or season of these dreams
and visions, or of these visions in a dream; that is, the night, and the night
considered under this division.

First, When deep sleep falls upon men.

Secondly, When they have their slumberings upon their bed; that is (as I
apprehend) at the beginning of the night, and break of day (for those are the
slumbring times of the night) or in the middle of the night or midnight, for
then usually men are fallen into and abide in a deep sleep, or as we render,
Then Deep sleep falls upon men.

Some sleeps, as we may say, are but shallow sleeps, slight sleeps, in
comparison of other; Deep sleep is that which we call, Dead sleep. The word
here used by Elihu, notes the strongest and the soundest sleep, and therefore
it is fitly distinguished from slumberings upon the bed.

(...) plus et quam (...) et (...) plus est quam (...) Aben Ezra.
There are three words in the Hebrew which signify sleep; whereof the first
signifies sleep in general; the second, deep sleep; the third, any slight
sleep, which we here translate slumbering. Ordinary sleeping is more then
slumbring, and a deep sleep, more then ordinary sleep; we commonly say, such a
man is fast asleep, he is, as it were, bound hand and foot. Sleep is the
binding of the senses, and so, by consequence the binding of all the members of
the body. We often find this distinction in Scripture ( Psalm: 132.4.) I will
not give sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber to my eyelids; that is, I will not
only not give my self to fall asleep, but I will not so much as (according to
our manner of speaking in that matter) forget my self. We find the same
distinction ( Ps: 121.4.) Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber
nor sleep. (...) aliquando simpliciter redditur dormire; Graece est (...)
proprie capite nutante dormire. Bold:
The words are a description of the exact watchfulness of God over his people,
he that does not so much as slumber, he that never lays his eyes together, he
that does not only not take a nap (as we say) but not so much as once nod (to
so little the Hebrew-word may be drawn down, which is likewise the importance
of the Greek-word, he, I say, that does not so much as nod) is far from
sleep, furthest of all from deep sleep. In both these degrees of sleep, the
Lord speaks by Dreams, first, in deep sleep; Secondly, in slumbrings.

Some conceive that Elihu intended by these different words, to set forth two
sorts of dreams; First, those dreams which men have when extraordinary deep
sleep falls upon them; such as that spoken of ( Gen: 2.21.) God commanded a
deep sleep to fall on Adam, when he took the rib out of his side and formed
the woman. We read also ( Gen: 15.12.) that a deep sleep fell on Abraham when
God revealed to him what should become of his posterity, and how they should be
in Egypt, and there much oppressed four hundred years, etc. It is said also
(1 Samuel: 26.12.) A deep sleep from the Lord was fallen upon them; that is, upon
Saul, and his guards, who lay round about him. And that might be called a sleep
from the Lord, both because it was a sleep which the Lord sent, and because it
was an extreme deep sleep. Secondly, there are dreams in ordinary sleep, or in
very slumbrings or noddings upon the bed, we may call them waking dreams. Thus
Elihu shows God taking several times or seasons for the revealing of
himself in dreams; sometimes in deep sleep, and often in the least and
slightest sleeps, called slumbrings.

I shall not here insist upon or discourse the way of Gods manifesting himself
to the Ancienrs, by dreams and visions, but refer the Reader to what has
already been done upon the 4th Chapter at the 12th and 13th verses; where
Eliphaz speaks almost in the same manner as Elihu here about visions; And,
indeed there is a very great Consent between their two parts in this book,
that of Eliphaz, and this of Elihu; They were both holy and prophetical men,
both of them had the same design in speaking about dreams and visions, namely,
to convince and humble Job; and both of them express themselves in terms of a
very near Cognation. So that if the reader please to consult that place ( Job
4.12, 13.) he will find these words farther cleared, as to the nature and
several kinds of visions. And if he turn to what has been done upon the 14th
verse of the 7th Chapter, he may find the doctrine of dreams further opened.

Only let me add here a note or two.

First, It has been the use of God to reveal his mind by dreams.

And I may give you five reasons why God used to apply himself to man in
dreams: First, because in sleep man is, as I may say, at best leisure for God
to deal with him; he is not distracted with business, nor hurried with the
labors of this life, but is at rest. Secondly, when we are awake we are very
ready to debate and discuss what we receive by our own reason, we are ready to
Logic it with God; but in sleep we take things barely as offered without
discussions or disputes. Thirdly, in sleep when all is quiet, that which God
represents, takes and leaves a deeper impression upon the mind of man. Common
experience teaches us how dreams stick, and how those apprehensions which we
have in our sleep dwell and abide with us when awake. Fourthly, I conceive the
Lord does this chiefly that he may show his divine skill in teaching and
instructing man, or that he has a peculiar art in teaching; he teaches so, as
none of the masters of learning were ever able to teach and instruct their
Scholars. There was never any man could teach another when he was asleep; they
that are taught must at lest be awake, yea they must not only be awake but
watchful; but now God is such a teacher, such an instructor, that when we are
asleep he can convay instruction and teach us his lessons; this (I say) does
wonderfully magnify the divine skill and power of God, who is able to make us
hear and understand doctrine even when we are asleep and cannot hear. There
may be also a fifth consideration moving God to this. Possibly God would hereby
assure us, that the soul is a distinct essence, and has its distinct
operations from the body; and that even death it self cannot deprive the soul
of man of its working. For what is sleep but a kind of death? sleep is a short
death, and death is along sleep. Now when the body is (upon the matter) laid
aside, the soul can go to work; when the body lies like a block and stirs not,
the soul can bestir it self about many matters, and run its thoughts to the
utmost ends of the earth, yea and raise them up to the highest heavens, in
blessed intercourses with God himself. There Is no need to prove the matter of
fact that it is so; what night, with reference to some or other, does not utter
this point of knowledge? nor need I stay to prove that this is, if not a
demonstrative, yet a very probable argument of the distinct substantiallity of
the soul from the body, namely its operations when the body (with all its
proper and peculiar faculties and powers) is a sleep, and contributes nothing
to those operations. For though it be granted that some irrational creatures
(who have no immortal part, nor any thing substantial in them distinct from
their bodies, though it be granted I say, that these) may have dreams; yet
their dreams differ as much from those of men, as themselves do.

Secondly Note, The revelation of the mind of God by dreams and visions, was
much, yea most used in those ancient times. When God had not so fully revealed
his mind by Scripture or his mind in the Scripture, then he spoke often in
dreams and visions; and hence the old Prophets were called seers.

The Apostle reports, God speaking at sundry times, and in diverse manners in
times past, unto the fathers by the Prophets, ( Heb. 1.1.) The Greek text has
two very significant words, (...),
the former most properly implying how God gave out his mind in diverse
measures, or how he parcelled it out, the other implying the several ways in
which he gave it out. As the measures were various, sometimes more sometimes
less of his mind about divine matters and mysteries being dispersed, so the
ways manners and forms of this dispensation were very various; yet the most
usual way was by dreams and visions ( Numb. 12.6.) If there be a Prophet among
you (says the Lord) I the Lord will make my self known unto him in a vision,
and speak to him in a dream. Yea we find that in the first days of the
Gospel, dreams and visions were frequent. The Apostle falling into a trance
had a vision ( Acts 10.10.) He saw heaven opened and a certain vessel descend,
etc. And when Christ would have the Apostle Paul carry the Gospel into
Macedonia, a vision appeared to him in the night ( Acts 16.9.) There stood a
man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, come over to Macedonia and help us.
The same Apostle says (2 Cor. 12.1, 2.) I will come to visions and revelations
of the Lord, whether in the body I cannot tell, or out of the body I cannot
tell. Paul's soul was wrapped up in such high and intimate converses with God,
that he even forgot how it was with his body, or had little to do with it.
Which suites well with that description which the Apostle John gave of himself,
when he had the whole mind of God concerning the state of his Church to the end
of the world, revealed to him in several visions, I (says he Rev. 1.10.) was
in the spirit on the Lords day, etc. That Is is a famous promise, which was
first reported by the Prophet Joel (Chap: 2.28.) and after repeated by the
Apostle Peter (Acts 2.17.) I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, etc. and
your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams. Thus it
is every where clear in Scripture, that dreams and visions were frequent both
in the Old Testament times, and in the beginning of the New;

But now in these last days (as the Apostle says Heb. 1.2, 3. passing from
those former ways of Revelation described in the first verse) God having
spoken to us by his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom
also he made the Worlds, who is [also] the brightness of his glory, and the
express Image of his person: God I say having spoken to us by his Son, and we
having now a clearer manifestation of the mind of God then the old fathers had,
the Son who once spoke to us in person on earth, still speaking to us in the
Gospel every day; therefore now for any to look after dreams and visions, or
visible apparitions for the revealing of the mind of God, is to go backward to
the old state of the Jewish Church, or to the infancy of the Gospel Church,
while the Canon or Rule of the Scripture as to all matters of faith and holy
life was not fully finished and completed. And though we ought to be far
from limiting God, yet he has limited us from looking after any wisdom in the
knowledge of his will above that which is written (1 Cor. 4.6.) The Apostle
also testifying by the Spirit of God, that the Scripture is sufficient to make
every man wise to salvation and the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good works (that good work especially of helping others to salvation)
1 Timothy 3.15.17.

Ardentibus votu precatus sum ut daret mihi deus certu^ sensum scripturae; et
pactum feci cum domino deo meo ne mihi visiones vel somnia mitteret. Luth. loci
com. quartae clas^is.
Luther observing how many were deluded in his time by dreams and visions,
which they falsely attributed to God, as the immediate Author of them;
earnestly prayed about two things: First, that God would give him a sound
understanding of his mind revealed in the Scriptures. Secondly; that he would
nor send him dreams or visions, yea, says he, I even contracted with God that
he would not. And doubtless he did this upon a double ground. First, to oppose
the wild opinions and practices of those, who had nothing to pretend for them
but dreams and visions. Secondly, to advance the honor of the written word in
its sufficiency, not only without the help of any humane tradition, but without
any further divine revelation. And therefore though God should please to speak
to us now by dreams and visions, yet that were only (as the Apostle speaks
about his adding of an oath to his promise ( Heb. 6.17.) to show that he is (ex
abundanti) more abundantly willing to satisfy our weakness by such a
condiscention, then that there is a necessity of it, with respect to any
deficiency of the Scriptures fulness. And hence it is, that if men shall
profess they have received any thing from God by dreams or visions, concerning
what is either to be believed or done, the matter of those dreams must be
examined and weighed at the balance of the Scriptures, and is no further to be
credited then as it is found agreeable thereunto.

It cannot be denied but that men may make profitable use of their dreams at
this day; they may see much of themselves when their eyes are shut up by
sleep. Evil men may see their lusts at work in the night, and find out what
lust is most working and wakefull in them. What is said in History of the
ancient Persian Kings, that they were seldom seen in the day, but came to view
in the night, is true of a man's special sin, or of that sin which reigns and
Kings it in him. What ugly apparitions of lust has many a man in his nightly
dreams, especially of those filthy lusts which are most proper to the night?
Thus also good men have sometimes a clearer sight of their graces in the night
by dreams, then in the duties of the day. What holy frames of heart? what
lively actings of grace? what sweet and ravishing communion with God have many
godly men found and felt in dreams? That may at lest, be somewhat of David's
meaning, when he said ( Psalm. 16.17.) My reins also instruct me in the night
season.

Lastly, Though we cannot make any certain conclusions, either what we are, or
what we are to do from dreams; yet from them they who are wise and watchful
may sometimes gather strong conjectures about both or either. To make dreams
the rule or warrant of what we do is extremely dangerous, yet that we may have
hints what to do in a dream, I nothing doubt, nor can there be any danger in
it, while the matter hinted is consonant to the rule of the word, both as that
which is lawful to be done, and lawful for us (all circumstances considered)
to do. Otherwise, whatsoever we may think our selves warned or warranted to
do by dreams, is but a mock or trick put upon us by the Devil, or a deceit
of our own foolish selfish hearts.

Thus we have seen the first way of Gods speaking to men of old, by dreams
and visions of the night; what work God is pleased to make with and in man by
such speakings, will appear distinctly in the three following verses.

Verse. 16. Then he opens the ears of men, and seals there instruction.
In this verse Elihu gives us the first of those gracious designs or purposes
of God in sending dreams or visions of the night; then he opens the ears of
men. There is a twofold ear of man, first, external, that organ of hearing
placed in the head. Secondly, internal, that power of hearing seated in the
heart. God can uncover or open both. There are but few who have their outward
ear stopped, we rarely meet with a deaf man. But we every where meet with and
speak to those who are internally deaf. The Lord opens this inward ear, and
he only is able to do it. God opened the heart (or internal ear) of Lydia to
attend to the things which were spoken of Paul (Acts 16.14. (...). Sep.
) The Septuagint render this place of Job expressly so. Then he opens the
mind of men. Their translation comes close to the sense, though not to the
letter of the Original. Quidam hanc loquendi formulam natam esso putant ex
hebraeorum consuetudine, qui cum antiquis seculis prolixam alerent comam, eaque
aures operirent, si quis arcanum


Further, the Hebrew is (as we put in the Margin) He reveals or uncovereth
the ears of men. This revealing or uncovering of the ear, say some, notes
only private speaking, and is a similitude taken from a common custom among
men; who when they would convey their mind secretly to a friend that stands by,
put their head near to his ear, and take up the brim of his hat, or put by his
hair (if long) that they may whisper in his ear. Thus in a dream God
whispers and speaks silently unto men. This seems to have a sutablenesse with
that ( Chap. 4.12, 13.) where Eliphaz spoke of a thing brought secretly to him,
or that was whispered or stolen into him. But I conceive there is more in this
place then the intendment of a secret and private conveyance of the mind of God
unto man in a vision or dream.

And therefore this opening of the ear imports the removing or taking away of
that (whatsoever it is) which hinders the effectual hearing or obeying of
those messages which God sends to men. When God spoke in a dream, he did more
then speak, aliquid in illorum aures in susussirare vellet deducebat defluentes
copillos et in apertes aures tacito ^^^mure aliquid instillabat. Sanct:
Cinthius aurem vellit et admonuit, etc. Horat. Loquitur et audire facit. Aurem
revelare vel aperire est insinuare aliquid auribus animisque quod intimis
sensibus reponendum sit. Clariorem et penetrantiorem insinuationem voluntatis
divinae denotat. Coc:
he opened the ear, yea, he gave an ear to hear: This powerful work of God
upon the heart is elegantly expressed by opening the ear, because when the
ears are stopped, we cannot hear, till that which stops them is plucked out or
taken away; so that here we have speaking with effect, or the clear and
penetrating power of the Spirit of God sweetly and prevailingly insinuating his
mind to man. God speaks so as he will be heard.

Hence Observe.

First, The ear of man is naturally stopped against the teachings of God. There
are many things which stop the ears of man, or man has many ear stoppers. I
will name seven, all which God removes and takes away when he effectually
reveals his mind to man. First, the ear of man is stopped with ignorance, that is
a thick veil or covering upon the ear, and keeps out the mind of God till it
be removed. And, Secondly, Unbelief is another ear-stopper; till the Lord
removes that we cannot hear. Thirdly, Impenitency or hardness of heart stops
the ear, there are a number of Scriptures I might give for each of these.
Fourthly, the love of any particular sin is an eare-shutter or an eare-stopper,
and the Lord removes that, when he opens the ear. Fifthly, Prejudices stop the
ear, prejudices sometimes against the person speaking, sometime against the word
spoken. That man will never hear a word to purpose, who has a prejudice
against the person, or a prejudice against the word, either a prejudice against
the man, or against the matter. Sixthly, Pride stops the ear too, the proud
man will not hearken, therefore God humhles and brings down the spirit that the
word may be heard. Seventhly, and lastly, the World is a great ear-stopper,
that locks up the ear against the word; the world in the profits of it, and
the world in the pleasures of it, and the world in the cares of it, and the
world in the fears of it, the world by or in every one of these stops the ear,
and by these the ears of all men naturally are stopped, so that they are as it
is said ( Psalm. 58.4.) like the deaf adder, that stops her ear, and will not
hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely. Till all these
stoppers are removed, and the ear opened, there is no receiving of the word.

Secondly Observe.

God is able to open and unlock the ear of man. Though it has never so many
stopples in it, he can pull them out, never so many locks upon it, though all
the seven spoken of, and seven more obstruct the ear, yet he can open them all,
and make a free and uncontrollable passage for his word into the remotest and
closest chambers of the soul. God can speak loud enough, not only to make the
deaf, but the dead hear his voice. Verily; verily I say unto you (says
Christ, Joh. 5.25.) the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear
the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. By the dead he
means not those who are corporally, but spiritually dead, that is, dead in sins
and trespasses, and in danger of eternal death for their sins and trespasses,
even these heard the voice of the Son of God then speaking personally, and
heard it afterward ministerially, in the dispensation of the Gospel, and that
voice revived them, not only by giving them the comfort of that natural life
which they had before, but by bringing in a new spiritual life which before
they had not. Then the internal ear is opened to purpose when those internal
or mystically dark graves of sin are opened, and the soul comes forth into the
light of life.

Yet more distinctly. God may be said to uncover or open the ears of men, when
he does these four things.

First, When he makes us not only to hear but to attend, not only to hear but
to hearken; or not only to hear but to give ear. Many give the word of God
the hearing, but they do not give ear to the word of God.

Secondly, God opens the ear when he makes us not only attend, but understand,
or when he takes the veil off from our minds. The Apostle says of the Jews
(2 Cor: 3.14.) The veil remains upon them untaken away to this day in the
reading of the old Testament (and it does so still) so that as they could not,
so yet they cannot, Look to the end of that which is abolished; that is, to
Christ, who was the end or scope at which the whole Ceremonial Law (now
abolished) did then aim. When once the e^re is divinely opened, then the veil
of ignorance and spiritual blindness is taken off from the mind, both as to
that greatest truth, and all other necessary truths. The opened ear is an
understanding ear.

Thirdly, God opens the ear when he causes us to believe what we perceive
and understand. As faith sets the whole soul aworke for God, so faith is the
great work of God upon the soul. When the ear is opened, truth is not only
known, but savingly believed.

Fourthly, This opening of the ear makes the soul obedient; Jesus Christ in
that great prophecy of him ( Psalm: 40.6.) to show his ready obedience to his
fathers command, says, Mine ear have thou opened (or dug) The ear of
Christ was never shut in the least, either through ignorance or unbelief; but
he is said to have his ear opened, only to show his constant preparedness and
readiness for obedience. He came into the world with an open ear to all the
will of God; and therefore it follows in the 7th and 8th verses of that
Psalm, Then said I, lo I come, in the volume of thy book it is written of
me, I delight to do thy will, O my God, yea thy law is within my heart. Christ
is brought in by another Prophet speaking to the same point with some little
variety, but with very great significancy of expression ( Isa: 50.4, 5.) He
wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned; we
usually say, Sleep is in the eye, yet this prophecy intimates a sleep in the
ear, thou have wakened mine ear. What we are to understand by this wakened
ear, is clear in the next words of the same prophecy, The Lord has opened
mine ear, that is the word of Eliphaz, and the consequence of opening the ear,
set down in the Prophet, is the same now given in this point, The Lord has
opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious. He does not say, The Lord opened
mine ear, and I heard, but, I was not rebellious; that is, I gave up my self
to obey the word or command, which I heard. The same Prophet ( Isa: 48.8.)
describing the rebellion of the Jews, puts this as the reason of it, Yea thou
heardest not, (that is, thou did not attend) yea thou knew not, that is,
thou did not understand, yea thine ear was not opened; as if he had said,
thine unopened ear was the cause why thou did neither attend, nor
understand, nor obey the word spoken to thee. So much of the first gracious
design of God in speaking to men by dreams and visions of the night; Then he
opens the ears of men. The second is given in the latter part of the verse.

And seals their Instruction. (...) signavit obsignavit; confirmavit perfecit.
The word signifies not only to seal, but to perfect or conclude. He seals
Instruction.

There is a threefold use of seals and sealing; First, to distinguish one
thing from another; Secondly, to keep things safe and secret; Thirdly, sealing
is to confirm and ratify; A Bond, Deed, or Evidence in writing, till it has
a Seal, is but a scrip of paper of no force, but when once the Seal is put to
it, then it is confirmed, then there is strength and force in it. A seal
fortifies the writing, or makes it authentic. He seals their Instruction.

(...) a radico (...) vincivit ligavit per metaphoram castigavit erudivit,
corripuit verbis aut verberibus.
The word here used signifies both correction and Instruction, and so it is
rendered by some here, He opens their ears, or seals their chastisement. Mr
Broughton takes that sense, And imprinteth why they are chastised; that is, (as
himself expounds it) when he has chastised them, he seals up the decree of
their judgment; or as another, He proposes it unto them as firm and
concluded, if they do not repent and imprinteth in their mind the certainty of
it, as also the true cause of it. We render fully to the sense of the word and
scope of the text, Disciplinameorum velut impresso sigillo consignat. Tygur:
He seals their instruction; that is, upon the opening of the ear there is a
sealing or a setting home the word which is received. When the ear is opened
to receive, God will make men hold what they have received. The sealing of
instruction, signifies the efficacy, energy, Phrasis obsignandi eruditionem,
denotat efficaciter crudire sc: ut non concedatur ei qui cruditur non attendere
et vim eruditionis non sentire. Coc:
or effectual working of God with the word, he ratifies and confirms it to
the soul, he makes his word as sure to them as a sealed Bond, both with
respect to the duty commanded, and the mercy promised. And, indeed, we have as
much need to have Instruction sealed, as to have the ear opened; for it is
possible the ear may be opened, we may hear and understand, and in some sense
believe, yea obey, and yet not have the instruction sealed. The instruction is
then sealed, when we keep what is received, as the ear is opened when we
receive what is offered. Unless the instruction be sealed, we hear and obey
only for the present, not for the time to come, that is, we do not retain and
hide the word received for use and practice.

Now, whether we take this sealing in reference either to correction or
instruction, it yields us matter of profitable meditation. First, As it referrs
to correction.

Note.

God assures sinful man that he shall smart for it, unless he hearken and
obey. It is as sure that he shall, as if he saw it under hand and seal;
Castigationem eorum obsignat. i, e. significat eis se certo eos castigaturum
nisi a peccato destiterint, non secus ac si sententiam hanc literis mandasset,
easque literas obsignasset. Pisc: Vellicans ipsoru^ aures et imminentes ipsis
castigationes an ^^is ipsorum insculpens. Bez:
or as if the sentence were engraven upon his conscience, and fixed before his
eyes. If the ear be not obedient to instruction, the back must submit to
correction; If the word will not do it, the rod must; if teaching will not
serve the turn, chastning shall; He seals their correction. Every correction
threatened is not certainly inflicted; for Elihu says afterward ( v. 26.) He
shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable to him; but the meaning is, man's
correction is sealed in case he proceeds on in his sin; if he does not give
proof that his ear is opened by his obedience to instruction, there is no
escaping correction. The correction of the dearest children of God is sealed,
if they hear and do not. God will not cocker his stubborn children, nor
spoil them by sparing the rod; He will certainly meet with them one time or
other, either by sickness, or poverty, or reproach; the order the warrant is
sealed for their correction.

We may much more apply this to the wicked, to the ungodly and rebellious, who
though they have their outward ears open, yet their hearts remain shut; If the
correction of the godly be sealed in that case, to be sure, the destruction of
the wicked is; they are sealed for death, yea they are sealed for hell; the
writ of their eternal Judgment is sealed. If Judgment must begin at the
house of God, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? what shall the
end of them be that obey not the Gospel of God?

Further, Take it as we render it, referring to instruction, He seals their
instruction.

Whence note.

God is able to set home his instructions effectually upon the soul. He can
leave such an impression upon the heart, as as shall never be forgotten nor
worn out. He can make every word stick; And so this is but a further
illustration of what was said before; he opens their ears to receive the
word, and then seals instruction upon them. The Apostle speaking of some
persons converted, who were the fruit of his ministry, says, Ye are the seal
of mine Apostleship (1 Cor: 9.2, 3.) that is, ye confirm and ratify my
ministry, that it is of God, and that God is in it. Now as the conversion of
sinners, and the building up of Saints, is the seal of our ministry; so the
sealing of instruction upon the soul, is the conversion of sinners, and the
edification of Saints. When a sinner is converted, his instruction is sealed
upon him, and when a Saint is built up and edified, and increases in the
things of God, then instruction is sealed upon him also. And until we thus
profit by the word, we have the word, as I may say, without a seal, nothing
fastens upon us.

Thus much of the first design of God in sending dreams and visions in those
times, it was to open the ears of men, and to seal their Instruction; This
being only a general benefit aimed at by those means, we have those which are
more special set down in the words which follow.

Verse. 17. That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.
This 17th verse contains two of those blessed ends or designs of God in
revealing himself to man by dreams and visions, or by visions in a dream, of
which Elihu spoke in the two former verses; as then he takes an opportunity to
open the ears of men, and seal their Instruction, to fasten and fix his word
upon them, to make it stick and stay by them; so in all this his purpose is;
That he may withdraw man from his purpose.

(...) auferre erit, vel mutare in melius.
The word rendered to withdraw, signifies, to take off, or put away, to remove or
change for the better. ( Isa: 1.16.) Put away the evil of your doings; that
is, do no more evil, or (as the Lord speaks by another Prophet, ( Jer:
44.4.) O do not this abominable thing that I hate; we render the word in the
other sense ( Job 27.2.) He has removed my Judgment far from me. There is
in man a kind of settledness and resolvedness upon his purpose, he will on; but
says Elihu, the Lord withdrawes him, he stretches forth his hand, and pull's
him back; He withdraws Man.

Adam, the earthly man; The proper name of the first man, is the common name of
all men. Man is earthly by nature, and so are all his natural purposes. To
draw an earthly man from that which is earthly, is no easy matter; only the
power of God can do it, He withdraws man From his purpose.

The word which we render purpose, properly signifies a work; (...) a (...)
fecit.
and so it is translated not only elsewhere, but here by several Interpreters.
Mr. Broughton is express, That the earthly man leave off to work, and then by
work, he means an evil work, as by purpose an evil purpose. The word work set
alone usually signifies an evil work, as the word wife put alone is taken for
a good wife ( Prove. 8.22.) He that finds a wife, finds good; every one that
finds a wife does not find good, (there are many bad wives) only he that
finds a good wife finds good. Vt a m^v^a^ homo opus, sc^ suum et animu^
malum. Iun:
So on the contrary, the word work standing here alone implies a bad work.
And to withdraw man from his work, or from his purpose, is to withdraw him from
his evil work or purpose: The Septuagint gives it clearly so, (...). Sept:
that he may withdraw man from unrighteousness. And Mr. Broughton glossing his
own translation, says, that he leave off man's work, and do the work of God.

Again, This term work, seems opposed to the thought or concupiscence of the
inner man; he withdraws man from his work, that his hand may not effect what
his heart has contrived: that the bitter root may not bring forth evil and
bitter fruit. Or if we follow our translation, the sense will be the same; He
withdraws man from his purpose, that is, he checks and stops the inward
motions and workings of man's heart, and so keeps him from bringing it to
perfection by an outward evil work. ( Jam. 1.15.) Then when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin, when it is finished, brings forth
death; God in great mercy takes man off from his purpose when he finds him upon
an evil device or purpose; he crusheth the Cockatrice's egg that it may not
be hatched, and destroys the conception of those Babylonish brats that they
may never come to the birth. ( Mic. 2.1.) Woe to them that devise mischief on
their beds, when the morning is light they practice it, because it is in the
power of their hand. The work begins at the heart, there it is plotted and
contrived; the heart is the work house of sin; now the Lord withdraws man from
his purpose, and will not suffer the inward work to be accomplished by the
outward work.

Further, we may refer these words either to what is past, or to what is to
come; some translate (referring it to what is past) that he may turn, Vt
avertat hominem ab iis qu^ fecit. Vulg.
or withdraw man from those things which he has done; that is, from those
evils to which he has already set his hand; this is done by giving man
repentance, which is our being humbled for, and turning away from any evil
already committed.

Our translation refers it to what is intended to be done, for that is a
purpose. So the meaning is, God does these things that he may keep man from
doing that evil or mischief which he has resolved upon, or at least is
forming and hammering in his thoughts. Abimelech had an evil purpose for the
matter (though possibly the purpose of his heart was not evil, for he said to
God (and God said he spoke true) in the integrity of my heart, and innocence of
my hands have I done this, Genesis 20.5, 6. (he was I say about an evil purpose
for the matter) when he thought to take Abrams wife from him, but the Lord came
to him in a dream, and withdrew him from the evil of his purpose. Laban
intended evil, or hard dealing to Jacob, but the Lord met him also in a
dream, and withdrew him from his purpose, saying, ( Genesis 31.24.) Take heed
thou speak not to Jacob, neither good nor bad, that is, hinder him not in his
journey, either by threathings or by promises. Thus man is taken off or
withdrawn from evil purposes by preventing grace, and from evil works by
repenting grace.

I shall prosecute the words according to our reading only, which imports that
when man has some evil purpose upon his heart, the Lord visits him in dreams
and visions of the night, to withdraw him from that purpose.

Hence observe First, Man is very forward and eager upon evil purposes.

God himself must come to withdraw and fetch him off, or otherwise he will be
driving them on. The heart of man naturally has no other purposes but evil
purposes, and upon them it is set (as I may say) to purpose; that is, he will
effect and bring them about if he can. When Moses reproved Aaron concerning the
golden Calfe which he had made, at the instance and violent importunity of the
people, Aaron answered for himself ( Exodus 32.23.) Let not the anger of my Lord
wax hot, thou know the people that they are set on mischief, they are bent
to it, they have such a mind to it, that there is no turning them from it; they
will hear no reason nor take any denial, when the fit is on them. There is a
setting of the heart of man continually upon evil; the wind blows that way,
and no other way, the wind sits always in that bad corner till God turns it.
There are two gracious acts of God, spoken of in Scripture, which do
exceedingly show forth the sinfullnesse of man; every act of grace does in its
measure aggravate the sinfullnesse of man, and always the higher grace acts,
the more is the sinfullnesse of man discovered, especially (I say) in this
twofold act of grace. The former whereof consists in drawing; the latter in
withdrawing; there is a gracious act of God in drawing the sinful sons and
daughters of men to that which is good. Man is drawn, First, into a state of
grace or goodness, by this he is made good. He is drawn, Secondly, to acts of
grace or goodness, by this he does good. Of the former Christ speaks ( Joh.
6.44.) No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw him,
that is, no man can believe, (for by faith we come to Christ) except he receive
power from on high. God draws the soul to Christ, and that is a powerful act
of divine drawing, though not a compulsory act: and as God must draw man into a
state of grace, which is our union with Christ by the Spirit in believing, so
he draws him to the acting of his graces. Of this latter the Church speaks
to Christ ( Cant. 1.4.) Draw me, and I will run after thee. These gracious
drawings show that we are not only utterly unable, but averse to the receiving
grace, and so becoming good, while we are in a state of nature; as also that we
are very backward to do that which is good, even when we are in a state of
grace. Now as God acts very graciously in drawing man to good, so Secondly, in
withdrawing him from evil, from those evil purposes and evil practices, to
which all men are so easily yet so strongly carried. The Prophet ( Jer. 2. 23,
24.) elegantly describes the exceeding forwardness of that people to evil,
while he compares them to the swift Dromodary, traversing her ways, and to
the wild Ass in the Wilderness that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure (or
the desire of her heart) in her occasion who can turn her away? As the wild
Ass set upon her pleasure, and in her occasion, when she has a mind to it,
will not be turned away; such is the heart of man. That other Prophet ( Isa.
5.18.) tells us of those who draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as
it were with a cart rope; that is, they set themselves with all their might to
do mischief. When men are thus vainly bent upon vanity, it is a mighty work of
God to withdraw them from their work. When, what men are purposed to do they
are fastened to it as with cords and cart-ropes, what but the power of the
great God can withdraw them from it?

Whence note Secondly, Unless God did withdraw and fetch us off from sin, we
should run on in it continually.

When man is in an evil way, he has no mind to return till God turns him;
let come on it what will he will venture: It Is only through grace that the heart
either abstains or returns from evil. David says ( Psalm. 18.23.) I have kept
my self from mine iniquity. David kept himself from his iniquity, yet he was
not his own keeper: It was by the power of God that he kept himself from that
sin to which he was most prone, even from that sin to which his own corruptions
and the Devils temptations were always drawing him. David had some special
iniquity to which his heart was inclined more then any other, and from that he
kept himself, being himself kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation. Of our selves we can neither keep our selves from doing iniquity,
nor leave off doing that iniquity, which we have once done. How can man
withhold himself from sin, while sin has so great a hold of him, yea the
Mastery over him?

Thirdly Note.

God is graciously pleased both to withdraw man from doing evil and to draw
him to repentance when he has done evil. Between these two the grace of God
is daily working in and toward man, and it works for the effecting of both
many ways.

First, by his word, and that in a fourfold consideration. First, by the word
of his command, he every where in Scripture forbids man to do any evil, and
bids him repent of every evil which he does. Secondly, by the word of his
threatenings; they are as thunderbolts to deter him. Thirdly, by the word of
his promises, they are divine alluremenrs, sweetly yet effectually to entice
him. Fourthly, by the word of his persuasions, they are full of taking
arguments to convince and win him.

Secondly, God withdrawes man from sin, and draws him to repentance when he
has sinned, by his works: First, by his works of Judgment, they break him to
these duties. Secondly, by his works of mercy, they melt him into these duties.

Thirdly, God withdraws man from sin and draws him to repentance by his
patience and long-suffering. (Romans 2.4.) Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads them to repentance. As if the Apostle had said, O man, if thou
know not the meaning of Gods patience toward thee, and that this is the
meaning of it, thou know nothing of the mind and meaning of God toward thee.

Fourthly, The Lord withdraws man from evil purposes by seasonable
counsels. David was going on in a very bad purpose (1 Samuel 25.) and God
stirred up Abigail to meet him, and by good counsel to withdraw him from his
purpose: This David acknowledged ( verse. 32, 33.) Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me. As if he had said, I was fully
purposed to revenge my self upon Naball, and had not surely left a man of his
house alive by the morning light, if thou had not met me; therefore blessed
be God who has sent thee, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou which
have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and have by thy good counsel
withdrawn me from that evil purpose.

Lastly, consider God withdraws man from his sinful purpose, all or any of
these ways, by putting forth his mighty power with them. For his word alone,
his works alone, his patience alone, the counsel of man alone would not do
it, if God did not stretch forth his own arm in and with these means for the
doing of it. Nothing is any further efficacious then as God is with it. ( Numb.
22.) Balaam was going on in his wicked purpose, being sent for by Balak to
curse the people of God: And though the Lord sent his Angel to be an adversary
to him in his way ( verse. 22.) so that his Ass turned out of the way into the
field, yet Balaam went on in his purpose, yea though the Angel standing
between two walls caused his Ass to turn so suddenly, that she crushed Balaams
foot against the wall ( verse. 25.) yet Balaam went on in his purpose: Once more
though the Angel went further and stood in a narrow way, where there was no
way to turn to the right hand nor to the left, so that the poor Ass fell down
under him ( v. 27.) and speaking (as the Apostle Peter expresses it, 2 Epist.
2.) with man's voice rebuked the madness of the Prophet; Yet so mad he was that
all these checks and warnings, could not withdraw him from his purpose. And
what the Lord did at that time to Balaam by an Angel, that he does by some
other means and providence to stop many from their evil purposes, who yet
will not be stopped. He speaks to them in the ministry of his word, he speaks to
them in his works; he spreads their way with roses, he hedgeth up their way
with thorns, he bestows sweet mercies upon them, he sends sharp afflictions
upon them, to withdraw them from their evil projects and purposes, yet on they
go like Balaam, unless he send more then an Angel, even his holy Spirit to
withdraw them.

Lastly, Elihu reports it as a special favor of God to withdraw man from his
purpose.

Whence note.

It is a great mercy to be hindered in sinful purposes and intendments.
Disappointments are acts of grace, when we are acting against grace; If God
stop us from doing evil, not only by his word, but by blows, or by a hedge
of thorns, yea if he stop us by a drawn sword, it is a great mercy. Though God
throw us to the ground (as he did Saul, afterward Paul, when he went with a
bloody purpose to vex and persecute the Saints ( Acts 9.) let us count our
selves exalted, and rejoice in it more then in any worldly exaltation. It Is a
rich mercy to be kept from executing an evil purpose, though by our own
poverty and outward misery. The doing of that which is sinful, is worse then
any thing that can be done to us, or endured by us, as a stop against sin. Sin
has death in it; sin has wrath in it; sin has hell in it; sin has Devil
and all in it; therefore to be kept from sin, let it be by what means it will,
if by pains and pining sicknesses, if by reproaches and disgraces, yea if by
death, we have cause to bless God. The greatest and sorest Judgment which God
powers upon sinful men, is to let them alone in or not to withdraw them from
their sins. To be suffered to go on and prosper in sin, is the worst of
sufferings, the last of Judgments, the next Judgment to hell it self, and an
infallible sign of an heir of hell. Thus the wrath of God waxed hot against
Israel when he gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in
their own Council (Psalm: 81.11.) This was the highest revenge that God could
take upon that sinful people. He said a little before, Israel would none of
me; when God wooed them they were so coy, they would have none of him; and
then, said he, go on, take your fill of sin; I give you up to your own hearts
lusts. The Lord did not say, I gave them up to the sword, to the famine, or to
the pestilence, but to their own hearts lusts, and to walk on in their own
way; That person or people may be sure, God has purposed evil against them,
whom he will not withdraw from their evil purposes. The severity of the wrath
of God against the Gentiles is expressed and summed up in this ( Rom: 1.26, 28.)
He gave them up to vile affections; he gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do
things which were not convenient. A natural man left to himself, will soon
do such things as nature it self abhors and blusheth at. The same
dreadful doom is denounced ( Rev: 22.11.) He that is unjust, let him be
unjust still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still. I will not
withdraw him from his way, let him go on and perish, let him go on and sink
down to the pit of perdition for ever. As St. John in the Revelation
foretelling the Church, given up or left to (not in) great sufferings of all
sorts; Here is the patience of the Saints. So when we see the world given up
and left in great sinnings of any sort, especially if to sinnings of all sorts,
we may truly and sadly say, Here is the wrath of God. It Is therefore a great
mercy, if God will any way withdraw man from his sinful ways and purposes,
especially when he takes such gentle ways, as dreams and visions, counsels
and instructions, to withdraw man from his purpose, and (as it follows in
this verse) to hide pride from man.

(...) texit operuit, imponendo aliquid quo tegas.
The word which we render to hide, is to hide by casting a covering, a veil, a
garment, or any other thing, over what we desire should be hid, ( Prove: 12.23.)
A prudent man concealeth knowledge; it is this word; he does not pretend to
know so much as he knows; he puts a veil upon his own abilities, (as Moses
upon his face when there was such a shining beauty imprinted there) rather then
reveals them unnecessarily or uncalled. It Is the foolish man, or he that has
but a show of wisdom, who loves and affects to be showing it. But to the text.
The word is used also, to note that gracious act of God, his pardoning the sin
of man. ( Psalm: 32.1.) Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven, and
whose sin is covered. God covers our sins in the riches of his grace, by the
perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Now there are two ways by which God hides pride from man. First, by
pardoning it; Secondly, preventing it. Here to hide pride from man, properly,
is not to pardon it when acted, but to prevent or keep man from the acting of
it; God indeed hides the pride of man by pardoning it (and that is a high act of
grace) and he hides pride from man by keeping man from doing proudly, or from
showing his pride in his doings.

(...) superbia excellentia.
The word rendered pride, signifies Eminency, or Excellency, because men are
usually proud of that wherein they are eminent and excel; there lies the
temptation to pride. And therefore as a man should turn away his eyes from a
beautiful harlot, lest she should ensnare him, so God hides man's own
beauties, eminencies, and excellencies, even his best works from him, lest he
should be proud of them, and so go a whoring after them: or as God did with
the body of Moses, he not only buried him, but hid him (for it is said, ( Deuteronomy:
34.6.) No man knows of his sepulcher to this day) and it is well conceived
that the reason why God hid his sepulcher, was, lest the people of Israel
should be drawn aside to some undue or superstitious veneration of him. So God
hides (by some means or other) that which is most eminent in us, from us,
lest it should draw us aside to some undue estimation of it, and so prove but
matter or fuel for pride to kindle upon. Thus the Lord hides pride from us,
when he hides that from us, which (considering our corruption) may probably
make us proud.

And the original word here used to signify the man from whom God hides
pride, (...)
has a near cognation to this notion about hiding pride it self. Man is
twice expressed in this verse, yet not by the same word; The first word notes man
in the weakness of his constitution, an earthly man; This second notes man in
the powerfulness of his condition, a strong man, a mighty man, an eminent man,
a man with all his furniture, in the fullness of his earthly glory and
greatness; when man has much natural power, much civil power, with the
various additions and ornaments of both these powers upon him, then man is in
greatest danger to be proud, and then God hides pride from man. And who can
hide pride from such a man but God alone. Men commonly blow up such men with
pride by great applauses, and such men have mostly great thoughts and high
apprehensions of themselves, and are very forward to discover (which is the
greatest discovery of their weakness) their own pride. God only hides pride
from man; that is, he makes it not to be, as well as hinders i'ts appearing;
that which is hidden is as if it were not. The word is used in that sense ( Job
3.10.) Because he did not hide sorrow from mine eyes; Sorrow is hidden from us
when the matter of sorrow is so taken away, that we sorrow not at all. To hide
pride is to take away the matter and occasion, the incentives and motives of
pride, whatsoever is a nurse of pride, or does encourage the pride of our
hearts, that is to hide pride from man.

Again, We may take this word, pride, in a large sense, as Comprehending all
sin, He withdraws man from his purpose, and hides pride; that is, sin of all
sorts from man; and doubtless there is pride of one kind or other in every
act of sin; There is a heightening of the spirit against God, some
dissatisfaction with the mind and will of God, and thence a setting up of our
will against the will of God in every sinner, especially in bold and wilful
sinners. Such sinners would not let the will of God stand, but desire that
their own may. This is pride; This in some degree is mingled with every sin,
and pride leads to all sin; therefore in Scripture sometimes an humble or meek
man is opposed, not only to a proud man in special, but to a wicked man in
general ( Psalm: 147.6.) The Lord lifts up the meek, he casts the wicked
down to the ground. Where the wicked man in the latter part of the verse,
stands in opposition to the meek or humble man in the former part of it. Nor
can it be denied, but that as pride is in it self a very great wickedness, so
it gives a propension and fitness for the doing of all manner of wickedness.
And thus take it in the largest sense, it is a truth that God hides pride, that
is, every sin from man, otherwise he would soon show forth any sin as much as
pride. But I rather keep to that strictness of Interpretation here, as pride
is opposed to humility, which is not only a choice grace, but the ornament of
all those graces which are hidden in the heart, and held out in the life of a
gracious man. And thus the Lord by exercising man with dreams and visions in
his affliction, does first stop and check the very purposes of evil, that they
come not to act, and when man has brought to pass or acted any good purpose,
he keeps him from ostentation. He hides pride from man.

It being the Lords design to hide pride from man, by those forenamed
dispensations.

Observe, First.

Man is naturally much disposed and very prone to pride. Those things which
Children are apt to abuse or hurt themselves with, their parents hide from
them; They will hide edge-tooles from them, lest they get a wound by meddling
with them; They will hide fruit from them, lest by eating overmuch they get a
surfeit. Thus the Lord our tender father often hides all the means and occasions
of pride from the eyes of his children, because they are so ready to boast and
lift up themselves in pride. Man (as was showed at the 13th verse of the former
Chapter) is a proud piece of flesh, and has much proud flesh in him. The
Prophet says ( Ezekiel: 7.10.) Pride has budded; pride has a root, and it
brings forth fruit. There is a twofold pride, or pride of two sorts. First,
secret unseene pride, or pride of heart; Secondly, open visible pride, or pride
of life. In allusion to the Prophets metaphor, we may say, there is pride in
the bud, and pride in the root, pride buddeth outwardly.

First, At the tongue, men speak proud words, they speak boastingly and
vaine-gloriously ( Psalm: 75.5.) Speak not with a stiff neck, that is, speak not
proudly. Pride budded at the tongue of Nebuchadnezzar (Dan: 4.30.) when he
walked in his Palace and said, Is not this great Babell that I have built for
the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
Majesty. Here was pride budding at the tongue.

Secondly, Pride buddeth also at the eye, in scornful lofty looks. David
professed that his heart was not haughty, nor his eyes lofty (Psalm: 131.1.) The
haughtiness of many men's hearts may be seen at those windows of the body, the
eyes, in lofty looks. These are threatened with a downfall ( Psalm: 18.27.) The
Lord will bring down high looks, that is, proud men who look highly. And
again ( Isa: 2.11.) The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the
haughtiness of man shall be bowed down. Once more says the Lord ( Isa:
10.13.) I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Asyria, and
the glory of his high looks. There we have pride in the root, a stout heart,
and pride in the fruit, high looks. (Isa: 3.11.) The show of their Countenance
testifies against them; that is, they look proudly, though (which should lay
them in the dust) they live very lewdly, yea they are proud of their lewdness.

Thirdly, How often does pride bud in apparel, in vain fashions, and
newfangled attires, in the affected adornings and trimmings of a body of clay?
What are these but the buddings of pride? yea the flaggs and banners of pride.
Some are as proud of their gay dresses, as the Peacock of his feathers. We
commonly say, Fine feathers make fine birds, but how foolish are those birds
that are proud of Feathers!

Secondly, There is pride of heart, or pride budding in the spirit of man,
which does not show it self; only the mind swells within. When men have high
thoughts of themselves (though they do not (as the Apostle Jude has it)
speak great swelling words of vanity, yet they have great swelling thoughts of
vanity, then pride buddeth in their spirits, their minds swell, and the mind
will swell more then the tongue. The tongue swells mightily, but the heart much
more. The spirit of a man may lift up it self on high, when the man looks very
demurely. ( Hab: 2.4.) Behold, his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in
him; If the soul be lifted up, the man falls; He that is high-minded, cannot
be upright in his mind.

It may be questioned, Whence it comes to pass, that the soul of man is so
much and so often lifted up with pride? What causes this swelling and heaving
of his spirit? I answer,

First, Some are proud of their birth, either, that they are borne of great
men, or that they are borne of good men. The Baptist admonished the Jews of
this piece of pride ( Math: 3.19.) Think not to say within your selves, we
have Abraham to our father. As if he had said, I well perceive what makes you
(as we speak proverbially) stand so much upon your pantafloes? and talk within
your selves, at such a rate of your selves, is it not because you are of
Abraham's stock? But I say unto you, let not your heart swell with these
thoughts, we are Children of Abraham; for God is able even of these stones to
raise up children to Abraham; that is, God will not want a people, though he
should lay you aside, and entertain you no longer for his people.

Secondly, Others are proud of riches, yea they boast of the multitude of their
riches (Psalm: 49.6.) Even they who desire to hide their riches as much as they
can, yet cannot but tell the world they are proud of their riches, so proud,
that they slight and contemn all men that have not as much riches as they; O
what rejoycings have most rich men over their riches? Hezekiah a great King and
a Good man (a rare conjunction) had much of that upon his spirit ( Isa: 39.2.)
when Ambassadors came from Babylon, He was glad of them, and showed them all
his treasure; He affected they should see what a rich King he was, and what
masses of Gold and silver as well as what multitudes of men were at his command.

Thirdly, Many are proud of their honors and powers in the world; They are
high-minded, because they are set in high places; It Is a dishonor to some
great men that they have not truly great spirits. And it is the temptation of
all great men to have proud spirits.

Fourthly, Not a few are proud of their bodyly perfections and strength; many a
soul is defiled and deformed with pride by the bodies beauty and fairness;
many look not after the beauty of holiness, while they dote upon the beauty of
their own comeliness; they see themselves in their beauty, till they are
proud of it, and care not (which should be our greatest care, and shall be our
greatest privilege, Isa: 33.17.) to see the King in his beauty. As some trust
in their spiritual beauty ( Ezekiel: 16.15.) so others over-weene their
corporal, both are the effects of pride; and the first is by so much the worse
of the two, by how much it rises from a better object.

Fifthly, Many are proud of their natural parts, proud of their gifts, proud
of their wit, proud of their memory, proud of their eloquence and abilities of
speaking. As knowledge it self puffs up (1 Cor: 8.1.) so do all those
endowments which serve either for the getting or expressing of our knowledge.
Gifts and abilities, whether natural or improved and acquired, do not more
fit us for service, then tempt us to and (unless grace work mightily) taint
us with pride.

Sixthly, As many are proud of what they have, so others are proud of what they
have done, they are proud of their actions, their spirits swell with the
thoughts of their own works. Some are so wicked, that they are proud of their
evil works. The Apostle says, They glory in their shame (Phil: 3.19.) David
complained of many ( Psalm: 4.) who turned his glory into shame; but these turn
their shame into glory, that is, they are proud of that for which they ought to
be ashamed. Now if some are proud of the evil, of the mischief which they have
done, how easily may we grow proud of the good which we have done? proud of our
duties, proud of our righteous deeds, proud of our charitable deeds to men,
proud of our prayers to God, proud of our zeal for God, as Jehu was who said,
Come and see my zeal for the Lord. The heart of a good man may soon have too
much to do with what he has done, his thoughts may quickly work too much
toward and upon his own works. But as for hypocrites and selfe-seekers, who
do good to be seen of men, they cannot forbear seeing it themselves, and
surely that sight of the eye cannot but affect the heart with pride.

Seventhly, Pride rises often from the success of what is attempted and done,
men are proud of victories. The Assyrian is described ( Isa: 10.13, 14.)
triumphing and insulting, because he had put down the nations as a valiant
man. And ( Hab: 1.16.) we have the Chaldeans sacrificing to their net, and
burning incense to their drage, because by them their portion is fat, and their
meat plenteous; that is, they boasted of and gloried in their great
achievements in war; so it seems to be explained in the next words ( v.
17.) Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare continually to slay
the nations?

Eighthly, Pride springs out of the very mercies and salvation of God. Thus
it is said of Hezekiah (2 Chronicles: 32.25.) after he had received two great
mercies; First, deliverance from a great enemy; and, Secondly, from a great
sickness; He rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him, for
his heart was lifted up. How lifted up? not in thankfulness, for he rendered
not according to the kindness, but in pride and high-mindednesse; for
presently it is said ( v. 26.) Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for
the pride of his heart.

Ninthly, The heart is lifted up and waxes proud with Church Priviledges; Some
say, they are in the Church, or they are the Church; they enjoy pure ordinances
and administrations of holy worship above others. For this kind of pride the
Prophet reproved the Jews (Jer: 7.3, 4.) Hear ye the word of the Lord, all ye
of Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship the Lord, etc. Trust ye not
in lying words, saying, The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are we;
The temple of the Lord are these; As if he had said, Be not proud of the Temple
(what we trust to, besides God, we are proud of) nor of your Temple
privileges, you will find no sanctuary, no security there, unless you amend
your ways; these things will do you no good, except you be better. The Jews
were taxed also by the Apostle for such a proud cry ( Rom: 2.17.) Thou make
thy boast of God; and can a man do better then to boast of God? but they
swelled with pride, they did not rejoice with thankfulness, they contemned
others, as if God were a God to them only, and saw somewhat in them above
others, as the reason why he chose them for his people above others. This was
pride of spirit, or spiritual pride. And again to the Jew (v. 22.) Thou that
make thy boast of the Law; And is it not our duty to boast of the law or word
of God? But the Apostle saw them proud of the Law, not obedient to it; He
perceived their hearts were lifted up in their privilege of having the letter
of the Law, while both their hearts and lives were unconformed and unsubdued to
the spirituallnesse of the Law.

Tenthly, Pride is ready to rise in the heart of man from that divine light and
those extraordinary Revelations which he receives from God; and it is hard to
keep the heart under when God discovers very much of himself to man. This was
Paul's case (2 Cor: 12.7.) Lest I should be lifted up above measure through the
abundance of revelations, there was given me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me. Even Paul in that case needed a thorn in his
flesh to let out or prevent the Impostumation of his spirit. Some conceive the
reason why the Prophet Ezekiel is so often called, Son of Man, was to keep him
humble, while he had many revelations from God.

Eleventhly, Some have been proud not only of divine and heavenly, but of
diabolical and hellish Revelations. We read of one Theudas boasting himself
to be some body (Acts 5.36.) This vain man pretended revelations from God,
which were indeed from the Devil; And he swelled with this conceit, boasted
himself to be some body, that is, he thought himself to be every body; as if
the perfections of all men were Centered in him, or as if all others were no
body, and he himself the only some body. The Apostle ( Acts 8.9.) speaking of
Simon, (...) idem atque (...). Hinc illud pindari, (...). Quid est Aliquis? i.
e. qui se putat esse aliquam. (...). Vmbrae somnium homo Hinc illud. Est filius
alicujus. i. e. egregij viri, non e media turba aut terrae filius. Et illud.
Fac ut me velis esse aliquem. Cic: Lib 3. ad Atticum Epist: 52.
who had used sorcery and bewitched the people of Samaria, says, He gave out
that himself was some great one; he swelled with pride from his diabolical
Revelations; giving out not only (as Theudas) that he was some body, but that
he was some great one. Though indeed for a man to report himself some body, is
(as both learned Grecians and Latins noted in the Margin tell us) to report
himself a Great one. And who are greater in pride, then they who make Great
reports of themselves, or report themselves great?

How great a proneness there is in the heart of man to pride, may appear by
all these instances; by which it appears that as there is much pride abiding
in man, so by all or any of these occasions it is daily budding out, unless
God hide it from man, and nip it in the bud.

Yet here it may be questioned; Whence it comes to pass, that man is so prone
to pride? or what is the spring of it?

I answer; First, Pride springs from Inordinate self-love, (2 Timothy: 3.2.) Men
shall be lovers of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud. They that are
undue lovers of themselves, or in love with themselves, they presently grow
proud of themselves. Self-love, and selfe-flattery, are glasses in which if a
man look upon himself, he appears double to what he is, or much greater then
what he really is. Self-love is a multiplying, yea and a magnifying glass.
It Is dangerous to see our selves through our own self-love; That sight of
self affects the heart with high thoughts of self, which high thoughts the
Lord would have all men cast down, or cast away, while he gives that
admonition by his Apostle to the Romans (Rom: 12.3.) Let no man think of
himself more highly then he ought to think (that is, let him not think
highly of himself at all) but (as it follows in the same verse) Soberly, or
to sobriety. For indeed many are drunken, yea mad, or mad-drunke with high,
that is, proud thoughts of themselves. Hence that of the same Apostle ( Gal:
6.3.) If a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives
himself; he that thinks himself to be something, is he that has proud
thoughts of himself; and such a something, is a mere nothing, that is, is no
such thing as he thinks himself to be; as is clear in the case of the Church
of Laodicea (Rev: 3.16.) Hence

Secondly, Pride springs from an opinion that what we have is better then
indeed it is; the proud man thinks all his silver gold, and his brass silver.
We speak proverbially of such, All their geese are swans; they always
over-rate their own commodities.

Thirdly, Pride springs from this false opinion, that what we have, we have it
from our selves, or that it is of our own getting. The Apostles
Pride-confounding question, is, (1 Cor: 4.7.) What have thou that thou have not
received? As if he had said, the true reason why men boast, or the ground of
all their proud boasting is this, they think not themselves beholding to any
for what they have; all is of themselves, or by a selfe-improvement; they have
somewhat (they imagine) which they have not received.

Fourthly, The proud man thinks what he has, he alone has it; at least, that
he has it in a greater measure then any other. He is the Cedar, others are but
shrubs. He is the Giant, others are but dwarfes. Only the humble attain that
rule ( Rom: 12.10.) In honor preferring one another: as also that ( Phil:
2.3.) In lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better then himself.

Fifthly, Pride rises from this thought, that what we have, we shall always
have. Holy David began to be blown up with pride, as soon as ever he said in
his prosperity, I shall never be moved. Babylon glorified her self, having
said in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow,
(Revel: 18.7.)

Secondly, In that God is here said to hide pride from man;

Observe.

Pride is a very vile and most odious sin. If God hide it from man's eyes, then
surely God himself is of purer eyes then to behold it, and be pleased. ( Psalm:
138.6.) The Lord knows the proud afar off; He that meets a spectacle or
person which he cannot endure to look upon, avoydes it, or turns from it while
he is yet afar off; whereas if the object be delightful, he draws near, and
comes as close as he can; when therefore it is said, the Lord knows a proud
man afar off, it shows his disdain of him, He will scarce touch him with a
pair of tongs, (as we say) he cannot abide to come near him. He knows well
enough how vile he is even at the greatest distance. Pride is the first of
those seven things which are an abomination to the Lord, (Prove: 6.17.) And how
abominable a thing pride is, may appear further by these six Considerations.

First, The folly and Irrationallity of pride, renders it odious to God;
nothing is more odious to a wise man then folly, how odious then is pride to
the most wise God! When Paul did any thing which had but a show of pride in it,
though he did it only upon Constraint, yet he calls himself fool for doing it
(2 Cor: 12.11.) I am become a fool in glorying, ye have compelled me. Does not
this intimate, that in Paul's opinion, all proud selfe-gloriers and boasters are
fools, that is, such as act below common sense or reason. In the Hebrew
language, the same word that signifies boasting and pride, signifies folly and
foolishness. The empty vessel yields the greatest sound; and they that make
so great a noise of themselves, are usually nothing else but a Great noise
themselves, at least they unavoydably raise suspicion of themselves, that they
are but empty vessels, or shallow rivers. This was Solomon's conclusion ( Pro:
25.27.) For men to search their own glory is no glory; that is, a man obscures
himself by selfe-glorying. How foolish, how irrational a thing is it for any
man to glory proudly, when as by doing so he obscures that which is the
chiefest glory of man as man, his reason; and seems to put himself to the
question, whether he be a reasonable creature yea or no.

Secondly, Pride is more abominable, because it is not only the folly of man,
but a robbery of God; nothing robs God of his honor so much as pride. It is
said of Jesus Christ ( Phil: 2.6.) He thought it no robbery to be equal with
God; He did not wrong God in making himself his equal, himself being God.
But if men will match themselves with God, or are lifted up in their spirits,
(as proud men are beyond the line of man) this is a robbery of God. Whatsoever
we take to our selves more then is due, we take from God, yea we steal from
God. They who forget God the author and fountain of all they have, and take
glory to themselves, commit the worst kind of robbery, and are the most
dangerous Thieves. ( Isa: 42.8.) My glory will I not give to another; therefore
if any take glory to themselves (as (I say again) all proud men do) it is
stealing, and it is not only (as I may say) picking of his pocket, but the
breaking open of his Treasury, of his Cabinet, to carry away the chief Jewel of
his Crown, so is his glory (Rom: 11.36.) All is from him, therefore all must
be to him; all is from the father of light, therefore what light, what gifts,
what strength soever we have, it must return to him in praises, and in the
glorifying of his name; we may not deck or adorn our own name with it, nor put
our name upon it? How much soever we have we have received, it is from the
Lord; therefore it is extremely sinful and sacrilegious to take or keep it to
our selves. And as whatsoever good we have we have it of God, so whatsoever
good we have done, we have had light and strength from God to do it; natural
yea spiritual strength, not only the first power of acting, but all subsequent
actings of that power are from God; therefore to have secret liftings up of
spirit, in our own actings, is to rob God ( Psalm: 51.15.) Open thou my lips,
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise, said David; As if he had said, Lord
if thou will open my lips, and help me to speak as I ought, I will not show
forth my own praise, nor boast of what I have either spoken or done, but I
will show forth thy praise; because the opening of the lips is from thee.

Thirdly, It is an abomination to be proud; for whatsoever any man has done,
or how good soever any man is, he is no better then he should be, and has done
no more then was his duty to do; he has done but his duty to God, and his
duty to man, when he has done his best, he has done no more; every man is
bound to do the good that he does, how much soever it be that he does;
therefore it is both an ignoble and an abominable thing for any man to boast of
what he has done.

Fourthly, Is it abominable to boast of what we have done, seeing how much
soever we have done, it will appear upon a right and due account, that we have
done less then we ought, and are much short of our duty, ( Luke 17.10.) When
ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants, and have done but that which was our duty to do. We can
do nothing but what is our duty, but all we do is not the one half of our
whole duty, and shall we glory as if we had obliged God by doing more then all!

Fifthly, It is an odious thing for any man to be proud of what he has done,
for God might have done it by another if he pleased. No man is necessary to
God, as if his work could not be done unless such a one do it. He has
choice of instruments, and is able to fit those for his business who are most
unfit of themselves. It is matter of thankfulness that God will call and use
us to do him any service, and enable us to do it; God could have put his
talent into another man's hand; the riches, the power, the wisdom, the
learning, the parts which thou actest by, he could have put it into other
hands; he can make the dumb to speak, as well as the greatest speaker; He can
make an Idiot, a Dunce, knowing and learned, as well as the most knowing among
the learned. Therefore the learned, the eloquent, have no reason to be proud,
but much to be thankful; He can make the weakest to do as much as the
strongest; therefore the strongest have no reason to be proud, but much to be
thankful; He can raise Children to Abraham out of the stones of the street;
therefore the Jews must not be proud, or think that God is beholding to them
for being his people; He can ordain strength and his own praise out of the
mouths of babes and sucklings (Psalm: 8.2. Math: 21, 16.) therefore the wise
and prudent have no reason to be proud, but much to be thankful. O remember,
It is of Gods vouchsafement not of our desert, that we are admitted to his
service.

Lastly, Pride must needs be an odious thing, and that which God greatly
abhorr's, because it quite crosses the design of God in the Gospel; which is
to keep the creature humble and low, that he himself alone may be exalted; He
will not bear it that any flesh should glory in his presence; He that
glories, let him glory in the Lord (1 Cor: 1.29, 31.) God will have his end
upon all flesh, and therefore he will dreadfully glorify himself upon those,
who proudly glory in themselves.

Further, The word by which man is expressed, from whom God hides pride
signifying (as was showed) a strong mighty man, the most accomplished and best
furnished man.

Observe, Thirdly.

Great men, wise men, rich men, are very subject to and often carried away by
pride. God therefore hides pride from them, because they lie so open to the
assaults of pride; our rising is oftentimes an occasion of our falling. And
that which God gives man for his good, proves (by reason of this corruption
mostly) his snare. One of the Ancients speaking of Pride, says it is the
greatest sin for four reasons.

First, In the antiquity of it, because it was the first sin, the Devill's sin,
before man sinned; that sin which he first dropped into man to make him fall, was
the sin by which himself fell; he would be higher, and more then he was, and
he provoked man to be so too. It Is disputed what was the original of original
sin, and the doubt lies between two, whether unbelief or pride had the
precedence in man's fall, (a question much like that, whether faith or
repentance has the precedence in his rising) I shall only state it thus; that
which appeared first was unbelief; the woman put a peradventure upon the
threatening of God in case of eating the forbidden fruit. But certainly pride
was Contemporary with unbelief; man would needs lift up himself beyond the
state he had, and so fell from and lost that estate.

Secondly, Says he, Pride is productive of many other sins, it is a fountain
sin, a root sin, it nourishes, nurseth, and brings up many other sins; no
man knows what sin may be next when pride is first.

Thirdly, The greatness of the sin of pride may be argued from the
over-spreading of it; pride has infected many mortally; and who can say his
heart is free from this plague, though possibly it be not the plague (or
special master sin) of his heart? Pride is an Epidemicall disease, all labor
under this sickness, and this sickness has got the mastery over many.

His fourth reason is that of the text and point; Pride is a great wickedness,
because usually it infects great men. They that are great in power, great in
gifts, great in learning, great in any thing, are sure to be assaulted if not
blemished and blasted with this sin, insomuch that it had been better for many
to have been fools, then learned, low then high, mean then great, poor then
rich in this world. There is a temptation in power, in greatness, in riches, in
knowledge, in gifts, in the best things, to make the mind swell, and the man
that is stored with them proud. Pride is (as I may say) of a very high
extraction, it was conceived in and borne by the now Apostate Angels, whose
place, first estate (or principality, as we put in the Margin of the Epistle of
Jude v. 6.) was aloft in heaven. Angels were the nearest servants and
attendants upon God himself, who calls heaven the habitation of his
holiness, and of his glory; And surely the habitation which the Apostle Jude
in the same verse says the Angels left, (and he calls it their own, that is,
that which was allotted and allowed them by God as their portion, this
habitation, I say,) must needs be a very high and excellent one, as themselves
by nature were in the highest classis or form of creatures. Now as pride began
from and had its birth in these high and noble spirits (which gave one occasion
(though it be as hellish a lust as any in hell) to call it Heavenly by Nation)
so the higher men are (who at highest are but dust) the more does pride haunt
them, and insinuate it self to get a dwelling of seat in them, Quia natione
coelestis sublim^um animos inhabitat. Hugo.
as the most proper and congeniall subjects which it can find here on earth it
self, with those of whom it first took possession and whom it made its first
habitation, being for ever cast down from heaven. Pride having once dwell in
those who were so high, loves still to dwell or take up its lodging (at least)
in those, who upon any reference whether to natural, civil, or spiritual
things, are called and reputed Highest.

Observe; Fourthly.

God by various means, even by all sorts of means, gives check to the pride
of man, he speaks once, yea twice to man in a dream, in a vision of the
night, that he may hide pride from man. Pride is a sin which God prosecutes
both night and day; if speaking by day does not mortify it, speaking in the
night by dreams shall. Nebuchadnezzar was full of pride, and God humbled him by
a dream, and brought down the haughtiness of his heart by a vision of the
night. This great Monarch of the world was so full of pride that he boasted it
out ( Dan: 4.30.) Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of
the kingdom, and by the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty?
Now while he spoke thus walking in the Palace of the kingdom of Babylon, there
fell a voice from heaven, saying, O King Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken,
The kingdom is departed from thee, etc. And they shall drive thee from among
men, And thy dwelling (who have thought thy self more then man) shall be with
the beasts of the field. The effect of this voice Nebuchadnezzar had in a
dream, as appears by Daniels interpretation of it in the former part of the
Chapter. God showed him in that dream what his condition should be, and he
executed it upon him to the full, to pull down his pride; That, he at last
might know that the most High rules the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to
whomsoever he will. Whereas then he thought that he alone ruled the world, and
could give kingdoms to whom he would. How wonderfully did God oppose the pride
of Paul's spirit, he could not favor pride, no not in that eminent Apostle,
Lest through the abundance of revelations he should he exalted above measure,
there was given him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
him, (2 Cor: 12.7.) that is, God used extraordinary means to humble him. As
here God is said to humble by visions, so there Paul being endangered to pride
by receiving visions, God found a strange way to humble him, even by the
bufferings of the messenger of Satan, who is the Prince of pride, and as (God
speaks of the Leviathan at the 42d Chapter of this book, v. 34.) a king over
all the children of pride. God does so much resist pride, that he cannot but
resist the proud (James 4, 6.) and scorn the scorners, (Pro: 3.34.) yea he
has told us of a day ( Isa: 2.11.) wherein the lofty looks of man shall be
humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down: and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day.

There are four special pride subduing Considerations.

First, They who are proud of what they have, are like to have no more, When
the Apostle had said ( James 4.6.) He resists the proud (he presently adds)
but gives more grace to the humble. As if he had said, Though the Lord has
given proud men much (for it is some gift of God, and usually a great one of
which men grow proud) yet he will now stop his hand and give them no more. The
Lord gives to them who are humble and praise him, not to those who are proud
and praise themselves.

Secondly, Not only does the Lord stop his hand from giving more to those who
are proud, but often makes an act of revocation and takes away that which he
has already given. As he who Idly puts his talent into a napkin, so he who
vainly and vain-gloriously shows it, is in danger of having it taken away from
him. It is as sinful to show our talent proudly, as to hide it negligently.
Nebuchadnezzar boasted proudly of his kingdom, and presently it was said to
him, The kingdom is departed from thee. Hezekiah boasted of his treasure (
Isa: 39.6.) and by and by the Lord told him, his treasure should be taken away,
(though not immediately from him, yet from his posterity) and carried to
Babylon. It Is so in spiritualls, when we proudly show our treasure, the
treasures of our knowledge, or other gifts and seize, the Lord many
times, in judgment, sends them into captivity, takes them from us, and strips
us naked of that clothing and adorning whereof we are proud.

Thirdly, If God does not take all away, yet what remains is withered and
blasted, it dries up and comes to little; if it be not quite removed, yet it
appears no more in its former beauty and luster. When God with rebukes
corrects man for (this) iniquity, he makes his beauty (the beauty of his
parts and gifts, yea of his graces) to consume away (as David expresses it,
Psalm: 39.11.) like a moth. O what a dryness, and so a decayedness falls upon
that soul from whom the soaking dewes and drops, the sweet influences of
heaven are restrained! And surely if they are restrained from any, they are
from proud men; No marvel then, if others see and they feel their
witherings, and even sencible declinings every day.

Fourthly, Suppose the gifts and parts of a proud man continue florid and
appear still acting in their former strength, vigor, and beauty, yet God sends
a secret curse upon them, and though he does not wither them, yet he does not
delight in them, not give them any acceptance. The best things how long soever
continued to proud men, are no longer blessings to them; yea it had been good
for them, that either they had never had them, or that they had been soon
taken away. That as one said falsely of the life of man in general, Optimum
est non nasci proximum cito mori.
but truly of wicked men; It had been best for them not to have been borne,
and their next best would be to dye quickly. So I may say in this case of proud
men; It had been best for them they never had received any eminent gifts from
God, and their next best would be to have them quickly taken away; For as
wicked men in General (if they dye unconverted) the longer they live, the
worser they live, and every day by adding new heaps of sin, heap up further
wrath against the day of wrath; So proud men in special, the longer they have
and hold their gifts, their riches, their honors, their powers, do but abuse
them the more, to the increase of their sin here, and (without repentance)
shame hereafter.

And therefore to shut up this observation, and the exposition of this verse, I
shall only give some few directions or counsels for the cure of this
soule-sickness pride, or for the pricking of a pride-swolne heart, that so the
wind, that noxious wind of ostentation, by which proud men are vainly puffed
up in their fleshly minds, may be let out and voyded.

First, Let the proud man consider what he is; Some have asked blasphemously,
What is the Almighty? as we saw at the 21th Chapter of this Book: But it may
well enough be asked, What is man that the Almighty should be mindful of him
(Psalm: 144.3, 4.) and may we not much more question again, What is man that he
should be so mindful of himself? David, a great king said to the Lord (2 Samuel:
7.18.) Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou have brought me
hitherto? Thus every man should say to himself, or put the question to his
own soul; Who am I? or what am I, that I should have a proud thought? All men
indeed differ in some things, and some differ in very many things. Men of high
degree, and men of low degree differ, men of knowledge and ignorance differ,
learned and unlearned men differ. And it is not only, as I may say, a piece of
heraldry, but a piece of divinity to keep up the differences of men. Yet what
is any man, whether high or low, knowing or ignorant, learned or urlearned,
that he should be proud? they all agree in this, they are all dust and ashes,
they are all but as a shadow, or a vapor, they are all as grass, or as a
flower of the field, and at their best estate (in the very hight of their
excellency) they are altogether vanity. How much soever men differ in other
things, yet in this they all agree, or are all alike in this, they are all
vanity. Then what is man that he should be proud? shall dust and ashes, shall a
passing shadow, or a disappearing vapor, shall withering grass, or fading
flowers, shall vanity it self be proud? The best of men at their best, are the
worst of all these, why then should any man be proud? Yea I may put the
question further, How can any man be proud, who knows what man is? and
acknowledges himself to be but a man. I will add yet further in this
questioning way, How can any man be proud who knows himself to be (which is
a more humbling consideration, then any of or then all the former) a sinful
man! We ought always to be humbled for sin, and shall we who are at all times
sinning, be proud at any time?

Secondly, To cure pride of spirit, Consider what ever man is (as to this
world) he cannot be long what he is. He that is high in the world, cannot be
long in his worldly heights. He that is rich in the world, cannot be long enjoy
his worldly riches; yea knowledge vanishes; all such kind of knowledge,
learning and skill as men now have, is a mere vanishing thing; man, in his
highest perfections, is very mutable, and the higher he is, the more mutable he
is; what has he then to be proud of? We have some changes every day, and when
a few days are past, we shall come to our great change; our change by death is
but a few days off, for the utmost of our days are but few. As man is not to
be accounted of by others, so not by himself, because his breath is in his
nostrills, and he may quickly perish ( Isa: 2.22.) Shall perishing things be
proud things? Shall they be lifted up with what they have, who (as to this
world) have so little being, that they can scarcely be said to be. By this
argument all men are called off from trusting those that are highest in this
world ( Psalm: 146.3.) Their breath goes forth. And we have the same argument,
not to be high in our own thoughts, because our breath goes forth, and there
is an end of us.

Thirdly, Consider all those things which are as fuel and occasions of pride
in man, even for those man must shortly give an account. And surely he who
remembers that whatsoever he has, be it riches, strength, honor, parts,
knowledge, or learning, he must come to a reckoning for it, that man will not
over-reckon himself so much for it, as to be proud of it. The Apostle
concludes, So then every man must give an account of himself to God, (Rom:
14.12.) That is, of all his receipts, and of all his expenses, what has been
bestowed upon him, and how he has improved what has been bestowed. He must
give an account of himself in his natural capacity as a man; and he must give
account of himself in his civil capacity, as a rich or great man; and he must
give account of himself in his spiritual capacity, as he has enjoyed means
to make him gracious, or to grow in grace. He must give an account of himself
about all the good things he has received, what good he has done with them,
either to himself or others. He that is serious upon such a meditation as
this, shall find two effects of it; First, it will keep him very busy, and
free him from Idleness; Secondly, it will keep him very humble and free him
from pride. Who can glory vainly in his Stewardship (for all we have is put
into our hands as Stewards, who, I say, can glory vainly in his Stewardship)
that always hears this voice sounding in his ears, Come give an account of
thy stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. O how ill an account
will they make when they are asked, what they have done with their riches? who
must answer, We have been proud of them; who being asked, what have you done
with your honor, must answer, we have been proud of it; who being asked, what
have you done with your knowledge? must answer, we have been proud of it. These
will be sad answers in the day of account, yet proud men (whatsoever they have
done with their receipts) must make this answer, what other answer soever they
make.

Fourthly, Consider that the more any one has received (and it is the degree
upon which pride rises the more, I say the more any one has received) in any
kind whatsoever, the stricter will his account be; for the account will be
proportionable to what the receipt is. ( Luke 12.48.) To whom soever much is
given, of him shall be much required, and to whom men have committed much, of
him they will ask the more; where much is sown, there God looks to reap much.
He looks not only for improving, but for suitable, for proportionable
improvement. If he that had received five talents ( Math: 25.) had brought only
two talents more, and so made his five seven, this had not been proportionable;
or if he that had received two, had made them three, this had not been
proportionable; but he that received five, brought ten; and he that received
two, brought four; This account was proportionable to the receipt; and
therefore to these their Lord said, Well done good and faithful servants. God
looks for doubling, (as I may say) that we should make his five ten, his two
four. Therefore why should any man be proud of what he has received, seeing
the more he has received, the more great and stricter will his account be.

Fifthly, That pride may be cured and hid from your eyes, I advise, That in the
midst of your fullness, you would think of your emptiness, and in the midst of
your perfections, of your deficiencies; think how much, and in how many things
you are wanting, when any thought of pride arises concerning what you enjoy,
or wherein you abound. He that thinks how much he is wanting, will not be proud
how much soever be abounds; and indeed our wantings being a great deal more
then our aboundings, and our imperfections then our perfections, should be to
us greater matter of humbling, then our abounding or perfections can be an
occasion of pride. To clear this further, Consider your deficiencies two
ways; First, in your selves; consider how low you are in knowledge, how low in
grace, how low in duty; remember that there is a great deal of darkness in the
best of your light, a great deal of water in the best of your wine, and a
great deal of dross in the purest of your silver; remember these weaknesses in
your selves, and then say as blessed Paul (Phil: 5.22.) I count not that I have
already attained; that is, that I have attained perfection, I am very much
behind, very much below my duty, I am below what I might be and have attained
to, both in the light of knowledge, and in the strength of grace. I am below
what I might be attained to, both as to zeal for, and as to faith in God. O
how many are our deficiencies when we have profited most! Secondly, Consider
your deficiencies in reference to others; The Apostle says (2 Cor: 10.12.)
They who compare themselves with themselves are not wise. The reason why many
think themselves over-wise, is, because they do not (as they ought) compare
themselves with others, or if they compare themselves with others, they compare
themselves only with those that are below, not with those who are above
themselves. They who compare themselves with themselves, or with those only who
are below themselves, are not wise, though they think themselves very wise. If
we would compare our selves with other men, who are above us, it would mightily
keep down the pride of our spirits; for who is there but might see more in
some, yea in many others then in himself? Now, as it is an excellent means to
keep the soul from murmuring and discontent, to consider that many others are
below us; so it is an excellent means to keep us from pride, to consider that
many others are above us; so much above us, that our knowledge is but ignorance
to their knowledge, our strength weakness, our faith unbelief, our patience
unquitenesse of spirit, our very fruitfullnesse barrenness compared with
theirs; or to speak allusively, that our fat kine are but lean to the fat ones
of others, and our full ears but withered looked upon with their full ears.
And as it is a good means to keep the soul humble or to cure it of pride, to
compare our selves with men who are much above us, so especially, if we would
but remember how much God is above us in comparison of whom all our fullness is
indeed emptiness, our strength weakness, our riches poverty, and our light
darkness. And therefore when Job (Chap: 42.) began to compare himself with
God, and to set God before him, then he was in the dust presently; though he
spoke over-valuingly of himself sometime, yet when once he came to set
himself before God, then says he, I have spoken once, but I will speak no
more; I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. And when the Prophet
Isaiah saw the Lord in his Glory, and compared himself with him, he cried out,
I am undone, I am a man of poluted lips; all his graces, and all his gifts
vanished into nothing, when he considered the Lord before whom he stood. Thus
we may keep down pride by considering our deficiencies, and comparing our
selves with others who are above us, especially by comparing our selves with
God, to whom we are not so much as a drop of the bucket to the whole Ocean, nor
the dust of the balance to the body of the whole earth.

Sixthly, For the hideing and keeping down of pride, often reflect upon your
own sinfulness; our defects in good may keep our hearts low, but our
abundance of sinful evils may keep them much lower. While we consider sin in
a twofold notion, how should it humble us? First, as dwelling or abiding in
us; Secondly, as acted and brought forth by us in either of these ways; look
on sin, and the heart must needs come down; thus poison may expel poison, the
remembrance of sin abiding in us and acted by us, may be a stop to the further
acting, as of all other sins, so especially of this sin, pride.

Seventhly, Let us be much in the meditation of Christ humbling and abasing
himself for us. What can kill pride, if the humblings of Christ do not? O how
may we school and catechize our proud souls with the remembrances of Christ
in his abasements! What! an humble Christ, and a proud Christian! an humble
Master, and a proud Disciple! did Christ empty himself and make himself of no
reputation, and shall we who are but emptiness be lifted up with a reputation
of our selves, or with the reputation which others have of us; did he abase
himself to the form of a servant, and shall we lift up our selves, as if we
reigned as Kings! he humbled himself and became obedient to death, even the
death of the Cross; and what have we to glory in but the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ ( Gal: 6.14.) if we have any thing to be proud of, it is the Cross
of Christ, God forbid (says Paul) that I should glory (or rejoice and triumph)
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby I am crucified to the
world, and the world to me. Think often and much of the humblings of Christ,
and then you will think of your selves as mere nothings. This is the most
effectual means, through the Spirit, to bring down the swellings of our
hearts, and to hide pride from man. Thus much of the second design of Christ
in speaking to man in dreams and visions of the night; the third follows.

Verse. 18. He keeps back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing
by the sword.
This verse holds out another gracious intendment of God, in revealing himself
to man by dreams and visions of the night. He does it thereby to give man
warning and wisdom to prevent and escape that destruction which is ready to
fall upon him.

He keeps back his soul from the pit. Some refer this He to man himself,
that is, when God hides pride from man, then man keeps his soul from the
pit, that is, thereby man is both admonished and instructed how to keep his
soul from the pit. They who avoyde the mountains and precipices of pride, are
most assured of escaping a downe-fall into perdition. Solomon tells us ( Prove:
16.18.) Pride goes before destruction, and a high mind before a fall; such a
fall as Elihu here speaks of, falling into the pit; therefore turning from
pride is the escaping of the pit.

But rather (as most Interpreters) the relative (He) referrs to God himself,
who both begins and perfects this great work of Grace; As he speaks with a
purpose to withdraw man from his purpose, etc. so he having effectually
withdrawn him from it, and hid pride from him, he thereby humbles him in the
dust of repentance, and so keeps back his soul from the pit.

The word rendered, keeps back, notes a threefold keeping back; First, by
force, as a man holds another from falling into a pit, or running into danger;
he holds him whether he will or no. Secondly, there is a holding or keeping
back by persuasion or entreaties, by seasonable advice and counsel; so Abigail
kept David from shedding blood (1 Samuel: 25.) Thirdly, there is a holding or
keeping back by authority, when a Command or an injunction forbids a man from
going on, and so stops his proceeding. Thus we see there is a keeping back,
(...) ita prohibere significat ut cum do initio dicitur prohibetur, no quid
omnino a principio fiat: quod proprie inhibere dicitur: hic autem non ad
initium refertur, sed ad jam caeptum, quasi jam esset homo in via ad exitium
nisi deus eum monuisset. Coc:
either by outward force, or by counsel, or by command. And there is a keeping
back according to any of these three notions, two ways. First, such a keeping
back, as hinders the very attempt, such a keeping back, as stops the first
motions, or step into an undertaking. Secondly, there is a keeping back when a
man is deeply engaged in an undertaking, when he is gone on and is near the
journeys end of his own purpose. Thus David was kept back from destroying
Nabal when he was far advanced in that enterprise; and Abimeleck was kept back
from taking Sarah Abraham's wife when the matter had made a very great progress
in his spirit. Both these ways we may understand it here, though chieflly, I
conceive, in the latter. Sometimes God keeps man, either by his power, or by
persuasions and commands sent to him, from setting so much as one foot forward
in any sinful way leading to the pit; yet often he suffers him to go on a
great way, and when he is advanced far toward, yea is near, very near to the
pits brink, even ready to drop into it, then, then the Lord graciously keeps
his soul from falling into it. This word is used ^in the negative twice to set
forth the high commendation of Abraham (Genesis 22.12.16.) When God had commanded
Abraham to offer his Son, and he was so ready to do it, that presently God
tells him, Now I know thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld (or kept
back) thy son, thine only son from me. Abraham might have had many reasonings
within himself to keep back and withhold his Son from being a Sacrifice, but,
says the Lord, thou have not withheld or kept him back; There the word is used
in the negative, as also upon the same occasion at the 16 verse of the same
Chapter. And so by Job (Chap. 7.11.) Therefore I will not refrain (or keep
back) my mouth. It is as hard a matter to keep back, or hold the mouth in, as
it is to keep back a headstrong horse with a bridle. Therefore the Holy Ghost
uses that Metaphor ( Psalm. 39.1.) But says Job, I will not refrain my mouth,
I will not keep it back, let it take its course, I will speak in the
bitterness of my spirit. The word imports powerful acting, take it either in
the negative or affirmative. When the tongue is kept back, it is done by a
mighty power of grace, and O how great as well as gracious is that power, which
the Lord puts forth to keep back a poor soul that is going, going apace too,
from falling into the pit. He keeps back His soul from the pit.

But does the soul fall into the pit? I answer, first, The soul is often in
Scripture (by a Synecdoche) put for the whole man; He keeps back his soul,
that is, he keeps him from the pit; secondly, possibly it is said, he keeps
his soul from the pit, to teach us that man by running on in sin, ruins his
best part, it is not only his body, and his skin that he destroys by sin, but
his very soul. It Is a mercy that God tells us aforehand the worst of that
danger, and the greatness of the hazard, or how great a matter we venture upon
evil ways and works. He keeps back his soul from the pit.

What pit? The word is rendered variously. First thus, (...) foveat, corruption,
mors.
he keeps back his soul from corruption. Eruens animam ejus a corruptione. Vulg.
The word is used for corrupting by sin ( Genesis 6.12.) And God locked-upon the
earth, and behold it was corrupt: for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the
earth; that is, all men were grown wicked and stark naught. In the very next
verse ( verse. 13.) The same word is used to denote corrupting by punishment due
to sin; Behold I will destroy (or corrupt) them with the earth; that is, I will
destroy the face of the earth, or deface the beauty of the earth, and I will
also destroy all men from off the face of the earth. (...). Sept. Prohibebit
animam ejus a fovea. Targ.
Secondly, the Septuagint render, He spares his soul from death. Thirdly, the
Caldee Paraphrase (as we) He prohibits his soul from the pit; these three,
corruption, death, and the pit are of near aliance; and the same word in the
Hebrew tongue signifies corruption, the pit, and death, The pit (or grave) is
the place of corruption and the seat or house of death. We find the pit and
destruction put together ( Psalm. 55.23.) they shall go to the pit of
destruction; So then the same word may well serve to signify a pit, corruption
and death; because in the pit dead bodies or carcasses putrify and corrupt.
Yet David prophesying of Christ speaks his assurance of escaping corruption,
Videre foveam est amplius qua^ sepeliri, nimiru^ ut is demum perfect dicatur
videre foveam, non qui ad tempus est, in fovea, sed qui ejus vim corruptricem
experitur, sive videt corruptionem in ea; videre enim est sentire sive pati
aliquid. Coc.
though not the pit or grave. ( Psalm. 16.10.) Thou will not suffer thy holy one
to see corruption, or the pit. It is this word; that is, thou will not suffer
him to corrupt in the pit of the grave; though being dead was buried and laid
in the pit, yet he did not see corruption in the pit. That is, corruption had
no power, no mastery over him; for he loosed the bonds of death (it being
impossible that he should be held by them) the third day, yea with the first of
that day, or as soon as it might be truly said that it was the third day;
Christ was buried in the latter part of the sixth day of the week, and arose
early the first day of the week, even when it did but begin to dawn toward the
first day of the week. (Math. 28.1.) And therefore seeing as naturalists
(according to Scripture evidence, Joh. 11.39.) testify corruption does not
naturally take hold of the body till the fourth day after death. The dead body
of Christ was altogether free from corruption, or Christ (as was fore-shewed by
David in the Psalm) saw no corruption.

Further, this word pit, is taken not only for death, the grave, and
corruption; but for those contrivances and plots which are made and laid for
any man's death or destruction. Thus David said of his malicious and subtle
enemies ( Ps. 7.5. Fovea denotat omnia vitae discrimina. Pin.
) Into the pit which they have dug, themselves are fallen; that is, they are
taken in their own plots; Those words of the Psalmist are an allusion to
Hunters or Fowlers who make pits to ensnare birds or beasts; we must not
imagine that there were pits literally made for David, but the pit was a plot
or a contrivance to do him mischief, and he blessed God that as himself had
escaped that mischief, so that the mischief-plotters and contrivers were taken
with it themselves. We have David speaking again under the same metaphor ( Ps.
9.15.) The Heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made. And ( Psalm. 35.7.)
Without cause they have hid for me their net in a pit, which without cause have
they dug for my soul; that is, they have laid a plot to undo and destroy
me. And if we take pit in this sense it may hold well enough with the scope of
the Text; for what is the pit, into which pride and evil purposes thrust
sinful man, but that mischief and misery which Satan is continually plotting
against him? And from this mischievous plot it is that God delivers man,
while it is said by Elihu, he keeps back His soul from the pit.

Some expound the word soul in this former part of the verse, in opposition to
life in the latter part of it, and his life from perishing by the sword. Soul
and life are sometimes taken promiscuously, or indifferently for the same
thing; yet there is a very great difference between soul and life; the life is
nothing else but the union between soul and body; but the soul is a spiritual
substance distinct from the body while remaining in it, and subsisting it self
alone when separate from it. That bond or knot which ties soul and body
together, is, properly, that which Elihu speaks of in the next words.

And his life As God keeps back his soul from everlasting destruction, so his
life from temporal destruction. Though the soul be most precioua, yet life is
very precious; skin for skin, yea all that a man has will he give for his life
(Chap. 2.5.) It Is therefore no small mercy for God to keep back a man's life
From perishing by the sword.

The sword is put sometime for war, that being the principal instrument of
war; some insist much on that sense here, as if the words contained a promise
of being kept from perishing by the sword of an open enemy. But the sword is
here rather put for any kind or for all kinds of hurtful evils; what ever
does afflict, vex, or destroy may be called the sword. Nomen gladii hoc in loco
generaliter denotare puto, quicquid pungit, percutit, torquet cruciat vel
affilgit. Bold.
The text strictly in the letter is thus rendered, and his life from passing by
or through the sword, we say, from perishing by the sword; which passing by the
sword is not to escape the sword, but to fall by the sword, Thus it is said of
that idolatrous King Ahaz (2 Kings 16.3.) He caused his sons to pass through
the fire, the meaning is not that he delivered them out of the fire, but
consumed them in the fire; for he made them pass through the fire to Molech,
which was a sacrificing of them to that abominable idol. It is also said (2 Samuel ^2.31.) when David took Rabba and destroyed the Ammonites, he made them
pass through the brick-kilne, not to save them, but to consume them. Some
conceive that this brick-kilne through which David made those captive Ammonites
to pass was the fire or furnace of Molech, that infamous Idol of the
Ammonites (with whose bloody and most cruel devotions the apostatizing Jews
or people of God, were in after times ensnared) And if so, then they might see
God turning their sin into their punishment; and declaring his fiery wrath
against them in that, by which they had declared their foolish and abominable
zeal. But that which I quote their punishment for, is only the form of its
expression; He made them pass through the brick-kilne; Transire in gladium est
idem quod incidere in manus et tela hostium, et cadere in bello. Gladius (...)
vocatur quasi missite telum. Drus.
that is, perish in it. Thus here, and his soul from passing by the sword, is
rightly translated from perishing by the sword. The word rendered sword
signifies also any missive weapon, or weapon cast with the hand, especially a
dart; so Mr. Broughton translates, and his life from going on the dart. The
general sense of this verse is plainly this;

The Lord withdraws man from his purpose, and hides pride from man, that so
he may in mercy preserve him from perishing both in body and soul, or that he
may keep him not only from the first, but from the second death, which is the
separation of the whole man from the blessed presence of God for ever. It Is a
great favor to be kept from the pit where the body corrupts, or from the sword
that wounds the flesh, but to be kept from that everlasting woe which shall
overwhelme the wicked in that bottomless pit or lake of fire and brimstone,
this is the highest favor of God to lost man. This is the pit, this the
perishing from which (says Elihu) the Lord keeps back the soul and life of
man.

First, from the emphasis of the word, he keeps back, importing, that God, as
it were by strong hand or absolute authority and command, keeps the soul of
man from the pit.

Note.

Man is very forward to run upon his own ruin, even to run upon eternal
ruin, if the Lord did not hold, stay, and stop him. Man would tumble into the
pit, at the very next step, if God did not keep him. The way of man naturally
is down to the pit, and all that he does of his own self is for his own
undoing: And as he is kept back from the pit, so (as the Apostle Peter has it,
1 Epist. 1.5.) he is kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation.

Secondly, considering the season signified in the former verse, that when man
is going upon an evil work, or walking in the pride of his heart, God is
keeping him from the pit.

Note.

While man has sinful purposes and pride in his heart, all that while he is
going on to destruction, both temporal and eternal. Every step in sin is a
step to misery, and the further any man proceeds on in sin, the further he
wanders from God; and the further he wanders from God, the nearer he comes to
misery. As the further we go from the Sun, the nearer we are to the cold, and
the further we go from the fountain, the nearer we are to drought; so they
that have to sin, have to sorrow, yea to hell. Solomon says of such, they love
death. There is no man loves death under the notion of death, there is no
beauty, no amiableness in death; but all they may be said to love death, who
love sin, and live in it. Every motion toward sin, is a hasting into the arms
and embraces of death, sinners woo and invite death and the grave, yea hell
and destruction.

Thirdly, note.

The warnings and admonitions which God gives to sinful man, whether waking or
sleeping are to keep him from perishing, to keep him from temporal, to keep
him from eternal perishing. This is the great end of preaching the Gospel, the
end also of pressing the terrors of the Law; both have this aim to keep man
from perishing. When man is pressed to holiness, and when he is represt from the
ways of sin, it is that he may not perish for ever. God has set up many
ordinances, he has employed many instruments to administer them; many
thousands go up and down preaching to the world, and crying out to the sons
of men, repent and believe, believe and repent; and why all this cry, but to
keep souls from the pit, and their life from perishing by the sword? The
Apostle Jude exhorts to save some with fear, and of others to have compassion,
that is, terrify some that you may save them, make them afraid that they may
not be damned; save them with fear, plucking them as it were out of the fire.
Sinners are running into the fire, and do not perceive it; they are tumbling
down to hell and consider it not; they must be pulled out of the fire, else
they will burn in it for ever. The great business of the Gospel is to pull
souls like firebrands out of the burning.

Fourthly, note.

They who turn from their evil purposes and the pride of their hearts, escape
wrath, the pit, and the sword. The wages of sin is death, and well are they
that escape, that miss such wages. If a sinner turn from his purpose, from
his sinful way, if his pride be subdued and he emptied of himself, then his
soul if kept from destruction, and his life from perishing by the sword.

JOB. Chap. 33. Verse. 19, 20, 21, 22. He is chastened also with pain upon his
bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain.

So that his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat.

His flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen, and his bones that were not
seen stick out.

His soul draws near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyer.


THe context of these four verses, contains a description of the second
means, which the wisdom of God is pleased often to use for the humiliation of
man, and for the discovery or revelation of his mind unto him. He speaks in a
dream, in a vision of the night, as was showed before, he speaks also by
pains and sicknesses, as is now to be considered.

Verse. 19. He is chastened also with pain.
That particle which we render also, gives the text an emphasis (He is
chastened also) For it imports, that here is a further addition or supplement
of means, whereby the Lord does awaken sinners to attend and obey his voice.
The subject of these four verses, is a sick man, or, the sickness of man. A
sorrowful subject. And the sickness of man is set forth in these four verses,
by four sad symptoms or effects.

The first is pain, grievous pain, ver: 19. He is chastened also with pain
upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain.

The second symptom of this sickness, is loss of appetite, and his nauceating
all manner of food ( v. 20.) So that his life abhors bread, and his soul
dainty meat.

The third symptom of his sickness is a general languishment or consumption
all his body over ( v. 21.) His flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen,
and his bones that were not seen stick out.

The fourth and last symptom of this grievous sickness is fainting, swooning,
or a readiness to expire and give up the ghost ( v. 22.) His soul draws near
to the grave, and his life to the destroyer; That is, he is sick, and even sick
to death. All these are special symptoms of a sick man, or of the sickness of
man. I begin with the first.

Verse. 19. He is chastened also with pain upon his bed. The word which we
render to chasten, has a twofold signification in Scripture.

(...) a reguit reprehendit, corripuit verbis sive factis.
First, to reprove or convince both by authority and reason ( Lev: 19.17.) Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke him; or,
reproving thou shall reprove him; that is, Thou shall surely reprove him. And
in that famous Prophecy concerning Christ ( Isa: 11.4.) He shall reprove with
equity; we put in the margin, He shall argue with equity, or convince by such
reasons and arguments as shall carry the greatest equity in them. Thus when
Christ had finished his Sermon on the mount, it is said ( Math: 7.28, 29.) The
people (his Auditors) were astonished at his doctrine, for he taught them as
one having authority, and not as the Scribes. This Sermon carrying so great a
reproof of the Scribes and Pharisees, both as to their life and doctrine
throughout, may well be expounded as a fullfilling of that ancient prophecy; It
being confessed in another place of the Gospel, even by the Officers that were
sent to attach him ( John 7.46.) Never man spoke like this man. The words of
Christ had so much evidence, so much equity in them, that they who came to take
and catch him, were taken and caught, if not to conversion, yet to such a
conviction, by what he spoke, that they could not (though they highly
displeased their Masters in saying so) but say, Never man spoke like this man;
As if they had said, Surely, the man that speaks thus is more then a man.

Secondly, The word often signifies to correct, which is also to instruct;
correction is for instruction. Chastning is the most real reproving. And so we
render it, He is chastened. Man is instructed not only by speech and counsel,
but by stripes and corrections. Thus David prayed ( Psalm: 6.1.) O Lord, rebuke
me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. The first
word which we render rebuke, is that in the text; As if he had said, Lord do
not rebuke me by angry afflictions, let me not find thee greatly displeased,
and my self sorely chastned at once. He deprecates the same again, and how
grievous the effects of such dispensations are, he shows ( Psalm: 38.1.)
Rebuke me not in thy wrath. (Psalm: 39.11.) When thou with rebukes do correct
man for iniquity; (He means it not only of word-rebukes, but of hand-rebukes
also, when thou with such doubled rebukes do chasten man for iniquity) What
then? The effects of it follow, even the staining of the glory of all flesh;
Thou make his beauty to consume away like a moth. And so some interpret that
( Psalm: 105.15.) He reproved Kings for their sakes? (speaking of his own
people) the Lord did not only speak to those Kings, but made them feel his
hand, for his peoples sake. Abimelech felt his hand for Abraham's sake. And so
did Pharaoh that hard-hearted King in a whole decade of plagues for Isreal's
sake, whom he had oppressed and would not let go. We render the word in this
second sense, for a rebuke by blows or by correction, which yet has a
language in it, and speaks with a loud voice to man. He is chastened with pain
upon his bed.

Pain is both the concomitant, and effect of sickness. The word notes, First,
the pain of the body, caused either by the violence of inward distempers,
(...) doluit corpore vel animo.
or from the outward stroke of a wound ( Gen: 34.) When the sons of Jacob had
prevailed with the Shechemites to receive Circumcision, It came to pass on the
third day, when they were sore, or pained with the wound of it, Simeon and Levi
came upon them (Gen: 34.25.) Secondly, the word signifies as bodyly pain
caused any way, so pain of the mind, which is grief or sorrow ( Psalm: 69.29.)
I am poor and sorrowful. Sorrow is always the effect of pain, either
outward or inward, either of the flesh or spirit; yet the wounds of the spirit
cause the greatest pain; for of that Solomon says, ( Pro: 18.14.) Who can
bear it? The same Solomon (Pro: 14.13.) speaking of a wicked man in his
highest jollity, says, In laughter the heart is sorrowful. His conscience
aketh (if he have an awakened conscience) even while he laugheth; and surely
while the heart is sorrowful and pained, laughter yields little pleasure. We
may take pain in this text in both senses, but specially in the former. The
sick man is often pained in mind, but always in his body. He is chastened with
pain Upon his bed.

There he used to have rest, but being sick his bed becoms restless to him. To
be upon the Bed, is a periphrasis of sickness; That of Christ ( Luke 17.34.)
There shall be two in one bed, the one shall be taken, and the other left, as
it may be meant of any two Bedfellowes (especially of husband and wife) in
their health, so some take it principally of two in a sick bed; Grace takes
hold of one and not of another upon a sick bed. I insist not upon that sense,
though it be a probable and a profitable one. But surely to say, A man is
chastened with pain upon his bed, implies, the man to be in extraordinary
pain; as to say, such a man keeps his bed, implies, he has more then an
ordinary sickness, or that he is very sick. We have three expressions in our
language gradually setting forth the sickness of a person; First, we say, he
keeps his house. He that is not well does not go abroad, sickness houseth
him. Secondly, we say, he keeps his chamber; that is a further degree, when
sickness has brought a man up stairs, and shut him in his chamber, he is
sick indeed. Thirdly, we say, such a man keeps his bed; The meaning of which
every one understands to be, that he is dangerously or extremely sick. Thus
when Elihu says, He is chastened with pain upon his bed; we may conceive him
so ill, that either he must not, or is not able to sit up. And Elihu in
speaking thus, seems to have relation to what Job had said ( Chap: 7.13.) When
I said my bed shall comfort me, and my couch shall ease my complaint; Then thou
scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions. As if he had said,
O Job, thou indeed have had recourse heretofore, to thy bed for refreshing and
comfort, in silent meditations and soliloquies with God, but he terrified thee
with dreams, and spoke to thee by scaring visions, to turn thee from thy
purpose. And not only so, but finding thee deaf to those admonitions, or not
regarding them, yea still continuing thy unquiet murmurings, he has now even
made thee bedrid, or unable to rise from thy bed. Though Elihu spoke here in
the third person, yet in all his speech he intended and poynted at, yea set
forth and poynted out Jobs condition. He is chastened with pains upon his bed,
And the multitude of his bones with strong pain.

A man may have pain, yea many pains, yet no pain in his bones. Bones are to
the body as beams and rafters, as posts and pillars are to a house. And when
pain comes to the bones, when it shakes those posts and pillars, it must needs
be a very strong pain. Satan said to God concerning Job, while he sought new
trials for him, in the second Chapter of this Book ( verse. 5.) Touch his bone
and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. And that he might be fully
tried, the Lord suffered Satan to afflict him to the bone, nor did Satan leave
a bone unafflicted; what Elihu spoke here of man in General, was true of him,
The multitude of his bones were chastned with strong pain. To have any one
bone in pain is an affliction, much more to have many bones pained and aching
at once. But when the multitude of a man's bones, that is, all his bones are
pained together, that is grievous. Multitude ossium dicitur pro omnibus ossibus
quam mult^ sunt. Coc:
And such a man is the while as it were upon a rack. That by the multitude of
bones here spoken of, we are to understand, not only many, or a great many of
his bones, but all his bones, may appear from ( Job 4.14.) where Eliphaz
describing those terrible visions with which God sometime visited him, says, A
spirit passed before my face, the hair of my flesh stood up, etc. which made
all my bones to shake. We put in the margin, The multitude of my bones. The
multitude of his bones are all his bones, he has not so much as one bone free.
The whole systeme of his bones is as it were confounded and disjoynted. The
multitude of his bones is chastned with strong pain.

The word pain, is not expressed in the latter part of the verse; the Hebrew
is, The multitude of his bones with strong pain. Mr Broughton renders thus,
And all his bones with a sore one. The word which we translate strong,
signifies two things; First, as we render, strength or might (Psalm: 74.15.)
Thou driedst up mighty rivers; God dried up the river Jordan for his people to
pass through, yea and the red Sea. Secondly, the word signifies perpetual
lasting or continual. So some render that place in the Psalms, not strong or
mighty rivers, but he dried up everlasting or perpetual rivers, such as had
always run with a full stream, and were not like those deceitful brooks
(spoken of in the 6th Chap: of this book ( v. 15th) to which Job compared his
Brethren) which in winter overflow the banks, but in summer, what time they
wax warm, they vanish when it is hot, and are consumed out of their place.
Now, in this place, I conceive, we may take the word in either sense, either
for strong and great or chronicall, and lasting pain. The man is so sick that
he has no good hours, no comfortable intermissions, his pain continues. And
because the word pain is not in the text, therefore it has caused several
rendrings of these words, yet all meeting in the same sense.

First, Some join the word strong to bone, or make it an epethite of the man's
bones. Though the multitude of his bones be strong, that is, though he were
once a strong man, sound and perfect all over, or as we say, sound wind and
limb, not crazy, not having the least flaw in him, yet he is chastened all
over with pain.

In multitudine ossium ejus est fortis. i. e. acris acerbus dolor.
Secondly, Others thus, in the multitude of his bones, or, in all his bones
there is a strong one, that is, a strong pain or grief seizes and possesses
all his bones.

Thirdly, Thus, The contention of his bones is strong; the word which
signifies a multitude, being alike in the letters with another which
signifies contention or strife, has given occasion for this reading; that of
David is near the same, There is no rest in my bones (Psalm: 38.3. Legendo
vocem (...) et lis ossium ejus vehemens est. i. e. dolor ossium ejus per quem
cum ipso velut litigat. Pisc. Sunt ex Hebraeis qui (...) multitudo, quia per
scribatur (...) etsi legatur per exponunt pro contentione, quasi deus
cumossibus ejus contendat. Merc:
) As if Elihu had said, the pain and anguish by which God does contend with
all his bones is strong, or God has a strong controversy with his bones upon
his sick bed.

Lastly, The vulgar translates, He makes all his bones to wither, decay, and
rott. When there is a consumption or a withering among the bones, how
intolerable is the pain! Broken bones cause the acutest pains, but decaying
bones the most constant pain. Withering bones are opposed to fatned bones in
that promise made to him that fasts spiritually, not carnally only in
abstaining from flesh ( Isa. 58.11.) The Lord will make fat thy bones; As if he
had said, Do not fear that thou shall pine by spiritual fasting, I will make
fat thy bones. Which is true even in regard of that which is natural, the Lord
renews bodily strength to those who humble themselves soul and body. The
body shall not suffer in this service of the Lord, if the soul be truly
afflicted in it. Yet when he says, he will make fat thy bones, it respects
especially their spiritual strength, that thrives best in a day of holy
abstinence and fasting. Here, when it is said, their bones shall wither through
pain, it notes the declining of the whole body, because as the bones are
strong in themselves, so they are the strength and support of the whole outward
man. When God smites the bones, then he shakes the pillars and rafters of our
earthly house, and threatens the downfall of it. He is chastened with pain
upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain.

Taking these words in connection with the former, where Elihu spoke of those
dreams and visions by which God speaks to man, and supposing (as there he
does) that because the man is not well awakened by those dreams and visions
from his security, therefore the Lord sends pain and sickness upon him, as a
second means to humble him, and make him understand himself.

Observe.

They that will not be instructed by dreams, that is, by gentler means, shall
be instructed by pains. They who will not take instruction, even in their
sleep, shall be taught by that, which will keep them awake. Several Scriptures
tell us of the Lords proceeding with man from words to blows. And if the Lord
proceeds from dreams (which are warnings in sleep) to blows, if when he has
spoken to us in a dream, we hearken not, he will chasten us with pain, even
the multitude of our bones with strong pain. And then much more will he
proceed from words to blows with them that are warned to awake, if they hear
not and take warning. That Is an awakening word to those who sleep waking (
Psalm: 7.12, 13.) If he turn not he will whet his sword: He bath bent his bow
and made it ready. If men will not return upon word-admonition and reproof,
the Lord has his arrows and his sword to reprove them with. Turn ye at my
reproof, says the Lord ( Pro: 1.23.) I give you warning to turn, but if you
do not, then (as presently it follows) I will laugh at your calamity, and
mock when your fear comes. As you have seemed to mock at my counsels, so I
will mock at your calamities, that is, I will show you no pity, as you have
showed me no respect. Thus the Lord deals with proud rebellious man, who casts
off his yoke, yea sometimes he deals very severely with his own people (for
they may put him to it) if words will not serve their turn (words in sleep,
and words when awake) they may expect blows next; and be made to feel the
hand of God, because they have not understood or not obeyed his will.

Secondly, From the manner of expression, He is chastened with pain upon his
bed. The Spirit of God uses a word referring to instruction both by smiting
and speaking, to show that there is a voice in the rod.

Hence note.

The chastisements of God upon us are our documents. When God sends sickness
and grievous pains, he reproves sinners from Heaven and chides them for the
errors of their lives. The chastenings of the Lord are speakings. He speaks
by his rods beyond all the eloquence of words ( Mic. 6.9.) Hear ye the rod. The
voice of God is in his rod; that speaks so loud from Heaven in many strokes,
that the prophanest sinners on earth are sometimes forced to hear and
acknowledge it. As those Magicians were forced by the plain evidence of the
fact to say ( Ez. 8.19.) This is the finger of God; So they must say, This is
the voice of God. He speaks to us, and speaks to purpose in these afflictions:
The voice of God in affliction, exceeds all the rhetoric and persuasions of
mortall-men. The cross is a school, in which they who are dull at hearing
what God speaks to them in his word, are wonderfully quickened up by his rod.
The words of the wise (says Solomon) are goads. And surely these goads of
affliction are pricking piercing words, for the promoting and putting on of a
lazy soul in Gods work. Job had desired God to speak with him, Elihu answers,
Why do thou desire more answers or directions from God? Has not God spoken
to thee in these soars and sicknesses, in these chastisements, with pain upon
thy bed? Is God wanting to thy instruction? has he not clearly told thee his
mind and thy duty? has he not written, yea engraven his will upon thy diseased
flesh? What are the pains, the corruption, the consumption, the strange
deformity, and sad transfiguration of thy body, but as so many voices of God,
speaking and speaking aloud to thee, repent and humble thy self? Therefore
attend, hearken to and meditate upon the answers which he has impressed or
printed legibly upon thy head, face, and wrinkled forehead. Thou have his
answer his own way, therefore be satisfied, and do not stand defiring that God
would answer thee after thy way, nor complaining because he does not. And we
may reply not only to obstinate sinners, but to many of the people of God, when
they enquire what the mind of God is, or what he intends toward them. His
providence give you many items and memorandums; which if you can spell out and
read you may know his meaning. This lesson, the signification of the word
offers us as the connection of the words offered in the former.

Thirdly, learn hence.

Man is a poor crazy creature subject to all diseases and infirmities. Yea, he
is not only subject to them, but he is the subject of them. His body is as it
were a vessel of natural corruption, as his soul is a vessel of moral
corruption. Man is called not only Adam, noting the matter of which he was
made, earth, red earth; but he is called Enosh, that is, sorrowful, sighing,
groaning man, he is a pined and a pining man: He is also called Abel, vanity, a
poor vain man; which two latter Titles have befallen man since man fell from
God.

Fourthly, (which may check the gross Atheism of many)

Observe.

Pain and sickness come not by chance, nor are we to stay in nature for the
cause of their coming. They come not at all by chance, nor do they come
altogether from natural causes. Nature has somewhat to do in their coming,
but somewhat else much more, even so much more, that in respect of that,
natural considerations may be quite shut out, and the whole cause ascribed to
that. But what is that? surely, nothing else but, and nothing less then the
will of God. He is pleased to give commission to pains and sicknesses, and then
they come. Elihu would teach Job (what he owned before) that God was the sender
and orderer of all his afflictions, as of the losses he had in his estate and
children, so of the pains and sicknesses which he felt in his body. Moses tells
the children of Israel, not only that sword and captivity, but the Pestilence,
Consumptions, Fevers, and burning Agues are sent by God himself, ( Deuteronomy.
28.21, 22.) What are diseases but the Lords Messengers? When he pleases he can
trouble the temper and cause the humors of the body to corrupt. He can make
them contend with one another to the death, let Physicians do what they can to
quiet and pacify them. Yea though some skillfull Physicians have kept their
own bodies in so due a temper, and to so exact a diet, that they could not see
which way a disease could take hold of them, or have any advantage against
them, yet sickness has come upon them like an armed man, and carried them
away to the grave.

Further, When Elihu says of the sick man, the multitude of his bones are
chastened with strong pain.

Note.

No man is so strong, but the Lord is able to bring him down by pain and
sickness. He that is strong as an Oak, and has (as it were) a body of brass
and sinews of iron; yet the Lord can make him as weak as water. The Lord has
strong pains for strong men, and can quickly turn our strength into weakness.
Thus Hezekiah lamented in his sickness ( Isa. 38.13.) I reckoned till morning
that as a Lion, so will he break all my bones. God can arm diseases with the
strength of a Lion, who not only teareth the flesh, but breaks the bones with
his teeth. David says ( Psalm. 39.11.) When thou with rebukes do correct man
for iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away like a moth, surely every
man is vanity. The word there rendered beauty signifies desire, (...)
Desiderabile been sanum et been curatum corpus denotat.
thou make his desire, or that which is most desirable in him to fade away;
we well translate beauty, because beauty draws the desires of man after it,
and is so much desired, yea lusted after by man. Now, as when the Lord does but
touch the body, he can make the beauty, so also the strength of it to consume
away as a moth.

Sixthly, whereas it is said, He is chastened with pain upon his bed.

We learn.

The Lord can make those things easelesse and restless to us, which use to give
us most ease and rest. He that being up is weary, weary with walking, riding or
laboring, hops to find ease in his bed, yet then does pain deny him rest
there, and fills him (as Job complained, Chap. 7.4.) with tossings too and
fro unto the dawning of the day. The Lord can make the Stocks or a Rack easy
to us, and our beds as uneasy to us as the Stocks or a Rack usually are.

Lastly, observe.

The purpose of God in chastening man with sickness, is to teach and instruct
him, not vex and destroy him. The Lord has many designs upon man when he
afflicts him, about all which he instructs him by affliction. He designs

First, To humble and break the stoutness of man's spirit; hence sicknesses and
afflictions are called humiliations; and the same word signifies both to be
afflicted and humbled.

Secondly, To make men taste how bitter a thing sin is; This is thy wick^dness
(says the Lord of his sore Judgments brought upon his people Israel (Jer:
4.18.) Because it is bitter. Ye would not taste the evil or bitterness of sin
by instruction, therefore I will teach you by affliction.

Thirdly, To put sorrowful sinful man upon the search of his own heart, and
the finding out of the error of his ways. While men are strong and
healthful, they seldom find leisure for that work. And therefore they are
confined by sickness to their houses, to their chambers, yea to their beds,
that they may attend it, and read over the whole book of their lives ( Lam:
3.39, 40.) Wherefore does the living man complain, a man for the punishment of
his sin; Let us search and try our ways, and turn to the Lord. That Is man's
work upon his bed, and it is Gods aim in binding him to his bed, that he may
have liberty for that work.

Fourthly, Afflictions are designed by God to bring man out of love with sin,
yea to stir up a holy hatred and revenge in him against it; as upon many
other accounts, so upon this, because it rewards him so ill, and he finds
such unsavory fruits of it. A little digging will discover sin to be the root
of all those evil and bitter fruits, which we at any time are fed with in this
world. Sin is the gall in our cup, and the gravel in our bread, and we are made
to taste bitterness and find trouble, that we may both know and acknowledge it
to be so.

Fifthly, The purpose of God in afflicting us, is to set us a praying to and
seeking after him. We seldom know our need of him, till we feel it. ( Hos:
5.15.) In their affliction they will seek me early; affliction puts man upon
supplication, yet every man who is afflicted, does not presently seek God (many
in their affliction mind not God, they seek to men, not to God, a cross
without a Christ, never made any seek God) but affliction through the workings
of the Spirit of Christ, is a means to bring the soul to God; and we see the
effect of it at the beginning of the next Chapter in the same Prophet ( Hos:
6.1.) Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us,
etc.

Sixthly, God is pleased to exercise us with crosses, for the exercise of our
Graces, or to set grace aworke; Grace has most business to do when we are
taken off from all worldly business, and are laid upon our bed, our sickbed.
Some work is not done so well any where else, as there. And many graces work
best when it is worst with us; they would even stand s^^ll, and have nothing to
do, if God did not bring us into straights, or keep us for a season in them.
In a sickbed the Lord shows us, and we may find work enough for all our
graces, especially for faith and patience, and submission of spirit to his
work and will. We may do better work (and do it better) in sickness then in
health.

Seventhly, God brings many upon their fick-beds, to teach them the worth of
health, and make them thankful for it. They who are seldom sick, are as
seldom thankful for their health, and scarce reckon that for a mercy, the
want whereof, they have never felt. It Is rare that we prize what we have, till
we have it not.

Eighthly, God exercises many with sickness, with a purpose to put men upon a
holy purpose of improving their health better, and of doing more for God while
it is well with them.

Lastly, not a few are afflicted, that God may have an opportunity to do his
work, and declare his power. God himself would be hindered of much glorious
work, in restoring and recovering them to health, did he not chasten them upon
sick beds. The question was put about the blind man ( Joh. 9.3, 4.) Who did
sin, this man or his Parents that he was born blind. Jesus answered neither
has this man sinned nor his Parents, but that the works of God should be made
manifest in him. If there had not been a blind man in the world, how could the
power of God have been made manifest in giving sight to the blind? if some were
not extremely torturingly sick, how would the power of God be seen in healing
the sick, and rebuking their pain? For all these purposes, Man is chastened
with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain. We
never profit by chastenings, till we answer the purposes of God in sending
them, and unless we know what and which they are, we can never answer them. If
we answer these nine touched upon, we shall either answer all, or, to be sure,
we shall baulke or refuse none. Elihu having thus showed us the sick man in
pain, proceeds to show us what further effect his pain and sickness wrought
upon him.

Verse. 20. So that his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat.
This verse shows the second effect of sickness. The former was pain, This
is loss of appetite, or nauseousnesse.

His life. That is, his living body; We may call the sick man's body a living
body, though it be hard to say whether we should number him among the living or
the dead. We read life put for the body which lives, or whereby it lives. (
Psalm: 88.3.) My soul (says Heman) is full of troubles, and my life draws
nigh unto the grave; that is, I am ready to dye, and my body to be buried. He
does not say, he has no great stomach to, but his life abhors bread.

The word here used is of a Syriack derivation; Vox (...) Syra est, notat
nauseare facere nam (...) sordes scoriam excrementum quicquid sordicum et
immundum est vel in humano corpore vel ex eo excretu^. Drus: Merc:
nor is it found any where in Scripture but here. The nowne signifies any
thing that is filthy, excrementicious or unclean; whence the verb is rendered
to abhor, loath, or nauceate; because we abhor those things which are
filthy or unclean. His life abhors bread.

That is common food. Sometimes bread is put for all kind of diet; as David
said to Mephibosheth (2 Samuel: 9.10.) Thou shall eat bread at my table. But
because of that opposition in the text to dainties, by bread, we may here
understand only ordinary food; His life abhors bread, and his soul dainty
meat.

The Hebrew is, Meat of desire. Not only such meat, as men usually desire for
the wholesomnesse of it, but such as curious palates desire for the
pleasantness of it; such meat is here meant; Yea thirdly, such meat as the man
had a desire to before his sickness for the sutableness of it to his own
taste and appetite, he then abhors.

His soul abhors dainty meat. The turning of the stomach, and loss of
appetite, are usual symptoms of sickness; Almost all sicknesses weaken the
appetite, and some take it quite away, so that the patient not only has no
desire to, but loathes dainty meat, or meat of desire. This phrase or form
of speaking is used ( Dan: 10.3.) I (says he) ate no pleasant bread, or no
bread of desires (as we put in the margin) neither came flesh nor wine in my
mouth. It Is used again (2 Chro: 32.27.) Hezekiah made himself treasuries for
silver and gold, etc. and all manner of pleasant jewels; we put in the Margin,
for all jewels of desire. So ( Amos 5.11.) Pleasant vineyards, or vineyards of
desire. It was the manner of the Hebrews to express pleasant by desirable,
because pleasant things are much desired. His soul abhors meat of desire,
or dainty meat.

Hence note.

First, It Is a mercy to taste our meat, or to take the comfort of what we eat.
Many have meat, but cannot taste it. That which gives the best taste to our
meat, is a taste of the goodness of God in it (1 Pet: 2.1.) If ye have tasted
that the Lord is gracious. It is sweet to taste meat and the goodness of the
Lord together.

Secondly, Note.

God can quickly make those things that are most desirable to us, dainty meat,
meat of desire, loathsome to us. Some abhor meat, because they have eaten of it
long. The Jews did eat Manna and Quails till they loathed them ( Number:
11.20.) Others loath meat, because they have eaten overmuch. A third sort,
loath some meat by a natural antipathy against it. Fourthly, Others loath
wholesome meat out of a curiosity, because it is not dainty enough. Lastly,
Sickness causes a loathing of all meat, even of the most dainty and desirable
meat. And the Lord at any time can make that which was our desire, our
loathing. We have a like description of a sick man ( Ps: 107.18.) His soul
abhors all manner of meat, and draws near unto the gates of death.

Thirdly, Note.

The best of Creature Comforts are but vain comforts. What can dainty meat do
a man good, when he is sick and ready to dye? Then gold and silver, lands and
houses, which are the dainty meat of a covetous man, are loathsome to him. When
a man is sick to death, his very riches are sapless and tastless to him; wife
and children, friends and acquaintance can yield little comfort in that dark
hour, yea they often prove miserable comforters: When we have most need of
comfort, these things administer least or no comfort at all to us. Is it not
our wisdom then to get a stock of such comforts, as will hold and abide fresh
with us, when all worldly comforts either leave us, or become tastless to us?
Is it not good to get a store of that food, which how sick soever we are, our
stomachs will never loath? yea the sicker we are, our souls will the more
like, hunger after, and feed the more heartily upon. The flesh of Christ is
meat indeed (Joh: 6.55.) Feed upon him by faith, in health and in sickness, ye
will never loath him. His flesh is the true meat of desires, such meat as will
fill and fatten us, but never cloy us. A hungry craving appetite after Christ,
and sweet satisfaction in him are inseparable, and still the stronger is our
appetite, the greater is our satisfaction. And (which is yet a greater
happiness) our souls will have the strongest appetite, the most sharp-set
stomach after Christ, when, through bodily sickness, our stomachs cannot take
down, but loath the very scent and sight of the most pleasant perishing meat,
and delicious earthly dainties. Look, that ye provide somewhat to eat, that
will go down upon a sickbed; your sick bed meat is Christ; all other dainty
food may be an abhorring to you.

Further, Not only are we to consider the sickness of the body, as the cause of
this tastlesness and listlesness after bread. But we are to consider the sick
man abhorring dainty meat, under the hideings of Gods face, or in fears about
his spiritual state; as appears by that which follows, If there be a
messenger with him, an interpreter, one of a thousand, to show unto man his
uprightness^, or to set him right in his spiritual state, etc. The sick man
for want of that as well as for want of health, can taste no sweetness in the
rarest dainties.

Hence note.

A sense of divine displeasure, or the hideing of divine favor from the soul,
renders all outward comforts comfortless to us. If a man have never so much
health, yet the appearances of divine displeasure will make him sick of his
most pleasant things. Carnal men can eat and drink, and live upon pleasures,
yea upon the pleasures of sin, and go on merrily with them a while, because
they know not the meaning of the displeasure of God, nor do they know what the
favor of God means; they understand not what they want, yea they flatter
themselves that they have enough, and are well enough, though they have
nothing, and are nothing, that is of any worth. But if God once awaken them out
of this dream, and show them their cursed condition, all will be gall and
wormwood to their taste, or as gravel between their teeth. As the sense of
divine favor makes bitter things sweet, and sorrowful things comfortable to
us, the sour herbs of affliction dainties to us; So not only common but dainty
meat, all the cates and viands of this world will be not only tastless but
bitter to us when God frowns upon us. An earnest in the love and favor of God
is the good of all good things.

For the close of all, take these two Counsels, upon the occasion of these
words.

First, Receive your bread and dainty meat with prayer and thankesgiving; you
may quickly else come to abhor your bread, yea and your dainties. The word
and prayer both sanctify and sweeten all creature-enjoyments.

Secondly, Take heed of abusing your meat; ye may quickly be brought to a
loathing of it. When they who have given themselves up to luxury and
intemperance lie upon their sick-beds and find their stomach turned from all
their dainties, it will be most grievous to them to consider how they have
abused their dainties to feed their lusts. As some who abuse the creatures are
punished with the want of them, so others with an abhorrence and loathing of
them.

So much for this second symptom of sickness, His life abhors bread, and
his soul dainty meat. The third follows, and appears in the general decay
and languishment of the sick man's body.

Verse. 21. His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen, and his bones
that were not seen, stick out.
In this verse and the next, Elihu still insists upon his description of the
sick man's condition, and in them he gives us two other sad effects or symptoms
of his sickness.

First, The general wast and consumption of the body ( verse. 21.)

Secondly, The utmost peril of life ( v. 22.)

Elihu describes the first effect of sickness (the first here but the third in
order) by two things.

First, By the disappearing of that which used to be seen, and appear very
fair and beautiful; the visible part grows (as it were) invisible, his flesh
is consumed away, that it cannot be seen.

Secondly, By the appearing of that which used not to be seen; his invisible
parts (not so in their own nature, but as to their place, I say, his invisible
parts) grow visible, His bones which were not seen, stick out. Thus with much
elegancy he sets forth the sorrowful and deplorable estate of the sick man.

His flesh is consumed away. As if he had said, Before his sickness he was
full of flesh, fat and fair, but falling into sickness, he falls away, and is
worn, (as we say) to skin and bones; his flesh is consumed. Flesh, in
Scripture, is taken two ways.

First, Improperly, and Tropically. Secondly, Literally or Properly.
In a Tropicall and Improper sense, flesh signifies our sinful corruption (
Gal: 5.17.) The flesh evermore lusts against the spirit, that is, the
unregenerate part in man against the regenerate. These two are always
contending and combating with one another in all those whom Christ has
conquered to himself. Happy are they that find their flesh, in this sense,
consuming away; and it is that which every man is studying (who knows what
godliness means) the consumption of this flesh, even the mortification of his
lusts, of pride and earthliness, of wrath, envy, and unbelief.

Secondly, flesh by a figure is put for the whole natural body, consisting of
many parts dissimilar to flesh. Thus the Psalmist complained in prayer, that,
the Lord had given the flesh of his Saints, to the beasts of the earth (Psalm.
79.2.) that is, he had exposed their bodies, through the rage and cruelty of
their enemies, to the teeth and bowels of savage and ravenous beasts.

Thirdly, flesh is also put for the whole man consisting both of soul and body.
( Genesis 6.12, 13.) The Lord saw that all flesh had corrupted their ways. That
is, all men (who are made up of a body and soul) had corrupted their ways by
letting loose and acting their sinful corruptions.

Fourthly, flesh is sometimes put for that which is b^st in man, his greatest
natural perfections, whatsoever in him is less then grace, whatsoever is
highest in him, below the spirit, is called flesh in Scripture. When Peter
(Math. 16.17.) had made that blessed confession which is the rock upon which
the Church is built (thou art Christ the Son of the living God) presently
Christ tells him flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, that is, the
highest, and the most perfect piece of nature has not taught thee this lesson;
the Evangelist says of all true believers (who have received this power (or
privilege) to become the sons of God) they are borne not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh (Joh. 1.13.) that is, the best of the creature, contributes
nothing to the bringing forth of new creatures, the sons of God.

Fifthly, flesh by a figure is put for all that in religion, or in the worship
of God, which is outward, or open to the eye; whatsoever comes under any humane
observation, is but the flesh of Religion, or the flesh of worship. In this
sense the Apostle puts the question ( Romans 4.1.) What shall we say then, that
Abraham our father, as pertaining to the flesh, has found? What he means by
the flesh, he tells us in the next words, he was not justified by works, that
is, not by any thing that did appear, not by any thing done to him or done by
him. He was not justified by Circumcision, or by the use of any external rite,
he was not justified by his own righteousness, or obedience to the Law. The
same Apostle also calls the very worship of the Gospel, as to the outward part
of it, flesh (Phil. 3.3.) For we are the Circumcision, which worship God in the
Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. That
is, in any outward work, or privilege which we have in our Gospel state. All
this flesh likewise ought to be consumed in our apprehensions, that is, we must
make nothing of it, nor reckon it any thing in our account for justification in
the sight of God or acceptance with him.

Secondly, Flesh properly taken is that integrall and similar part of the body,
which is opposed to blood and bones, to veins and sinews. When Elihu says his
flesh is consumed, we are to understand it either in this proper sense, or in
the second figurative sense before named, as flesh is put for the whole body;
his flesh is consumed, that is, his flesh in opposition to his bones spoken of
before, or his flesh that is his outward man Is consumed.

The Original word signifies to wax old; (...) sonuit consenuit in piet
consumsit.
for as when a man recovers from sickness, his flesh is said to return like
the flesh of a child. So when he is under the extremity of any sickness, his
flesh, as it were, waxes old, or withers like the flesh of an old man. Thus
it is translated ( Lam^n. 3.4.) My flesh and my skin has he made old; that is,
though I am not old in years, or how young soever I am, yet God, by many
sufferings, has made me look like an old man; I am decayed and weak. David
speaking of wicked worldly men, tells us, ( Psalm. 49.14.) Their beauty shall
consume in the grave; As death and the grave make a total and final
consumption of the beauty of bad men, that is, of all that splendor and
bravery wherein they lived, while they lived in the body; so pains and
sicknesses do exceedingly consume the body, and eat out the flesh. As a
tyrannical oppressor eats out the people under his government, in which sense
this word is applied ( Dan. 7.25.) Or as a garment is worn out by time and
using. The flesh is often in Scripture compared to a garment, and dying to
uncloathing; because when we dye we put off the flesh. The garment of the
flesh, that beautiful garment waxes old and wears out apace on a sick bed.
Sickness not only staineth and abateth the beauty of it, but wastes it
deeply, so that, as it follows it cannot be seen;

Or as Mr Broughton renders, his flesh wastes away from sight, or he has no
flesh left to be seen.

Again, When it is said, his flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen,
some expound it thus; His flesh is so consumed away, that the seer withdraws
from it; or no man cares to see it, that is, the sick man is so discolored and
wasted, that visiters and spectators start and are almost frighted to look
upon him. The flesh of man in a healthful and flourishing condition, is a
lovely spectacle, and draws beholders, but the flesh of a very sick man is a
ghastly spectacle and a regreet to the beholder. We love not to see that which
we do not like. Beauty attracts, deformity withdrawes the eye. It is said of
Jesus Christ himself, that he was so deformed by his sufferings ( Isa: 52.14.)
that many were astonished at him (his vissage was so marred more then any man,
and his form more then the sons of men) and ( Isa: 53.3.) We hid as it were
our faces from him, he was despised and we esteemed him not; that is, he was so
dis-figured by sorrow, that no man cared to look upon him. Thus it is often with
the sick. And this is a profitable and a probable sense of the text in hand;
His flesh is consumed away, and then he who before delighted to see it, is
troubled at the sight of it, or is rather affrighted then pleased in seeing it.

Quid si carnem consum^ a visu, per elegantom hyperbelen esset, tam manifest
indies marc^ssere, ut quasi ab ipso respicientis oculo consumi videatur. Bold:
There is yet a fourth reading, which further aggravates the sick man's
consumption; His flesh is consumed in sight; that is, say some, his flesh does
consume so fast, that a man may almost see him consume; as we say of some
plants, they grow so fast, that we may, almost, see them grow; so we may say of
those that decline and fade much, we may see them consume, their flesh
consumes even to the eye or to view. He that looks steadfastly upon them, may
see them fade and wither like a flower, yea they seem to fade by his looking
or fixing his eye on them.

Hence note.

First, The flesh of man is a very fading and declining thing. It quickly
consumes and drips away in a disease; A violent fever or any other acute
disease, dries up the spirits, and drinks up the moisture, and how soon does
such a man decay! and as the extremity of a disease, so extreme want of food
or famine consumes the flesh. Hunger having nothing to eat, feeds upon the
flesh of the hungry, till all be eaten up. We read ( Lam: 4.8.) how rudely
famine dealt with the flesh of those delicate Nazarites, who were purer then
snow, whiter then milk, they were more ruddy in body then rubyes, their
polishing was of Sapphire; yet the next words tell us, Their visage is blacker
then a coal, they are not known in the streets, their skin cleaves to their
bones: it is withered, it is become like a stick. And though a man escape
sickness, and famine does not eat up his flesh, yet time (that great eater)
will, old age will wast what famine and sickness have not touched. As the
Prophet threatened, what the Caterpillar has left, the Canker-worme shall
devour; so what sickness leaves, time will certainly consume. Thus bodily
flesh is every way liable to a consumption; and therefore the Prophet being
commanded to cry, and putting the question, what shall I cry, had this answer,
All flesh is grass. (There indeed flesh is taken in the most comprehensive
notion, as to all externalls; not only the flesh of the body, but all the
riches, honors, and dignities of this world, come under the name of flesh
there) All flesh is grass (Isa: 40.6.) But why does he call it grass? It Is so
under a twofold consideration. First, for the greenenesse and fairness of
it. God has put beauty upon this fading flesh, both for the comfort, and for
the trial of man; that flesh is fair as a flower, is matter of delight; and
to abstract our thoughts or weane our hearts from that which is fair and
delightful, is matter of trial. How hardly are we taken off from affecting
flesh, our own or others, while this grass continues beautiful and green!
Secondly, Flesh is grass, because soon gone (as it follows in the Prophet)
The grass withers and the flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord (or
his breath like a blasting East wind) blows upon it; Which yet some expound
more spiritually, of the Spirit of God discovering the vanity and mutability of
all earthly things to the soul, for that presently causes the gayest and best
of them to wither or be as a withered flower before our eyes. In which sense
David said ( Psalm: 119.^6.) I have seen an end of all perfection. Take flesh
in the largest sense, and it is a consuming thing; The fashion (or scheame) of
the world passes away, and so does the fashion of all those perfections, or
most perfect enjoyments, which are but of a worldly birth and extraction. Flesh
under every form is a fading thing, especially the flesh of the best-form'd
face and body of man. Whence take these six inferences. If the flesh the
fairest outside of man be a fading thing, then

First, Be not desirous, much less ambitious, to make a fair show in the
flesh; for it may prove but a vain show, and at last, not so much as a show.
Flesh may so consume away, that it cannot be seen. When the Apostle tells us
of some, who desire to make a fair show in the flesh (Gal: 6.12.) he specially
means it of those that brave it and boast themselves in the outward part of
religion, and would appear much in the form; It Is a most vain thing to
desire, to make a fair show in the flesh of spiritual things, as hypocrites
and formalists do; And it is a very vain thing to desire to make a fair show
in the flesh of corporal things, as proud and vainglorious men love to do.
Many desire to make a fair show in the flesh of their bodies, they love to
have fair faces, and fair skins, to be fairly dressed and decked, is a great
part of their care. But take heed of desiring to make a fair show in this or
in any thing that is called flesh. For when you have done all, flesh will be a
nothing; And after you have bestowed much cost upon the flesh of this body,
that it may be seen, a sickness may come and consume it, that it cannot be
seen.

Secondly, Take heed of priding your selves in the flesh, when your flesh
(possibly unsought by you) makes a fair show; Though you have beauty, and the
goodliest structure of body that ever was seen, though you have riches and
honor, the highest built estate that ever was enjoyed, what have you to be
proud of? will it not consume and moulder away? may it not melt like a
snow-ball, or like wax before the fire? be not proud of any thing called flesh,
how goodly a sight soever it is to the world, for in a little, in a very little
time, there may be nothing of flesh left in sight. His flesh is consumed away,
that it cannot be seen.

Thirdly, Be not over-carefull to provide for your flesh, the outward man, this
body, or any thing that concerns it. As the Apostle utterly forbids us to make
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof (Rom: 13.14.) that is,
those lusts that are exercised in the flesh; so, be not much careful, not at
all unduely careful to make provision for your flesh, to satisfy the
necessities of it; for it is but a perishing thing. Be not careful what you
shall eat and drink, and wherewith you shall be clothed, as Christ himself
advises ( Math: 6.) The flesh that you prepare for your flesh, is not more
perishing then the flesh for which it is prepared. Meats for the belly and the
belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it and them (1 Cor: 6.13.) It will
not be long before there shall be an end both of the meat that is eaten, and
of eating meat.

Fourthly, If the flesh may soon be so consumed by the hand of God that it
cannot be seen, then be not unwilling to wast and consume your flesh which is
seen in working for God, or in doing good work, which is the work of God:
your flesh may consume upon worse terms quickly, then working for God, why
then should you be unwilling to consume it in Gods work? Are not some so
tender of their carcass, and their skin, that they are afraid (though that
fear be their shame and sin) of taking too much pains in the work of God,
lest they should damage their bodies, endanger their health, and consume their
flesh? This flesh will wast with idleness, is it not better to wast it by
industry in useful services? The Apostle was willing to spend and be spent in
the service of the Corinthians; That is, he was willing to spend not only his
purse and his pains, but to be spent as to his bodyly strength, health and
life. He cared not for his own flesh, so he might be serviceable to their
spirits, and promote their spiritual good, (2 Cor: 12.15.)

Fifthly, Be not unwilling to waste and consume your flesh in duty with God; as
the flesh consumes in work for God, so in duty with God, in prayer and fasting
and selfe-humbling, these are duties with God. Some are afraid of taking too
much pains in these soule-workes with God, lest they hurt their bodies, their
flesh. We can never lay out our strength, or bring our flesh to a better
market, we can never put it off at a higher rate (if it must be put off) then
in ways of communion with God. Yet let us remember we have a promise, that our
bodies shall thrive as well as our souls, even in those duties of communion
with God, which are most expensive and severe to our flesh, prayer with
fasting. ( Isa: 58.61.) And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy
thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones. Which though it may have a more
spiritual meaning, yet there is a truth in it as to the point in hand. Holy
Fasting, which is a soule-fatning duty (as all agree) is under a gracious
promise, that it shall also be a body-fatning, yea a bone-fatning duty. Now,
though we have a good assurance, that while we are trading with God for the
gain and increase of our souls, our bodies shall not waste nor be loosers,
yet we should be ready to waste and wear off the flesh from our bodies for the
gain and increase of our souls.

Sixthly, Why should we be unwilling to offer our flesh to be consumed by the
fury of men, or by the rage of flames in the cause of God, seeing it may ere
long consume by sickness and not be seen? why should we be afraid to let our
flesh consume or rot in prisons, or by tortures for Christ, seeing a disease
will do it, and has often done it? Thousands of the blassed Martyrs, and
suffering Saints, have rejoiced they had flesh to consume when God called them
to it. So some interpret that Scripture before mentioned (2 Cor: 12.14.) where
the Apostle professed, I am willing to be spent for you (how spent? as an
offering or sacrifice by fire) in the service of your faith, and in bearing my
witness to those truths of the Gospel which I have preached to you. And indeed,
he in that sense, spent his flesh at the last, he suffered death, and let his
flesh fall, in holding up and holding out the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ.
It is better that our flesh should be thus consumed (if God call us to it) then
that we leave it to be consumed by age or sickness, by worms or rottenness.
How freely should we offer up this flesh to so noble a consumption, seeing we
cannot keep it long from so mean a consumption, do what we can?

Secondly, Note.

Sickness is a consumer; sickness is a consumer of all that will consume. It
consumes the body, and it consumes the purse, yea it consumes all our worldly
comforts and concernments, it consumes every thing but grace. We say, A time of
sickness is a spending time; the usual reference of that expression, is to
spiritualls. In health we gather grace and lay up truths, which we spend in
sickness. But though sickness be a spending time, yet, it is not (I am sure it
ought not to be) a wasting time to grace and spiritualls. A spending time it
is, that is, a time wherein a godly man may lay out a great deal of his
spiritual stock and heavenly treasure, a great deal of faith and patience, a
great deal of sweet contentation and selfe-submission to God. But sickness is
not a wasting time to any of these graces or heavenly treasures; yea where
grace is real and active, it is not only not wasted or consumed, but increased
and improved, occasionally, by sickness; God having promised, that all things
shall work together for good to them that love him (Rom: 8.28.) will not
suffer the best things of those that love him (their graces) to take hurt by
the worst of bodyly sicknesses. Sickness does only damage the body, and deface
the beauty of the flesh; and it quickly does, as Elihu affirm of his sick man
in the text, His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen, yea, as it
follows And his bones that were not seen, stick out.

Flesh and bones are the two eminent materials of this fair and most regular
building, The Body of man. The Bones of a healthy and strong man, are not seen
because they are covered with flesh; they are only felt or perceived through
their clothing, skin, and flesh. God has put these very comely and beautiful
garments as a covering upon our bones: but sickness pulls away these coverings,
it pulls away the clothes from our bones, and makes them appear, as it were,
naked. When the fat is dript away, and the flesh is spent, the bones seem to
start out. We commonly say of a man that has been consumed by a lingering
sickness, He is a very Skelleton, he looks like an Anatomy, which is nothing
else but a pack of bones, the flesh is gone. Thus David mourned ( Psalm: 31.10.)
My life is spent with grief, my years with sighing, my strength fails
because of mine iniquity: and my bones are consumed. The sin-sickness of a
sencible soul consumes the bones, more then any bodyly sickness. This was not
only the consuming but the breaking of David's bones ( Psalm: 51.8.) And as his
sorrow for his own transgressions, so his sorrow for the afflictions of Sion,
had the like effect in him ( Psalm: 102.3, 4, 5.) My days are consumed like
smoke or into smoke (they vanish like smoke) and my bones are burnt as a
hearth. My heart is smitten, and withers like grass; so that I forget to
eat my bread; By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to my
skin.

Et comminuentur ossa ejus, non videntur; interpretantes vocem (...) in
significatione Syriaca. Pisc. Significatione^ Syriacam malo quam omnes pene
hebraei sequuntur. Merc:
Some read this Text, His bones are diminished, lessened, wasted, or broken in
pieces, as if the consumption reached not only his flesh but his bones too.
That Is a fierce disease which at once invadeth and wastes the bones. The word
which we render to stick out, signifies in the Syriack Idiom, the abating
lessening or breaking of any thing into lesser parts or pieces. And so those
words (are not seen) in the text (which according to our translation refer to
the time of health, when a man is so fat and full fleshed, that his bones
cannot be seen, scarcely felt, those words I say) are referred according to
this translation to the time of sickness, which is supposed so to diminish and
wast the bones, that by an ordinary strain of Rhetoric they are said, not to
be seen. His b^^^^ are diminished, they are not seen. We also render this word^
(...) that first prophetical word concerning our restoring by Christ ( Genesis
3.15.) by bruising. It (that is the woman's seed) shall bruise thy head (that is
the Devils) and thou shall bruise his heel. When bones are bruised, and as it
were shuffled together, they cannot be seen in their proper places, or as once
they were fixed by nature. This various reading does not vary the general sense
of the Text, but only heighten and increase it. We render fully and
significantly, his bones that were not seen, stick out.

Hence note.

There is no man so strong, there is nothing in man so strong that can stand
out against the strength of sickness. Our bones are not made of brass,
sickness will diminish them, and pain master them.

Secondly, Whereas it is said, His flesh (that was seen) is not seen, and his
bones that were not seen stick out, or are seen.

Observe.

Sickness makes a wonderful change in man. It puts that out of sight which
was seen, and it brings that in sight which was not seen; This holds true, not
only as to that which is natural in man, his flesh and bones, of which this
text treats in the letter; but it is true also as to that which is moral and
spiritual in man, his virtues and his vices, his graces, and his lusts or
corruptions. How often is the flesh (in a moral sense) that is, the outward
profession of a hypocrite consumed in sickness, and no more seen; will the
hypocrite always call upon God? (Job 27.10.) He will not. He that does all to
be seen (that is the character of a hypocrite ( Math. 6.5.) will in a little
time do such a little or rather such a nothing in Religion, that it cannot be
seen at all. His profession is sick, when he is fick; and then also that which
was not seen sticks out; the hypocrite covers many of his corruptions, his
impatiency, murmuring, and unbelief, in a day of prosperity with the skin at
left or fair show of faith, but in a day of trouble those dead bones appear,
and stick out. A day of sorrow, sickness, and trouble is a great discoverer;
it occasions the appearance and sticking out of many base lusts that were not
seen before. It Is so also in the better way with godly men, their corruptions,
that appeared upon them before, are abated, wasted, and consumed by affliction,
and many of their graces which lay hid and unseen, stick out and appear
gloriously in a day of trouble, or upon a sick bed. Their patience and
submission of spirit under the hand of God, their long-sufferance and sweet
self-resignation to the will of God, which lay hid, show themselves. Sickness
and affliction make wonderful changes and discoveries both as to the outward
and inward man; it is seldom seen or known either how good or how bad any man
is, till he is in pain or reduced to some extremity; till his very bones are
vexed, or till, as Elihu further describes the sick man in the next verse.

Verse. 22. His soul draws nigh to the grave, and his life to the destroyer.
When the disease is at the height (as Physicians speak) then the sick man's
soul draws nigh unto and is ready to go down into the grave. But does the
soul go to the grave? I answer, the soul, here, as frequently in Scripture, is
put for the person; as if he had said, the man draws nigh to his grave; The
soul being the noblest and most princely part of man, is honored with the
denomination of the whole man; or, because all the world is nothing to us (as
Christ told his Disciples ( Math. 16.26.) if we lose our souls, therefore man
is spoken of as if he were nothing but a soul ( Genesis 14.21.) The King of Sodom
said unto Abram, give me the souls, and take the goods to thy self, we
translate, give me the persons, and put in the Margin, give me the souls; Thus
it is said ( Genesis 46.27.) All the souls of the house of Jacob that came into
Egypt were threescore and ten. The Apostles rule of obedience to Magistrates
runs in this strain, Let every soul (that is, let every man) be subject to the
higher Powers (Romans 13.) And I conceive the Apostle expresses it so, because
there ought to be an inward subjection to that, as to any other Ordinance of
God; the soul must be subject as well as the body to the powers of this world,
that is, there must be (though no subjection of conscience, yet) a
conscientious subjection unto Magistrates. Thus here, his soul that is,
himself, the man draws near Unto the grave; to corruption, say some, to the
pit, say others.

(...) Corruptioni sepulchrum a graecis vocatur Sarcophagus.
Both are joined or meet in the grave, for that is the pit of corruption. The
Greeks call the grave Flesh-eater, to draw nigh to the grave, imports such a
prevalency of diseases as bring a man to the graves mouth, to the very point of
death; and then (as we say) he is drawing on. Whither is a sick man drawing on?
surely to his grave; David (Psalm. 107.18.) having described the condition of
sick men, adds, they draw nigh unto the gates of death; Here (which is the
same) Elihu says, his soul draws near to the grave.

Hence note.

Diseases and death are near one another. A sick bed and a grave are not far
distant; David speaking of himself and others in extreme danger of death by
the cruel plots and cunning snares of the enemy, has a like expression (
Psalm. 141.7.) Our bones are scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth
and cleaves wood upon the earth; as if he had said, we are so near death, that
it is a miracle if we escape it. Though we are yet alive, yet we have the
sentence of death in our selves, and are within sight of our graves. What David
spoke there of himself in consort with others, Heman spoke personally of
himself ( Psalm. 88.3.) My life draws nigh unto the grave; We are always in
our health drawing toward the grave, but in sickness we are drawing near unto
it. There is but a little distance between any man and the grave, there is
scarcely any distance at all between a man that is very sick and the grave. Now
if the sick man be drawing near unto the grave, then

First, Let them that are sick remember the grave; it is our duty to be always
remembering and meditating upon the grave in our health, much more should that
be our remembrance and meditation, when we are sick, most of all when we are
sick unto death, or ready to dye and drop into the grave.

Secondly; If the sick are drawing near unto the grave, then let sick men draw
near unto God; if ever you will draw near unto God, the living God, be sure to
do it upon the borders of death; it is good yea best to draw nigh unto God when
we are well, and all is well with us, even at best in the world ( Psalm. 73.25.)
But when we are in danger or drawing nigh unto death, O how earnestly should we
draw nigh unto God, in the actings of faith, and love, To whom should we go
(as Peter said to Christ, Joh. 6.68.) in the appearances and approaches of
temporal death, but unto him who has the words of eternal life. It is high
time for us to draw nigh unto God, when any of the comforts of this life are
withdrawing from us, is it not more then high time therefore, to draw nigh to
him, when life it self is withdrawing from us, and we drawing nigh to the
grave! How miserable is their condition who have death near them, and God far
from them. Though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet (as
David professed he would not, Psalm. 23.4.) we need not fear any evil, while
God is with us; but how will the very shadows of death put us in fear, if God
be not with us? and what confidence can we have of his being with us, if we are
not acquainted with him, if we use not to draw near to him?

Thirdly, If they that are sick draw near unto the grave, then it is good for
such as come to visit their sick friends, wisely to mind them of the grave;
when will a discourse with our friends of death and the grave be seasonable, if
not when we see them dying and going to the grave? yet some, when they visit
sick friends, will not speak a word of either; they fear it may hasten death to
hear of it, and that speaking of the grave may put them into it, then which I
know no fear more foolish, or more to be feared. Yea some will forbid visiters
to mention death, when their Relations lie sick, O do not speak of death to my
Husband, says the Wife, etc. But remember it, if the sick are drawing near to
the grave, they that visit them should remember them of the grave, both in
prayer and in conference; to speak of death cannot hurt the body, but the not
speaking of it may hurt the soul, and hinder it from getting out of the snares
both of spiritual and eternal death. Yet godly prudence and great caution is
to be used about it; none should do it bluntly, nor suddenly, but having by
discreet insinuations, first hinted to the sick man his danger of death, we
should then by faithful counsels prepare him for it, and by comfortable
Scripture cordialls strengthen and arm his spirits against it. Such savoury
and well managed discourses of death may (through the blessing of God) be a
savor of eternal life to the sick man, and will not in the least prejudice
his recovery from sickness, when his soul draws near to the grave, And his
life to the destroyers.

(...) Mortificantibus. Mont:
The Hebrew is, to those that kill, or to l^fe destroyers. There is a difference
among Interpreters, who are here intended by these Destroyers, to whom the sick
man's life draws near, or who are these life destroyers.

First, some thus, his life to the destroyers, that is, to his enemies that are
ready to destroy him. But that is improper to the text, which speaking of
sickness cannot intend any destroying enemy but the last enemy which is to be
destroyed, death, or the antecedents and usual attendants of it, sicknesses.

Ad Angelos morti praefectos non incommode resertur sequentis versiculi ratione
habita, ubi Angeli vitam annunciantis unius de mill mentionem facit, ut (...)
intelligas mortis ^umcios. Merc:
Secondly, by the destroyers others understand, Angels, who are commissioned
and sent of God to cut the thread of life, and to take mortals out of this
world by mortal diseases; and so the destroying Angel in this verse stands in
opposition to that comforting Angel spoken of in the next verse; if there be a
messenger or an Angel, etc. That Angels have such a Ministry, is clear, (2 Samuel 24.16.) Where ( David having chosen to fall into the hands of God) an
Angel is presently dispatched to do execution upon his people. And when the
Angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the Lord repented
him of the evil, and said to the Angel that destroyed the people, it is
enough, stay now thine hand, etc. That destroyer (so he is called, Exodus
12.23.) who slew all the first borne of the Egyptians (Gods last and greatest
plague upon them, his tenth plague) is by most interpreted to be an Angel, yea
by some a good Angel, because appointed and directed by God to spare his
people the Jews, and to pour out his vengeance upon the Egyptians, his and
their enemies. For most usually the wicked are plagued by good Angels, and the
good, as Job in this book was, are afflicted by evil Angels. Howbeit that
text say some ( Psalm. 78.49.) leads us rather to believe that it was an evil
Angel; He cast upon them (meaning the Egyptians) the fierceness of his anger,
wrath, indignation, and trouble, by sending evil Angels among them. Yet
possibly those Angels which destroyed the Egyptians, are called evil Angels,
not because they were so in their nature, but because they were Ministers of
evil to that hard-hearted people. Which way soever we take it, there is a
truth in it applicable to the Scripture here in hand. And so some expound that
of Solomon (Prove. 17.11.) An evil man seeks only rebellion, therefore a
cruel Messenger shall be sent against him. The text may be rendered a cruel
Angel, that is, an Angel with a Message of wrath and destruction shall be
sent unto him; The Apostle (1 Cor. 10.10.) speaking of those dreadful
judgments, which God sent upon his people the Jews in the Wilderness (such as
we are like to find in these Gospel times, if we provoke him, for all those
things are said to have happened unto them for Types or examples (verse. 11.)
And there he gives us warning, neither murmr ye, as some of them also
murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. That is, by the Pestilence or
Plague (as it is expressed, Numb. 14.12, 37.) which the Apostle Paul calls a
destroyer, because, doubtless it was executed by some invisible destroyer, or
Angel. The Devil, whom John in the Revelation (Chap. 9.11.) calls, the
Angel of the bottomless pit, is there also set forth by this Title, whose
name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue has his name
Apollyon. The Devil is the Apollyon, the Abaddon, both which signify a
destroyer; yea the Devil ( Heb. 2.14.) is said to have the power of death, as
if he were set over that sad work, and Lorded it over dying men; yet (let us
know to our comfort) the Devil has not the power of death as a Lord, or
Judge, but only as an Executioner; thus the sick man's life may be said to draw
nigh to the destroyer, that is to the destroying Angel, or to the messenger of
death.

Thirdly, we may take the destroyers, not for persons sent to destroy, but for
diseases, and sicknesses; these are destroyers. And thus it may be said of a
sick man, his life draws nigh to the destroyers, that is, he is in the hand
or under the power of such diseases, as probably will destroy him. That seems
to be Mr. Broughtons understanding of the words, Praestat generale est et ad
omnia mortis signa et mortifera, quicquid illud sit refer. Merc:
who renders, his soul draws nigh to the grave, and his life to killing
maladies. Whatsoever is a death-bringer, whatever is deadly or mortal to man,
may be comprehended under this expression, The Destroyers. And so, these words,
His life draws nigh to the destroyer, may signify only thus much, he is
deadly, or (as we commonly express it) mortally sick. There Is no hopes of him,
he is past recovery, the Physicians have given him over. Heman (Psalm. 88.3, 4,
5.) speaks to this sense and near in this language of himself. My soul is full
of troubles: my life draws nigh unto the grave. I am counted with them that
go down into the pit: I am as a man that has no strength. Free among the
dead, like the slain that lie in the grave whom thou remembrest no more. Heman
was alive, yet with respect either to the anguish of his soul, or the pains of
his body, he looked upon himself as one free among the dead, that is, as a dead
man, his life drew near to the destroyers. And hence

Fourthly, Others read the words not in an active sense, (as we) Destroyers,
but in a passive, His life draws nigh to those who are destroyed or dead.
Dying men are so near to, that they may be reckoned as dead men. That word of
encouragement in the Prophet ( Isa: 41.14.) Which we render, Fear not thou
worm Jacob, and ye men (or as we put in the Margin Few men) of Israel, is
rendered by some others, Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye that are dead of
Israel, that is, who are (in your own fearful apprehensions or in the
opinion of your proud and prepotent enemies) as dead men, or nigh unto death;
or (as we may expound it by that of Paul concerning himself and his
Fellow-Apostles, with respect to the continual hazard of their lives 1 Cor:
4.9.) men, as it were, appointed unto death; yea, as the learned in the Hebrew
language tell us, (...) a (...) haec vox ex eo nata videter, quod simus morti
subjecti; Ita et a Graecis (...) et a latinu mortalu usurpatus. Martyn:
the word translated in the Prophet men, with the change but of one point, and
that only in the position of it, signifies properly, dead men. We find the
word applied specially to wicked worldly men ( Psalm: 17.14.) who are there
called the hand of God (to afflict or take away the lives of Godly men) and are
said to have their portion in this life; the word, I say, is applied to them,
as implying, that how much soever they rejoice, either in the present
enjoyments of this natural life, or in the hopes of a long natural life in
this world, yet they always are within one point (or prick with a pen which
is the shortest imaginable space) of death. In which sense also St Paul
speaking of the different state of the body now in this life and after the
resurrection from the dead, says (1 Cor: 15.54.) When this mortal shall have
put on immortality; that is, when we, who now live in dying bodies, or in
bodies bearing the marks or tokens of death, and looking like dead men, shall
have put on the beautiful and glorious robes of immortality, Then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written, Death shall be swallowed up in
victory. Whereas now death which is ready enough to get the victory over
healthy and strong men, is so ready to get the victory over weak and sick
men, that their life may very well be said (according to this fourth and last
interpretation) to draw nigh to the destroyed, or those that are already dead.
Thus if in stead of Death-Bringers or destroyers we read Destroyed or those
that have been brought to death, the meaning of Elihu in this passage is plain
and easy; importing the sick man so sick, that there is scarce a step or but
a point between him and those who are actually dead.

But whether we take the word in this passive sense, and translate The
Destroyed, or in the active, as we, and translate destroyers, thereby
understanding either Angels in special, or diseases in General sent by God to
destroy or take away the life of the sick man; which way soever of these, I
say, we expound the word, it yields a clear sense as to the scope of the text,
and as to the truth of it, (upon the matter) the very same. His life draws
nigh to the destroyers.

Hence note.

First, Diseases are destroyers. Either they themselves destroy when they come,
or the destroyer comes with them. ( Psalm: 90.3.) Thou turnest man to
destruction and say, return ye children of men. It Is a Psalm penned by
Moses lamenting the frailety of mankind. He lived to see all Israel, whom
under his hand and conduct God brought out of Egypt, dye, ^^cept that renowned
two, Caleb and Joshua; And therefore he having seen the great destruction of
that people for their murmurings and unbelief, for their ten-fold provocations
in the wilderness, might say from his own experience more then most men to
that point of man's mortality. And as God turned that people to destruction, and
said according to that irrevocable sentence ( Gen: 3.19.) Return ye children
of men to your original and first material, dust; so he says the same to men
every day, who as they are dust, so we see them returning to their dust. Every
disease, if so commissioned by God, is death, and every pain (if he say it)
the period of our lives.

Again, Elihu is here speaking of a man whom the Lord is but trying, teaching,
and instructing upon his sick bed; yet he says, His soul is drawing near to
the grave, and his life to the destroyers.

Hence observe.

Those afflictions which are but for instruction, may look like those which
are for destruction. When the Lord has a purpose only to try a man, he often
acts toward him as if he would kill him. If any shall say, this is hard, I
answer; A ruff horse must have a ruff rider. Ruff wood will not cleave
without a beetle and wedges. We put God to use extremities, that he may bring
us to a moderation. Our spirits are often so ruff and headstrong, that they
must be kept in with bit and bridle; they are so tough and knotty that there is
no working, no cleaving of them till the Lord sets his wedges to us, and lays
on with his beetle of heaviest and hardest afflictions; In a word, we even
compel him to bring us to deaths-doore, that he may teach us to live.

Now seeing pains and sicknesses (of which Elihu speaks as the way and means
by which God speaks to sinful man) are accompanied with such dreadful
symptoms and effects, loathing and loss of appetite, consumption of the
flesh, and the breaking of the very bones, the soul drawing near to the
grave, and life to the destroyers; seeing I say, there are such sad effects of
sickness, remember,

First, Health is worth the praying to God for.

Secondly, Health is worth the praising of God for; and that considered,
either, first, as continued, or, secondly, as restored. It Is a mercy not to be
pained, not to be sick; it is a more sencible, though not a greater mercy to be
freed from pain, and recovered out of sickness. While we are kept free from
pains and sicknesses, how thankful should we be; and when we are freed from
and brought out of the bonds of bodily pain and sicknesses, how soule-sicke,
yea how dead are we if we are not thankful!

Thirdly, Seeing pains and sicknesses are such sad afflictions; be wise and
careful for the preservation of your health; do not throw away your health
upon a lust, do not expose your selves to lasting pains and pining
sicknesses, for the satisfying of a wanton sensual appetite. The health and
strength of this frail body, are of more value then ten thousand of those
vanishing delights. Yet how many are there, who run themselves to the graves
mouth, and into the thickest throngs of those destroyers, for the taking up of
such pitiful and perishing delights? who to please their flesh for a few
moments in surfeiting, drunkenness, and wantonness, bring many days, yea
months and years of pain and torment upon their flesh? yea, and not only
shorten (I mean as to what they might probably have had by the course of
nature) the number of their days, but suddenly end and extinguish them. It
has been said of old, Gluttony kills more men then the sword; that is, it
casts ^^em into killing diseases. It Is a maxim in war; Starve your enemy if
you can rather then fight him; cut his throat without a knife, destroy him
without drawing a sword; that is, with hunger. Some are indeed destroyed with
hunger, and hunger, if not relieved, will destroy any man! Yet surfeiting
destroys more then hunger, and it is a more quick and speedy destroyer. We
have known many who have cut their own throats, by cutting too much and too
fast for their bellyes; Pampering the Body destroys more bodies then
starving. Many while they draw nigh to their Tables, their souls (as Elihu
here says) are drawing near to the grave, and their life to the destroyers.
Therefore, remember and consider, O ye that are men given to appetite, (as
Solomon calls such, Pro: 23:2.) or rather as the Hebrew elegancy there has
it, ye that are Masters of appetite, studying your Bellyes, till indeed ye are
mastered by appetite, to you, I say, remember and consider, Health is more then
meat, and life then dainty fair. All the content that intemperance can give
you, cannot recompense you for the pains that sickness will give you; you may
have pleasure for an hour or two, and sickness for a month or two, for a
year or two. And if all the pleasure we take in satisfying that which though
it may be glutted, yet will not be satisfied, a lust, cannot recompense the
pains that are found in a sick bed for a few days, months or years, how
will it recompense any for those everlasting pains that are found in hell,
where the damned shall be always conversing with death and destruction, and
yet never dye nor be destroyed.

Fourthly, Forasmuch as sickness is often accompanied with such grievous
dolours and racking tortures, let the sick pray much that they may be armed
with patience; who knows what trials and extremities sickness may bring him
to? Though the beginnings and first appearances of it are but small, like the
cloud which first appeared to the servant of Eliah, only of a hands-breadth,
yea though it begin but with the little finger of the hand, yet as that little
cloud did the whole face of the heaven, so this little distemper may
overspread the whole body, and put you to the exercise of all your patience:
it may hang and increase upon you, till it has broken your bones, and consumed
your flesh, and brought you to the graves mouth, therefore pray for patience.

Lastly, Let not the strong man glory in his ^^^ngth, nor the healthy man in
his health; sickness may come shortly, and then how strong soever any man is,
down he must, and lie by it. There Is no wrestling away sickness any way (if
God send it and bid it come) but by wrestling with God (as Jacob did, Gen: 32.)
in prayer. If you think to wrestle away bodily sickness by bodily strength and
striving with it, you will be thrown and get the fall. Who can stand before a
fever, or a consumption, when they arrest us in the name of the Great King,
and carry us prisoners to our beds? Therefore let no man glory in his strength,
if any man do, it shows at present his moral weakness; and his natural
weakness may quickly teach him another lesson, and spoil his glorying.

JOB. Chap. 33. Verse. 23, 24, 25, 26. If there be a messenger with him, an
interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness:

Then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down to the
pit, I have found a ransom.

His flesh shall be fresher then a childs: he shall return to the days of his
youth.

He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and he shall see
his face with joy: for he will render to man his righteousness.


THese words hold forth the third way by which God speaks or reveals himself
to man, and recovers him out of his sin. As if Elihu had said; When God has
brought a man to his sick bed, and he yet continues in his blindness, not
perceiving either his own error, or the purpose and intention of God to him;
If then besides all this God so order the matter, that in his merciful
providence he provideth for his further instruction, and sends a special
messenger (as he does me to thee) an interpreter (which is a singular favor of
God) to explain, and expound the meaning of his dealings with him, and what his
own condition is, to bring him to a true sight and sense of his sin, and to
set him upright in the sight of God, by the actings of faith and repentance;
this soon alters the case, and hereupon God is presently appeased toward
him. Then he is gracious, and then many blessed fruits and effects of his grace
do follow, and are heaped on him. Here, therefore, we have a very illustrious
instance of Gods loving kindness to poor sinful man, recovering and fetching
him back (when he is as it were half dead) from the gates of death, restoring
him both as to soul and body, putting him into a perfect (so far as on this
side heaven it may be called perfect) state, and giving him indeed what he can
reasonably desire of him. In the context of these four verses; Consider

First, The instrument, or means by which God brings this about, and that is,
by sending a messenger, or a choice interpreter to the sick man's bed, to
counsel and advise him. Verse. 23. If there be a messenger with him, etc.

Secondly, We have here the motive, or first moving cause of this mercy, that
is, the grace or free favor of God, then he will be gracious unto him; and
says, Deliver him from going down to the pit, that is, being gracious he will
give forth this word for his deliverance. Then he is gracious to him, etc. (v.
24.)

Thirdly, We have here the meritorious Cause of this merciful deliverance; and
that is a ransom; I have found a ransom, at the latter end of the 24th verse.

Fourthly, We have the special benefits of this deliverance, which are
twofold.

First, Respecting his body; He is delivered from the pit of death (v. 24.) And
not only so, but he has a life as new as when he began to live; His flesh
shall be fresher then a childs; the days of youth shall return to him
again, (v. 25.)

Secondly, We have the benefit respecting his soul, ( v. 26.) He shall pray,
and God shall be favorable to him, and he shall see his face with joy; for he
will render to man his righteousness.

Thus you have the parts and purpose of these words; I shall now proceed to the
particulars.

If there be a messenger with him.
Hypothetica locutio significat libertatem dei in conferendo hoc beneficio.
Indicatio contingit quibus deus vult. Coc. (...) inde (...) missus legatus
nuncius.
These words are Hypotheticall, or by way of supposition; if there be: noting,
that it is not always so, every one has not this mercy to have a messenger
sent him; it is a special privilege granted by God to some; If there be A
messenger.

What or who is this messenger? The word in the Hebrew has a threefold
signification; all which are insisted upon by interpreters upon this place.

First, It signifies an Angel; Now, Angels properly taken are spiritual or
incorporeall substances, whose both office and high dignity it is to attend
about the throne of God, and to be sent forth upon his special service ( Psalm:
103.20.) Bless the Lord ye his Angels that excel in strength, that do his
commandments, and hearken to the voice of his word. God has thousand
thousands of these servants ministering to him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand standing before him (Dan: 7.10.)

Some stay upon this exposition, affirming that here we are to understand an
Angel by nature; And hereupon ground the ministering of Angels to those who are
either sick in body, or troubled in mind. Yea the Popish writers would hence
prove the intercession of Angels for man, and man's invocation of Angels; but
though the exposition be granted, yet it yields no ground for this Inference.
For what though God should send an Angel to instruct and comfort a sick man,
will it therefore follow that the sick man should pray to him, and so give him
the honor which is due to God?

Secondly, The word is applied in particular to Jesus Christ the uncreated
Angel, or the creating Angel, the Lord of Angels, who, by way of eminency is
called, The Angel of his presence, (Isa: 63.9.) and the (Angel or) messenger of
the Covenant, (Mal: 3.1.) He also was that Angel of whom the Lord spoke to the
children of Israel (Exodus: 23.20.) saying, Vides quam clare hoc loco Elihu de
Christo concionetur; per quem omnis conscientia, quontumcunque per legem occisa
vivificatur per quem omnis crux vitae et liberationis initium est. Brent:
Behold I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring
thee into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and obey his voice,
provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions (if you persist in
them) for my name is in him, that is, he is of the same nature with my self,
and with that nature he has my name, Jehovah. Thus some carry it here, as if
Elihu specially intended the ministration of Jesus Christ, the Angel of the
Covenant, to the sick sinner, for his restoring both as to the health of soul
and body. It Is true, Jesus Christ is the great Angel, or messenger, and he
primarily and chiefly does all the business for poor sinners; he is the
messenger sent from God, and he is the interpreter of the mind of God, he came
from the bosom of the father, and reveals the mysteries of heaven to us by his
holy Spirit. He indeed is the one of a thousand, the chiefest of ten thousand,
to show unto man his uprightness. Yet, I conceive, that in this place, not the
Lord of Angels alone, but some Angel of the Lord is also intended. And
therefore,

Thirdly, The word Angel is applyable to every Messenger; The Scripture gives
it first to those that are sent by men about any errand or business (1 Samuel:
23.27.) But there came a messenger unto Saul, saying, have thee and come; for
the Philistims have invaded the land. We read of an evil messenger ( Pro:
13.17.) who is either such a one as brings an evil message, or is himself
evil ( Isa: 14.32.) What shall one then answer to the messengers of the
Nation, the Lord has founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in
it. And as it notes a messenger first by man, so a messenger sent by God. The
ancient Prophets were in this sense the Angels of God, his messengers, and so
are the Ministers of the Gospel at this day. The Epistles to the seven
Churches, are all directed to the Angels of the Churches, that is, to the
several Pastors or Ministers of the Churches respectively. And thus we may
conclude, that by the messenger in this text, we are to understand any
faithful Minister of Christ, sent to convince, convert, or comfort a sick
troubled soul. And, as was intimated before, we may very well gather up both
these latter interpretations into one, that which applies it to Christ, and
that which applies it to the Ministers of Christ. For so we have here both the
author and the instrument of this comfort to the sick man. Jesus Christ is the
chief messenger and comforter of poor sinners; and the Ministers of the
Gospel are instruments in his hand, sent out by him for the perfecting of that
work. The word is applied to both, ( Mal: 3.1. Nuncius est propheta aliquis
seu doctor a deo missus. Pisc:
) Behold, I will send my messenger (or, my Angel) and he shall prepare the way
before me. John the Baptist was Christ's messenger, as Christ himself (an
infallible interpreter) assures us ( Math: 11.10.) And presently it follows,
The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the messenger of
the Covenant, whom ye delight in; Behold, he shall come, says the Lord of
hosts. In the first part of the verse, John is called the Lords messenger, and
in the latter part Christ is called the Lords messenger. Both were messengers,
yet with a mighty difference; and therefore John the messenger of Christ, says
of Christ the messenger, ( Math: 3.11.) He that comes after me is mightier
then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear. And again ( John 1.26.) He it is
that coming after me is preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not
worthy to unloose. If there be a messenger.

Hence note.

First, The Ministers of Christ are the messengers of Christ. Christ is the
fathers messenger, and they are messengers sent out by Christ. As my father
has sent me, so send I you, said Christ to his Apostles (John 20.21.) And
though that Title of Apostle, which signifies One sent, or a Messenger, be
most properly attributed to those, who were immediately called and inspired by
Christ, yet in an allayed sense it may be applied, commodiously enough, to any
true Minister of the Gospel, for he also is sent; he has both his mission and
commission mediately from Christ. Yea the word Apostle is applied in common to
all or any that are sent upon business ( John 13.16. Apostolus hic non
specialis muneris, sed generale nomen est, missum cum mandatis significans.
Grot:
) He that is sent (let him be who he will or upon what occasion soever he is
sent) is not greater then he that sends him.

So then, the Ministers of the Gospel are called the messengers of Christ;
First, Because they are sent by Christ; and have a Commission from him.
Secondly, They are his messengers because they are instructed by Christ, and
carry forth his mind: they may not speak their own words, nor their own
sense, but the word which they bring, is or ought to be, what they have
received, or what Christ has put into their mouths, that is their duty. And
the messengers of Christ are to speak his mind.

First, Plainly (1 Cor: 2.4.) In the demonstration of the Spirit.

Secondly, boldly, not flattering the persons, nor fearing the faces of men.
Thirdly, They should speak authoritatively, though they beseech, and beg, and
pray, yet they are to do all as having a warrant for what they do, and as
being clothed with power from on high. If any man speak (says the Apostle, 1
Pet. 4.11.) let him speak as the Oracles of God. As he is to speak the Oracles
of God, so as the oracles of God. Some speak, who do not speak the oracles of
God, but their own opinions. Others speak the oracles of God materially, that
is, they deliver divine truths, yet they do not speak them as the oracles of
God, with that authority which becomes the Gospel; we say of some, They mar
their tale in the telling; Though they report, or tell the mind of him that
sent them, yet they spoil it in reporting it; The Ministers of the Gospel
spoil their message, unless they report it plainly, boldly, and with
Authority.

Thirdly, If Ministers be the messengers of Christ, surely then, they are to be
heard, and their message is to be received; if God sends a messenger to us,
shall we not open the door to him? if a friend send a messenger to us, he
takes it very ill (and well he may) if we do not. It Is below civility, it is an
high affront to a man not to receive his message, what is it then to the most
high God! How dreadful is that woe which Christ pronounces against such as
refuse either his messengers, or their message, ( Math: 10.14, 15.) Whosoever
shall not receive you, nor hear your words; When ye depart out of that house
or City, shake off the dust of your feet; Implying, that God would so shake
them off, or esteem them no more then the vilest dust. Yea (as another Gospel
has it ( Mark 6.11.) implying, that as they had not received the testimony
which his messengers bare of him, so their dust should be kept as a testimony
against them. And lest the mischief threatened them in this aenigmatical or
covert speech should not be understood, Christ himself expounds it in the next
words, Verily, I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom
and Gomorrha in the day of Judgment, then for that City.

Further, It Is not enough barely to receive Christ's Messengers, they must be
received as the Messengers of Christ. Such a reception the Apostle found among
the Galatians, (Chap. 4.14.) And my temptation (or daily affliction) which was
in my flesh, ye despised not, nor rejected, but received me as an Angel of
God, even as Christ Jesus. And what is said of the Messenger, is to be
understood also of his message, both are to be received as from Christ. How is
that, you will say? Take it in these four words, First, when it is received
gladly, (Acts 2.4.) It should be the joy of our hearts (the Psalmist calls it
the joyful sound, Ps. 89.15.) to hear a word from Christ. Secondly, when it is
received reverently, and respectfully, as giving honor to the message and the
Messenger for Christ's sake. Thirdly, when it is received obedientially, as
submitting to the word; else your respectfull, and joyful receiving the
message of Christ is but a complement, or piece of Courtship. Fourthly, when
their whole message is thus received, as Cornelius said to Peter (Acts 10.33.)
We are all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee
of God. We must receive not only those things that suit us well, but those
things that are most cross to our corrupt natures and interests, whether of
worldly profit or pleasure; this is to receive the Messengers and messages of
Jesus Christ, as his. If there be a Messenger, An Interpreter.

That Is a second style, (...) dulcuit inde (...) oratorem vel interpretem
significat, qui^ dicentis sermones dulces auditoribus sunt. Novar;
or Title given to the man sent to the sick sinner; The Hebrew word here
rendered an Interpreter, comes from a root signifying sweetness, or to
sweeten. Some conceive the Latin word (Mel) for honey has its original from
it, because the message, or interpretation that comes from God should be sweet,
as honey to us; David professes, The word of God is sweeter then honey, and
the honeycomb, (Psalm. 19.10.) As if he had said, it is sweeter to the soul then
that which is sweetest to sense. Now, the messenger sent from God, is called an
interpreter, because he is sent to interpret and declare the mind of God to his
people. Mr. Broughton renders, A Teacher. The word interpreter may be taken
three ways.

First, For any one that interprets tongues or languages. Thus it is said (
Genesis 42.23.) Joseph spoke to his brethren by an interpreter, they ('it is like)
did not understand the Egyptian language, and he either for state, or to
conceal himself the better, would not seem to understand theirs.

Secondly, There is an interpreter of mysteries as well as of languages. Many
things spoken in our own language may need an interpreter more then the words
of a strange language. We read ( Prove. 1.6.) of a Parable, and the
interpretation of it. Parables are wise, but hard and dark sayings, they need
an interpreter. The Gospel is a mystery, and he that can expound and declare
the mysteries of the Gospel is an interpreter indeed.

Thirdly, The word interpreter is taken in a larger sense, (...) corte est
advocatus quem Chaldaei vocant (...) paracletum, significat eadem voce oratorem
Rhetorem. Drus:
for any person that interposeth between two, or that endeavors the settling of
any matter in difference, either between God and man, or between man and man; (
Isa. 43.27.) Thy Teachers (we put in the Margin interpreters) have transgressed
against me. As if he had said, they who as Mediators should have prayed for
thee to me, and have declared my will to thee, are themselves depraved.

Further, We may distinguish of a threefold interpreter. First, a grammatical
interpreter, whose business is to give the sense of words. Secondly, a logical
interpreter, who gathers up the meaning, scope and mind of any sentence, or the
purpose of man in what he speaks. Thirdly, there is the divine of spiritual
interpreter, who labors to bring the truths of God, and the heart of man
together. The Apostle having treated about prophesying, concludes (1 Cor.
14.25.) And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling
down on his face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth;
as if the man that believed not, or one unlearned (for of such he speaks, verse.
24.) had said, surely these men understand what is in my heart, for they have
brought the truth of God, and my heart together, so that I must confess God is
in them, that is, there is a divine wisdom or interpretation in them. When
Elihu faith, If there be an interpreter, we are to understand him in this last
sense; not of one that can interpret words, like a Grammarian, or give the
scope and sense of words like a Logician, but of one that has a divine skill
to bring the truths of God home to the heart of man, that is, to convince and
inform an ignorant conscience, and to comfort, relieve and support a troubled
conscience. If there be an interpreter,

Hence note.

The Ministers of Christ are the interpreters of the mind and good will of God
toward poor sinners. They interpret the mind of God as to peace and
reconciliation, as to grace and salvation, as well as to duty and holiness of
conversation. It Is the nicest and hardest thing in the world to interpret the
mind of God aright to a sinner, to bring his heart to a closing with the great
truths, and promises of the Gospel; he that can do this skilfully is worthy
the name of an interpreter. The Apostle says of him who is but a babe in
Christ and uses milk (that is, lives upon the lower and more easy principles
of faith) he is unskillfull in the word of righteousness (Heb. 5.13.) that is,
he knows not how to make out and manage for his own comfort the doctrine of
free grace through the alone righteousness of Jesus Christ. And therefore, as
first, God himself is the author and fountain of this grace; as secondly,
Jesus Christ is the purchaser or procurer of the fruits of this grace to
sinners; as thirdly, the effectual worker of our hearts to receive this grace,
as also the witness-bearer and sealer of it to our souls is the holy Spirit; as
fourthly, the word of the Gospel is the Charter, and Covenant of this grace:
so fifthly, the Ministers of Christ are the interpreters of this grace; and
they are, or ought to be skillfull in this word of righteousness. Their skill
and duty is first to explain what the Covenant is, and rightly to lay down how
the sinners reconciliation to God is wrought. Secondly, to make a suitable and
seasonable application of it, or to bring it home to the souls and consciences
of poor sinners, as they find their state to be. And as the Ministers of Christ
are Gods interpreters to his people, so they are the peoples interpreters unto
God. They are the former, two ways; First, by opening the mind of God to his
people; Secondly, by urging and pressing them to receive it both for their
direction and consolation. They are the latter four ways: First, by laying
open and spreading the peoples wants, and weaknesses before God. Secondly, by
confessing their sins, and transgressions to God. Thirdly, by entreating the
Lord for them, or by praying for mercy, pardon, and forgiveness in their
behalf, for sins committed. Fourthly, by giving thanks in their name for
mercies received. Thus they are first, Gods mouth to the people in preaching
and declaring the Gospel; Secondly, the peoples mouth to God in prayer and
thanksgiving. And in both perform the work and Office of an interpreter.

And if the Ministers of the Gospel are interpreters; Then,

First, Every Minister must be acquainted with the mind of God. He must have
skill in the mystery of the Gospel. How shall he be able to interpret the mind
of God to sinners, who is not acquainted with the mind of God? We have the mind
of Christ (says the Apostle of himself and his fellow laborers in the Gospel
(1 Cor. 2.16.) and when he says, we have the mind of Christ, his meaning is
not only this, that they had the mind of Christ written in a book, but they had
a clear understanding of it, and so were fitted to interpret it to others.

Secondly, As he must have the knowledge of the mystery, so he must have the
tongue of the learned ( Isa. 50.4.) That he may be able to speak a word in
season to him that is weary; that is, to the wounded, and troubled in
conscience; This is the interpreter intended by Elihu. He is one that has
learned, and is taught of God. Humane learning, the knowledge of Arts, and
Sciences, is good, and has its use; but divine learning, or learning in divine
things, that is to be divinely learned, ('it is possible for one to have learning
in divine things, and not to be divinely learned) is absolutely necessary to
make him an interpreter. It is not enough to know divine things, but he must
know them divinely, or by the unction and teachings of the Spirit. The Apostle
John (Rev: 10.8.) is commanded to eat the book; this eating of the book,
signifies the spiritual knowledge of divine truths; in this sense, we know no
more then we eat, then we (as it were) turn into our own substance, that which
is eaten becomes one with us; the mystery of the Gospel must be eaten by the
interpreter of Gospel mysteries. A man cannot interpret the mind of God till
he knows it; and he cannot know the mind of God, unless God himself reveals
it; so the Apostle argues (1 Cor. 2. from 12, to 16.) As no man knows the
mind of a man, but the spirit of a man that is in him, so the things of the
spirit of God knows no man, but the spirit of God, and he to whom the Spirit
of God does reveal them. And therefore though a man may have an abillity to
interpret the word of God, as it is an excellent book, a book full of admirable
knowledge, he may (I say) have an abillity to interpret it soundly by humane
learning, yet no man can do it savingly and convertingly, but by the help of
the Spirit. ( Psalm. 25.14.) The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him,
and he will show them his Covenant; he will show it effectually, he will make
them know it. Thus David prayed ( Psalm. 119.18.) Lord open thou mine eyes, that
I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. Natural parts and humane
learning, arts and languages may give us an understanding of the tenor and
literal meaning of the Law of God; but none of these can open our eyes to
behold the wonders of the Law, much less the wonders and mysteries of the
Gospel. The opening of our eyes to behold these spiritual wonders is the
Lords work, and it should be marvelous in our eyes. For this opening of the eye
(and nothing without this) will make any man the most ignorant man among a
thousand, An Interpreter One among a thousand.

These words contain either a third higher Title, or the highest commendation
of the former two. A messenger, an interpreter, even such a one as is one among
a thousand; One is no number, and a thousand is put for the greatest number;
then one among a thousand, or one of a thousand, implies that the one here
spoken of is a very rare one; only he that is seldom seen, or found, is one
among a thousand; Solomon says ( Eccl: 7.24.) One man among a thousand have I
found, but a woman among all those have I not found. There were very few wise
or good men among many when he found but one among a thousand. He might find
men in great number, but the number of those that deserved to be called men was
very small, so small, that he says he found but one among a thousand. So that
here when Elihu calls the interpreter One among a thousand, he teaches us that
such a messenger, such an interpreter is rarely to be had, or being had is a
very rare and excellent one. It Is a proverbiall speech, with an hyperbole, Hi
nuncii rari sunt ita ut ex mill hominibus, vix unus reperiatur, qui munere
illo recte fungi possit. Pisc:
to say of any man, he is one among a thousand; for though we are not to take
it arithmetically or strictly, yet one being no number, must needs signify
very few, or the smallest number, and a thousand being the greatest whole
number must needs signify many, very many or a great number. And therefore to
say of this interpreter, he is one among a thousand, must needs import, that
even among a thousand men, we can hardly find one who has a faculty or a
competency for this office, or is fit to be honored and adorned with this
Title, An interpreter.

Hence note.

True and faithful interpreters of the mind of God are very rare. He is a rare
and choice man that is picked out of a thousand men. The faithful messengers
and interpreters of the mind of Christ, are rare under a twofold notion; First,
as being precious and of great worth and use. Such are the light of the world,
and the salt of the earth; The minds of all men would be dark, and their
manners corrupt, if God did not send out these interpreters to inlighten and to
season them. Secondly, they are rare as not being every where to be had or met
with; what is hardly had is highly prized. It is said (1 Samuel 3.1.) The word of
God was precious in those days, why so? the reason is added, there was no open
vision, there were not such frequent manifestations of the mind of God, as had
been formerly; there were few Prophets few Interpreters to be found in those
days. The true and faithful messengers or interpreters of the mind of God,
are rare at all times, in what numbers soever they appear, though they come
like an Army by thousands, though (as is said, Psalm. 68.11.) God giving the
word great be the company (we put in the Margin Army) of those that publish it,
or (as the old translation has it) great be the Company of the Preachers. They
are rare, also, because not to be had at some times and in many places. Look
over the times or ages of the world, and you will find some of them were dark
times, days of ignorance, there were few interpreters; look at any time or at
this time over many parts and places of the world, and you shall find such
interpreters are not to be found in the greatest part, in the most places of
it. Not one to be had in some whole countries and huge tracts of the earth. Go
to all the Heathen and Mohammedan nations, and you shall not find one of these
messengers, or interpreters; go to Greece, which anciently engrossed all
knowledge, and was famous for all sorts of learning, yet an interpreter is
scarcely to be found there in these days. Go to the popish nations, though
they bear the name of Christ, and abound with learned men, men learned in the
knowledge not only of common Arts and Sciences, but in divinity and the
Scriptures; yet in the sense here spoken of they have not many interpreters,
the most being such as pervert and wrest the Scriptures, and lead the people
into error, rather the messengers of Antichrist, then of Christ; Satan's
emissaries, then Gods interpreters. So then, if we consider, that several parts
and countries of the world are quite without, they have none, and others are
filled with false teachers and interpreters of the word of God, which are worse
then none, we must conclude an interpreter is one of a thousand,

Again, If we turn our eyes to those parts of the world, where there are many
sound, orthodox, faithful messengers and interpreters of the word of God (with
which blessing this nation (above many, if I say not above all) has been
crowned for a hundred years together; England as Jerusalem of old ( Isa. 21.1.)
may well be called a valley of vision, a seminary of seers, because of that
abundance and variety of visions and divine revelations which God has stored
us with in these latter ages) yet (I say) even here as in all other the best
reformed Protestant Churches and christian nations, an interpreter may be
called one of a thousand; and that in a twofold reference.

First, If we consider, the whole body of any reformed nation, Ministers are
but few compared to all the people, they are hardly so much as one of a
thousand, throughout that whole nation; there are but few who give themselves
up to the work of the Ministry. Few that dedicate themselves to Christ's service
in publishing the Gospel, for the saving of souls; there is (I say) but one of
a thousand that is dedicated to that work.

For First, Most are unwilling to meddle wsth that calling, because of the
laboriousness of it; interpreters are they who labor in the word and doctrine,
and not only so, but they must give a strict account to Christ of their
labors. Some good men have declined the ministry, being terrified both with
the weight of the wo^k, and the strictness of the account, and doubtless (were
we duly sensible) it might make the ablest Ministers tremble every hour of the
day, to think what a burden of care and account lies upon them, who are set to
watch over souls.

Secondly, Others will not enter into this calling, because as the labor is
great, and the account strict, so the reward, as from man, is small; it does
not lead to riches, and greatness in the World, comparatively with other
callings; though there be a comfortable competence allowed to the Ministers of
the Gospel, yet there is not much of the world to be expected by them, yea they
are charged not to look for much, or not to do their work for filthy lucre,
but of a ready mind (1 Pet. 5.2.)

Thirdly, As the reward is small, so the opposition is great, Ministers are
often persecuted, and reproacht, and the more faithful and dilligent they are,
the more they are opposed and reproached. To preach the Gospel fully as it
should be preached, is to provoke thousands, and bring the World about our
ears. No marvel then i^ the messengers and interpreters of it be not many, if
they be but as one among a thousand. Thus you see what hinders the generallity
of men from meddling with that work. It Is but one among a thousand that will
engage in a work upon these hard terms, or that prae-apprehending them, has
faith and self-denial enough to swallow and overcome them.

Again, Consider those that outwardly bear the name and Title of the Ministers
of Christ, and you will find that among them, they who are true and faithful
to their trust, are upon the matter, but one among a thousand. As there are but
few Ministers among many men, so there are but few Ministers among many that
are true and right interpreters. Do but take out or sever these five sorts
from among them who pretend to be Ministers, and then it will soon appear that
the interpreters in truth are but few among many of those that are so in Title.

First, Take away all those, who thrust themselves boldly, or are admitted
carelessly, or by mistake into the Ministry, who yet are ignorant, blind,
ungifted, and so unable for the work.

Secondly, Take away those, who though they have gifts and abilities, yet are
lazy, and sloathfull, such as will not take pains nor work in the work.

Thirdly, Take away those, who have gifts, and are industrious, yet are unsound
(at least in many points) and erroneous in their judgments, and so mis-lead
and mis-guide those, whose guides and leaders they are.

Fourthly, Take away those, who though they are not unsound, and erroneous, yet
are profane, and scandalous, pulling down that truth with one hand which they
have set up with another, or building again those sins by their practice,
which they have destroyed by preaching, and so make themselves (as the Apostle
speaks in a like case, Gal: 2.18.) transgressors; for as God justly calls
such transgressors, because they have sinned against his word, so they make
themselves transgressors, because they sin against their own; even against
the doctrine by which they have condemned those sins, which themselves live in.

Fifthly, Take away those, who though they are neither of these, neither
ignorant, nor idle, nor unsound, nor scandalous, yet are but mere formal
preachers, such as only speak words, deliver the outside, and skin of the
Gospel, but have no acquaintance with the marrow and power of it. Take away
these five sorts from among Ministers, and surely this expression of Elihu will
be but too much verified, The interpreter is but one among a thousand. Abstract
all that are ignorant, idle, unsound, scandalous, formal dispencers of the
word, from those who are commonly called Ministers, and then, they who remain
will be very few, so few, that every one of them, may be reckoned, one among a
thousand. And we shall be forced to say, that Elihu has not said without
cause, whether we respect their excellency or their scarsity, that any
faithful messenger or interpreter is one among a thousand.

This is not spoken by Elihu here, nor ought it to be taken up by any of the
most faithful Ministers of Christ, to draw honor and respect upon themselves,
or that their persons may be had in admiration who are faithful; this were a
pitiful design of holding out such a truth; but it serves for this end, that
the people of God may see, they have a blessing where any are faithful; and
may learn how they ought to prize those faithful messengers, whom the Lord
sends among them, yea how readily they should receive the grace of God which is
tendered in their ministry. These are not only each of them, one messenger, or
interpreter, but each one of them is one of a thousand. A soule-convincing,
converting, quickening, comforting Minister of the Gospel is worth thousands,
and one among a thousand. The Prophet says ( Isa: 52.7.) How beautiful are
the feet of them that bring glad tideings, etc. By their feet he means their
coming, feet being the instruments of their coming to bring this glad
tideings; yet when he says, their feet are beautiful, it may have a greater
emphasis, for (the feet being the lowest part of the structure of man's body)
it may intend thus much, that even that which is lowest and meanest in a
messenger of the Gospel, his feet wearied and wet, yea foul and dirty with
travel, have a beauty upon them, how much more his face and countenance; for if
the very feet of such news-bringers, of such messengers, and interpreters,
should be acceptable and lovely (so beauty is) to all men, how much more should
their persons and most of all their message and tideings be? And doubtless, if
men did but understand it, they would acknowledge, that God has committed such
a treasury to them, as is better and more beautiful, then all the gold and
precious things of this world, and would cry out, O what a mercy is it to have
such a News-bringer? and what Greedy News-mongers would they be? The one among
a thousand would be more desirable then many thousands of Gold and Silver.

Elihu having described the person, whom the Lord often makes isntrumental for
the restoring and comforting of the sick sinner, calling him A messenger, an
interpreter, one of a thousand (which latter may be applicable to both the
former) proceeds to show the business of this messenger, or interpreter, who is
one of a thousand, more expressly, or to set out what his work is, surely
excellent, and glorious work, even this To show unto man his uprightness.

We are not to understand this showing for a bare report of the thing; in which
sense the Prophet complained; Lord who has believed our report! (Isa: 53.1.)
that is, we have showed good things to the world, but who has believed us? The
showing spoken of by Elihu, is not a bare declaration of the matter to the
ear, but an effectual, and powerful impression of it upon the heart. Such a
showing as is spoken of at the 16th verse of this Chapter, then he opens the
ears of men; The Lord speaks so by his messengers, and interpreters, that he
not only makes the ear hear, but the heart too. The heart hears when we have
a sense, and are under the power of what is heard. As before we had a
spiritual interpreter, so here we have a spiritual showing of his
interpretation. Here Is a heavenly messenger, and a heavenly message to the
earthly man; To tell the earthly his rightfullness, says Mr Broughton.

Now, because of the pronoune, [his] his uprightness; It may be demanded whose
uprightness he means? or, what this uprightness is, which the interpreter
shows.

First, Some expound it of Gods uprightness, and then the sense runs thus; God
sends an Interpreter to show unto man his uprightness, that is, his own right
and just dealing with man; As if Elihu had said, Gods messenger shall convince
this troubled man that God does not wrong him, how much soever he does afflict
him, or that God is upright and faithful in his dealing with him. This David
acknowledged ( Psalm: 119.75.) In faithfullness thou have afflicted me; that is a
good sense of the words, and very suitable to the purpose of Elihu, who was
about to convince Job that his complainings were very sinful and uncomely,
seeing God neither had nor would, nor, indeed, could do him any wrong. God is
faithful, just, and right, yea, God is good and merciful to man, when he
corrects him sore. Mr Broughton gives this interpretation of his own
translation; To tell the earthly his rightfullness, that is, God his mercy. The
uprightness of God is that by which he does righteous things. Equitatem illius.
i. e. dei, qua omnia et nominatim ipsos laborantes regit et gubernat. Jun:
This uprightness of God consists not only in his holiness, in his love of that
which is good, and in his hatred of evil, but also in his preservation of man
according to his word of promise. It Is the righteousness of God, that through
the death and intercession of his Son, he should save and heal the believing
and repenting sick sinner.

Secondly, And more clearly (as I conceive) to the present scope of this
place; the Antecedent to His, is the sick man; And then, to show unto man his
uprightness, is to show him his own uprightness.

But you will say; Is the messenger or interpreter, only to tell man how good
he is, and what good he has done? and so to flatter him into a good opinion of
himself, or of his own good deeds?

I answer; This showing unto man his uprightness, may be taken

First, As implying the man's ignorance of that uprightness which he has; or
that he has an uprightness, but does not know nor understand that he has it.
It Is so sometimes with the sound godly man, as well as with the sick, when
(though in bodyly health, yet) he is discomposed and troubled in mind; For then
though he has an uprightness of heart, an integrity toward God, or (as Job
speaks of himself) the root of the matter in him; that is, though he be
truly converted and really godly, yet he sees it not, such temptations of
Satan and troubles of mind assault him, such clouds of doubt, and darkness are
upon him, that he is not able to make out his own state. In this case the
faithful messenger or interpreter coming to him, and inquiring how it is with
him, picks out this from him, that there is an uprightness, and an integrity of
heart in him toward God, and that his state is good, though he cannot discern
it. For as the life and state of grace, is always a secret to those who have
it not; so it is often a secret to those that have it. Some men, never, few men
always understand their own condition, and it is very hard to make them
understand it. For as it is with many hypocrites, and with all presumptuous
ones, you cannot beat them out of a good opinion of themselves; though they are
stark naught, rotten at heart, and have nothing to salve themselves up with,
but a little boldness and confidence, yet they will not be persuaded off from
their false foundations, and deceitful bottoms; they will be good in their
own eyes, upright in their own opinion, and do not doubt but all is well with
them, and will be well with them always. Now, I say, as it is with some
hypocrites, and all presumptuous ones, they think themselves to have an
uprightness which they have not; so many are upright and sincere, who see it
not, and it is a very hard work, the hardest work that the Ministers of the
Gospel have to make them understand and see their own uprightness.

Secondly, The word uprightness, and the showing unto man his uprightness here
spoken of, Quid ipsum facere pro officio oporteat. Bez: Quid hominem agere,
aequum sit, sc: ut agnitis peccatis dei gratiam propter merita salvatoris
imploret. Scult.
takes in the whole duty, yea and the whole privilege and interest of a Godly
man, or that which will be his uprightness and set him right both before God
and his own conscience. To show unto man this his uprightness, is to show him
when he is right, and how he may be settled in a right state; in such a state as
will be to him like Mount Sion which cannot be removed. Thus the uprightness of
man comprehends the whole business both of faith and repentance, or all that
which a sinner is called both to do, and believe, for the repayring and
mending of his lost and ruined state, for the putting and settleing him in such
a state as the Lord may own him as his, and be gracious to him. This,
whatsoever it is, is man's uprightness or righteousness, and the showing unto
man, this his uprightness is the bringing him word in the name of Christ, that
God justifies him from the guilt of all his sins, and accepts him into his
favor.

Hence observe.

The great duty of the Ministers of the Gospel, is to clear up to man, whether
he be upright, or how he may stand upright with God. This observation takes in
both parts of the exposition. To show unto man how it is with him, what his
present state, and condition is, and to show unto man what he ought to be, or
how he may be in a safe condition, this is the work of that messenger and
interpreter who is one among a thousand, this is a blessed work, and thus it
must be done.

First, Man is to be showed the uprightness of his state, or that which must be
and be had to make up the uprightness of his state, which is

First, His first-repentance, or conversion to God. Fallen man can never come
into a right state^ till he return to God from whom he fell. A man's sinful
state is a crooked, perverse, and wretched state; repentance or returning to
God, is the bringing of a man right again, it brings him to his uprightness,
even to that state, wherein he was first made; Lo this have I found (says
Solomon, Eccl: 7.19.) that God has made man upright; but they have sought out
many inventions. Solomon does not discover the several branches and streams
of man's sinfullness, but the root and spring of it he does, the corruption of
his nature by the fall. For as he found that God made man upright, so mutable,
subject to temptation, and as easily yiedling to the temptation, as admitting
himself to be tempted: and so, not resting in that way and means of happiness
(as the Devil his tempter did not) which the wisdom and goodness of God had
chalked out and allotted to him, but conceiting to himself a higher
perfection, he then began and still continues to seek out variety of means
(called by Solomon, many inventions) as then to get more then he had, so now to
regaine some shadow at least of what he had. These inventions, are all those
carnal shifts, whereby man hopes either to palliate his sin, or to pacify his
conscience. But all prove vain inventions; there being no possibility now, for
man to get out of sin, or to go back to God, and so to his first estate, but
by repentance; That Is Gods invention, and he has concluded, that nothing
without that shall bring man (the case of infants is another thing) to that
state of uprightness, in which he was first made. And therefore the Apostle
giving an account of his ministry, how he acted as a messenger, or an
intepreter (He indeed was one among a thousand) says ( Acts 20.20, 21.) I kept
back nothing that was profitable unto you, etc. testifying both to the Jews,
and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, which is

The second thing wherein this uprightness of man's state does consist. These
two, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, were the
sum of all those Sermons in which Paul gave counsel both to Jews and
Gentiles what to do that they might be saved. And this is the work of all
Gospel Ministers in showing unto man his uprightness. He that is converted, and
believes, he that turns from sin, and takes hold of Jesus Christ by faith
for righteousness, is in a better state of uprightness, then when he was first
made upright. The Prophet ( Hab: 2.4.) speaking of faith, and that which is
opposite to it selfe-confidence, uses this word, Behold his soul which is
lifted up (namely in thoughts of any self or creature-sufficiency) is not
upright in him. A proud soul is not an upright soul. What is pride? surely
this, for a man to think himself in a good condition, or that he is well
enough, that he wants nothing, as it is said of the Church of Laodicea (Rev:
3.17.) when yet he is empty and guilty, poor and peny-lesse in spiritualls,
wanting every thing, especially a sight and sense of his poverty and wants; yet
this is every man's thought of himself, till he is showed what is indeed his
uprightness. The natural man's spirit is lifted up, not to God nor in God by
faith and repentance, but in himself. The soul thus lifted up is not upright
(says the Prophet, and what faith he next?) But the just shall live by his
faith. As if he had said; The man that lives by faith, or the man that
believes, and so lives upon Christ, is upright and has an uprightness which
will hold him right, which the uprightness of creation did not. Then the whole
matter of man's uprightness was in himself, and he was to stand upon his own
bottom, having no promise of support. But now the maine matter of man's
uprightness is out of himself, and besides, himself has a promise to be
supported in his uprightness. Man by the grace of repentance, turning from sin,
and by the grace of faith closing with the Lord Jesus Christ, is set right in
the Court of heaven, and shall be preserved (in his uprightness) by the power
of God through faith unto salvation.

Again, When man is showed his uprightness as to his state, which is his life
of justification; then he must also be showed his uprightness as to his way or
course of life in sanctification, or holiness of conversation. The interpreter
must not only bring man to Christ, but must tell him how he ought to walk in
Christ. Man being set right, ought to go right, or (as it is said, Psalm:
50.23.) To order his conversation aright. Man's uprightness in walking and
working is an inseparable fruit of his uprightness in Being.

Thirdly, The business of the interpreter, is not only to bring the troubled
soul to a true sense of sin, to a clear sight of Christ, and a suitable
conversation, but to furnish him with weapons to resist Satan's temptations, to
show him how to manage the sword of the Spirit, and the shield of faith, that
he may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Devil; as also to answer,
resolve, and remove the doubts and scruples, that may arise in or are upon his
own conscience, and so to settle him in a sweet and comfortable dependence
upon Christ by faith as his uprightness and righteousness, against all the
fears which at any time assault his peace.

But some may say, Should not sinners be showed their un-uprightness or
unrighteousness, rather then their uprightness?

I answer; First, It Is a piece of our showing man his uprightness, to show him
that he has no uprightness. The Spirit convinces, first, of sin, and then of
righteousness ( John 16.8.) Secondly, I answer, a man's uprightness (according
to the meaning of this Scripture) cannot be showed him, but he must also be
showed his unrighteousness. Thirdly, I answer, The sick man here spoken of, may
be supposed a man troubled in mind about his sins; and in that case the
interpreters duty is to ease his mind by showing him his uprightness in the way
opened, rather then to burden his mind further by showing him his sin or
unrighteousness. And therefore lastly,

To close this point with a word of caution; When Elihu speaks of an
uprightness to be showed the troubled soul; It Is not, that the messenger who
comes to relieve and comfort him, should use flattering words, and blow him up
with a conceit of his own good works, and so tell him a story of his virtues
or virtuous deeds. No, the uprightness chiefly intended here is the
righteousness of Christ, in and by which we are reconciled to and made one with
God. Nor can we ever attain to this till we are made sencible of our own
nothingness, till we are unhinged of self, and quite taken off from any
bottoming upon our own righteousness. Some, when they have trouble of
conscience upon them, what do they? they fly to their own righteousness; And
when they are sick, and ready to dye, how do they prepare to stand right
before God? they confess they have sinned, and done amiss, but they hope they
have repented, and made amends for that; yea they can remember they have done
such, and such, possibly, many good things, they have been just to all men, and
charitable to the poor, they have heard the word, and been at many a good
Sermon, they have prayed and fasted, etc. Thus they patch up the business, as
if this were their only uprightness, whereas, indeed, their only uprightness is
the righteousness of Jesus Christ. We never see where our uprightness is, till
we see there is nothing that makes us stand upright in the court of heaven, but
only Christ our righteousness. This is the great duty of the messengers, and
interpreters of Christ, to declare to man this righteousness for his
uprightness. And that hence it is (as Elihu proceeds in the next verse to
assure the sick man) that God is and will be gracious to him.

Verse. 24. Then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going
down into the pit, I have found a ransom.
These words hold out the general issue and fruit of the labors and good
counsel of that messenger or Interpreter dealing with the sick man, and
showing him his uprightness.

There are three distinct interpretations which run quite through this verse,
and they arise from a different apprehension about the antecedent in this
pronoune [He] then he is gracious unto him. He; who is that? All the Popish
interpreters refer it to the Guardian-Angel sent to attend on this sick man;
Then he (the Angel) will be gracious, and he will say, deliver him. But as I
then laid by that opinion that the messenger was an Angel properly taken, so I
shall not stay upon that which is a consequent of it, here.

Secondly, Several of our Protestant interpreters refer this he, to the
Messenger or Interpreter, to the Prophet or any spiritually wise and holy man,
sent of God to assist and help the sick man in his distress. Some are so
positive in this opinion, that they deny the text any other reference; Hoc de
nuncio dicitur non de deo; apt enim tribuitur nuncio etinterpreti voluntatis
dei ut miscreatur hominis in summo vitae discrimine constituti. Merl: Et de
gratia eum alloquutus dixerit redime cum nec desce^dat in soveam expiatione
(quam) inveni. Jun: Summa orationis quae apud deum pro afflictis, habenda est.
Jun:
This is to be understood of the Messenger (says one) and not of God. And I
grant it is suitable to the business of the messenger who comes to comfort and
instruct the sick man, that he should pity and compassionate him in that
disconsolate condition, and likewise pray for him, according to the tenor of
these words in the text, or to the same effect; O Lord God, be gracious to him,
and deliver him, let him not go down to the pit, for the ransom sake which I
have found. As if Elihu had said; When that faithful messenger shall have
declared the benefits and grace of God to the afflicted man, then pitying his
afflicted soul, he shall pray for him; O God deliver him from death and
condemnation, from the pit, and from destruction, for I have found and showed
him a ransom, by which his soul may be delivered, and his sins pardoned.

In the 19th Chapter of this Book at the 27th verse, Job uses this word in
his application to his friends, for their pity to him, and more favorable
dealing with him; Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O my friends, for the
hand of God has touched me. As if he had said, The hand of God presses me
sore, O let not your hand be heavy upon me too. This exposition carries a
great truth in it, and is not at all inconsistent with the letter of the text;
yet I shall not insist upon it, but adhere rather to a third, which makes the
antecedent to this [He] to be God himself.

Then he is gracious. That is, when the messenger has dealt with the sick man,
when he has opened his condition to him, and showed him his uprightness, or
how he may stand upright before God, or what his righteousness is before God,
and has brought his heart to an unfeigned sorrow for his sin, and to the
actings of faith upon the promise; then God is gracious, and then he gives out
the word for his restoring, and orders it to be presently dispatched away to
him, saying, deliver him, unloose him, unbind him, let him not go down into
the pit, I have found a ransom. Taking this for the general sense of the
Text, I shall proceed to open the particulars.

Then he will be gracious, or then, he will have mercy upon him, as Mr
Broughton translates. Then and not before; till then the Lord lets his bones
ache, and his heart tremble, till then he suffers him to be brought so low that
he is reckoned among the dead, but then, though not before, he shows himself
gracious unto him. When a poor man is reduced to the utmost extremity, then is
Gods opportunity, then is the season of mercy; and the Lord therefore lets us
be at the lowest, that we may be the more sencible of his goodness in raising
and lifting us up: The Lord suffers many (as Paul spoke of himself, (2 Cor.
1.9.) to have the sentence of death in themselves, that they may learn not to
trust in themselves, but in him who raises the dead. We seldom give God
either the glory of his power by trusting him, or of his goodness by thanking
him for our deliverances, till we are brought to the last cast (as we say) or
to such an exigent as leaves no visible means in probabillity, no nor of
possibility to escape. And when it is thus with us, then he is gracious.

Secondly, Then he is gracious, that is, when the man is doubly humbled, when
the man's heart is graciously broken, when the man is grown into an abhorrence
of himself and of his sin, or loathes himself for his sin, as much as he
loathed his meat, as it is said in the former verse; when his heart is thus
taken quire off from all that is below in the world, and gathered up
beleevingly to Jesus Christ in the word of promise; Then he is gracious.

(...) Misertus, gratificatus, gratia prosecutus fuit, ex gratia donavit
benesecit.
The Original word has many comfortable significations in it, yet all
resolvable into this one, he is gracious. It signifies to pity, to have
compassion, tenderly to regard, to bestow grace, to do good, there is enough
in the bowels of this word to bear up the spirit of the sickest body, or of
the most troubled soul. It is said ( Genesis 6.8.) Noah found grace (or favor) in
the eyes of the Lord. Noah was the only man that held out the grace of God in
that age, him only did God find perfect or upright in his Generations ( Genesis
6.9.) and Noah only was the man, that found grace or favor in the eyes of the
Lord in that generation ( Genesis 6.8.) God was gracious to him and his, when the
whole world peri^hed by water. That proper name John is derived from this word;
when God gave Zachary and Elizabeth a Son in their old age, he also directed
how he would have him called, ye shall call his name John, which name (as we
may well conceive) was assigned him either because God did very graciously and
favorably bestow that gift upon his Parents in their old age, and so showed
them much favor (a child at any time is a great favor from God, especially in
old age) or, secondly, because John was to open the Kingdom of Grace, to
preach the Gospel, and to prepare the way for Christ, by whom grace and truth
came. The Baptist was as it were the loop and button between the legal and the
Gospel dispensation; therefore his name might well be called John. And there is
frequent use in Scripture of the Adverb which comes from this Verb, to signify
injuries received without desert or undeservedly. ( Ps. 7.4.) Yea, I have
delivered him that without cause was mine enemy, or that was mine enemy gratis.
And again ( Psalm. 35.7.) For without cause have they hid for me their net in a
pit, which without cause have they dug for my soul. Yet more, as the word
signifies the doing of good (gratis) or when there is no desert; so any injury
done gratis, or when no provocation has been given the party so to do. Now,
as all the mischief which the wicked plot against or do to the people of God
is undeserved, and flows merely from their malice, so all the good which God
does for his people is undeserved, and flows purely from the fountain of his
free grace, or from his compassions, which fail not. And surely the Lord
deserves highest praises from man for any good he does him, seeing what he
does is gratis, or undeserved.

Further, This Hebrew word Chinnam answers the Greek word ((...)) rendered
freely (Romans 3.24. (...). Gratis i. e. ejus gratia. Bez:
) We are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ. How can unjust men deserve justification? Therefore Mr Beza translates,
We are justified gratis, that is, by his grace.

Again, When it is said, then he (or, the Lord) is gracious, it may be taken
two ways. First, as, to be gracious implies the intrinsecall graciousness of
his nature, or that mercifullness and kindness which dwells in the heart of
God, and which indeed is God, (for the graciousnesse of God is the gracious
God) thus God is always and altogether gracious, he is infinitely and
uncessantly gracious. Secondly, when it is said, he is gracious, it may note
only the graciousness of his acts, and dispensations; thus, as I may say, the
Lord is gracious (ad hinc et nunc) as he sees cause, at this time he is
gracious and not at that time; that is, he puts forth acts of grace now, and
not then. The Lord puts forth acts of grace, both according to the pleasure of
his own will, without respect to any thing in man, as also without respecting
what man is or does, according to his pleasure. And thus we are chiefly to
understand it here; then he is gracious. God is gracious in his nature always,
and always alike gracious; but he is not always alike gracious in his
dispensations, or in giving forth acts of grace; he is gracious to man
according to his secret will as he pleases, but he is gracious according to
his revealed will as man pleases him.

Hence Observe, first.

The first cause and spring of all our mercies is the graciousnesse of God. Or,
All our mercyes flow out from the grace of God. That Is the fountain, yea
that is the Ocean which seeds and fills all the Channels of mercy, which stream
to us, as our happiness in this world, and for our everlasting happiness in the
world which is to come. All is of grace fundamentally, or because the Lord is
and will be for ever gracious. Thus the Lord spoke to Moses (Exodus 33.19.) I
will be gracious to whom I will be gracious. My mercy shall flow our, when, and
to whom, and where I please. And the proclamation which he made of himself in
all his royal Titles runs in the same strain ( Exodus 34.6.) The Lord, the
Lord God, merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity. If we consider God,
first in doing us good; Secondly, in forgiving us the evil which we do;
Thirdly, in delivering us from the evils which we now suffer; Fourthly, in
delivering us from the fear of future sufferings; all is from grace and from
free grace. He does us good though we are undeserving any good, that is grace,
yea, he does us good though we are ill deserving, and that is more grace. He
does all for us through grace, First, in spiritualls, and Secondly, in
temporalls; not only do the good things of eternal life, but the good things
of this present life flow from grace unto his own people. Not only the health
of their souls, but the health of their bodies, not only deliverance from hell,
but deliverance from sickness also, flow from his free grace in Jesus Christ.
Therefore of all their mercies and salvations (both as to the foundation and
top-stone of them) the people of God must cry (as the Prophet Zachery (Chap.
4.7.) foretells the people of God should say of that longed for deliverance,
when that great mountain should become a plain before Zerubbabell) grace,
grace, unto them: That is, grace has begun them, and grace alone will
maintain, continue, and perfect what it has begun. As there is nothing in us
(except our misery) which moves the Lord to begin, so there is nothing in us
(but our inability) which moves the Lord to perfect what he has begun. He
sees we cannot, and therefore he will perfect what he has begun, and all this
he does that he may exalt his own name, and perfect the praise of his free
grace toward us.

More distinctly, that all comes from grace, or from the graciousness of God,
may note these five things to us. First, not only that God does all for his
people freely, or without desert. But Secondly, that he does all things
willingly, or without constraint for his people. Thirdly, that he does all
things forwardly for his people. He does very much unaskt and unsought, and he
is not much asked or hardly drawn to do any thing for his people. Though he
has said of some things, I will be sought unto, or inquired after that I may
do them for you, (Ezekiel. 36.37.) yet his mercies are never forced nor wrested
from him by entreaties, but flow from a principle of love, naturally, as water
out of a fountain. Fourthly, he does all rejoycingly, even with his whole
heart, and with his whole soul. Mercy pleases him, and he is pleased with
occasions of showing mercy, it is no burden to him to do us good; mercy
proceeds from his nature, and therefore he delights in mercy ( Mic: 7.18.)
yea, to be merciful is his nature, and therefore he cannot but delight in it.
Fifthly, graciousness being the very nature of God, implies that he will do us
good liberally, and constantly, or that (as the Apostle James speaks) he gives
liberally, and upbraideth not; he does not upbraid us with our poverty, who
receive, nor does he upbraid us with the riches of the gifts which himself
bestows; And because they flow from his nature, therefore he does not in the
least empty himself, how much soever he fills the creature with his gifts or
goodness. Some men (upon the matter) even exhaust and undo themselves by
liberallity unto others; and they who give most, or have most to give, cannot
always give. It is said in this Book, ( Chap. 37.11.) By watering, he wearieth
the thick cloud; that is, God commands the cloud to give rain so long, that
it has not a drop more to give, but is quite spent. Springs or fountains are
never wearied or spent with watering, because their waters come as freely and
as fast as they go; God is an everlasting spring of grace and goodness; He is
not wearyed, nor emptyed by what he gives out to, or does for the creature,
because all flows from his natural graciousnesse as from a fountain.

Then he is gracious. I would urge the second reference of that word (then) a
little further; It was showed before, that it might refer, First, to the
extremity of the sick man, Secondly, to the sick man's humiliation, or the
right disposure of his spirit to receive renewed acts of grace, and favor from
the Lord.

Hence observe, Secondly.

God usually dispenses or gives out acts of grace when we repent and turn
from sin, Si aegrotus ille monitis illius nuncij paruerit ac proinde
resipuerit, tum etc. Pisc:
when we believe and lay hold upon the promise; Then he is gracious. It is said
( Isa. 30.18.) Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious. The Lord
has always a gracious disposition, a gracious nature; he always has a store
and a stock, a rich stock and store of mercy by him; but he does not always
give it forth; no, he waits to be gracious, that is, he waits till we are in a
fit frame, till we are in a due temper to receive his grace. And because as to
the dispensings of grace, God waits to be gracious; therefore many retard and
hinder their own good; they are not yet in a frame to receive; their vessel
is not yet seasoned to hold mercy. The Lord waited to be gracious to David
after his grievous fall, and therefore he did not give Nathan a Commission to
say, Thy sin is done away, till David's heart was broken, and had said (2 Samuel:
12.13.) I have sinned against the Lord; But when once that word fell from him,
then Nathan declared how gracious the Lord was to him. As soon as David said,
I have sinned (that is an act of repentance) presently, Nathan said, the Lord
has done away thy sin, that is an act of grace. When did Ephraim hear a word
of comfort from God? The Prophet tells us ( Jer: 31.18, 19, 20.) I have heard
Ephraim bemoaning himself, (that is, mourning over and bewayling his sin)
saying, thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed
to the yoke. We have him there also praying, Turn me, O Lord, and I shall be
turned, etc. Upon this, how graciously, how meltingly did the Lord speak? Is
Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? since I spoke against him, I do
earnestly remember him still, (or, in remembering I remember him) my bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have mercy on him. Now I will manifest my
grace, and acquaint him with my goodness. The Lord was very gracious to Saul
afterward Paul, he sent Ananias to him with a message of mercy, as to restore
the sight of his bodyly eyes, so to assure him that he should be an instrument
in the hand of Christ to open the eyes of many, and a chosen vessel to bear
his name before the Gentiles and Kings and the Children of Israel, (Acts 9.15.)
But when was this message delivered him? the text tells us ( v. 11.) For behold
he prays; the man is in the dust, he is brought upon his knees, his spirit is
broken; that word he prays, comprehends the whole work of a gracious soul,
as to his humiliation and returning to the Lord. In the parable of the
prodigal Son, his father is represented abundantly gracious to him; but he did
not signify it, he did not send the ring, not the rich robe to him, when he
was abroad in a strange Country among harlots, drinking and wasting his estate,
time and strength vainly; we read of no acts of grace to him then, but when,
being pinched with famine and hunger, he came to himself, and began to bethink
himself of coming back to his fathers house, and that he had brought himself
by his own folly to beggary, and want, and husks; when he was upon these
terms, or resolves to go home to his father, and cast himself at his feet as
unworthy the name or privilege of a Son, then his father ran to meet him,
fell on his neck and kissed him, then he put on the ring, and clothed him with
the robe, then he killed the fatted calfe, and made a feast for him. All which
scene of mercy does but hold out this one word in the text; Then he is
gracious.

There are two sorts of gracious acts of God. First, some are acts of absolute
grace, or of preventing grace; These are put forth upon and exercised toward
the creature, before there is any the lest preparation in the heart, to draw
them out or invite the bestowing of them. Thus, the grace of God in election is
absolutely free, there was no prevision of any qualification in man moving God
to elect him. And so that wonderful act of grace (in which election first
descends and discovers it self) effectual vocation, is absolutely free. God
calls a sinner when he is in the heat and hurry of his evil ways, pursuing
his lusts in the height of his pride, and in the hardness of his impenitent
heart. Now, if when God first calls a sinner there is nothing in him but sin;
What can move God to call him but free grace? A third absolute act of grace is
justification; God does not justify a sinner for any thing that he finds or
sees in us; As to us it is altogether free. He justifies the ungodly (Rom:
4.5.) when that wretched infant was in its blood (which expresses a miserable
unclean poluted condition) then was a time of love (Ezekiel: 16.8.) then was God
gracious. What loveliness was there in that infant (representing the best of
men in that fallen natural estate) to draw out the love of God? nothing at
all, yea she was altogether unlovely, yet then (says God) thy time was the
time of love, or then was the time of putting forth love in her conversion and
voc^tion; Then, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, live. And because
the thing might seem not only strange, but even impossible, that the heart of
God should be toward such a wretched one for good, the word is doubled, yea I
said unto the^, when thou wast in thy blood, live. These acts of absolute free
grace are the glory of the Covenant of grace; for if the Covenant should hold
out acts of Grace only upon our pre-dispositions, when should we receive any
act of grace? The promise is not of this tenor, I will pardon them when their
hearts are soft and tender; but, I will take away the heart of stone, and give
them a heart of flesh.

Yet Secondly (as to the point in hand) there are conditional acts of grace, I
may call them second acts of grace, or renewed acts of grace. For when after
conversion we fall into sin, and by that evil heart of unbelief (remaining in
a great measure unmortified) we depart from the living God ( Heb: 3.12.) God
does not give out fresh acts of grace, but upon repentance, and the renewings
of our communion with him. Having once received grace, we being again helped
and assisted by grace, act graciously, before God declares himself gracious to
us. When a man is cast upon a sick bed for sin, (that is the case of many) the
Lord will see repentance before he will raise him up again. ( James 5.15.) The
prayer of faith shall save the sick, and if he has committed sins, they shall
be forgiven him; that is, if he being cast upon a sick bed to correct or
chasten him for the sin that he has committed, shall humble himself, and seek
the Lord by prayer, praying and calling for prayer; Then the sin committed
shall be forgiven him, and the Lord will raise him up again. It Is not the
prayer of another that can obtain deliverance for the sick, much less the
forgiveness of his sins, if himself be prayer-lesse, and repentance-lesse. But
while others pray for the sick man's bodyly health, they praying also for his
souls health, the Lord gives him repentance for his sin, and then a
comfortable sight of pardon. So then before the Lord puts out these second acts
of grace, he looks for and finds something in the creature yet still, that also
is an effect of his grace both to them and in them. They, who have already
received grace, must stir up their grace, and renew acts of grace (thorough
grace) toward him, before he dispenses acts of grace toward them. And as
consolation in this life, so that highest and last act of grace, salvation, in
the life to come, is not bestowed upon any, till they are fitted. God calls and
converts the worst of men, those that are in their filth, and mud, and mire,
but he will not save a filthy person, he will have him first purged and
prepared. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not enter into the kingdom of
God (1 Cor: 6.9.) and that without holiness no man shall see the Lord (Heb:
12.14.) There is no eternal salvation without preparation; nor is there any
promise of temporal salvation without it. When a man is sick to death (as in
the text, salvation comes not, the Lord is not gracious till the sick man's
spirit is humbled and set right; till the messenger has showed him, how he may
stand upright before the Lord, and he has embraced his message; then, and not
till then he is gracious. And as in these words we have the occasion of this
grace; so in the following words we have the publication of this grace; Then he
is gracious.

And says, Deliver him from going down into the pit. [And saith] that is, the
Lord gives out an order presently, he gives out a warrant for the release of
the sick man. When earthly Princes have once granted pardon to an offender,
they say, deliver him; they sign a warrant for his deliverance out of prison,
or they sign a pardon, and say, deliver him from death, when he is at the
place of execution. Thus concerning this sick man, God says, deliver him from
going down to the pit.

The word rendered deliver, signifies also to redeem, (...) ide^ quod (...)
redemit liberavit verbum (...) non alias reperitur, et pro ratione loci
intelligitto et exponitur pro (...) Merc:
it is used in this form no where else in all the Scripture. To free, deliver
or redeem a man, intimates his person in hold, then will he say, deliver him.
From what? there are as many sorts of deliverances, as there are of troubles,
each particular strait, and trouble, has a proportionable deliverance. There
is deliverance, First, from captivity or bondage. Secondly, from want or
poverty. Thirdly, from imminent sudden danger or peril by land or Sea.
Fourthly, from sicknesses and diseases. Fifthly, from death; and that twofold;
First, from temporal, Secondly, from eternal death. Here when he says,
deliver him, we may determine this deliverance by the latter words of the text,
to be a deliverance from deadly sickness; deliver him from going down to the
pit; that is, deliver him from death; To go down to the pit, is often in
Scripture put to signify dying.

Further, The pit implies corruption, because in the pit or grave, the body
corrupts. It is said indeed ( Numb: 16.30.) of that rebellious triumvirate,
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, they went down alive into the pit, but they went
down to death, and ordinarily the dead only go down to the pit. The same
phrase is used ( Psalm: 28.1. Psalm: 88.4. Ezekiel: 31.14. Ezekiel: 32.18, 24, 29, 30.)
That text is very remarkable ( Prove: 28.17.) He that offers violence to the
blood of another, he shall flee to the pit, let no man stay him; That is, The
murderer, who in wrath and hatred, or upon private revenge dest^oyeth the life
of any man, shall hasten to destruction, either as chased and hurried by his
own fears like Cain and Judas, or as prosecuted by the justice of the
Magistrate. And as he thus hastes to the pit, so let no man stay him, that is,
First, let no man conceal him; Secondly, let no man move for his impunity, or
solicit his pardon; or if any do, then Thirdly, let not the Magistrate grant
his pardon; For the old universal Law tells him his duty ( Gen: 9.6.) He that
sheddeth man's blood, by man (that is, by the Magistrate commanding, and by his
officers executing) shall his blood be shed. And as another Law has it ( Deuteronomy:
19.13.) Thine eye shall not spare him, etc. The Magistrate who is in Gods
stead, may not say of him, as here God does of the sick man, Deliver him from
going down to the pit. His blood is ill spared who would not spare the blood
of another.

But it may be questioned, for as much as the text says only in general,
deliver him, Into whose hands this warrant for his deliverance is delivered? or
who is directed to deliver him? Master Broughton represents God speaking this
to the sick man's disease, for thus he renders the text; Then he will have mercy
upon him, and say, Spare him (O killing malady) from descending into the pit.
God will speak thus to the disease (and there is a great elegancy in it) spare
him O killing malady. Diseases come and go at Gods command; they hurt and they
spare at his direction; As the Lords breath or word blows away the winds (
Math: 8.27.) The men marvelled, saying, Who is this that even the wind and the
seas obey him? So the Lords breath blows away sickness; if he do but speak
to a disease, to a fever, to an ague, to a dropsy, to a consumption, O
killing malady, spare him, thou have done enough (any disease might prevail to
death, did not God say, spare him) hold thy hand, not a blow more, not a fit
more O killing malady. Death it self, much more sickness, hears the voice of
God. And it may be said to hear him, because it does that, which they who have
the power of hearing ought to do; that is, it obeys or yeildeth to the voice
and command of God, and will no longer afflict the sick man. Diseases may be
said to deliver a man from death, and the pit, when they depart from him. Yet,

Secondly, I conceive this warrant for the deliverance of the sick man, is
given out to the messenger or interpreter, to the one among a thousand, that
visits him in his sickness. He having been with him, and dealt with his
conscience, he having brought him into a good frame, the Lord is gracious,
Sequestrem illum Jubebit ei renunciare impetratum esse sibi liberationem. Bez:
and in answer to his prayer, sets it upon his heart that he shall recover, and
warrants him to tell him so, which is, declaratively, to deliver him from going
down to the pit. This act of man's delivering the sick, is like that act of
man pardoning the sinner ( John 20.23.) that is, it is ministerial or
declarative, not original nor Authoritative. The interpreter does not deliver
him, but tells him God will. We have the Psalmist speaking thus after his
supplication and prayer made to the Lord for a sick State or Nation or for a
sick Church (that is his scope, Psalm: 85.) Will thou not revive us again, that
thy people may rejoyc^ in thee (v. 6.) Surely thou will, and he expresses his
confidence, that God would ( v. 8.) I will hear what God the Lord will speak,
for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints. When he had prayed
he would harken for news, or for a message from heaven, whether or no, the Lord
would order him to speak peace to those for whom he had been praying, and say,
deliver them from going down to the pit. Thus did the Prophet Habakkuk, I will
stand upon my watch, and set me upon my tower, and see what he will say unto
me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved (Chap: 2.1.) In the next verse,
The Lord answered and said, write the vision and make it plain upon tables,
that he may run that reads it. And what was the answer? surely deliverance;
for having said, in the end it shall speak and not lie (v. 3.) he concludes (
v. 4.) The just shall live by his faith. Believing deliverance, he shall at
last be delivered from the pit of captivity and live.

Here in the text we must suppose this messenger had prayed, and having prayed,
he did not neglect his prayer, but was harkening what the Lord would say. Elihu
was confident the Lord would give a gracious answer, though not by an immediate
voice or revelation to his ear, yet by an assurance of the mercy given into
his spirit. When that good king Hezekiah, was not only sick unto death, but had
received an express message from the Lord, Set thy house in order, for thou
shall dye and not live (2 Kings 20.1.) It Is said at the 2d verse, He turned his
face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, saying, etc. And at the 4th verse,
The word of the Lord came to Isaiah the Prophet, saying, turn again, and tell
Hezekiah the Captain of my people; Thus says the Lord, the God of David thy
father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears, behold, I will heal
thee, etc. Here God gave a word formally, and put it into the Prophets mouth,
Go deliver him from going down to the pit. And though the Lord does not thus
now in such an explicit and open way, nor may we expect it, yet there is a
virtuall saying of this word from the Lord, and that sometimes mightily impressed
upon the hearts of those who have prayed and sought unto him, for the sick man,
whereby (not by an ungrounded vain confidence, but by a scripturall holy
confidence, comparing the promise with the man's condition) they are enabled to
tell him, The Lord has delivered thee from going down to the pit. And he
shall as certainly be delivered, as if the Lord had sent an express from
heaven to tell him so. Then he is gracious to him, and says, deliver him from
going down to the pit.

Hence observe.

First, Death is a going to the pit, a going to destruction. Thus it is
ordinarily with all who dye, to the pit they go. Many dye and go down to the
bottomless pit; all who dye may be said to go to the pit. To go to the
bottomless pit, is the circumlocution of eternal death, as to go to the pit
is the circumlocution of temporal death.

Secondly, Forasmuch as the man being sick the Lord gives out this word,
deliver him from going down to the pit.

Note.

Sickness has in it a tendency unto death. The sick stand as it were upon the
borders of the grave. Some not only put death far from them in health, but in
their sickness; until they are even dead, they scarce think themselves dying.
It is good for us in our health and best strength to be looking into the pit,
and considering upon what grounds of comfort we can descend into the grave. How
much more should we be thinking of and looking into the pit, when we are in a
languishing and dying condition?

Thirdly, Observe.

The word and work of deliverance is from God alone; Then he will be gracious
and say, deliver him from going down to the pit. God can, and God only can
deliver from death; no creature in heaven or earth can speak this but by
commission from God; none can open this secret till God interpret it.
Deliverance is the Lords salvation; and the word of salvation from sickness, as
well as of salvation from hell, comes out from the Lord.

But is it not said ( Pro: 11.4.) Righteousness delivers from death.

I answer; when it is said, Righteousness delivers from death, The meaning
is, God delivers the righteous from death. He delivers them from the sting
and terror, from all that which is properly called the evil of corporal
death; and he delivers them wholly from the least touch or shadow of eternal
death. And this righteousness which delivers from death is not our own, but the
righteousness of Christ made ours by the appointment of God, and received as
ours by faith. It Is neither any righteousness wrought in us, nor any
righteousness wrought by us, but that righteousness which is wrought for us,
which delivers from death: and that delivers us from death, because God
says of such a righteous person, deliver him, as often from temporal death,
or going down to the pit of the grave, so always from eternal death, or
going down to the pit of hell.

Fourthly, In that this word deliver him, is given to the messenger.

Observe.

God conveighs deliverance and mercy to us by men like our selves. He will have
the creature beholding to the creature for his mercy, though mercy come freely
and only from himself. God delivers the sick and the sinner in such a method
that we may own, though not stay in his messengers, as the instruments of his
favor. God who can do all things by himself, will not do many things but by
means. He says to the messenger, Deliver him from going down to the pit.

You will say, How can a Minister or a Messenger deliver the sick from going
down to the pit?

I answer, (as was touched before) he delivers him by declaring to him the
mind of God, by acquainting the sick with the promises of deliverance, and by
pressing him to believe and rest upon them; by assuring him that as God is able
to perform the promise, so he is faithful and willing to perform it; yea
that he has given some tokens for good that he will deliver him from going
down to the pit. Thus the work of Gods free grace, mercy, and power, is
oftentimes attributed to instruments and second causes, because they have their
place and use in the bringing about the purposes of God for the good of his
people. Hence some men are called Saviors; And Saviors shall come up on mount
Zion (Obad: v. 21.) No man can save either from temporal or eternal
destruction; He that is our God is the God of salvation, and unto God the Lord
belong the issues from death (Ps: 68.20.) yet says the Prophet, there shall
come Saviors; that is, God will raise up worthy men, principal men (as
another Prophet calls them, Mic: 5.5.) who shall destroy Zions enemies. Thus
Paul admonishes Timothy, Take heed to thy self, and to thy doctrine, continue
in them, for in so doing thou shall save thy self and them that hear thee (1 Timothy: 4.16.) The Apostle James (Chap: 5.20.) speaks the same thing; He which
converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death,
and shall hide a multitude of sins. And the same Apostle faith (as to the case
in the text) at the 15th verse of the same Chapter; The prayer of faith shall
save the sick. Though none can save, yet many are means of our salvation. And
the Lord is pleased to honor those who are the means of any salvation, so
far, as to say, They save. It is indeed the duty of all to ascribe the all of
every work and piece of salvation and deliverance to God only. When the people
stood wondering at Peter and John after they had healed the lame man, Peter
answered ( Acts 3.12.) Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this? or why look ye
so earnestly on us, as if we by our own power or holiness had made this man to
walk. The God of Abraham, etc. has glorified his Son Jesus; As if they had
said, Therefore do ye also glorify him, not us for delivering this lame man.
Though God is pleased to put much honor upon man, by speaking of what himself
does, as if man had done it; yet he will not give the glory of what he does to
any man, nor may any take it. God says to the messenger, deliver him from
going down to the pit; but woe to that messenger who says (when he is
delivered) I have delivered him from going down to the pit.

Thus we see the spring of the sick man's recovery, it is from the graciousness
of God, and we see the means of it, God gives a warrant to his messenger,
saying, Deliver him from going down to the pit; But what is the procuring or
meritorious cause of this deliverance? As the Text has showed us the first
moving cause, The grace of God, so it shows us the meritorious cause, by which
his deliverance is procured; Things are so ordered in the Covenant of grace,
that though the Lord acts with infinite freeness, yet he has appointed and
ordered a way in which alone he will do, what he freely does. This is
expressed in the last clause of the verse, Fer I have found a ransom.

But where did God find it? certainly in his own bosom, in his own heart;
Jesus Christ came out of the bosom of the Father, there he was, God found him
in and with himself; God did not find the ransom by chance, nor did he find it
by advice and consultation with others, but he found it in himself, in his own
infinite wisdom and goodness; that is, he contrived it, he invented i^ there.
This rare, this most excellent thing, a ransom, is the Lords own invention. I
have found it, I know how to do this man good, I know how to save him, and do
my own honor and Justice no hurt, no wrong: my honor is saved, Verbum (...)
denotet expiationem, aut redemptionem, tum, etiam pretium quod pro redemptione
offertur. Significat etiam cooperire linire, aut operire bitumine, quasi
pristinam facie^ rei alicujus aut immunditiem abscondere; quod eleganter
refertur ad ab stertionem peccati. Pined:
my Justice is satisfied in doing it. I have found a ransom.

The word here rendered a ransom signifies in the Verb, to cover or to hide
that which before lay open, that it appear no more. Grace brings another face
upon things, a new face, I may say, upon our souls. The covering of sin
elegantly denotes the pardon of sin. And what reason have we to be thankful
and rejoice, when sin (our soul dirt and deformity) is covered! We have very
foul faces (I mean outward conversations) and more foul souls, or inward
inclinations, till the Lord is graciously pleased to put a covering upon them.
If we cover our own sins we shall have no mercy, but if the Lord once cover our
sins, he cannot deny us mercy, that being it self our greatest mercy, and the
fruit of his great mercy. The Mercy-seat, so famous in the Mosaicall Poedogogy,
is expressed by this word, which properly signifies a Covering. The Mercy-seat
was it self a Covering of pure gold, laid over the Arc, in which Arc the Law
was put ( Exodus 25.17.21.) Thou shall put the Mercy-seat above upon the Arc,
and in the Ark thou shall put the testimony that I shall give thee. And as the
dimensions of the Arc were two Cubits and a half in length, and a Cubit and a
half in breadth, so the same were the dimensions of the Mercy-seat; ( Verse.
10.17.) which figured that as the Mercy-seat fully covered the Arc wherein the
Law was, so Christ should fully cover all our sins, which are transgressions of
the Law. The righteousness of Christ is as long and as broad as the Law, and
so, our sins being covered with that shall never appear against us. Therefore
also from above this Mercy-seat between the two Cherubims (the Lord said (
verse. 22.) I will meet thee, and I will commune with thee. There was a
gracious manifestation of the presence of God above the Mercy-seat, because
that typified Jesus Christ the true Propitiatory or ransom, covering and
hiding out of the sight of God for ever all our defections iniquities and
transgressions. And hence the same word which signifies expiation or
redemption, signifies also the procuring cause of our Redemption, here called
(as also in the New Testament) A Ransom.

I have found a Ransom. A ransom is properly a price demanded for release out
of bondage. And when the Captive is released, the price is paid. To be redeemed
and to be ransomed is the same thing, ( Isa. 35.9, 10.) The redeemed shall
pass there, and the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Sion, and
everlasting joy upon their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Graeci dicunt (...) quod non est aliud quam
sanguis Christi, in quem et vetores crediderunt. Merc:
Thus here, Deliver him (says the Lord) from going down to the pit; I am
satisfied, I have found a price, a ransom. Both Law and Gospel meet in this;
here is the Law, by which the man being humbled confesses his own sin, and the
wrath of God, due to it. Here is also the Gospel, by which he has been taught
to believe, that his sins are pardoned, and the wrath of God turned away from
him for the ransom which Christ has paid.

So then, it is not as popish Expositers tell us, I have found a ransom, that
is, I have found the man's good works, I have found his repentance, I have
found his tears, his prayers, his alms. I now see that in him for which I may
be propicious to him, and deliver him from the sickness under which he is
detained; Apparet in homine aliquid aequitatis, ex quo ei miserer^ possum, quam
quaerebam. Aquin:
thus they generally make somewhat in man or done by man, his ransom, at least
to have a share in it. The heart (as was showed before) is prepared for
deliverance, by the workings of faith and repentance. But the ransom upon
which deliverance is given, is nothing at all wrought in us or by us. Woe to us
notwithstanding our prayers and repentance, our reformations and humiliations.
To put these in place of a ransom, or to hope for deliverance from the pit
upon their account is to pervert the whole Gospel.

Others give a better sense, yet not clear enough, thus, He has humbled
himself, and I am as well satisfied as if I had received a ransom, but I lay
that by also. For when God says I have found a ransom, we are to understand
it of a real ransom, of full pay or satisfaction, not of a ransom by favor
and acceptance. This satisfaction to the justice of God is only and wholly
made by Jesus Christ, without any the least contribution from man. The perfect
ransom which the Lord finds is the blood of his own Son, which is called the
blood of the Covenant, because thereby the Covenant is confirmed, and all
Covenant mercies assured to us. Upon this price or ransom God restores the
sick sinner and pardons him, he heales both his body and his soul. And that Job
had knowledge of this ransom as the only means of deliverance, appears (
Chap. 17.3.19.25.) Deliver him, for I have found a ransom.

Hence Observe, First.

The redemption or deliverance of man by a ransom is the invention of God, and
the invention of God only. If all men on earth, yea if all the Angels in
Heaven had sat from the foundation of the world to this day, in counsel
beating their brains, and debating this question, How man, sinful man might
be delivered out of the hand of the Law, or from that condemnatory sentence
under which the Law had cast and detained him, with satisfaction, or without
damage to the Justice and righteousness of God, they could never have found it
out, nor any thing like it. This is Gods own invention; or, if God had said to
fallen man, I see thou art in a lost pitiful condition, but sit down and
consider how I may do thee good, and not wrong my self, how I may relieve
thee, and not dishonor my self, I will freely do it. If God (I say) had
given man a blank to write down what he would have done to bring this about,
he could never have found it out; but must have perished for ever in his sin.
The thought of a ransom in this way had never entered into the heart either of
men or Angels, if God himself had not revealed it. Therefore the Apostle Peter
having spoken of the great diligence of the old Prophets searching into and
inquiring about that great mystery, the way and means of man's salvation,
c^ncludes (1 Epist: 1.12.) Which things the Angels desire to look into. (...).
The word there used notes a curious prying into that which has some veyled or
secret rarity in it. We may conceive the Apostle in that word alluding to the
Cherubims, which by Gods command, to Moses, were made with their eyes looking
down to the Mercy-seat or propitiatory in the Holy of holyes (Exodus 25.20.)
figuring the ransom in the Text, yea and expressed by the same Hebrew word.
The living Angels do that which those representative Angels seemed to do,
they look earnestly at the mystery of our redemption made, or ransom given by
Jesus Christ. There is such an exquisiteness in this invention, the deliverance
of man by Christ, that the Angels desire to look into it, even as men desire
to see rare inventions. And this exceedingly commends the wisdom of God in our
redemption, that it was a secret to the very glorious Angels. They did not
know it, but as it was made known to them; nor did God (as it seems) make it
known to them firstly or immediately, but it was revealed to them,
occasionally by the revelation of it first to the Church; as the Apostle does
more then intimate, ( Ephesians. 3.10.) To the intent, that now unto principalities
and powers in heavenly places, (that is the holy Angels) might be known by the
Church the manifold wisdom of God. As if, had it not been for the light given
to and spread abroad in the Church, the Angels had been in the dark to this
day about that matter. And doubtless if the Angels did not gather up their
knowledge of that mystery by the ministry of the Apostles preaching it to the
world, in a way of information, yet by their contemplation of what was done in
the Church, and of the goodness of God to the Church, they saw as in a glass
that manifold wisdom of God which before they saw not, or were ignorant of.
Now if the holy Angels knew not this mystery, but as it was revealed, much
less could man. We (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8, 9.) speak wisdom
among them that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the
Princes of this world, that come to naught. But we speak the wisdom of God in
a mystery, etc. which none of the Princes of this World know, Ecclesia ex
Judaeis pariter ac gentibus collecta, quasi speculum est in qu^ contemplantur
Angeli miri ficam dei sapientiam, quam antea nesciebant. Cato.
(who use to be the most knowing men in the World) for had they known it, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. As if he had said, surely the
Princes of the world would have adored, not reproached and crucified Christ,
had they understood who he was, or the work which he came about. And therefore
the Apostle calls it not only a mystery, but a great mystery, and that there is
not the least question, but it is a great mystery. (1 Timothy 3.16.) Without
controversy great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh;
this great mystery, which from the beginning of the World has been hid in God
(Ephesians. 3.9.) that is in the counsel and decree of God, has been also some way
or other revealed by God almost as soon as the world began; It was revealed to
Adam by the promise of the woman's seed; and to Abraham by promise, that in his
Seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed; It was revealed to the
Church of the Jews in Ceremonies and Prophesies, and it has been revealed to
the Church both of Jews and Gentiles by the Spirit in the preaching of the
word, ever since Christ paid this ransom to this day; and it had been hidden
to this day, if the Lord had not revealed it; it is therefore the Lords
invention.

Let me add this by way of inference. We honor men that bring forth any rare
invention. And if it be an invention which also produces profit and advantage
to mankind, how are the Authors of it admired, and their names recorded? All
the inventions of the most refined wits in the world, are dull pieces to this
invention, the redemption of man by Christ. And as there is the stamp of an
infinite unchangeable wisdom upon it; so the profit which comes in by it to
mankind is infinite and inestimable. How then should we honor God, both for
bringing this wonderful invention to light, and giving us the benefit of it
freely! It had been great mercy if God had delivered us upon our finding out
and proposal of a way to him; but he has not only delivered us, but found out
a way himself, and plotted how we might be delivered. What a glorious mercy is
this! When Darius saw how Daniel was ensnared by his act or decree, he was
extremely troubled, and (says the Text, Dan. 6.14.) he was sore displeased
with himself, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him, and he labored
(beating his brains and studying) till the going down of the Sun to deliver
him, yet could not, but cast he was to the hungry Lions, only he told him, (
verse. 16.) Thy God whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee. Darius
could not find a ransom, any means of deliverance for his servant and great
Favorite Daniel. But when we had brought ourselves into a snare, and must have
been cast to the Lions for ever, to be torn by them, the Lord brought forth
this rare invention, a ransom, whereby we poor sinners are delivered out of
the mouth of the roaring Lion, who goes about continually to devour us.

Secondly, Inasmuch as deliverance is got by ransom.

Observe.

Our deliverance is costly. Souls are precious, they are dear ware; Blood, and
that the blood of Christ is their ransom; ( Math. 20.28. Romans 3.2.5. Ephesians. 1.7.
Col. 1.14. Heb. 9.12. Rev. 5.9.) in comparison of which all the treasures of
this world are trash, our Gold and Silver corruptible, and our very
righteousness a corrupt thing. Deliverances are obtained three ways.

First, By power or plain force; thus Abraham delivered his Nephew Lot when he
was carried captive ( Genesis 14.14.) He armed his trained servants, born in his
house three hundred and eighteen, and rescued him. I may say, the Lord Jesus
has delivered us thus, even by force and power, he has beaten all our
enemies, and having broken and spoiled principallities and powers, he made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them in it (his Cross spoken of in the
former verse) or in himself; that is, in his own personal power, not by any
aid or foreign assistance received from men or Angels.

Secondly, Deliverance is obtained by price or payment. When our friends or
countrymen are taken Captives by Turks or others, we cannot send an Army to
rescue them, but usually we do it by ransom; we buy them again out of the
enemies hand, or out of bondage. Jesus Christ has delivered us, not only by
power, but by price, it was not (as has been already showed) by gold or
silver, but by his own most precious blood, (1 Pet. 1.18.) Jesus Christ has
delivered us out of the soul destroying hand of Satan by force, but he delivers
us out of the sin-revenging hand of his Father by price. Christ owed the Devil
nothing (nor do we) but blows, but having undertaken our cause, he owed his
Father as much as our debt and deliverance from it amounted to, a vast sum,
yet he had enough to answer it to the utmost farthing, and did, and so
delivered us.

There is a third way of deliverance, and that is by supplication and
intercession, which may be considered two ways, First, by our own prayers and
supplications; Secondly, by the prayers and supplications of others; which
prayers of others are properly called intercessions. The intercession of a man
with man may deliver him from the wrath of a man. And the intercession of a man
with God, has wrought the temporal deliverance of some both persons, and
Nations; and therefore when the Lord was resolved not to spare his people, he
forbad the intercession of the Prophet ( Jer. 14.11.) Pray not for this people
for their good: And he professed ( Jer. 15.1.) Though Moses and Samuel (those
two mighty Advocates) stood before me (praying he means for them) yet my mind
could not be toward this people, cast them out of my sight; In that God would
not deliver his people upon their intercession, is an argument that he often
does. But it is the intercession of Christ alone which carries it with God (and
that always carries it, for the Father always hears him, that is, grants
his requests) for the deliverance of his people both from temporal spiritual
and eternal evils. This intercession of Christ is the fruit of his blood
shed, or of the ransom paid down for us. For as his blood purchases our
deliverance, so by his intercession it is given in or applied to us. We have
the impetration of our pardon by Christ's sufferings, and the application of it,
by Christ interceding for us. So then, we are delivered both by power, and
price, and prayer, in several and distinct respects; But the present text
speaks of deliverance only by a price, I have found a ransom, I am well paid,
says God, for man's deliverance. This ransom every poor soul may plead before
the Lord, for his deliverance both from sickness death and hell. He that has
nothing to offer to the Lord (as indeed the best have nothing of their own
worth the offering, and if they offer any thing of their own, of how much worth
soever it may seem to be, it will not pass nor be accepted, he (I say) that
has nothing of his own to offer) yet may tell him he shall be well paid; he
may tell God, he shall have more by saving him, then by damning him. If he
damn him he shall have but his own blood (the blood of a creature) for
satisfaction; but if he save him, he shall have the blood of his Son, the blood
of God, as a ransom for his salvation.

Thirdly, Observe.

Though the Gospel was not clearly and fully revealed in those elder times, yet
it was then savingly revealed. How does the grace of God shine forth in man's
deliverance by a ransom, in this Scripture; Here is nothing said of
deliverance from sickness by medicines, but by a ransom; and if they knew that
deliverance from a disease must come in by a ransom, how much more, that
deliverance from damnation must come in that way? The old Patriarchs had the
knowledge of Christ to come, and not only was there a knowledge of him to come
in that nation and Church of the Jews, but the light scattered abroad, the
Land of Vz. had it, Job had it, as has appeared from several passages of this
Book, Elihu had it as appears by this.

Fourthly, Observe.

Not only our eternal deliverances, but even our temporal deliverances and
mercies, are purchased by the blood of Christ. A believer does not eat a bit
of bread, but he has it by virtue of the purchase of Christ; Christ has
bought all good for us, and Christ has bought us out of all evil. Christ has
not only purchased deliverance from hell, and salvation in heaven for us, but he
has purchased deliverance from a sick bed, and freedom from bondage to men for
us. ( Zech. 9.11.) As for thee also (says the Lord) by the blood of thy
Covenant (that is, the Covenant which I have made with thee) I have sent forth
thy prisoners out of the pit wherein was no water; that is, from the Babylonish
captivity. The Jews were delivered from corporal slavery, as well as
spiritual, by the blood of Jesus Christ, and so are the Covenant people of God
to this day. The blood of the Covenant serves to all purposes; for the good
things of this life, as well as of that which is to come. Nothing else can do
us good to purpose, or deliver us from evil but the blood of Christ. ( Ps.
49.7, 8.) They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the
multitude of their riches, none of them can by any means redeem his brother,
nor give to God a ransom for him. In some cases, as Solomon says, ( Prove.
13.8.) The ransom of a man's life are his riches. As a man's riches do often
endanger his life (all the fault of some men for which they have suffered as
deep as death, has been only this, they were rich) so a man by his riches may
redeem his forfeited or endangered life, he may buy off the wrath of man, and
so ransom his life by his riches. But all the riches in the world cannot buy
his life out of the hand of sickness; though a man would lay out all his
substance, and spend all that he has upon Physicians (as the poor woman in the
Gospel did) yet that could not do it. We need the blood of Jesus Christ to
help us out of a sick bed, and from temporal sufferings as well as from hell
and everlasting sufferings. And the more spiritual any are, the more they have
recourse to the blood of Christ for all they would have, whether it be freedom
from this or that evil, or enjoyment of this or that good.

Therefore, First, When we hear of a ransom let us remember that we are all
naturally captives. Here is a ransom for our souls and a ransom for our
bodies, we are ransomed from hell, and ransomed from death, surely then, we are
(through sin) made captives to all these.

Secondly, In that the ransom is expressed by a word, that notes hiding or
covering, it should mind us, that, Jesus Christ by his blood (which is our
ransom) has covered all our bloody sins; and surely the blood of our sins
will appear not only to our shame, but to our confusion, unless the blood of
Christ cover them.

Thirdly, We may hence infer, The Lord shall be no looser by saving the worst
of sinners. His Son has taken care for that, he has undertaken to see his
Honor saved, and his Justice satisfied.

Fourthly, In all your outward afflictions and sicknesses; apply to the blood
of Christ for healing, for help and deliverance.

Fifthly, Being delivered from going down to the pit, from death by sickness,
bless Christ for his blood. We are rescued from the arrest of death, from
Deaths Sergeant, sickness, by the blood of Christ. And remember that as Christ
ransomes us from going down to the grave when we are sick, so Christ will
ransom us from the power of the grave when we are dead. ( Hosea 13.14.) I will
ransom them from the power of the grave. Which though it were primarily meant
of the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon, where they seemed to be not
only dead but buried; yet the Apostle applies it clearly to the ransoming of
the body dead indeed and laid in the grave, by the power of Christ at the
general resurrection (1 Cor. 15.54.) For then shall be brought to pass that
saying that is written, Death is swallowed up of victory. O death where is thy
sting? O grave where is thy Victory. Yea Christ has ransomed all those from
going down to the pit of hell, who take hold of his ransom by believing. See
that you have an interest in this ransom, else you will never have deliverance
from going down to that pit. We read not all the Scripture over of any ransom
to deliver those, who are once gone down to that bottomless pit. They that
are in the grave shall be ransomed and recovered by the power of Christ, but
they that go into hell shall never be ransomed from thence. Take hold of this
ransom that ye may have full deliverance, both from sickness leading to death
here, and from hell which is the second death hereafter.

JOB. Chap. 33. Verse. 25, 26. His flesh shall be fresher then a childs; he
shall return to the days of his youth.

He shall pray unto God, and be will be favorable unto him, and he shall see
his face with joy; for he will render unto man his righteousness.


IN these two verses Elihu proceeds, to show the perfecting of the sick man's
recovery, the foundation of which was laid in the Lords graciousness to him,
spoken of in the former verse; and the declaration of it in that word or
warrant, which went out from God to the messenger about his deliverance from
going down to the pit.

This mercy or recovery in, the full extent of it, has a twofold respect;
First, to his body; Secondly, to his soul.

The mercy as it respects his body, is laid down in the 25th. verse; His flesh
shall be fresher then a childs; he shall return as in the days of his youth.

The mercy which respects his soul, or the state of his inward man, is laid
down in the 26th verse; He shall pray unto God, and be will be favorable unto
him, and he shall see his face with joy; for he will render unto him his
righteousness.

In this recovery of his soule-state, we may further consider, First, the
causes of it.

First, The Isntrumental cause, prayer; He shall pray unto God.

Secondly, The principal or efficient cause of it, together with the first
moving cause, The kindness of God; He will be favorable unto him.

Secondly, The consequence of this his renewed soule-state; He shall see his
face with joy.

Thirdly, The matter wherein this joyful state does consist, in the close of
the 26th verse; For he will render to man his righteousness.

So much for the scope and parts of these two verses; which show the blessed
issue, which God gives this distressed and sick man from his afflictions and
sorrows.

Verse. 25. His flesh shall be fresher then a childs.
By flesh he means the natural flesh of the body; this flesh shall be fresh,
yea fresher, and not only fresher then it was before he fell sick in his
manhood, but then it was in his childhood, fresher then a childs. (...)
mollitur, recreatus fuit, alibi quam hic non legitur. Ex (...) quod virentem
significat ac vegetu^ (ut cap: 8. 16.) et (...) quod syriace significat
crescere, q. d. revirescet plantarum more et germinum. Merc:
The word which we render comparatively, fresher, signifies to wax soft or
tender. It Is no where read in the whole Bible but here. Grammarians say, it is
compounded of an Hebrew word, which signifies to be green or flourishing (
Chap: 8.16.) and of a Syriack word which signifies to increase and grow as a
plant; we render it as noting the man mending apace (as some sick men upon
recovery do) in his strength and health. He shall be fresh-coloured, who
before was pale and wan, he shall be full-fleshed, who before was fallen and
lean; so that, when he says, His flesh shall be fresher then a childs, It Is
an Elegant hyperbolical expression, to show his perfect recovery from that
mortal sickness to health. As if he had said; God will restore him so, that
there shall be no scarr, nor print, no dregs, nor appearance of his former
disease seen upon him. We know how tender and soft, how delicate and fair,
the flesh of a little child is, how sweet his countenance is, how full of good
blood his veins are, how healthy and strong (as to his time) his whole body
is. Thus it shall be with this sick man; His flesh shall be fresh^r then a
childs; he shall be as if he were newborn, or entered a second time upon the
stage of this world. Our spiritual estate of renovation by Christ is set forth
as a youthful, or child-like state, as to the purity and perfection of it (
Ephesians: 5.27.) Christ shall present us to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. The Church has her sin-spots and wrinckles
now in her militancy; but when Christ shall present the Church at last
triumphantly to himself, then as himself was ever without spot or wrinckle,
so shall the Church be. Her flesh shall indeed be fresher then a childs, being
perfectly recovered out of her spiritual sickness. Notat perfectissimum
sanitatis modum, qui nullum transacti morbi vestigium relinquit. Mert:
And thus, in proportion, Elihu assures the penitent sick man, that, when his
peace is renewed with God, and his spirit set right for God, his very flesh
shall be without spot or wrinckle, fresher then a childs. The latter part of
the verse bears the same sense.

He shall return as in the days of his youth. That is, he shall not barely
recover his health, and get upon his legs again (as we say) he shall not
merely escape death and the grave, but he shall have an addition of bodily
ability, he shall, as it were, be young again. As sickness makes a young man
look old, so recovery from sickness makes the old man look young. That Is to
return to the days of his youth.

Hence Note; First.

Bodily beauty, health and strength are the Gift of God. He gives them, and
takes them away at pleasure, or having taken them away, he can give them back
when he pleases. He kills and he makes alive, he brings down to the Grave,
and brings up, as Hannah said in her Song (1 Samuel: 2.6.) How low soever a man
is brought by sickness, either proper or metaphorical, the Lord is able to
raise him up again. We read ( v. 21.) in how pitiful a plight, the sick man
was, how rather like a carcass then a living man he looked, His flesh was
consumed, that it could not be seen, and his bones which were not seen, stood
out; as much as to say, He was nothing but skin and bones; yet, when in that
case all hopes were gone, and all natural helps failed, it was no hard matter
with God to cure him. When the skill of the Physician, and the virtue of
medicines fail, the power of God fails not. As it is in reference to those
outward dangers and desperate exigents, which we meet with in this world by
enemies and persecutors, when we look upon our selves as dead men, when all
hope of deliverance seems past and gone, then the Lord always can and often
does deliver. The Apostle gives us his experience of it (2 Cor: 1.9, 10.) We
had the sentence of death in our selves; he spoke not thus in regard of
sickness, but of trouble and persecution; As if he had said, The malice and
wrath of our enemies was such, that we thought we should never escape, We had
the sentence of death in our selves, but providence suffered it to be so, that
we should not trust in our selves, but in God who rayseth the dead. As it is (I
say) in such dangers, so in dangerous deadly sicknesses; when a poor creature
has the sentence of death in himself, when he makes no other reckoning but to
dye, as good King Hezekiah said of himself in his sickness ( Isa: 38.13.) I
reckoned till morning, that, as a Lion, so will he break all my bones, from
day even to night will thou make an end of me; yet then as in his case, so in
many cases the Lord stretches forth a healing hand and takes the sick man up
again, to continue in the land of the living.

Secondly, From the way of expressing this, in allusion to a child or a youth.

Note.

God he can quickly make the greatest changes in nature, either for the better
or for the worse, He can turn youth into old age, and old age into youth. That
is, he can make a young or a healthy man weak as an old man, and an old or
sickly man strong as a young man; and as it is with natural, so with
political bodies, as with persons, so with nations. A nation that is
flourishing in its youth, heat, strength and glory, rich and full of peace and
plenty, God can bring an oldness upon it, and cause it to decline every day.
The Prophet spoke of the state of Israel in this notion ( Hos: 7.9.) Gray
hairs are here and there upon them, and they perceive it not; they thought
ttemselves to be in a very youthful flourishing condition (as a state) but the
Lord brought gray hairs, that is, they were decaying, withering, weakening, and
became a decrepid nation; And when a nation is gray-hayred, old and withered,
he can make it youthful, he can recover the honor and power of it, and cause
the dread of it to fall upon the neighboring nations round about. He turns a
land into a wilderness, which before was as the Garden of God; And he can
change that land into a Garden of God which now is a desolate wilderness. The
unchangeable Lord is visible and glorious in all these changes. The health and
strength both of the body politic and natural are at his dispose. He can
bring a decay upon what is built, and repair what is decayed, whether in
nations or persons. When the earthly house of this Tabernacle is ready to drop
down into the grave, and crumble into dust, God by a word speaking, repayreth
it to as much beauty and strength, as when, the first stone being laid, the
top-stone was set up. When Naaman had once submitted to and obeyed the Prophets
counsel, which at first he despised, and washed in Jorden, His flesh (says
the text, 2 Kings 5.14.) came again like unto the flesh of a little child.
The holy Psalmist charged his own soul to praise the Lord, and all that was
within him to bless his holy name (Psalm: 103.1, 5.) Who had satisfied his
mouth with good things, so that his youth was renewed as the Eagle. This
renovation of his youth may be understood three ways; First, as to his
natural state, or bodyly strength. Secondly, as to his civil state or worldly
successes, as to his honor and kingly renown. Thirdly, as to his spiritual
state, or the hightning of his gifts, graces, and comforts. It Is probable,
David had found a declension in all these, and at last through the goodness of
God and his blessing upon him, the renewing of them all from that oldness to a
youthfullness again, like that of Eagles. We find the same allusion in the
Prophet ( Isa: 40.31.) They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength,
they shall mount up as with Eagles wings. Some Naturalists say, the Eagle
renews her strength by sucking blood when her stomach is so weak that she
cannot seed upon the flesh of her prey. Saints indeed renew their strength as
the Eagle, while by faith they suck the blood of Jesus Christ; and they get
cure of their own weaknesses, while they believingly lay hold upon his
strength.

Thirdly, We heard in the former verse of a divine warrant issued out for this
man's recovery; Then he is gracious to him, and says, deliver him. Here we have
the warrant executed; His flesh shall be fresher then a childs.

Hence observe.

The commands and warrants of God are effectual, they shall be obeyed and made
good to man. If God say, deliver him from a sick bed, he shall be delivered; I
will work (says the Lord, Isa: 43.13, 14.) and who shall let it? for your
sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their Nobles, or bars,
as the margin reads it; I will have it done, I will break all those Nobles who
are as bars in the way of my peoples deliverance. So when the Lord sends his
warrant for the delivering of a sick man, he will break all those bars and
bands by which diseases and sicknesses hold him as a prisoner in his bed.
Nothing can stand against the word of God: as by a word speaking he gave the
creature a being, when it had none (The Lord only spoke the word, Let there be
light, let there be a firmament, etc. and it was so) Thus also the word or
warrant of God renews a wel-being to those, with whom it is worst, or a
comfortable life to those, who are compassed about with the sorrows of death.
The word of God prevails over all, or is effectual to every purpose ( Psalm:
33.9.) He spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast.

Further, In this restoring of the sick, we have a shadow of the resurrection.
The raising of a dying man from his bed, is like the raising of the dead from
the grave. The spring of the year is a shadow of the resurrection, because
then the earth returns to her youth, and is fresh as a child, In winter all
things are dead and desolate, their gloss and beauty is gone; but then comes
the spring and all revives again, the face of the earth looks fresh, corn and
grass, trees and plants flourish and put forth their buds and blossoms. Now,
what the spring of the year is to the body of the earth, the same is the
return of health to the body of man; In both we have an exemplar of the
resurrection, as also in the regeneration or new birth of the soul, by the
power of the holy Ghost. For till then we are, like old sickly men, in the old
man, yea we are dead. But no sooner does the Spirit bring us forth by a second
creation into the life of the new man, but we become in spirit fresh like
Children, our youth returns to us again; that is, we return to that state
wherein we were first created and set up by God in righteousness and true
holiness; yea into a better and surer state then that. Man through grace is not
only as he was in the first day of his creation, but better; He returns to the
day of his youth, and receives such a youth as shall never decay into old age;
yea the older he is in nature, the younger, that is, the stronger and more
beautiful he shall be in grace. He shall (according to that promise, Psalm:
92.14.) still bring forth fruit in old age, he shall be fat and flourishing.
This renewed youthfullness and flourishing condition of the restored sick man
in spiritualls, is specially and fully set forth in the next verse.

For Elihu having showed the recovery of the sick man's body, he proceeds to the
recovery of his soul, which eminently returns to the days of its youth, both
in the puttings forth of or exercising the grace of God received, and in
receiving more grace, favor, and comfort from God, as will appear in opening
the words.

Verse. 26. He shall pray to God, and he will be favorable to him, and he shall
see his face with joy, for he will render to man his righteousness.
El^hu gave us, before, one means of the sick sinful man's recovery from his
bodyly and soul sickness, that was the counsel and instruction given in by
the messenger, the interpreter, one of a thousand. And here he sets down
another means by which he is restored to both, especially to the sweetness of
both.

He shall pray unto God. The word here used to pray, signifies not barely to
pray, (...) multiplicavit, proprie verba fortia et magnacopia fudit in
oratione. inde (...) supplices. Zeph. 3.10.
or put up requests to God; It Is a word with an emphasis, implying the
Multiplying of prayer, and that not the multiplying of prayer so much by
number, as by weight; the pouring forth or multiplying of strong prayers, or,
as it is said of Christ, In the days of his flesh (Heb. 5.7.) the offering up
prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears. There may be a
multiplying of weak insignificant words in the ears of God by prayer; But the
faithful people of God, through the Spirit, power out many strong words in
prayer (as Christ did in the days of his flesh) to him who is able to save
them from death or danger, and give them life. When Elihu says, He shall pray,
he intends such prayers, even the urgency, importunity, or vehemence of the
soul in prayer. When Isaac saw his wife Rebecca was long barren (he was forty
years old before he married, and many years being elapsed in marriage, there
was no appearance of Children) Then (says the Text, Gen: 25.21.) Isaac
entreated the Lord for his wife, because she was barren, and the Lord was
entreated of him, and Rebecca his wife conceived, It cannot be imagined that
Isaac being so holy and gracious a man, had not prayed for that mercy before;
Doubtless he prayed that God would fulfill the promise to his father Abraham
in giving him a child: but when he saw the promise so long delayed, or stick
so long in the birth, then he entreated the Lord ('it is this word) he powered out
many and strong prayers. The word is used again concerning Manoah, after his
wife had received a promise from the Lord of hearing a Son, afterward called
Sampson (Judge: 13.8.) Then Manoah entreated the Lord, and said. O my Lord, let
the man of God which thou did send, come again unto us, etc. Fearing they
might not fully follow the instructions given his wife for the education of
their son, he earnestly begged of the Lord further direction in that matter.
That prophecy either of the Gentiles to be converted, or of the return of the
dispersed Jews, expresses them by this word ( Zeph: 3.10.) From beyond the
rivers of Ethiopia, my suppliants shall come, even the daughter of my dispersed
shall bring mine offerings. As if the Prophet had said; They shall spend
themselves in supplications at their return, they shall come with strong
petitions, with mighty prayers, as making prayer their business. They shall not
come with frozen affections and cold requests, but with hearts flaming up in
the ardency of their desires, and urgency of their supplications to the Lord.
That Is the force of the word; He shall pray; As if Elihu had said, He shall not
come with dead-hearted prayers and petitions, (as many do in their sicknesses
and sorrows) nor with a formal Lord have mercy upon me, and help me; but he
shall make a business of it, he shall pray to purpose, he shall pray with his
whole strength. In which sense the Lord bid Ananias go to Saul, afterward
Paul (Acts 9.11.) For behold he prays; intimating that he had never prayed
all his days before; nor indeed had he (though being brought up a strict
Pharisee, he was much in the form of prayer) ever prayed in power before.

He shall pray. Some understand this, He, relating to the messenger praying for
the sick man, He shall pray, and God will be favorable to him. That Is a truth,
it is the work and duty of the messenger to pray for, as well as advise the
sick man. But I conceive rather the person here intended praying, is the sick
man for himself, who after he has been counseled, directed, and advised by
the messenger what to do, applies himself to the doing of it.

Further, Some, who agree that the sick man is the person praying, yet
understand it of prayer after his recovery; who finding himself healed and
strengthened prays unto God for grace, or for a right use of his health and
strength. But I rather understand it of his prayer unto God in the time of his
affliction; who when his sins and transgressions have been laid before him by
the messenger, and his soul-soars searched to the bottom, and faithfully dealt
with, and so brought to a sight of himself, and of his sin, with the sad
effects of it visible upon this pained and consumptive body, is then stirred to
seek the Lord, and entreat his favor; He shall pray unto God;

Hence Note.

Sickness is a prayer season. Prayer is a duty never out of season, yet at
some times more in season, and most in season in times of affliction; Is any
man afflicted, let him pray, (James 5.13.) And among all afflictions the
affliction of sickness seems to be a special season calling for this duty.
Therefore in the 14. verse of the same Chapter, as soon as he had said, is any
man afflicted, let him pray, it follows, is any sick among you, let him call
for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him; It Is high time for us
when sick to look about us, to call in prayer-aide, or help from others in
prayer; yet it is not enough fot the afflicted, or the sick to get others to
pray for them, they must pray for themselves: some put off the duty of prayer
to others, and think it suffices if they send bills to ministers or move
friends to pray for them. I know sickness indisposeth to prayer, bodily pain
and weakness hinder continuance and abiding in the duty; but that does not
excuse the sick from praying for themselves. To desire others to pray for us in
bodyly sickness, and neglect it our selves is an ill symptom of a sick soul;
yea to desire others in that case to pray for us, when we have no heart to pray
for our selves, is too clear a prognostic that their prayers will not profit
us, nor be prevailing for us. Pharaoh, when under those dreadful plagues,
could send for Moses and Aaron more then once, and said unto them, entreat the
Lord for me, (Exodus 9.27, 28. Chap. 10.16, 17.) But we read not that he
entreated the Lord for himself. Simon Magus when struck with the terrible
threatenings of Peter, said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these
things which ye have spoken come upon me. (Acts 8.24.) But we read not that he
prayed for himself. The prayers of others are rarely beneficial to any,
unless they either pray or have a desire to pray for themselves. Elihu
represents the sick man praying for himself, he shall pray

Unto God. There Is the object of prayer.

Hence Note.

Prayer in sickness, and in all other cases must be directed unto God, and to
him only. Divine addresses are fit for none but God; For First, none are worthy
of this honor but God; Prayer is so great a part of that honor and worship
which is due to God, that it is often put for his whole worship. Mine house
(says the Lord, Isa. 56.7.) shall, be called an house of prayer for all
Nations. Secondly, none can hear, that is, answer prayer but God; there is no
help to be had but in him. As it is his glory to be prayed to, and such a glory
as he will not part with to any other, so it is in vain to pray to any other.
In vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of
Mountains (that is, from the greatest worldly Powers) truly in the Lord our God
is the salvation of Israel, (Jerem. 3.23.) God only was David's Hills (Psalm.
121.1, 2.) I Lift my eyes to the hills from whence comes my help; what these
hills were, himself explaines in the next verse. My help comes from the Lord
who made heaven and earth; Baals Priests called upon Baal, they cried Baal hear
us, but says the Text, th^re was neither voice, nor any that answered (1 Kings
18.26.) It is not only sinful, but senceless to pray to any other then God
alone. That popish Doctrine of invocation to Saints and Angels, is not only a
will worship, but folly and dotage.

Fourthly, He shall pray, etc.

Hence Observe.

If we would have any mercy from God, we must ask it. God is ready to give, but
he looks to be entreated, and he will be entreated: What God has promised to
do for us, his doing of it must be obtained by prayer. Working prayer, works
the promises to their issue, yea prayer works the prophecies, whether of
salvation upon Sion, or ruin upon Babylon to their issue. Promises and
prophesies are the express will of God, and shall certainly be fullfilled in
their season; yet if we desire their fullfilling, we must pray that he would
fulfill them; and it is a token for good that God is about to fulfill them,
when the hearts of his people are drawn out much in prayer for their
fullfilling. There are some mercies, in the promises, rightly called preventing
mercies, they come upon us before we ask; such is the mercy of out vocation,
conversion or turning to God; we are naturally so far from praying while we are
in the state of nature, that we are continually blaspheming or dishonouring the
name of God; but, as for persons converted, (who are eminently called heirs of
the promise, that is, of the good in the promise) if they will have any good
out of a promise, they must ask it. When the Prophet had declared many
prophesies of good and great and glorious things which God would do for his
people, he concludes with this direction from the Lord. ( Ezekiel. 36.37.) I will
yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them. As if
the Lord had said, I will not do these things unasked, as you look I should
do these things for you, so I look you should pray unto me that they may be
done. A promise was made to Abraham (Genesis 22.17.) that his seed should be
multiplied as the Stars of Heaven; now might not Isaac his Son have said, God
has promised me children, what need I pray for them? but Isaac knew better, he
knew that the promise was to be brought to the birth by prayer, therefore he
entreated the Lord that he might have children.

Fifthly, from these words He shall pray compared with the next, and he (that
is God) will be favorable to him.

Observe.

The Lord is ready to hear when we pray, ready to give when we ask. As prayer
is honorable and delightful to God, so fruitful to man. Ask and it shall be
given you, seek and you shall find (Math. 7.7.) He shall pray unto God, and he
will be favorable unto him. Prayer shall not be lost, nor vanish into air.
There was never any faithful prayer lost; though the prayers of many have not
been answered in kind, that is, they have not had the very thing they asked
for; yet they have had an answer to their prayers; and though prayer be not
always answered in our time, yet there is a time wherein all faithful prayers
shall be answered; one age reaps the fruit of those prayers which another age
has sown. The seed time is one age, the harvest in another. Latter
Generations get good by the prayers of the former. Though we who pray see not
the fruit of it, yet many shall find the fruit of it; and how often does the
fruit of prayer appear presently, how often does the answer come in upon the
very putting up of the request? (Isa. 65.24.) Before they call, I will answer,
and while as they are yet speaking, I will hear. While the word is in their
mouth, the mercy shall be put into their hand. While the Church ( Acts
12.5.16.) was praying, Peter came in among them. As if God had said, there is
your prayer. What the Prop^et Elisha said (2 Kings 6.33.) of the messenger sent
to apprehend him; Is not the sound of his Masters feet behind him? The same may
we say sometimes of this messenger holy and fervent prayer, is not the sound of
the mercy prayed for at the very heels of it? Thus close does Elihu put the
sick man's prayer and the answer of God, he shall pray unto God, And he will be
favorable unto him.

(...) Graecis est, (...), significat vehementer velle ac delectari. Merc:
That is, he shall have a gracious and a speedy answer; he will be favorable
unto him, or, he will accept him; as Mr. Broughton renders: It Is a very
comfortable word, it notes not only to wish well to, or to be at peace, but to
be well pleased with another, yea to be delighted, and take pleasure in him.
It Is not barely, to be appeased and reconciled, to lay down wrath and
displeasure conceived against a man, but it notes much sweetness of spirit
toward him, and full content or complacency in him ( Psalm. 149.4.) The Lord
takes pleasure in his people, (they are as the joy of his heart) he will
beautify the meek with salvation; he will not only save them, but adorn them
with salvation; they shall not only be delivered (after they have layen among
the pots, Psalm. 68.13.) from the blackness and filth of their adversity, but
they shall have a beauty put upon them, or (as it follows in that Psalm last
cited) They shall be as the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her
feathers with yellow gold. God will be favorable to them, that is, he will
give them favors to wear for him, he will put markee of honor upon them, they
shall not only be benifited, but beautified and crowned with salvation.

God expressed that highest favor and most indeared affection which he bare to
his own Son, as serving him, by no better nor more emphaticall word then this (
Isa. 42.1.) Behold my ser^ant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul
delights. What is or can be more delightful to God then his Son? and what
can be more comfortable to man, then to hear and know, that God delights in
him, and bears favor to him (through his Son) with the same affection as he
does to his only begotten Son? He will be favorable unto him.

Whence note.

First, God is well pleased with, he is favorable to, and delighted in an
humble sinner. When a sinner is brought upon his knees and becomes a suppliant,
when as he is laid low by affliction, so he lies low in prayer and
supplication, then the Lord will be savourable to him, and show his delight in
him. The Lord delights not in the strength of the horse, he takes not
pleasure in the legs of a man ( Ps. 147.10, 11.) No man is favored by God,
because of his outward favor, because he has a beautiful face, or strong
clean limbs; yea not only has the Lord no pleasure in any man's legs, but not
in any man's brains, how reaching soever, nor in any man's wit how quick soever,
nor in any man's judgment how deep soever, nor in any man's tongue how eloquent
or well spoken soever, but the Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in
those that hope in his mercy; in those that walk humbly with him, and call upon
him. Let me (says Christ to his Spouse, Cant. 2.14.) hear thy voice for it is
sweet; he means it not of an artificial singing voice, but of a spiritual
praying voice. That Is the music which the Church makes for Christ. Nothing is
so tunable nor takes the ear and heart of Christ, like the voice of prayer and
praise from a gracious heart. All the beauties and rarities both of persons and
things are dull and flat, yea wearisome and loathsome to God in comparison of a
gracious, honest, humble soul. Princes have their favorites (they are
according to the language of this Text) favorable to some above many, either
because they are beautiful and goodly persons, or because they are men of
excellent speech, prudence and comportment. All godly men are Gods Favorites,
he is favorable to them not only above many men in the world, but above all
the men of this world, who have their portion in this life; And he therefore
favors them; because they are the purchase of his Son, and the workmanship of
his Spirit, convincing them of, and humbling them for their sins, as also
creating them after God in righteousness and true holiness. Such shall be his
favorites.

Secondly, Consider the coherence or dependence of these words, He shall call
unto God, and he will be favorable unto him. Whereas, before, all his
complainings and outcryes stood him in no stead, now being humbled effectually,
and taking hold of the righteousness showed and offered him by the Messenger of
God, he no sooner makes suit to God but is heard.

Hence Note.

God first shows regard to the person, then to the offering, to prayers and
services. This truth may be understood two ways, First, in reference to the
state of grace. When Abel and Cain brought their sacrifices or offerings, God
had respect to Abel and his offering, but to Cain and his offering had no
respect, (Genesis 4.4, 5.) Abel was in a state of grace, Cain was not, so the
Apostle states their case, ( Heb. 11.4.) By faith Abel offered unto God a more
excellent sacrifice then Cain, by which he obtained witness that he (his
person) was righteous, God testifying of his gifts; and what did he testify?
surely that his gifts were brought in faith, and were presented from a
principle of grace, which Cain had not; and therefore God did not approvingly
testify of his gifts. Till we close with God by faith, God does not close with
our services by acceptance. Secondly, as this is true in reference to the state
of grace, so in reference to somewhat in the present actings or dispositions of
those who are gracious. It Is possible for a godly man to act so sinfully, and
to be so ill disposed to the frame of his heart, that God may seem to deny
acceptance to his prayers, and services. David said ( Psalm. 66.18.) If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. And God told the
Jews, his Covenant people, ( Isa. 1.15.) When ye make many prayers, I will not
hear; your hands are full of blood. Thus while they who have a state interest
in Christ, walk unworthy of it, they are under the frowns of God, and his
dis-acceptation of all their duties, till they renew their repentance and
humble themselves. And I conceive this was the case of the sick man in the Text
(in whom doubtless, he aimed at Job) whom Elihu granted to be a godly man, yet
under great distempers of spirit, which must be healed and removed before he
could so call upon or pray unto God, as he would be favorable to him, or give
him testimony of his favor. Thus we see, in both these references, how the
person of a man must be respected and in favor before his prayers can. For as
we can have no benefit by the intercession of Christ, till we accept his
person, so God will not give us any benefit by our supplications, till himself
accepts our persons, which he does only in Christ. Many would be saved by
Christ, they would be pardoned and get to heaven, they would enjoy the benefits
and privileges which he has purchased for his people, but they neglect Christ
himself; nor do they think of closing with his person. Now, I say, as unless
we have respect to the person of Christ, and desire union with him, we have
nothing to do with his benefits; so unless God has respect to our persons, we
get no benefit, no answer of our prayers.

Thirdly, Note.

To have the favor of God, or to be accepted with him, is the top and sum of
all desirable favors. It Is the Alpha and Omega, the first and last of all
other favors, to find God favorable to us; if God be favorable to us, it
matters not much who frowns upon us, or what foul weather we meet with in this
world. And, as to be in his favor should be the chief of all our desires, so
to be assured of his favor should be the chief of all our studies and cares (2
Cor. 5.7.) Herein (says the Apostle) we labor, that whether present or absent
we may be accepted of him. The word notes to labor ambitiously; as if he had
said, we labor as much for the favor of God, as ever any of the sons of
ambition labored for the favor of Princes, or regard with the Kings of this
world. No man ever plotted or flattered and crouched so much to the Kings of
the earth for favor, as we do to God for favor; herein we labor. We make it
our business to be accepted with him; if God once accept a man, you may turn
him loose, he will shift for one. How compleately happy the condition of such a
favorite is, will appear yet furtber in opening the next clause of this verse.

And he shall see his face with joy. When once God is favorable to a poor
sinner, then he shall be used or dealt with like a favorite. Great Favorites
stand in the presence of Princes, and frequently see their faces. Whomsoever
any man favors he freely admits to his presence, and takes delight in his
company. Thus Elihu speaks of Gods Favorite, He shall see his face with joy.

There is a twofold interpretation of these words tending both to the same
spiritual sense.

Videbit deus faciem ejus cum laetitia, i. e. hilariter cum intuebitur, vultu
laeto et facili eum respiciet, cum ante vultum iratus avertebat. Merc:
First, Some by the Antecedent He, understand God himself, and by his face the
face of the humbled sick man; and so the sense of this assertion, he shall see
his face with joy, is plainly, this. God will look cheerfully and smilingly
upon the face of this poor suppliant; God will look upon him, as we do upon
friends whom we favor and have much respect for. Friends may see content and
joy shining in or stamped upon our faces, when we look them in the face. The
content which we take in seeing the face of another is visible in the smiles
and joys of our own faces. As when we look sowrely, angryly, sorrowfully,
sullenly upon a man, when darkness is seen in our faces, and clouds gather in
our brows, ready to dissolve into a storm, this speaks we bear him no good
will, or rather that we bear him much displeasure. So when we look pleasantly
upon a man, does it not say, that we are highly pleased with him? To be sure,
when God is at peace with a repenting sinner, he no longer frowns upon him,
nor turns his face from him as an enemy, but entertaines and welcomes him as a
friend; which is directly opposite to Jobs apprehension of God at the 10th
verse of this Chapter, Behold he finds occasions against me, he counts me
for his enemy. This is a sweet soul-reviving and ravishing truth. God beholds
the face of his people with joy, he beholds them smileingly, cheerfully,
delightfully. David calls it The light of Gods countenance (Psalm. 4.6.)

Et videbit (homo) faciem dei cum jubilo. Merc:
Secondly, (and I rather conceive that to be the meaning of the place) most
relate the He, to the sick man; who having been upon his knees humbling himself
before God, and finding God favorable to him, he then sees his face, that is,
the face of God, with joy. God fills his soul with a great deal of peace,
comfort, and sweetness in his approaches to him. Before, possibly, if he did
but think upon God, he was troubled as Asaph found ( Psalm. 77.3.) I remembered
God, and was troubled. To a man in great trouble, especially in trouble of
mind, the very thoughts of God (who is our only help in trouble) may be
troublesome; but when he is set right and restored to the favor of God, or God
being again favorable unto him, he beholds his face with abundance of joy.
Here are yet two things to be opened, or two Queries may be made and answered
for the clearing of these words.

First, What is meant by the face of God; Secondly, what is meant by seeing his
face.

To the former query, I answer; First, the face of God is the essential being
or perfect Majesty of God, of which himself says to Moses. (Exodus 33.23.) My
face shall not be seen. Secondly, the good will and favor of God is his face (
Ps. 80.3.) Cause thy face to shine, (that is, be good to us) and we shall be
saved. Thirdly, the face of God in Scripture is put for any manifestations of
God to man. God manifests himself in wrath to some men, ( Psalm. 34.16.) The
face of the Lord is against them that do evil; Facies dei iram, quandoque
favorem notat. Drus:
That is, he is angry and greatly displeased with them. He manifests himself
in love to others, and all such are said either (as in the Text) to see his
face, or (as other Texts express it) to have his face shining upon them. God is
a spirit, he has no face properly; but as the face of a man is that, by which
he is known (if a man hide his face we know not who he is, though we see all
the other parts of his body, he is a concealed man) so that whatsoever it is,
by which God is clearly known, that in Scripture language is called his face.
And hence Thirdly, the worship and holy ordinances of God, are called the face
of God ( Genesis 4.14.) because they are great manifestations of God, or because
God is manifested in his Ordinances, in his word and worship, who and what he
is, After a sick man, through the help of God, is recovered; he goes into the
congregation to give thanks; and then he may be said to see the face of God,
because there be exhibits the signs of his presence, and does as it were show
his face. There as in a glass we behold the face of God, that is, the
discoveries of his holiness, of his love and goodness; The face of God is seen
in his works, as the Apostle teac^eth us, ( Romans 1.20.) The invisible things of
him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his eternal power and godhead: much more in his
word and Ordinances, and above all in Jesus Christ is God seen and manifested.
Jesus Christ is the face of God, the brightness of his glory, the express
image of his person, (Heb. 1.3.) The light of the knowledge of the glory of God
shines to us in the face of Christ. Thus the face of God is beheld in the face
of Christ. There we may see how holy, how just, how good, and merciful God is;
all this glory of God appears to us in the face of Christ, who is the highest
manifestation of God. Here in the Text by the face of God; we are to understand
any demonstration of Gods favorable presence; in which sense of the word,
Aaron was to bless the children of Israel (Numb. 6.25.) The Lord make his face
to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee. The Lord lift up the light of
his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. That is, the Lord manifest
himself to thee in ways of grace and peace, in favor and in mercy. David
prayed in the same style ( Psalm. 67.1.) God be merciful to us, and bless us,
and cause his face to shine upon us; that is, give us tokens and pledges of his
favor.

Secondly, How see we the face of God? Does not God tell Moses, No man can see
my face and live. How then can the face of God be seen?

I answer; The face of God (which was touched before) as taken for the essence
of God, or for his essential glory, cannot be seen; That Is too transcendent a
glory for man to behold. What we see of God is but some ray or beaming out of
light and glory from himself, we cannot see himself. The essential or
personal glory of God, is that face which cannot be seen, but the declarative
glory of God is a face of God which may be clearly seen by faith in the light
of his word and works. And to see the face of God, is nothing else but for a
man to know in himself (as the Apostles word is in somewhat a parallel case,
Heb: 10.34.) that God is gracious to him, that is, to have an assurance of his
favor, or a reflect act of faith about it. The holy Spirit shows us what God
is, and what the things of God are (1 Cor: 2.12.) We have received not the
spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we may know the
things that are freely given to us of God; that is, that we may^e enlightened
with the knowledge of the grace, goodness, and favor of God to us discovered
in the Gospel. The Spirit shows us this blessed face of God, and we see it by
the actings of our faith; all our visions of God in this life are visions of
faith; upon whose wings all our intellectual powers soar aloft and are
carried up to God. Faith is not only a work of the will in consent and
application, but a work of the understanding by assent and knowledge. Thus we
see God (as a Spirit is only to be seen) with a spiritual eye. The vision of
God is intellectual, the vision of faith. Videre faciem dei, nihil aliud est
quam sentire apud animum suum deum propitium. Coc: In Jubilo. i. e. in quodam
inexplicabili gaudio. Aquin:
Thus the reconciled sinner finding God favorable to him; he sees his face
with joy.

The word signifies joyful acclamation, or shouting for joy, such as men use
after great favors done them and benefits or rather bounties bestowed upon
them. There is a seeing of the face of God with terror; so the wicked shall see
God, that is, they shall have manifestations of Gods displeasure; they shall be
made to see him with shame and sorrow: They shall say (when they see him) to
the mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. They who never saw the
face of God with joy, shall see it with horror and amazement. Saints see it
with joy, they have unexpressible comfort and contentment in beholding God;
they shall rejoice with shouting, as in the year of Jubilee, when they sounded
out their joys with trumpets, or made a joyful noise. It Is no ordinary but a
triumphant joy, with which the godly see the face of God. Extraordinary sights
affect with extraordinary joy. Now the face of God being the highest and most
glorious sight in the world, it must needs affect the beholder with a glorious
with a Jubilean joy. He shall see his face with joy.

First, It being said, He shall see his face with joy, upon his prayer, and the
humbling of himself before God.

Observe.

God hides or vayles his face, till we humble our souls and seek his face.
God will not be seen at all times, no not by his own people; There are
several cases in which he turns away his face in anger, or draws a curtain
(as it were) yea a cloud between himself and the soul. And this he does,
First, and most usually to try his people, how they can bear his withdrawings,
and to see whether or to what they will betake themselves, when he takes
himself so much from them, that they cannot see him. Secondly, He does it
often to chasten and correct man for sin. To be under the hidings of Gods face,
is the saddest effect of sin to a sencible or an awakened soul. David made a
grievous complaint because of this, what ever the cause or occasion of it was.
( Psalm: 13.1.) The absence of God from him (though possibly but for a short
time) was so tedious to him, that he cried out, How long will thou forget me, O
Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy face from me? Even Jesus Christ
while he stood in the place of sinners, bare the hiding of his fathers face, as
the sum of all those punishments which were due to and deserved by our sin.
This pressed him more then all bodyly sufferings, and made him cry out, while
he hung upon the Cross, My God, my God (not why have thou left me to be
crucified, but) why have thou forsaken me (Math: 27.46.) Thirdly, God hides
his face from some, because the manifestations of it have not been received
thankfully, nor improved rightly. We ought to give thanks for the light of the
Sun shining in the air, and also do our work in it; Is it any wonder if God
cloud and eclipse the light of his countenance toward those, who neither prize
it, nor improve it? If you would always see the face of God, then be ye
always seen at the work and in the ways of God.

Secondly, Observe.

It is the sole privilege of Gods Favorites, or of those to whom he is
favorable, to see his face. As no man can see that face of God, his essential
presence, so none but Godly men shall see this face of God, his comfortable or
blessed-making presence. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord (Heb:
12.14.) There is a twofold vision or sight of God, and that negative assertion
may be understood of either or of both. There Is first, a vision of God on
earth; thus we see his face, as was showed before, in the actings of faith; For
though the Apostle opposes these two, faith and sight; We walk by faith, and
not by sight (2 Cor: 5.7.) yet faith has its sight; we walk not by sight as
the worldly men walk, who do as they see, and make their eyes both the guide
of their consciences, and the in-bringers of their comforts; we walk not by
outward sight, nor do we make conclusions how to guide our conversations, by
what we see. We walk by faith, and that is the sight which we have of God while
we are here on earth, which cannot possibly be without holiness; faith being so
great a part of our holiness, and (by drawing virtue from Christ daily) the
maintainer of it all. Secondly, there is a sight of the face of God in glory.
And if none can enter into glory but holy men, then no man without holiness can
see the face of God there. Thus Christ says of the Angels, They always
behold the face of my father which is in heaven (Math: 18.10.) Now we see the
face of God darkly as in a glass (1 Cor: 13.12.) that is, in his word and
works, in his ordinances and appoyntments; in these we have glimpses of the
face of God, but we shall see him face to face; that is, as fully and
comprehensively as creatures can; we can never comprehend God, but we shall
have comprehensions of God so far, as finite can take in the fruitions of
Infinite. We shall see his face with joy.

Thirdly, Note.

It is the greatest joy and happiness of man imaginable to see the face of God.
Any manifestation of God is a joyful favor, and a full manifestation of him
fills the heart with joy; Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us
(says David, Psalm: 4.6, 7.) thou have put gladness in my heart more then in
the time their corn and wine increased; As if he had said, I rejoice in thy
favor more then worldlings do in their best enjoyments. Show us the father
and it suffices us, said Philip (John 14.8.) let us have but that favor, and
we desire no more; we have enough, we can have no more, if we may but see the
father. True joy stands not in any sights, nor in the sight of any thing here
below, but in the sight of God above while we are below, and in a hope that we
shall at last get above too, and there have an everlasting sight of him, in
whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore. We read in the Leviticall Law, of the shewbread, which was to be set
in the holy place, upon a Table ( Exodus: 25.30.) The Hebrew is, the bread of
faces. There are two reasons of this denomination; First, Because that Bread
did show the gracious provision that God made for them all the way they
journeyed from Egypt to Canaan, or that he spread a Table for them in the
wilderness where they had no harvest; To which the Prophet may allude ( Jer:
2.2.) I remember (says the Lord) the kindness of thy youth, the love of thy
espousalls, when thou wentest after me in a land that was not sown; that is,
when thou did trust me for thy daily bread. Secondly, It was called the
shewbread, to testify the special presence of God with them, and that his
eye was always upon them, ready to do them good upon all occasions. This was
the high privilege of the Jews then, they had the bread of faces; and this is
the joy of the people of God now, that what ever good they have, it is the face
of God to them; their bread is the bread of faces, and their wine is the wine
of faces, etc. that is, they are a signification of the favor and love of God
to them, or they look upon the love and favor of God manifested in those
things, much more then upon the things themselves. Now if it be so great a
mercy to have some manifestation of the face or favor of God, or that we are
always in the sight and view of God; What will it be to us when we shall
always abide in the presence of God, and see his face with joy?

Lastly, Note.

A justified person has confidence to look up to and think of God; He does
it with joy; and that is the fruit of a well-grounded confidence. Where the
Spirit of the Lord is (says the Apostle, 2 Cor: 3.17.) there is liberty, a
liberty of address and approach to God, a liberty also of speech and prayer to
God. True godliness has much well regulated boldness with God; and as a Godly
man ought with reverence, so he can with a wel-grounded confidence look God in
the face.

For he will render unto man his righteousness. This latter part of the verse
gives an account of the ground of that joy which the sick man found in seeing
the face of God. He shall see his face with joy (says Elihu) for he (that is,
God) shall render unto man his righteousness.

(...) a radice (...)
He shall render; The Hebrew is, he will make to return; The word signifies,
First, to return to a place from whence we have departed ( Genesis 18.10.)
Secondly, to return or turn from that displeasure which was once conceived.
When the Lord, is, as it were, in a hot pursuit of sinners, he returns or turns
from his anger. The Prophet speaks in the negative ( Isa: 5.25.) For all this
his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, or he is not
returned from his anger. Thirdly, The word is used to note man's return unto God
by repentance ( Deuteronomy: 30.28.) We by sin turn away from God, and by repentance
we return to him. Fourthly, It signifies to return by way of requital (
Psalm: 116.12.) What shall I render unto the Lord (It is this word) or, What
shall I return to the Lord for all his benefits? David was in an holy muse or
maze, what testimony of thankfulness he should bring to the Lord. What shall I
render? And in that sense it is attributed both to God and man; sometimes in
relation to evil done, and then it notes to render punishment or revenge (
Psalm: 28.4.) Render to them their desert, so the word is used by Joseph's
brethren ( Gen: 50.15.) He will certainly requite us all the evil which we did
unto him; they were jealous of their brothers love when their father was dead.
And as it notes a return of evil done in way of revenge, so also a return of
good done in way of reward, thus here.

He will render unto man. It is an indefinite assertion, not to this or that
man, but to man. With God there is no respect of persons, but he that works
righteousness (let him be who he will) is accepted of him. To man, that is, to
every man God will render his righteousness.

Righteousness is of two sorts; First, There is the righteousness of our
sanctification, which consists; First, in our turning from or leaving to do
evil; Secondly, in our doing good: this is a righteousness wrought by us and
dwelling or inherent in us. The Hebrews by this word often express that which
we call alms or charity; and the reason is twofold, why alms or acts of
charity are expressed by that word which signifies righteousness; First,
because our charity or our alms must be given of those things that are rightly
gotten. We must not do unjustly that we may be charitable, nor wrong some to
relieve others. Secondly, because charity and alms is a due or right to the
poor that are in want; we call it charity, but it is a work of duty ( Prove:
3.27.) therefore it is well expressed by righteousness. He shall render unto man
his righteousness or beneficence. We may take it in this large sense; for this
also is a part of our sanctification. And when it is said, he will render unto
man his righteousness, we are not to understand it of righteousness in kind,
but of the reward or fruit of his righteousness. For here Elihu speaks of a
person already righteous, or at least of him who had repented of and turned
from his unrighteousness. So that, to return or render unto man his
righteousness, is to return the mercy promised to those that are righteous.
Reddet justitiam. i. e. praemium justitiae. Drus:
For as iniquity or unrighteousness is often put for the punishment of
unrighteousness; so equity or righteousness is often put for the reward of
righteousness, or for that which God according to his righteous promise
returns unto a righteous person. Thus we may understand Elihu here. As if he
had said, God dealt with this man before, as with a sinner, or he afflicted him
for his sin; But now he will deal kindly with him as with a righteous person,
and removing his affliction, and taking his hand off from him, he will render
his righteousness to him, he will not reckon with him for any former
unrighteousness.

From this notion of the word, Observe.

God usually deals with men as they are, and according to what they do. If a
godly man sin he shall smart for it; and if a sinner return and repent, God
will show him kindness. Though the mercy and kindness which God shows to a
returning sinner, be not for his returnings or repentings, yet it is according
to them. The favor which God shows any man is for Christ's sake, or for what
Christ has done and suffered, but it is according to what himself has done
or suffered. David experienced this himself ( Psalm: 18.20.) The Lord rewarded
me according to my righteousness, etc. That is, as I have been a righteous and
just person, so the Lord has dealt with me. And he gives the rule with respect
to all others ( v. 25.) With the upright thou will show thy self upright, with
the pure thou will show thy self pure, etc. That is, Thou will be such to men
in thy dispensations, as they are in their conversations and dispositions, in
the frame and bent of their hearts and lives. And as it follows ( v. 27.)
Thou will save the afflicted (or humble) people; but wilt bring down high
looks; that is, those that are proud and high-minded. The Prophet holds out
the same truth in way of direction ( Isa: 3.10.) Say ye to the righteous, it
shall be well with him, for they shall eat of the fruit of their doings; that
is, they shall have good for the good they have done, or according to the good
which they have done. ( Rom: 2.10.) Glory, honor, and peace to every man that
works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile.

If any object; But may it not be ill with men that do good and are good? does
the Lord always render to man according to his righteousness.

I answer; It is well at present with most that do well; look over all the
sons of men, and generally ye shall find that usually the better they are, the
better they live.

Secondly, I answer; It shall be well with all that do well in the issue, and
for ever. This truth will abide to eternity; God will render unto man according
to his righteousness.

Secondly, We may take the word righteousness, Justiam, quam ei confert in
Christo, reputans eum pro justo. Jun:
for the righteousness of justification; Mr Broughton inclines to that sense,
He will restore unto man his justice. And presently adds by way of gloss;
Justice is Christ; It is Christ's Justice or righteousness that is restored to
man. Christ is indeed The Lord our righteousness (Jer: 23.6.) And thus several
others of the learned expound these words. He will render unto man his
righteousness; That is, he will bestow upon him or restore to him righteousness
in Christ; he will account him righteous, though he has no righteousness of
his own which will hold in Gods account. Elihu, I grant, calls it Man's
righteousness, his righteousness; yet we may well understand him calling it so,
not because it is wrought by but because it is imputed to or bestowed upon man
as his righteousness. That is ours which is freely given us, so is
righteousness in justification by faith in Christ. We have no righteousness
wrought in us or by us, for that purpose; but we have a righteousness wrought
for us, and freely bestowed upon us, for that purpose, which is therefore
truly called man's righteousness.

But some may question, how can it be said, that God does render or return to
man this righteousness, that is, the righteousness of justification? Can this
righteousness be lost? can a person justified fall out of a justified state?

I answer; The righteousness of justification (which is true also of the
righteousness of sanctification) as to the substance and being of it cannot be
lost; But it may be lost as to the comfortable enjoyments and fruits of it, or
as to our apprehension of it; And the Lord is said to return to man the
righteousness of his justification, not as if the grace it self were lost or
taken away from him, but because the sight and sense of it, the sweetness and
joy of it, Non enim ablata justitia redditur sed ablatae justitiae sensus. Coc:
the workings and effects of it having been lost, are now restored to him
again. When the Lord by his Spirit gives the soul a clear and fresh evidence
of it, or renews the testimony of his Spirit with our spirits, that our sins
are forgiven, and that we are justified, beloved, and accepted in Christ, then
the Lord is said to render unto man his righteousness; otherwise, neither the
faith, by which this righteousness is applied, nor the righteousness it self
which is applied to us by faith, is at any time lost or removed. Only in this
sense, as in many other Scriptures, so in this, the Lord is said to render unto
man his righteousness, both of sanctification and justification. For, when a
believer through sin has blotted his own evidences, and God has left him
under the darkness of his own spirit, for his negligent, unwatchfull and
unworthy walking, or when the Lord hides his face, to try him what he will
do, whether he will trust in his name while he walks in darkness and sees
no light, when, I say, after withdrawings for either of these reasons or for
any other the Lord gives him in a renewed evidence of his love, then he is said
to render unto man his righteousness. It is in this case as with a man that
labors under some strong and dangerous disease, which takes away his senses,
and leaves him half dead; we say, the man is gone, yet he recovers, his speech
returns, and his spirits revive, and then we say, his life is rendered to him,
or he is brought back from the grave, we have fetched him again; not that his
life was quite taken away (for he was not a carcass in that condition, a body
without a soul) but his life was, for that time, withdrawn, there was no
appearance of it, no sencible breathing, no motion, no vital visible
operation. Thus we may conceive what is meant by the rendering unto man his
righteousness.

Hence observe.

First, A justified person is a righteous person. He has a clothing of
righteousness; that which we call his righteousness, is not properly but
imputedly his. It is not a clothing of his own making, but made for him and
bestowed freely upon him. ( Rom: 10.3.) They being ignorant of the
righteousness of God; and going about to establish their own righteousness,
have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. It is Gods
righteousness not our own, and yet it is our own as well as the righteousness
of God, it being imputed and reckoned unto us for our righteousness; it is the
believers righteousness as given to him, it is Christ's righteousness as wrought
by him.

Secondly, Observe.

A justified person under great afflictions and temptations often loses the
comfortable sight and sense of his own righteousness. And so may look upon
himself as an unrighteous person, as having no righteousness, or as being
unreconciled and unjustified. For, as many bold sinners and hypocrites presume
they have a righteousness when they have none, and boast themselves to be in
the number of the justified when they are not. So many an afflicted and tempted
soul, who is indeed justified in the sight of God, may be unjustified in his
own. Great afflictions have an appearance of divine displeasure, which stands
most opposite to justification. As affliction is a kind of darkness, so it
often leaves the soul in much darkness. And he that is in the dark is full of
fear, he is apt to question his state, whether he has any thing of God in him
or no. For though it be not good for a Christian always to begin to live, he
should come to a point, and labor for a certainty; yet some are brought to
such a pass that their former evidences and experiences are even dead and lie
prostrate, and they constrained to begin a new reckoning about their spiritual
estate, or, as it were, to begin again to live.

Thirdly, Note.

Man's righteousness or justification, is as lost to him when he wants the
evidence, that is, the comfort, sweetness, and peace of it. When his soul-state
is so ravel'd and entangled, that he can make nothing of it, then his
righteousness is as lost. Those things which appear not, are to us as if they
were not. Not to know what we have, is a degree of not having. When grace does
not act or is not used, we are said in Scripture to lack grace, or to have
none. (2 Pet: 1.9.) But he that lacks these things is blind, and cannot see
afar off. The whole context carries it of believers, who are in a state of
grace, who yet not using grace are said to lack it, and are called blind, as
not able to see afar off, how it was with them when the work of conversion
first began, and so have upon the matter forgotten that they were ever purged
from their old sins. That is, they act as a man that has never had any
acquaintance with God, or knew so much as the meaning of repentance from dead
works. He, in the Gospel, who had but one talent and did not use it, is said
to have none, From him that has not shall be taken away even that he has
(Math: 25.29.) It Is a strange expression to say, that shall be taken away from
a man which he has not; yet the idle servant is said not to have that one
talent which he had, because he did not use it, but laid it by as a dead
stock. Now, as in reference unto the grace of sanctification in us, when we
do not act, we are said to lack it, or not to have it, so in reference to the
peace of justification, when we have not the comfort of it, we are said to be
without it. And therefore when peace is restored to the soul, righteousness or
justification is restored also.

Further, from the connection of these words, He shall see his face with joy;
for he will render unto man his righteousness.

Note, Fourthly.

When the sight of our righteousness or justified state in Christ returns to
us, our comforts return. We may be justified or in a justified state, and not
rejoice. But if we know we are in a state of justification, we cannot but
rejoice. It will make a man rejoice to purpose, when he sees the righteousness
of justification is clearly his ( Isa: 45.25.) Surely shall one say in the
Lord have I righteousness and strength: One shall say this: He shall not only
have righteousness in the Lord, but he shall say he has; that is, he shall be
able to make it out; he shall have the light of it upon his spirit, and then as
it follows in the Prophet; In him shall all the seed of Israel be justified
and shall glory. When they are able to say this, then they shall not only
rejoice but glory. Glorying is the height of joy, or joy is in its full
strength. The Apostle says ( Rom: 14.17.) The kingdom of God is not meat and
drink (What is it then?) but righteousness (and what else?) peace and joy in
the holy Ghost. Righteousness brings in peace, that is the first fruit; The
war is ended, the controversy determined between God and the soul, and when
once peace is entered, joy will follow. It is usual to make triumphs, when, a
formerly broken, peace is made between two nations. When Abimilech sent
commissioners to make a covenant of peace with Isaac, the holy Story says (
Gen: 26.30.) He made them a feast, and they did eat and drink. Surely when
God sends his holy Spirit to speak peace to a troubled soul (against whom his
terrors have been set in array (as Job said in his own case, Chap: 6.4.) and
the arrows of the Almighty within him have drunk up his spirit) he (I say)
having his peace thus restored to him, cannot but have the joy of the Lord
restored to him, as David prayed his might ( Psalm: 51.12.) Restore unto me the
joy of thy salvation; That is, show me that I am justified, that my sin is
pardoned; this will bring back into my bosom the joy of thy salvation, and my
drooping soul shall be not only refreshed but feasted as with marrow and
fatness. Joy is a certain consequent upon the sight of our justification; Yea
joy is not only a consequent, but a fruit and effect of it; joy flows out of
the nature of it; nor is it ever interrupted or suspended, but upon the hiding
of righteousness out of our sight. And therefore joy returns unfayleably when
the Lord is pleased thus to render unto man his righteousness.

JOB. Chap. 33. Verse. 27, 28, 29, 30. He looks upon men, and if any say, I
have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profits me not:

He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the
light.

Lo, all these things works God oftentimes with man,

To bring back his soul from the pit, and to be enlightened with the light of
the living.


WE had the blessed issue of the Lords dealing with the sick sinner in the
former verse. Now, in the two first verses of this context, we have the same
case and issue put in general with reference to any man. And in the two
latter, Elihu recapitulates or sums up the whole matter, and then applies it
to Job personally and particularly in the three last verses of the Chapter.

He looks upon men, etc.
(...) a radice (...) inspexit, intentis et fixis oculis intuitus est.
The word notes a strict beholding and fixing both of the outward and inward
eye, that of the mind, with that of the body. It Is here, after the manner of
men, attributed to God; He marks and animadverts upon men, how it is with them,
or how they stand disposed and affected.

Yet there is a difference among interpreters, who is the antecedent to the
word He. He looks upon men. The doubt or question is to whom this relative
pronowne, He has respect; whether to God or to the sick man lately spoken of.

Some understand it chiefly of the sick man recovered. He looks upon men;
That is, the sick man looks upon those about him; Qui hoc modo afflictus
fuit, resipiscens intuetur homines et diciter. Drus:
and says, I have sinned and perverted that which is right. As if being raised
from his sick bed, he should raise himself up, to give glory to God by
confessing and acknowledging before men, that he had sinned in perverting the
rule of righteousness given him to walk by, and had found by dear-bought
experience, that it profited him not. The Italian translater says, He
afterward shall turn himself toward man, and say, etc. That is, Fructum
alium miserecordiae domini in afflictum subjungit, quod ille liberatus, et
culpam suam coram caeteris hominibus agnoscet et dei miserecordiam in se
confitebitur ut alios aedificet, etc. Merc:
he shall preach Gods grace to sinful man, and propose himself an example of
it, magnifying the grace of God to him, and acknowledging his own vileness.
They who insist upon this exposition render the 28th verse, as the continued
speech of the sick man, making it out to this effect, I have sinned and
perverted that which ^as right, yet he has delivered, or will deliver my soul
from going into the pit, and my life shall see the light.

It must be granted, that to look upon or behold man, is in Scripture, a
descriptive periphrasis or circumlocution, expressing a man recovered from some
dangerous and deadly sickness. And therefore when Hezekiah thought his sickness
was to death, and his case desperate; He thus bemoaned himself ( Isa: 38.11.)
I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living; I shall
behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world. But, says Elihu, the
sick man being perfectly recovered, talks with and looks upon men; And the
first discourse he issues, is a confession of repentance for his iniquity; I
have sinned, I have perverted that which was right, and it profits not: And
his next is a confession of praise for his recovery; He has delivered, or I am
assured he will deliver my soul from going down to the pit, and my life shall
see the light. This is a profitable exposition; and much insisted upon by some
very learned interpreters, and therefore I shall make a little improvement of
it by this brief observation.

It is our duty, being recovered from sickness, to confess and make known the
goodness of God and our sinfulness to those that are about us. There is a
threefold confession; First of faith, that we believe what God has revealed
and promised to do for us. Secondly, of praise, that we thankfully acknowledge
what God has done for us according to his promise. Thirdly, of repentance,
that we are heartily sorrowful for and bewail, what we have done against the
command of God. We should be ashamed to sin before men, but let us not be
ashamed to confess our sinfullness, and (in some cases) our special sins
before men. Though we neither impose nor extort particular confessions from men
(as the Papists do) yet it is good for men who have been under the afflicting
hand of God, and have had great experience of his mercy in raising them up, to
declare what God has done both for soul and body, that others may be bettered
by their experiences.

But I shall not stay upon this, because our translation (which is clear and
safe) runs another way, making the antecedent to this he, to be God; He, that
is, God looks upon men, and says, If any say, I have sinned, and have
perverted that which is right, and it profited me not, Then (as it follows)
He will deliver him from going down to the pit, and his life shall see the
light. The sense of the context in General, is plain; God looks upon men,
and if he sees them penitent, he will have mercy upon them, and deliver them,
or give them that which is better then bodily deliverance. More distinctly.

He looks upon men. It is the work of God at all times to look upon men; and
he looks so upon all men, as if he had but one man to look upon. His look
upon men is not a bare look, but a considering, and an observing look. He so
looks upon men, that he looks through them. He looks upon them, and takes
notice what they are, how it is with them, what they are doing, and at what
they are driving. He looks upon them to consider both the frame of their
hearts, and the course of their lives; yea his looking is an expecting: he so
looks upon man, as looking for somewhat from man, or as desiring to see
somewhat in him. Though God has no need of us, nor of any thing we can do,
yet he looks, waits, or has an expectation, of somewhat to be done by us.
He looks upon sick men, to see how they take it; with what patience they
bear affliction, what the workings of their hearts are, what their repentings,
what the actings of their faith; such things as these the Lord looks for from
most men, mostly from men under the rod, under sad and sorrowful
dispensations. And the words following show what it is expressly which the
Lord looks for. Yet before I open them, note in general.

God loves to see occasion of doing good to man. What we love to do, we love
the opportunities of doing it. The Lord is good, and he loves to do good, and
therefore he is expressed as one troubled when he wants, and as one pleased
when he has the occasions of doing it. We may take up that sense eminently
from that most patheticall wish ( Psalm: 81.13, 14, 15, 16.) O that my people
had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways, I should soon have
subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries. The haters
of the Lord, should have submitted themselves, but their time should have
endured for ever: I should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat,
etc. As if the Lord had said, How glad should I have been if my people had been
but fitly qualified to give me occasion of removing all evil from them, and of
doing them all manner of good. The holy Prophet speaks the heart of God in the
same readiness ( Isa: 30.18.) Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be
gracious unto you, therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon
you. As if he had said, The Lord expects your reformation, that he may not
proceed in rigor against you, or as some conceive rather, he only delayeth his
putting an end to your troubles, till ye are humbled, expecting a seasonable
time to show you that mercy, in bestowing of which he will exalt and advance
his own name and honor, when once he sees you fitted and duly prepared to
receive it. The Lord (says David, Psalm: 14.2.) looked down from heaven upon
all the children of men, to see if there were any did understand and seek God.
There he is represented looking down from heaven to see if any did understand,
as here, he looks upon men to see if any do repent, saying, I have sinned,
etc. The Lord often, yea always looks down upon Nations, Cities and people,
to see if any have a right understanding of him, or a will with upright
affections to him. The Lord at this day is looking upon the sick, and looking
upon the sound, to see if there are any, who are going on faithfully in a right
way, or repenting that they have gone wrong. He looks upon men; And if any
say, I have sinned, etc.

In this latter part of the verse, we have the matter expressed which the Lord
looks upon men for, it is repentance and godly sorrow for sin; If any say, I
have sinned; That is, if any repent. When the Lord says, If any say, I have
sinned, he does not mean it of a bare saying so, but, if any say so, laying
his sin to heart; if any say so from a true sense of the evil of sin; if any
say so burdened with sin, and tasting the bitterness of it; if any shall say, I
have sinned, and say it thus, then etc. The word which we translate sinned,
notes a mistake of our aim or way; As if it had been said; If any man say, I
have gone besides the line, and done besides the rule. Sin is in all men a
missing of the mark, and a stepping out of the right path; it is also in very
many, as it is expressed in the next clause, a perverting of that which is
right. If any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which is right.

(...) curvus obliquus contortus perversus.

Latini dicunt curvos mores.


The word implies more then ordinary sinning, more then sins of infirmity,
which arise from ignorance and mistake, even those which are committed with a
resolvedness of spirit, and purpose of heart; or they imply not those sins
which a man falls into unadvisedly and unawares, but those which he commits
upon deliberation, and in the eye of the Law, that showing him plainly what is
right, and that he ought not to pervert it. So then in strictness of sense, to
pervert that which is right, is to be willingly, yea wilfully unrighteous. The
Church making a graduall confession of her sin by three steps, puts this word
in the midst ( Psalm: 106.6.) We have sinned with our fathers, we have committed
iniquity ('it is this word) or done that which is crooked and perverse) we have
done wickedly. Cain, the first man born, sinned thus ( Gen: 4.13.) My
punishment is greater then I can bear (so we render) or (as we put in the
margin) mine iniquity is greater then can be forgiven. Cains sin was a
perverseness, he knew he perverted that which was right in slaying his brother.
So that, here we have the confession of sin, with the aggravation of it, a
notorious sin. The penitent person does not only say, I have sinned, but I have
sinned greatly, or I have perverted that which was right. To sin, and to
pervert that which is right, are materially the same; only the latter intimates
the manner how a sin is committed, namely, when we would not be ruled by the
Law, but accommodate the Law (as if it were a leaden or lesbian rule) to serve
our lusts; so perverting that which was right, that we might countenance and
embolden our selves in doing wrong. If any ask

What is right? Surely, right is First, The Law, Secondly, that which is done
according to Law. The statutes of God are right, rejoicing the heart (Psalm:
19.8.) The word of God is right, and the rule of right, yea it is a ruling
right. To pervert that which is right, or to pervert the law of righteousness,
is to act against the light and convictions of conscience which will be our
Judge. One of the latin interpreters uses a harsh and course word to press
this by; yet full and proper to the scope; Peccavi et rectum torrificavi.
Cajet: Praevaricatus sum a probitate. Tygur:
I have t^rtified (or writhed and bended) that which was right. Another renders
it, I have prevaricated from that which was right. Our word gives the sense
fully enough, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right.

Hence note.

First, Sin must be confessed. The Lord looks for it. He looks upon men to
see whether any will say, I have sinned. He will have their sin out of their
own mouths. When Nathan brought the parable home to David and said, Thou art
the man, he presently fell into confession, I have sinned (2 Samuel: 12.13.)

But some may say, Is this confession of sin sufficient to say, I have sinned.

I answer; First, a general confession of sin, or that we have sinned is not
sufficient, unless we are also willing and ready to confess before the Lord
all our particular sins. Some are ready enough to say, they have sinned, who
yet will scarce be brought to acknowledge any particular sin; yea many say,
Peccatores se esse plerique confitentur etiam qui se vel peccasse non credunt.
Greg: l. 24. Moral: c: 12.
they are great sinners, who know not how or in what they have sinned, not what
it is to sin. Therefore barely to say, I have sinned, is not a Gospel
confession of sin. I answer. Secondly, Though a general confession is only
expressed in this and many other Scriptures, yet a special confession is
intended. The prodigal Son ( Luke 15.19.) said, I will return to my father,
and I will say to my father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee,
and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. He did not enumerate the particular
evil acts he had committed and was guilty of, yet doubtless he had them as a
burden upon his heart, and was willing to unburden himself of them, one by
one, in a hearty and heart-afflicting confession. The publican ( Luke 18.13.)
stood a far off, and durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, but only said, God
be merciful to me a sinner. He struck at all his sins, though he did not by
name touch any one of them. He that says (knowing what he says) I have
sinned, will not hide any one of his sins; And he that indeed and truth
confesses any one, will cover none of his sins. Those sins may be pardoned
which are not expressly confessed, but if we conceal or hide any sin, and
will not bring it forth in confession, we cannot, in faith, expect the pardon
of it.

Again, Consider the time or season when the Lord looked for this confession;
It was a time of trouble and affliction, of pain and sorrow, the man was sick,
or but in a way of recovery out of his sickness.

Hence note.

Times of affliction are special times of confession and repentance.
Confession of sin must not be omitted (especially not neglected) in our most
comfortable days, much less in a day of trouble. A sad and troubled state
calls us aloud to a gracious sadness of heart, to the search of our hearts and
lives, which are preparatory to repentance and Godly sorrow. Usually in
prosperity men will not be at leisure to search their hearts, and take notice
of their sins. Therefore the Lord draws them to confession by drawing them
from the world, by laying them upon their sick beds, or by bringing them into
straites. And as when affliction is upon persons or families, then is a
special time to confess personal and family sins; so to confess national
sins, is most seasonable when affliction has seized upon kingdoms and
nations. The want and neglect of that public confession and sorrow in such a
day is mightily aggravated, and most severely threatened ( Isa: 22.12, 13, 14.)
God looks and loves to hear every man, saying, and a whole nation, as one
man, saying in a day of sorrow and trouble, I have sinned, and perverted that
which was right.

From the latter words, I have perverted that which was right, or the Law.

Note, First.

The law of God is the rule of righteousness; a right rule. All rightness and
righteousness is comprehended in it, and measured by it.

Secondly, Learn.

Sin is a perverting of that which is right. Every (the least) sin is so in
some degree, though here, possibly, sins are intended of any, even of the
highest degree. The Apostle defining sin, calls it (1 John 3.4.) A
transgression of the Law; and if so, it must needs be a perverting of that
which is right: For what is or can be right, if the rule of righteousness be
not. What the Apostle spoke to Elymas (Acts 13.10.) Will thou not cease to
pervert the right ways of the Lord, shows the nature and effect of every sin,
and the more sinful any sin is, by so much the more does it pervert that which
is right. Some sinners are said to make void the law of God, to pervert it, as
if they would quite subvert and disanull it. David remembers God of such, and
desires him to look to them betimes ( Psalm: 119.126.) It is time for thee to
work, for they have made void thy law; That is, they have done their best, or
worst rather, their utmost to make it void, and of no force; It Is not in the
power of all the powers of the world, to vacat rescind or null one tittle of
the law of God, heaven and earth shall pass away before that, yet many attempt
it, yea some do that which will be found and interpreted a making void of the
law of God, who think themselves great zelotes for, or very zealous of the
law. That will be the case of many, especially, of all will-worshippers.

Again, Consider though the person here spoken of had not only sinned, but
perverted that which was right, that is, sinned perversely, yet upon confession
the Lord deals graciously with him.

Hence Note.

The free grace of God extends to the pardon of the greatest sins, even sins of
perverseness. Where sin abounds, Grace abounds much more ( Rom: 5.20.)
whether the abounding of sin be taken in the number of it, or in the weight of
it, that is, in the greatness and aggravations of it, Grace has its suitable
super-abounding ( Number: 23.21.) When Balaam would show that the people of Israel
were a people impenetrable by his curses, he says, The Lord has seen no
iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel. (...)
The word there used is of a different root from this in the text, but the
sense is the same, implying, if the Lord had seen perverseness in Israel, it
would have laid them open to a curse; yet sins made up of perverseness are
within the compass of a pardon. There is no sin excepted from pardon, but that
which at once refuses and despises it, the sin against the holy Ghost ( Math^
12.31.) This should not encourage any to sin perversely, only it is a comfort to
those who have. They who have sinned perversely, or who have perverseness mingled
with their sin, should not cast off the hope of pardon, but woe to those who
sin perversely, (that is, against the light of their own consciences) upon
hopes of pardon. Such persons have no true hope (they may have much
presumption) that they shall be pardoned. They who having sinned perversely,
confess it, have good ground to pray for pardon, but they who go on sinning
perversely, have no ground (while they do so) to hope for it. This text speaks
of a person confessing and bewayling that he has sinned perversely, not of a
person purposing to sin so, as appears further in the last clause of the
verse; If any say, I have sinned and perverted that which is right.

And it profits me not. Here Is another point of confession, we must not only
confess that we have sinned, but the fruitlessness of sin, or that sin
profits not. There are two rendrings, and so two several expositions of
these words.

(...) potest esse verbum, potest esse et nomen faemininum. Vnde sensus est,
non accepi tantundem, non reposita est mihi par paena pro peccato meo. Coc: Non
digne in me inquisivit pro his quae poccavi. Sept:
The word signifies most properly that which is equal; And hence some give the
sense thus, (which carries in it an eminent work of repentance) I have sinned,
and perverted that which was right, and have not that which is equal; That is,
Though I am greatly afflicted, and my sorrows lie heavy upon me, yet they are
not equal to my sinning, or perverse dealings with the Lord. I have not
received as I was worthy, or according to my ill deservings. The Septuagint
speak thus; God has not made a strict inquisition for my sin. My iniquity is
not charged upon me to the utmost. I have sinned grievously, but God has dealt
graciously with me, and has not measured out to the full of mine iniquity.
It Is an argument of true repentance to justify God in afflicting us. This is a
pious and a profitable rendering of the text.

Whence observe.

First, The punishment of sin in this life is not equal to sin. As all the
sufferings of this life are not worthy to be compared with the glory of the
next life ( Rom: 1.18.) so neither are they comparable with the sins of this
life. When a man is under very sore affliction, chastened with pain upon his
bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain: So that his life
abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat; yet he must confess, his sufferings
are less then his sin. The Church of the Jews acknowledged this as to that
great affliction, their captivity in Babylon (Ezra 9.13.) After all that is
come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that our
God has punished us less then our iniquities deserve, etc. It was no little
punishment which that people endured, yet they confessed it was less then
their iniquity. The least sin is so great, that no punishment which man is
capable of in this life can equal it; nor can that in the life to come equal
it as to present degree, but only by the everlastingness of its duration

Secondly, Note.

A soul truly humbled is ready to confess to the glory of God, that his
punishment and suffering is less then his sin. As a godly man does not think
any sin little, so he does not think any affliction great compared with his
sin. Cain said, My punishment is greater then I can bear; but he did not say,
it was greater then his sin. How hot soever the furnace of divine wrath is
heated, yet sinners must acknowledge there is sparing mercy in it; and that God
might have made it seven times hotter, and therefore has afflicted them less
then their sin. As a godly man is ready to acknowledge his mercy more then he
has deserved ( Gen: 32.10.) I (said Jacob) am not worthy of the least of all
the mercies, and all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant, as if
he had said; I am less in my good actings then any of thy actings toward me
for good have been) so he is ready to say, his greatest afflictions or evils
which he suffers are less then his sins, or then the evils which he has
done.

Secondly, The word signifies to profit, so we translate; Verbum (...) expono,
profuit non fuit mihi conducibilo quod peccaram. Merc:
And it profits me not. Other Scriptures comply with this sense ( Hester
3.8.) Haman in his malicious and envious suggestions against the Jews, tells
the King, It is not for the Kings profit to suffer them to continue. He uses
the same word again ( Hest: 5.13.) where after he had reported all the great
things that he enjoyed, he concludes; What does all this profit me? or all this
avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings
gate? Thus here, says the sick man, I have sinned, And it profited me not, or
I have got nothing by it: And when he says, it profited me not; we are to
expound it by a usual figure in Scripture, whereby more is intended then is
expressed, so that, it profits me not, is, it had been very detrimentall,
dangerous, and deadly to me. I feel and smart under the sad issues of my sin,
my perverting that which was right has done me (though I have had but my
right) much wrong. I have sinned, and it profited me not.

Hence note.

First, Sin pretends profit and advantage to a sinner. There is no temptation
comes without a bait. Though some sin purely for sins sake; yet it is rare that
sin comes without the offer of a bribe, and profit is one of the greatest both
baits and bribes that the Devil puts upon the hook of temptation, when he
fisheth for souls. You shall get by it, says that deceiver. But the repenting
soul, can truly say, it profited me not; I had thought to have gotten by my
sin, it promised me very fair, but I have got nothing but blows. The
temptation with which the Devil assaulted our first parents was of this kind,
He told the woman of profit, she and her husband should gain knowledge by it,
(that is a noble gain) They should be as Gods knowing good and evil, there is
all profit imaginable in such a knowledge. Christ himself who was God and
perfectly knew good and evil, was also tempted with profit ( Math: 4.8, 9.)
The devil showed him all the kingdoms of the world (and those not with bare
walls, but ready hung and furnished) and the glory of them, and said unto him,
all these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. If
our head and the heir of all things was tempted with profit, how much more
poor we! No marvel if Satan provide him Agents to say to us as they are
represented ( Pro: 1.13.) Come, cast in your lot among us, we will all have one
purse, or a joint stock in this wicked trade; What they hoped to get by it, is
told us in the next words; We shall find all precious substance, and fill our
houses with spoil. We shall get enough, and you shall share with us if you
will but come and go with us. We see what sin promises; But what does the
sinner find? himself answers, It profited me not.

Hence learn.

There is nothing gotten by sin, no good is gotten by it. The Apostle puts the
question to sinners ( Rom: 6.21.) What fruit had ye then, in those things
whereof ye are now ashamed? Cast up your account, and tell us what you find at
the foot of it. Possibly some may say, we have gotten hundreds and thousands,
we have gotten houses and lands, our barnes are full of corn, our fields of
cattle, and our bags are full of treasure. But is it profit to have house and
land, gold and silver come in by sin? Let that Scripture answer ( Math: 16.26.)
What is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world and loose his own
soul? But some may say, they that are in Christ cannot loose their souls by
sin. I answer; First, though they that are in Christ cannot be such sinful
souls, as to sin away their souls, though they cannot sin at such a rate, nor
in such a height as to loose their souls who have indeed found Christ, or
rather who are found of him, and planted in him; yet the damage which every
sin unrepented of and unpardoned puts man to is the loss of his soul.
Secondly, suppose a sinner repents, what has he got by sin, but the sorrows
of repentance. And though no man shall have cause to repent of true repentance
for sin, yet no man shall have cause to boast of the pennyworth he has had by
sin which has occasioned the sorrows of that repentance. One hours communion
with God in ways of holiness is better then all the profits and pleasures
which any man has got while he was committing that sin, or running any course
of sin, whereof he now repents. At the best sin dishonours God, troubles our
consciences, and breaks our peace; at the best nothing is got by sin which is
worth the having, at worst the soul is lost by it, which of all things we have
is most worth the having.

Thirdly, Note.

Sin is exceeding dangerous and destructive to man. Some would sin for the
pleasures and carnal contentments which are found in sin, though they knew they
should make no earnings, or get no profit by it, yea though they knew they
should be and dye beggars by it. Once more, if this were all, that they should
loose heaven by it, or if the meaning of loosing their souls were only this,
that their souls should be no more, they would easily venture it. But there is
an affirmative in the negative, and when, it is said, sin profits not, the
meaning is, it brings trouble and renders us miserable for ever; Fools (that
is, all sinful men, says the Spirit of God, Psalm: 107.17.) because of their
transgression, and because of their iniquities are afflicted; and all such
among these fools, as dye in their sin are damned; and who is able to sum up
the damage of damnation?

Fourthly, Learn.

Sinners shall be forced at last to confess that there is no profit in sin.
True penitents confess it willingly now; and impenitents shall confess it at
last, whether they will or no; they shall have such a conviction of the evil
of sin by their sufferings, as will make them say, what has pride profited me?
and what has envy profited me? what has malice and wrath profited me? And
what has the fraudulent deceiving of my neighbor profited me? this will be
the cry of sinners to all eternity. Oh what has sin profited us? That which is
the willing confession of a gracious repentant here, will be the forced
confession of damned impenitents for ever hereafter. This will be a bitter
repentance. Hell is and will be full of the words of repentance, but no fruit
of repentance shall be found there. The damned shall not find either amendment
in themselves, or mercy from God. This will be the confession of all sinners at
last (as of those that repent and are saved, so of those who repent when
damned) we have sinned and perverted that which was right, and it has not
profited us. And when once man has made this hearty confession to God of his
sin and folly, then God makes him a gracious promise of deliverance and mercy,
as appears in the tenor of the next verse.

Verse. 28. He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life
shall see the light.
There is a twofold reading of this 28th verse, as was showed in opening the
former. For whereas that 27th verse is understood by some as the humble
confession of the sick man recovered, and so read in this form; He looks
upon men and says, I have sinned and perverted that which was right, and it
profited me not; then, this 28th verse is rendered to make up that sense, as a
thankful acknowledgement of his recovery, He has delivered my soul from
going into the pit, and my life sees the light. Thus, as we had his confession
of repentance in the verse foregoing, I have sinned, Ju^ta hanc loctionem erit
etiamnu^ hic versus ex co^fessione restituti aegri dei in se summam
beneficentiam agnosc^ntis. Merc:
etc. so here we have his confession of praise and thankfulness; He has
delivered my soul from going into the pit. Mr Broughton translates to this
sense; He saved my soul from going into the pit, that my life does see the
light. Thus the sick man being restored breaks out into thanksgiving; The Lord
in mercy has freed me from death, hell, and the grave; I need not fear Satan's
accusations; my body enjoyes the light of the world, and my soul the light of
Gods countenance shining upon me, which is better then life. But because our
own reading is clear in the original text, and holds out the scope of the
context fully enough, therefore I shall prosecute that only.

He will deliver his soul from going into the pit. The words are an assertion
of the favor and goodness of God to the penitent sick man; He (that is, God)
looks upon men, and if he hear any saying, I have sinned and perverted that
which is right, and it profits me not, if he make such an humble and gracious
confession, this will be the issue; the Lord will deliver his soul from going
into the pit. At the 18th verse, we had words of the same import; He keeps
back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword. And
again, at the 24th verse, Deliver him from going down to the pit. To be
delivered from the pit (as was there showed) is to be delivered from death. And
the word soul (as was then likewise expounded) is put for the person; As if it
were said; He will deliver him, the penitent man from death; and that both from
temporal death, the death of the body, and from eternal death, the
destruction of body and soul; or he will deliver him first from the pit of the
grave; and secondly, from the pit of hell. He will deliver his soul from the
pit.

And his life shall see the light. Videre lucem periphrasis est vitae; sicut e
contrario tenebrae sunt symbolum mortis. Pined:
That is, he shall live to see the light; To see the light, is a circumlocution
of life; As if it had been said, He shall recover out of his deadly sickness,
and behold the light of the Sun, as living men do. Thus David prayed ( Psalm:
56.13.) That he might walk before God in the light of the living. And thus the
wicked man is threatened with eternal death ( Psalm: 49.19.) He shall go to the
generation of his fathers, they shall never see light; That is, they shall
never enjoy life, but be shut up in a perpetual night of death, or in the
night of perpetual death.

Secondly, When it is said, his life shall see the light, we may understand it,
not only for a bare return to life, or that he shall live, but that he shall
live comfortably and prosperously, he shall lead a happy life. To see the
light, is to live and rejoice; light is pleasant, it is comfortable to behold
the Sun, as Solomon speaks. To see light, comprehends all the comforts of this
life, and of that to come, which is called, the inheritance of the Saints in
light, (Col: 1.12.) For as darkness is put not only for death, but for all the
troubles of this life, and the torments of the next; so light is put both for
life, and for all the comforts of this and the next life. All the blessings of
this temporal life, and the perfect blessedness of eternal life, are
comprehended in light. So that when it is said, his life shall see the light,
the sense rises thus high; He shall be happy forever; so extensive is the
favor of God to repenting persons, that time is too narrow for it; everlasting
light shall be their portion. From the former branch of the words thus opened,
He will deliver him from the pit.

Observe.

All our deliverances are of God. As there is none can deliver like God, so
none can deliver but God. If he gives out the word that such a man shall go to
the pit, it is not in the power and skill of all the Princes and Physicians in
the world, to save or stay him from it. And how low and desperate soever any
man's condition is, if God say the word, he is delivered and reprieved from
going down into the pit.

Secondly, From the connection with the former verse, the sick man having made
this confession, I have sinned and perverted that which is right, and it
profits me not, the Lord presently delivers him, etc.

Observe.

God is ready to deliver, humble praying and believing sinners. That command
has a promise joined to it ( Psalm: 50.15.) Call upon me in the day of trouble,
and I will deliver. The 107th Psalm speaks this quite through, where we find
many sorts of perishing persons, crying unto God, and God delivering them from
perishing when they cried. As when sin cries God will afflict, so when sinners
cry, God will relieve them in or bring them out of their affliction.

From the latter branch, His life shall see the light.

Note.

Natural life, and light are a great blessing. God promises much when he
promises life and light; The light of this life is no small mercy, how much
greater is the light of spiritual life? But who can conceive how great a mercy
the light of eternal life is! yet all this God speaks to the humble and
believing sinner, when he says, His life shall see the light.

Secondly, Comparing the two parts of this text together, He will deliver him
from going down to the pit, and his life shall see the light.

Observe.

The mercy of God to humble sinners, is a complete mercy. Here is not only
deliverance from evil, but the bestowing of good; it is much to be kept from
going down into the pit, but it is more to see light, the light of comfort
here, and the light of glory hereafter. The mercy of God to his people is great
in temporalls, greater in spiritualls, greatest in eternalls. The benefit of
redemption (to show the fullness of it) is set forth two ways; First, by our
freedom from evil; Secondly, by our enjoyment of good. ( John 3.16.) God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. He shall not perish (that
is, he shall be delivered from going down to the pit) he shall have
everlasting life; that is (as the text speaks) his life shall see the light.

Elihu having at large drawn a description or narration of the whole
proceeding of God with sinful man in all the parts and particulars of it,
gives a brief of all that he said, in the two next verses.

Verse. 29. Lo all these things works God oftentimes with man;

Verse. 30. To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the
light of the living.


As the Apostle after he had discoursed at large, about the dignity of Christ's
Priesthood, gathers up all together ( Heb: 8.1.) Now of the things which we
have spoken, this is the sum: we have such an high Priest, who is set on the
right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens: So Elihu having spoken
much of the several ways, by which God reveals himself to man, and works
him to a sight of his sin, and penitential sorrow for it, recollects and
sums up all in these words.

Lo all these things works God oftentimes with man, etc. In these two verses,
we may take notice, chiefly of two things.

First, The frequency of Gods dealing thus with man ( v. 29th Lo all these
things works God oftentimes.

Secondly, The design and purpose of God in doing so; That he may bring back
his soul from the pit, and be enlightened with the light of the living.

Lo, all this works God oftentimes with man. Here Is the application of the
former Doctrine; Elihu presses his hearers with it, and bids them lay it to
heart; As if he had said, I have not been speaking of things in the clouds, but
of what is really and daily acted among the children of men. Lo (or behold) all
these things. There are four special significations in Scripture of this
word, Lo, or behold, and they may all four meet in this place.

First, It imports some new unheard of and wonderful thing ( Isa: 7.14.) Lo,
or behold a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son: That a virgin should bring
forth a son, is a wonder of wonders, a wonder so much above the course and
power of Nature, so much beyond the compass and comprehension of reason, that
men and Angels have reason to be astonished at it.

Secondly, It Is prefixed, to show some extraordinary impulse or readiness of
spirit for action. Thus Christ speaks in that other noble prophecy of him (
Psalm: 40.7.) Then said I, Lo, I come, in the volume of the book it is written
of me; I delight to do thy will O my God: yea thy Law is within my heart. Lo,
I come, that is, I am ready to come, I am pressed upon the work, I am under the
pressure and command of my own spirit, as well as under thy appointment and
decree to undertake and finish that work of man's redemption.

Thirdly, It frequently implies matter worthy of weight and deepest
consideration. That Is useful and remarkable which is thus prefaced. Thus
Solomon speaking of the field of the slothful man, says ( Prove: 24.31.) Lo,
it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof,
and the stone wall thereof was broken down: As if he had said, Mark, this is
a thing to be attended, the sluggards field is full of thorns; that is, in a
spiritual sense, slothful hearts are full of lusts and vanities. In this
language the Church invites all to consider the Glorious excellencies of God (
Isa: 29.9.) Lo, this is our God. And thus Christ speaks of the woman whom he
had healed on the Sabbath day ( Luke 13.16.) And ought not this woman, being a
daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound, lo, these eighteen years, be
loosed from her infirmity on the Sabbath day? As if he had said, Pray consider
the case and speak your minds.

Fourthly, It Is often used in a way of strong assertion, and affirmation,
intimating the certainty of what is spoken ( Gen: 1.29.) And God said, Behold,
I have given you every herb bearing seed. And again ( Gen: 12.11.) It came to
pass, when he was come near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarah his
wife, Behold, now, I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon. (Read Psalm.
132.6. Ezekiel: 30.9. Luke 1.32.)

In the present text it may have all these intendments; for is it not a
wonderful thing, that God should be gracious to poor creatures? is it not
strange that he should take so much pains with, and exercise so much patience
toward them? Secondly, Lo, God works all these things; He is ready to do
them, he waits to be gracious, or to magnify his grace in doing them.
Thirdly, Lo, God works all these things; is not this a matter of great
consideration, ought we not to sit down and weigh it well? Fourthly, Lo, all
these things works God; certainly God has and will work all these things;
this is a truth out of all question, a truth of which there is no doubt to be
made. As the Apostle says (1 Timothy: 3.16.) Without controversy, great is the
mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the flesh; So I may say without
controversy, great is this mystery of Gods manifesting himself to frail
flesh, and doing all these things here spoken of, awakening the consciences of
men by dreams, and working upon them by grievous sicknesses, sending an
interpreter one of a thousand to declare unto man his uprightness, and at last
delivering his soul from going down into the pit. Lo, all these things
works God.

(...) operatus est egit, perfecit, usurpatur etiam pro gubernatione rerum
creatarum.
There is somewhat peculiar in that expression, he works. The native sense of
the word, implies; First, a willing work, not forced or constrained.
Secondly, a full and complete work, not an essay or offer, not a work begun
only, but carried on to perfection. The wicked are called workers of iniquity,
(Psalm: 5.5.) because they are free and ready to sin, they have a strong tide
and bent of spirit to do evil, and they do it not to halves but thoroughly;
they do not only begin or nibble at the bait a little (as a good man often
does) but greedily swallow it down hook and all; they are fully in it, and
do it fully, they make a work of it, and so are workers of iniquity. The Lord
does good, as the wicked do evil; All these things works God, He works
them willingly, he works them completely, ( Isa: 26.12.) Lord thou will
ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our works in us; Thou art
the Author and finisher of them. We are invited ( Psalm: 46.8.) to come and
behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the earth. The
building works, and the desolating works of God, whether respecting persons
or nations, are perfect works. Lo, all these things works God.

Hence note.

What ever good we see wrought among or for the children of men, God is the
worker of it. As he over-ruleth the evil which is done, and both sends and
orders the evil which is suffered; so he is the worker of all the good that
is done. God works it all either immediately by himself, or mediately by
second causes; and what instrument soever is set a work, yet the work as to
the matter and manner of it, as also to the result and issue of it, is the
Lords. He was the worker of all that has been spoken of in the former context;
though we read of a messenger, of an interpreter, yet the work was Gods. It Is
said ( Gen: 39.22.) The keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand, all the
prisoners that were in the prison, and whatsoever they did there, he was the
doer of it. Not that he did every thing with his own hand in the prison, but he
gave the rule, and ordered all that was done. Much more may I say of the Lord,
whatsoever is done in the world, especially among his people, God is the doer
of it, All goes through his hand. Lo, all these things works God.

Further, From the prefix, Lo.

Observe.

The works and dealings of God with men are wonderful, those especially which
he works for the humbling of a sinner, and for the delivering of a soul from
going down to the pit. The breaking of the heart, the raising of it by faith,
the renewing of its peace and comfort, are wonderful works of God. And the
reason why we wonder no more at them, is, because we consider so little of them.

Hence again from the word, Lo.

Note.

The works of God are to be deeply considered, to be stayed upon. We must not
pass them by lightly, whether they be toward our selves or others, God has
made his wonderful works to be remembered (says David, Psalm: 111.4.) or to be
considered, that is the design of God in his works, he has made them for that
end, that they should be remembered, and attended to, or they are such as cannot
but be remembered; they leave their marks and memorialls behind them. God sets
such a stamp of his power, wisdom, justice, and goodness upon his works, that
they will not be forgotten. And as his outward providential works, are such,
so his spiritual works are much more such. The godly-wise understand them so,
they have a critical eye in discerning those invisible works of God with a
poor soul, in reducing him from sin, and bringing him to himself. David
calls all the godly to the consideration of those works in his own case (
Psalm: 66.16.) Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he
has done for my soul. What God does for our bodies is very considerable, but
what he has done for our souls can never be enough considered nor admired.
Lo, all these things works God oftentimes with man.

(...)
The original is, twice, thrice, so we put in the margin, and render it
oftentimes, in the text. Some expound it, of those three distinct ways, in
which God deals with man, before described. The Septuagint are express for
that; (...). Sept: (...). Schol.
All these things works the strong God three ways with man, Which the
Scholiast exemplifies in the three ways here noted by Elihu. First, awakning
him by dreams and visions, Secondly, troubling him by sicknesses and
afflictions; Thirdly, teaching him by Prophets and Interpreters. Yet, I
conceive, the text does not strictly recapitulate those three several ways
before spoken of, in these words, twice, thrice, but only shows us that God
uses all these ways or any other, as his wisdom shall think fit, many
times, or oftentimes for the producing of those blessed effects.

Lo, all these things works God oftentimes with man. Twice, thrice, is a
double certain number, put for any single uncertain number; And it only
teaches or assures us, that God debateth with the sons of men in all or any
of these ways oftentimes, or more then once. If they do not answer his call
or purpose (which they seldom do) at the first; he calls again and again,
twice or thrice, or oftentimes, that is as often as he sees it good, needful
or expedient to do it. And we may suppose that Elihu uses this number twice,
or thrice, in allusion to the customs of men; whether civil Magistrates or
Churches, who when they deal with others about any fault committed or offense
given, they do not take them at the very first default, but warn and admonish
them twice or thrice, or send them (as the case may require) several Citations
to appear, and either to acknowledge their guilt, or acquit themselves of it.

These things works God twice or thrice. Tiibus vicibus, i. e. multoties, sed
utitur numero ternorio, ut congruat humanae consuetudini, per quam solent
homines ter moneri vel citari. Aquin:
And remember, it is but twice or thrice; which speech though it may be well
rendered (as we say) oftentimes, yet it is not very often; once is no number,
twice is the least number, and thrice is but a small number, two or three
witnesses are the least number of witnesses that can be admitted in any
business. That, the Lord will do this, twice or thrice proves that he will do
it several times, men shall have means, and frequent means, but twice or
thrice, may not be very often, much less always, there is a stint, and a
determinate number in the breast of God; and that we might not expect to have
his patience lengthned out always to us, it is put into the smallest numbers,
All these things works God twice or thrice, with man.

The word by which man is here expressed, is, no ordinary word, (...) non
quelibet viru^ importat, sed ut plurimum nob^lem illustrem, vel aliqua ratione
spectabilem. Bold:
it is that word by which signifies the highest and greatest of men, God deals
thus not only with inferior persons, and mean men, but with great men, with
men of note, with men of power and strength; let men be as strong, and stout,
as they will, God can tame them, and bring them to his foot.

Further, when he says, Lo, all these things God works oftentimes with man.
This appellative man, may be taken two ways.

First, Personally or individually, that is, he works thus oftentimes with
the same man, God is put to renew his actings more then once with one and the
same man, because he will not bow nor obey at first.

Secondly, We may take this word man specially as implying several men, or men
of all sorts, as well as any one man of a sort. That manner of speaking is
frequent in the old Testament ( Job 1.4.) And his sons went and feasted in
their houses, man his day, q. d. unicunque hominum solet deus praedicta suae
voluntatis judicia manifestare, ut sit oration distributiva. Bold:
or every one his day. So ( Jon: 1.7.) And they said, every one to his fellow,
or man to his fellow, so here God works these things oftentimes with man,
that is, with several men, as seems good to him. The speech is distributive.
For though we are not to understand it so largely, as if God dealt thus with
every particular man, yet he deals thus with many men, even with as many as
himself pleases, or has purposed. Lo, All these things works God
oftentimes with man.

Hence note.

Such is the goodness of God, that though man is not wrought upon presently, or
at the first, yet he will come a second or a third time to carry his work
through with him. It Is a mercy that God will speak once, or use any means once
with us, it is mercy that he will speak any one word in any one way, to bring
us off from sin; it is mercy that he will send one vision, or one affliction, to
awaken us out of our security, or one messenger to instruct us once in our
duty; but when the Lord is pleased to use several means, and those several
means, several times, how does the abundant mercy and graciousness of God
appear in this! And as the mercy of God in general, so the patience of God in
special appears abundantly in it. The Lord waits to be gracious, he waits
the working of this or that means, of a second and third means, and he waits
the working of them all over again and again, or oftentimes; here is patience
with long-sufferance.

Secondly, Observe.

God will perfect his work, and bring it to an issue with sinful man. God
would not give over working to humble Job, till he had fully humbled him; And
this made Job almost amazed at Gods dealing with him ( Chap: 7.17, 18, 19.)
What is man that thou should magnify him? and that thou should set thy
heart upon him? And that thou should visit him every morning, and try him
every moment. Job seemed much troubled at this instancy of God with him, and
therefore expostulated in the next words, How long will thou not depart from
me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle? But, for all his crying,
God would not depart from him, nor let him alone for a morning, no nor for a
moment till he had finished his work and accomplished his will both in him and
upon him; till he had brought his heart into a due frame and temper under his
mighty hand. If once or twice will not do it, he will do it thrice; The Lord
is not weary either of working or waiting; God is a rock (says Moses Deuteronomy:
32.4.) and his work is perfect; and of all his works, that of grace is most
perfect. His visible providentiall works are perfect or shall be before he has
done with them, or put his last hand to them, but his invisible spiritual
works are most perfect; as God works often to bring man out of the state of
sin to grace; so he will not cease working till grace be perfected, he will
work till that work is wrought to the height, till the top-stone of it is set
up, or as the Apostle phraseth it ( Ephesians: 4.13.) Till we all come to a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Though a man
has been once truly humbled, yet God humbles him again, that he may be
humbled gradually as well as truly to his own mind. They that are humbled by
affliction, may need more afflictions to humble them. The same means by which
faith and repentance are wrought at first, do also increase and strengthen
faith and repentance. Those means by which a man is at first purged, are very
proper for his further purging ( John 15.2.) Every branch in me that bears
not fruit, he takes away: and every branch that bears fruit, he purges it,
that it may bring forth more fruit. As no man can be a true branch (hypocrites
and formalists are branches only in appearance and profession, they were never
truly purged, now, I say, as no man can be a true branch) till he is purged, so
God purges those who are true fruit-bearing branches more and more, that they
may bring forth more fruit. And the means by which he purges them, that is,
mortifieth their corruptions, seldom reach this blessed effect at once or
twice working, and therefore the Lord is even constrained to work these things
twice, thrice, or oftentimes, else the work would not be brought to the
intended issue.

Thirdly, In that it is said, All these things works God oftentimes, not
always.

Observe.

Man should make have to answer the call of God, and come up to what he
requires of him. For though God work these things oftentimes, yet no man
knows how often he will work, and we may all know, he will not work always.
It Is a high and dangerous presumption to defer at any time upon hopes that
God will work at another time, because in some cases he works oftentimes.
Remember (as was showed before in opening the words) this thrice is the least
number of often, as twice is the least number of any; two or three are the
least number that makes a Church-assembly ( Math: 18.20.) The Prophet says (
Amos 2.4.) For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not turn
away the punishment thereof. Implying that if men multiply their
transgressions, God will not always give them means of repentance, but power
out wrath upon them; So Elihu says, God works twice and thrice; but if men
will sin three or four times, where is their warrant that God will pardon or
pass by their sins? The Prophet did not bind up the mercy of God precisely to
two or three transgressions, Rabbi Solom: colligit tertantum homini ignoscere
deum; at quarto si ad peccandum redierit esse quod sibi^a gehenna timeat; et id
esse putat quod hoc loco ab Elihu dicatur.
but if men sin without bounds, he shows they have no ground to expect God
should be merciful. One of the Jewish Rabbis (as some expound him) concludes
peremptorily, If man sin twice or thrice God will spare, but if four times God
will punish. We do not circumscribe the grace of God to a special number, and
possibly that Rabbin did not intend it so, but only that all should take heed
they do not abuse the grace of God. That God multiplyeth to pardon, or (as we
render, Isa: 55.7.) Pardons abundantly, is no security for any man to sin
abundantly, or to multiply transgressions. My spirit shall not always strive
with man (says the Lord, Gen: 6.3.) I have striven long already, and I will
yet strive longer, even an hundred and twenty years, but I will not strive
always. God gave Jezebel a space to repent ( Rev: 2.21.) but when she repented
not, he did not promise her a new space to repent in, but threatened her with
wrath to the utmost if she repented not. There is a frequency in the work of
God to reduce sinners, but not a perpetuity. And as in this verse Elihu reports
this frequency of his work, so in the next he reports that to be the design
of it, Verse. 30. To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with
the light of the living.

This verse (I say) shows the purpose of God in working twice, thrice, or
oftentimes with man. This purpose (as was touched before) is twofold. First,
to free and deliver him from evil, the worst of evils, a horrible pit.
Secondly, to estate him in and give him possession of not only that which is
good, but best of all, the light of the living. Not is this purpose of God a
bare desire (that is often fruitless and successless) but a strong or settled
resolution, to bring back the sick man's soul from the pit. And Elihu (we may
suppose) spoke thus, as to press Job to hasten the work of his repentance; so
to put him in hope (upon consideration of this design of God in afflicting
him) that he should be delivered from his afflictions, and have not only his
life continued, but the comforts of it restored to him. As if he had said, Be
not afraid, do not look upon thy condition as hopeless, or that the
humiliation of thy self will be fruitless, for I dare assure thee, God has
gracious purposes and intendments toward thee in working these things.

And here we have a twofold gracious purpose of God expressed; First, to
deliver him from evil, to bring back his soul from the pit. Secondly, to do
him good, or to bestow positive blessings upon him (as was showed at the 28th
verse) even to be enlightened with the light of the living; As if he had said,
God in all this aims only at man's good, that his sin unrepented of be not his
death and destruction, and that under a sense of Divine favor toward him, he
may lead a comfortable life here, and be happy for ever.

To bring back his soul from the pit. It is said at the 28th verse, He will
deliver his soul from going into the pit; in both places the pit is the same.

But seeing the Lord there promised to deliver his soul from going into the
pit, how is he said here, to bring back his soul from the pit? A man being
delivered from going to the pit, cannot be said to be brought back from the pit.

I answer in two things; the words rendered to bring back his soul from the
pit, may be read thus; to turn away his soul from the pit; that is, to
preserve him from death. So the Hebrew word is used ( Chap: 15.13.) as also (
Mal: 2.6.) He walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn away many from
iniquity. If we take that rendering of the word, then the expressions in both
places bear the same sense. But taking it according to our reading, in which
to bring back his soul from the pit, sounds, as if the man had been in the pit
already; and it may well be said so, because a man in great affliction, whether
of soul or body, is, as it were, dead, or buried alive. For as when God
converts a sinner, he (upon the matter) brings him back from hell; so when he
delivers him from any grievous sickness, he does (upon the matter) bring him
back from the grave. Heman in spiritual afflictions and soule-desertions, the
terrors of the Lord being upon him, called himself free among the dead, like
the slain that lie in the grave, whom God remembers no more, and they are cut
off from thy hand, (Psalm: 88.5.) They that are near the pit of death, are not,
much, improperly, called dead, and they that being in such a desperate case are
kept from going down to the pit, are not, much, improperly said to be brought
back from the pit, or pulled out of it. In which sense we may keep to our own
reading; and so to bring back his soul from the pit, notes only the extreme
danger wherein he was, whether spiritual or temporal, and Gods graciousness
in delivering him from it.

Hence note.

When God restores a man out of any desperate condition, whether of soul or
body, he gives him a new life; he brings him in one respect back from the
grave, and in another from hell. As a sick man, he is brought from the grave,
and as a sinner he is brought from hell. Great deliverances are a kind of new
creation; And fresh blessings are to us as fresh beings. Take these two
inferences from it.

First, How should they, who have been under great outward afflictions, praise
the Lord when they are delivered! They who having had the sentence of death in
themselves, should look upon themselves when restored, as men raised from the
dead. And how should sinners praise the Lord, when he has reconciled them to
himself, and pardoned their sins. In doing this for them, he delivers them
from wrath, from hell, and from eternal death. Let such praise the name of the
Lord, and say, as in the text, He has delivered our souls from the pit.

Secondly, Let such live unto God, having received a new life from God; They
that have received a new temporal life from God, ought to dedicate it unto
God; how much more they that have received new spiritual life? They that have
received it indeed, cannot but dedicate it unto God. This negative mercy calls
aloud for all that we are or have to be given up to God, but that positive
mercy which follows, calls yet louder for it.

And to be enlightened with the light of the living. Nomen (...) non sumitur pro
quibuslibet hominibus hac vita fruentibus, sed pro divi^ibus potentibu^, vivere
est vigere, valere. Sunt qui ad futuram vita^ referunt, sed id s^nam quidem
Allegorice intelligi, postquam ad literam de hac vita intellecteru. Merc:
Take it for temporal, spiritual, or eternal life, all these ends are
accomplished in those merciful works of God to poor sinners; some restrain
the text to the light of this temporal life, others enlarge it to the light of
spiritual and eternal life. We are enlightened with the light of the living,
When the comforts of this life are restored, much more are they, who are
restored to the comforts of their spiritual life, and so to the hope of
eternal life.

By the living, we are not to understand those who are barely on this side the
grave, and yet breath in the air; or who have only a weak shadowed spiritual
life, which they scarce know of or perceive. The living here are they that live
comfortably and prosperously both as to soul and body. Thus it is said in that
Prophecy of Christ ( Psalm: 72.13.) He shall live, and to him shall be given of
the gold of Sheba: prayer also shall be made for him continually, and daily
shall he be praised. Christ lives to purpose, he lives as a Prince, in power
and dignity, yea he is the Prince of life. It was more then a sensitive or
rational life which David's faith was assured of, when he said ( Psalm: 118.17.)
I shall not dye but live; his meaning was, I shall live honorably and
triumphantly, declaring (with joy) the works of the Lord. Thus here, To be
enlightened with the light of the living, is, to enjoy a comfortable life, or to
live happily.

Hence note.

A troubled state is a dark state, sickness and sorrow, whether inward or
outward, are darkness. They are darkened with the darkness of the dead, whose
life is wrapped up in anguish and sorrow.

Secondly, Note.

The design and purpose of God in all his ordinances, and providence toward
his people is for their good. All that has been said before, emptieth it self
into these sayings, To keep back his soul from the pit, and to be enlightened
with the light of the living. The Lord has no eye in these works to his own
gain, but man's good. The Lord does not willingly grieve, nor afflict the
children of men. (Lam: 3.35.) He takes no pleasure in it abstractly
considered, nor does he look for any profit by it: Much less does he it (as it
follows, v. 36.) merely to crush under his feet all the prisoners of the
earth. All that he expects by it as to himself is to be glorified by all (for
himself is above all, and therefore designeth himself in all) yet the glory
which God has by man is only the manifestation of his glory, not any addition
to it. The benefit which God aims at in afflicting man returns to man. He
would have man bettered by affliction, and as soon as man is bettered by
affliction, every thing shall go better with him, and he shall be delivered
from affliction. ( Rom: 8.28.) All things work together for the good of them
that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. And as all
things work together for the good of them, who are the called according to his
purpose, so it is the purpose of God that all things should work together for
their good, and that is not a successless purpose. Indeed every rod upon the
backs of the wicked has a voice in it, to call them from the pit of death and
destruction, and to be enlightened with the light of the living, but God makes
this call effectual to all his elect, none of whom shall perish with the
world. So that a godly man should be so far from judging himself dealt with
as an enemy (as Job in his extremity did) when he is most sorely afflicted,
that indeed he may see the love and fatherly care of God in it. All the
providentiall dispensations of God work to glorious ends. Sometimes for the
outward good of his people in this life, always for good as to their
spiritual and eternal life.

Therefore, lay aside hard thoughts of God whatsoever hard things he is a
doing, or you are suffering. The ways in which God leads us, may possibly be
very dark, yet they run to this point, to keep us from the pit of darkness,
and that we may be enlightened with the light of the living.

Thirdly, Note.

Man would undo himself both for here and for ever, if God did not work
wonderfully for him, and powerfully keep him from destruction. All these things
God works twice and thrice, to keep our souls from the pit; man left to
himself would run headlong upon mischief in this world, and upon eternal
misery in the world to come. Nothing but the hand of God can hold man from
ruining himself. The heart of man is so set upon sin, that he will rather
loose his soul, then leave his lust; and will rather dye then that shall. It Is
as easy to stay the motion of the Sun, or to turn back the course of nature,
as to stay or turn back the natural motion or course of the heart in sinning.
An almighty power must do the latter as well as the former. So that if the
Lord did not put forth more then mercy, even mercy clothed with power, no man
could be saved; should God wish us never so well, and tell us what good he has
laid up for us, if we will but believe and obey him; should he tell us he has
riches of mercy, and that every one who will come shall have his share, yet we
should never have any, if left to our own choosing. It Is a work therefore both
of mercy and power which keeps us from the pit. God had much ado to keep Lot
from being consumed in Sodom. He had warning to be gone, yet he was loath to
go; The text says ( Gen: 19.16.) While Lot lingered the men laid hold upon his
hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters,
the Lord being merciful to him, and they brought him forth, and set him
without the City; else probably he had lingered, till he had perished. Surely if
God did not thrust sinners out of the Sodom of this world (as we say) by head
and shoulders, they would perish in it and with it. How wonderful is the
goodness of God who does all these things, not only to keep poor creatures
from going down to the pit, both temporally, and eternally, but also that they
may be enlightened with the light of the living.

JOB. Chap. 33. Verse. 31, 32, 33. Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me, hold thy
peace, and I will speak.

If thou have any thing to say, answer me: speak, for I desire to justify thee.

If not, hearken unto me; hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom.


THese three verses contain the Epilogue or conclusion of Elihu's first
address to Job. In which we may consider these three things.

First, He persuades him to a due attention and silent consideration, both of
what he had said, or should say further. ( v. 31.) Mark well, O Job, hearken
unto me, etc.

Secondly, He gives him liberty, and fair leave to reply, if he should please
to what he has already spoken ( v. 32.) If thou have any thing to say answer
me, speak. To which concession or invitation he adds a very friendly and an
ingenuous reason in the close of the verse; For I desire to justify thee.

Thirdly, He professes his own readiness to proceed and speak further with
him, or to carry on this discourse, in case Job had nothing to reply. ( v. 33d)
If not, hearken unto me, hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom.

Verse. 31. Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me.
In this verse Elihu calls for a twofold attention; First, to those things he
had already spoken. Secondly, to those things which he was yet to speak. What
he had already spoken, he desires him to consider and make reply if he
pleased, as is clear ( v. 32.) and as to what he had yet further to say, he
desires his attention and submission, as it follows ( v. 33.) If not hearken
unto me, hold thy peace.

Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me. (...) magnam mentis attentionem donotat,
quae sit cum gestu, puta aurium arrectione. Cornel: a Lap: in Pro: 2.3.
Here are two words of attention, mark, and hearken, and both very significant
ones. The word rendered mark, signifies to attend, with utmost diligence; it it
sometimes rendered by harkening (Isa: 32.3.) The eyes of them that see shall not
be dim: and the ears of them that hear shall hearken; that is, they who
heretofore, through the just judgment of God for their wilful shutting their
eyes and ears, inseeing did see but not perceive, and in hearing did hear but
not understand ( Isa: 6.10.29.10. compared with Math: 13.14.) shall at last see
clearly and attend diligently to the will of God delivered to them; yea it
seems to note some special gesture, as the lifting up of the ear to hear.
For as there is a lifting up of the voice in the zealous speaker, so of the
ear in the diligent hearer. To mark is to hear and observe, to hear and lay
to heart the things which are spoken, Mark well, O Job, and hearken.

That Is a word of a large extent, (...) auscultavit, exaudivit, dicto obediens
fuit, paruit.
to hearken is more then to hear; it takes in not only, first the work of the
ear, but secondly, the work of the mind; it is hearing, first, with
understanding; secondly, with believing; yea thirdly, it takes in the work of
the whole man in obeying, or submitting to what is spoken. Thus God said to
Adam (Gen: 3.17.) Because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, that
is, because thou have obeyed her voice, and done the thing she persuaded thee
to; After harkening comes doing. Lastly, it includes also a work of the
affections; harkening is with delighting, that which we hearken to we are
pleased with; it is (like good music) sweet unto us; in this compass and
extent we may expound these words, Mark well, O Job, and hearken unto me. And
these words, especially the former of the two, rendered mark, are often used in
Scripture, when the people of God desire and beg that he would take notice of
and attend unto their prayer. Thus David more then once ( Ps: 5.2.) Hearken
unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God: for unto thee will I pray (Psalm:
66.19.) but verily God has heard me, he has attended to the voice of my
prayer (Psalm: 130.2.) Lord hear my voice, let thine ears be attentive to the
voice of my supplication. Now, as when we desire that God would hear our
prayer, we desire that he would be very attentive to our prayer, and not only
so, but do what we pray for, and that our prayers may be welcome, acceptable,
and delightful to him; so when we are said to mark and hearken to what is
spoken to us, all the powers of our inward man, the understanding, will and
affections are at work in hearing.

Hence note.

He that will profit by hearing must be an attentive hearer. He must mark and
hearken, a fruitful hearer does more then hear, he marks; not only is his
ear at work, but his mind, his heart, his whole soul is, as it were,
transformed into an ear, or is active at his ear. There are many, and it were
well there were more hearers of the word, but there are few markers of the
word, many come to Sermons, yet but few hearken unto Sermons; every hearer is
not a marker, not a hearkner to what he hears, and not being so, he can
scarcely be called a hearer; for they only that are markers shall attain that
mark of which the Apostle speaks ( Phil: 3.14.) I press toward the mark for
the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. What is our mark in
hearing? is it not salvation by Christ, and glory with him? Now unless we are
markers, we never press toward, much less attain that mark, the price of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me,
hold thy peace, and I will speak.

(...) fodit, fundum aravit. Metaphorice, cogitavi^, fodit cogitatione,
intentus vel attentus fuit rei alicujus co^ficiendae, sicut orator praeparat
terram ante seminatorem.
It Is but one word in the Hebrew which we translate, hold thy peace, and it
signifies properly to dig or plow the ground, and by a metaphor to think of,
or to meditate, because thoughts go deep in the soul, a man does, as it were,
plow up his own spirit, while he is meditating or thinking seriously ( Pro:
3.29.) Devise not evil, or (it is this word) plow not up evil; that is a bad
soil indeed, to be plowing up. They that plow evil, shall sow the wind, and
(except they repent) reap the whirlewind. The prophet exhorting Ephraim to
break up their fallow ground and sow in righteousness, that they might reap
mercy ( Hos: 10.12.) reproves them ( v. 13.) for a very unprofitable piece of
husbandry, by this word, Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity, ye
have eaten the fruit of lies, that is, ye have plotted, devised, and contrived
wicked things, and ye have fared accordingly. Now as the word signifies to
meditate, by a metaphor, from digging or plowing; so by the figure antiphrasis
or contrary speaking, it signifies to forbear doing or speaking, to sit still,
or as we render it here, to hold our peace, and say nothing. ( Isa: 41.1.)
Keep silence before me; O Islands. (Psalm: 50.3.) Our God shall come, and shall
not keep silence; that is, he will speak aloud. Elihu bespeaks Job in the
affirmative, hold thy peace, be silent.

Some conceive Job began to interrupt Elihu, Vidatur Jobin se avertisse, vel
displice^tiae signum dedisse, illum igitur ad so audiendum invitat. Scult:
or gave some token of dislike, while he was discoursing; as if he had received
his speech with disgust, and not only inwardly stomacked at it. But did not
forbear to discover it by some significant gesture or frown, and that Elihu
perceiving this, desired him to hold his peace; As if he had said, If you
desire to reap any benefit by what I speak, be patient, and do not interrupt
me. But I conceive there was no such height nor heat of spirit in Job at that
time; He began now to be sedate and quiet enough, being somewhat convinced of
his former error and intemperance of speech.

But some may say; was it not an over-bold part in Elihu a young man to impose
silence upon Job, or to bid him hold his peace?

I answer; Elihu does not bid Job hold his peace, either, first, as if he had
seen him unwilling to let him speak, or would not hear him any more; Job was
a very patient hearer; he heard his friends patiently, and he had heard Elihu
too with silence and patience, yea though Elihu offered him leave, yea almost
provoked him to speak ( v. 5.) yet he did not but gave him scope to speak
out. Nor did Elihu speak this, secondly, as if he slighted Job, or thought him
a man unable to answer him, or speak to purpose, for presently in the next
verse he desires him again to speak. Nor thirdly, as if he had such high
thoughts of his own wisdom, and loved so much to hear himself speak (as
some men do) that he cared not to hear others, but would engrosse all the
discourse. Nor was it, fourthly, because he saw such an affectation in Job to
speak, that he needed (as the Apostle speaks of some, Tit: 1.11.) to have his
mouth stopped. It was not upon any of these or such like reasons, that Elihu
desired Job to hold his peace; but it was either first, that himself might
speak more clearly, and carry his matter through to his understanding; or
secondly, that he might set the matter more home upon his conscience, and move
him to consider yet more seriously what he had said, of the various ways of
Gods dealing with man to humble his soul, and bring him nearer to himself; or
lastly, that Job might perceive and take notice, that he was the man aimed at
in all the foregoing parable. As if he had said, Sir down quietly, and
consider with thy self, whether all this discourse has tended, or whether or
no thou art not the man intended in it. As Christ when he had spoken that
parable of the sower concluded ( Math: 13.9.) He that has an ear to hear,
let him hear; that is, let him take it home to himself; or as Christ
concludes his Epistles to the seven Churches in the second and third Chapters
of the Revelation, with, He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches; so does Elihu to Job in special, Mark-well, O Job, and
hearken unto me, hold thy peace.

This silence was made of old in great assemblyes (Majestate manus) by putting
the hand to the mouth, and then stretching it forth. Acts 12.17. Acts 13.16.
Chap. 19.23. Chap. 26.1.

If any would know yet more distinctly what Elihu meant when he bid Job hold
his peace? I answer,

First, Negatively, not a bare silence, or saying nothing, but affirmatively,
when he says, hold thy peace; it might note these two things.

First, That he would have him much in the work of consideration, or to
forbear speaking, that he might be more in meditating, and weighing, and
laying things to heart; he would have him bring what he had spoken to the
balance of the Sanctuary, and then to his own heart. A man is never more
busy then when he thus holds his peace.

Secondly, When he says, hold thy peace, it might note that he desired his
submission to the counsel given, or to be given him; He would have him bridle
his tongue, in token that his spirit was brideled. He would have Jobs silence
say, speak on, I will say nothing, let the truth of God reign and rule over
me by thy word. What Samuel answered to the Lord himself (1 Samuel: 3.10.) Speak
Lord, for thy servant hears; that should we answer to those who speak to us
from the Lord; speak ye, we will hear and hold our peace: or we should say
with good Cornelius, when Peter came to him ( Acts 10.33.) We are all here
present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. When a
man holds his peace (upon these terms) it is a sign he lays down his own
wisdom, and his will, he does not stand upon his pantofloes (as we say) nor
abound in his own sense, but is ready to be delivered or cast into the mould
of any holy and wholesome doctrine which shall be delivered unto him. They are
in the fittest frame to hold the truth which others speak, who can withhold
themselves from speaking.

Further, There is a twofold holding of the peace. First, at the works of God,
or at what God does ( Lev: 10.3.) when God had smitten the two sons of Aaron
dead with fire from heaven, Aaron held his peace; that is, he did not murmr
at, nor contradict what God had done. That also was David's temper ( Psalm:
39.9.) I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou Lord did it. The
Prophet Jeremy describes an humbled soul in the same posture ( Lam: 3.28.) He
sits alone and keeps silence, because he has borne it upon him. When God
lays his yoke or cross upon us, it is our duty to be silent and submit (
Zach: 2.13.) Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord: for he is raised up out
of his holy habitation, that is, the Lord begins to work, therefore let all
men, or men of all sorts and degrees be quiet and say nothing either
discontentedly or complainingly. In all these Scriptures, holding our peace is
called for and commanded or showed at the works of God.

Secondly, There is a holding of our peace at the word of God, or at what God
speaks. Thus it is when not only the tongue but the heart is silent, and every
thought is brought into subjection or captivity to the obedience of Christ. The
heart of man often speaks much, and is very clamorous, when he says nothing
with his tongue. That Is to hold our peace indeed, when the heart is quiet, let
God say or do what he will. It Is not more our duty to resist the Devil, that
is, all his hellish whisperings and temptations to the doing of evil, then
it is to submit to God in all his speakings and dispensations. Elihu speaking in
the name of the Lord, faithfully advises Job in this sense, to hold his peace.

Hence learn.

We ought to submit and keep silence when the truth of God is spoken. Or, when
the mind of God is brought unto us, there must be no replying but obeying, no
disputing but submitting. They have learned much, who know how and when to say
nothing. Solomon says ( Eccl: 3.6.) There is a time to keep silence, and a
time to speak; but this kind of silence is in season at all times, we ought
always to be silent thus, that is, always submit to the mind of God. We need
to be minded of this, because the pride and overweening of man is great. We
have need to put a bridle upon our tongues, much more upon our hearts; it is
hard to bring our wills and our understandings under; we are apt to strive and
struggle when truth comes near us; yea to kick at it, when it comes very nee^^
and home to us, though indeed the nearer it comes the better, nor can it ever
come too near. The Apostle James apprehended this when he gave that admonition
( Chap: 1.21.) Receive with meekness, the ingraffed word, which is able to
save your souls: Meekness is that grace which moderates anger; a passionate
or fierce spirit, receives not the word, but rises up against it, turns not
to it but upon it; and, which is worst of all, turns it to evil, not to good,
turns light into darkness; and so the word of life becomes a savor of death
for want of a due submission to it. Therefore hearken, and hold your peace when
the word of God is spoken. Do not say it is but the word of man, because
delivered by man; God speaks in and by his faithful Messengers; ye oppose the
authority of the living God, not a mortal dying creature, when you reject the
word. And remember, it is not only our duty but our liberty to give up our
selves prisoners to the truths of God; we are never so free as when bound by it
or to it. And as we should hold our peace at or submit to all the truths of God
in all cases, so especially in these three.

First, When we are reproved for our sins in practice; then we should not stand
excusing what we have done, but repent of it.

Secondly, When we are showed our error in opinion; then we should not stand
disputing, and arguing for what we hold, but recant it. It Is time to hold our
peace, when once it appears to us, that we do not hold the truth. To err is
common to man, but to persevere in an error, to the defense and patronage of
it, is more then inhumane, devilish.

Thirdly, We should hold our peace when our duty is plain before us; then we
should not stand questioning it, but do it. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do
(says Solomon, Eccl: 9.10. that is, whatsoever appears to be a duty) do it
with all thy might. Hold thy tongue, but do not withhold thy hand when once
thy hand has found what must be done. Elihu at this time was dealing with Job
upon all these three points; He told him his sin, that he had been too querious
and impatient, he showed him his error, that he had been too bold with God,
because inn^cent toward men; And he pressed him to duty, both that, and how he
ought to humble himself before the Lord. The Apostle treating about that great
point of justification, tells us God will at last cause all men to hold their
peace. ( Rom: 3.19.) Now we know that what things soever the law says, it
says to them who are under the law, that every month may be stopped, and all
the world may become guilty before God; that is, man will have nothing to say,
but sit down silent, and hold his peace, or only say, I am nothing, I have
deserved nothing but death and condemnation, when he once understands the
holiness and strictness of the law, together with the unholiness and looseness
of his own heart and life.

Hence note.

It speaks yea proclaims a gracious prudence, to know how and when to hold
our peace and say nothing. When men insist upon their own conceit and reason,
when they logic it unduely with God or men, and will needs seem to know more
then the word teaches them, what do they but give evidence against
themselves, that as yet they know nothing as the word teaches, or as they
ought to know, and themselves least of all? It Is pride and presumption, not
prudence and understanding which opens such men's mouths. We never profit by
what we hear, till (in the sense opened) we have learned to hold our peace.
The counsel which Elihu gave Job, was to hold his peace; yet he laid no
constraint upon him to refrain necessary speaking, but put him upon it in the
next verse.

Verse. 32. If thou have any thing to say, answer me; speak for I desire to
justify thee.
Lest Elihu should be interpreted to have taken too much upon him, or to have
denied Job his liberty of speaking, when he said, hold thy peace; he here calls
him to speak; This is a full proof, that his intent was not to bar him from
speaking, but only that he should forbear unnecessary speaking. As if he had
said, Now that I have gone thus far, if I have spoken any thing that thou at
unsatisfied in, and do desire I should explain my self about; speak thy
mind freely; for though I have more to say, yet I will not hinder thee from
saying what thou can fairly say for thy self, neither will I ever-burthen
thy memory, with too much at once, therefore come now and answer if thou will
or can to what is already spoken.

The Hebrew is, If thou have words answer me, that is, if thou have arguments
to defend thy self with, or to oppose me; if thou have such words ready, as
have the weight of reason or authority in them to maintain thy cause, bring
them forth, I am not afraid of what thou can object; neither am I unwilling
to hear thy defense.

Some expound Elihu speaking Ironically, at least Rhetorically, If thou have
any thing to say answer me, speak and spare not. As if he had said, Possibly
thou can set all right, and show me where I am wrong. Possibly thou think
I have spoken amiss, when I said, In this thou art not righteous, go to then,
show me my mistake, or wherein I have misapprehended thee, make it good if thou
art able against my assertion, that thou art just and righteous, even in that
wherein I have endeavored to detect thy unrighteousness. Possibly thou may
bring me to be of thy opinion, and then surely I shall justify thee,
Artificiosa prohibitio per concessionem. Simile est illud poetae. I, sequere
Italiam ventis, pete regna per undas. Virgil: Aeniad. 4to.
and retract my censure of thee. Rhetoricians call this an Artificial
prohibition, by a concession; or the admitting of another to do that, which
they know, he cannot do when he has done his utmost, or (as we say) has left
no stone unturned to do it. But I conceive, Elihu spoke plainly to Job, and
did not like a subtle Orator, put him upon impossibles, but like a sincere
friend, soberly and seriously invited him to do and say as much as was
possible in his own defense. If thou have any thing to say, answer me.

Hence note.

Wise men though they have more to speak, and purpose to speak more, yet are
willing that others should speak too. Though they can speak still, yet they
are ready to sit still and hear. The most prudent speakers, are also patient
hearers. Elihu when he began to speak ( Chap: 32.18, 19.) compared himself to
a full bottle, he was even burdened with his own conceptions. I am full of
matter (said he there) the spirit within me constrains me; Behold, my belly
is as wine which has no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles. And
though he had not half emptied himself, yet he could stop his vessel and
contain himself. Answer me, I will hear. Though Elihu was warm in his
work, laboring tooth and nail to convince and humble Job, and show him
wherein he had exceeded and offended, though he was teaching him to give glory
to God, and to ahhorre himself (as at last he did) repenting in dust and
ashes, yet he was unwilling to determine till he had heard him speak, if he
had any thing to speak, and a mind to speak it.

Hence note.

It Is but equal to give him leave to speak for himself, with whom we are
unsatisfied. How else can we either get satisfaction, or give an account why we
remain unsatisfied? We must not condemn any man in have, nor judge him till
we have heard him. Necessary stops are no delays. They may procure not only a
better but a speedier issue of our business, especially in matters of
controversy. Politicians have a rule, Take time and you may do any thing. To
make have slowly is the surest way of making have. Many a journeying man had
rid more miles in a day, if he had not rid too fast. They who will do all at
once, or in a breath, often loose their breath, but seldom do any thing,
that is worth the doing. And as hastiness hinders us in doing, so it altogether
unfits us for censuring. Time brings forth truth; a sentence deferred, may
afterward be given, but when it is once given, it cannot be recalled;
therefore it is good before we censure, to hear every man out; If this
moderation and wel-tempered ingenuity were exercised in all our controversies
with others, it would be a great help to the ending of controversies. And we
should either see no reason to condemn many, or condemn them with more
reason, had we patience to hear them. But when first, we will not hear an
answer, or when secondly, we suppress our opposites with power and violence,
whom we cannot answer or convince by argument; or thirdly, when we interpret
what they say in answer to the worst sense; or fourthly, when we are glad to
find any weakness or insufficiency in their answers, and are so hasty to
condemn, that we will not give them leave to recollect their thoughts, or
think better on it to mend their answers, and explain their meaning, either by
speech or writing; it is impossible breaches should be healed, and differences
reconciled, or that ever we should come to a clear and full understanding of
one another. This offer made by Elihu to Job is a good pattern, and shows us
how to deal with brethren in all such cases: and that which follows shows
the best and noblest ground of such amicable condiscentions, even a willingness
not only to agree with but to embrace those from whom we differ. That Is the
general sense of what Elihu assures Job, and would have him confident of in
the next words.

For I desire to justify thee. As if he had said; I have not spoken all or any
of these things to thee, because I would conquer thee, nor do I now provoke or
invite thee to speak, because I have a mind to lie at catch, or entangle thee
in thy answers, for I tell thee, my heart and my aim in this overture, is, I
(heartily) desire to justify thee.

(...)
The word whereby Elihu expresses this desire, signifies more then a bare
desire.

It notes, first, an earnest desire, or strength of desire.

Secondly, A pleasing desire, or delightful desire.

The highest act of desire is delight; delight is the intention and strength of
affection, Non mihi volupi est, ut tu im causam injusta^ estendam, velim enim
esse justam nec esse in te quod reprehendi possit. Merc: (...) est non modo
pietatis sed et veritatis laudem tribuere; significat se magis propendere ad
defendendum quam increpandum. Coc:
or desire at rest. As if Elihu had said, I have not spoken out of ill will to
thee, or desire of victory over thee, nor would any thing be more welcome news
to my soul, then to see just cause of justifying thee; it does not please me
at all to prove that thou art not just, it would extremely please me, even
ravish my heart with joy if thou could prove thy self or thy cause so just
and faultlesse, that nothing could be blamed or reproved in either. I desire to
justify thee.

That is, not only to judge thee a godly man, or a man fearing God (which I
already do) but to judge that thou have in all things both done and spoken
well, which as yet I do not, nor can, unless thou show me better reason
for it then hitherto thou have done. To justify another is four ways applied
in Scripture; as was showed more largely at the second verse of the former
Chapter.

First and chiefly it is applied or attributed to God himself ( Rom: 8.33.) It
is God that justifies. God puts man into a state of justification, he
justifies his person so fully, that none can (of right) lay any thing to his
charge, much less condemn him upon any charge laid against him.

Secondly, Man justifies God ( Luke 7.29, 30.) And all the people that heard
him, and the Publicans justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John.
God himself who is the Judge of all men, is condemned by many men; and when
things are at worst, he always has some to justify him. Man justifies God
when he honors God, taking his part, and owning both his power and his
righteousness in whatsoever he does. It is impossible God should be unjust,
and God is pleased to say, we justify him, when we maintain his ways as just
and righteous.

Thirdly, Man justifies himself, when he is either lifted up proudly in the
thoughts of what he is or has done well ( Luke 18.11.) or when he upon good
grounds can maintain that to be well done which he has done.

Fourthly, Man justifies man, when he either consents to, or approves of what
he has done or spoken, whether it be good or bad; he that approves of a man
justifies him, though the man be unjust. ( Prove. 17.15.) He that justifies the
wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are an abomination unto
the Lord. Let a man be never so wicked, and do never so wickedly, some through
ignorance of his wickedness, and others through love to and liking of his
wickedness, (being such themselves) will approve of him, and give him their
good word. But (as Christ speaks, Math. 11.19.) Wisdom is justified of her
children; that is, the true lovers and followers of wisdom, having a right
knowledge and estimation of her worth, will stand by her, and speak for her,
when slighted by the blind and unknowing world. And as this is true of
declarative wisdom, so especially of Christ, who is essential wisdom. His
children highly prize and justify him, while the world condemns and contemns
him. In this fourth sense Elihu is to be understood here, I desire to justify
thee; that is, to give testimony unto thee, or subscribe thy certificate, that
thou art worthy of commendation. Though Elihu was a man of a very warm and
keen spirit, full of fire, and mettle, yet he discovered a very honest bent,
and a well governed intention toward Job, in saying, I desire to justify
thee; for it is as if he had said; It would not please me at all to see cause of
further censure, but it would please me fully to see cause of approving and
acquitting thee. Therefore do but state thy case and make out the merits of
it, and I shall yield so soon as I see cause. So then, Elihu did not carry
himself in this business, first, as a party, or as one that had taken a side,
and was resolved to hold it (as some do) right or wrong, because he had
appeared in it. Nor Secondly, was he hurryed by passion, or intemperance of
spirit. Nor Thirdly, was he hood-winkt by prejudice, or fore-stalled by his
opinion against the person. Nor Fourthly, was he engaged by love to contention
or hopes of victory. Nor Fifthly, was he purposed to suppress smother or keep
down the truth. Nor Sixthly, had he any desire to asperse Job, and make him
appear black. Nor Seventhly, had he a mind to grieve the man, or burden him
with accusations; but declared a clear candor and much melting compassion
toward his afflicted Antagonist, hungring and thirsting, yea even longing for
a just occasion to justify him.

Verbum justificare sumitur pro justitiam exercere, just ac recte procedere.
q. d. statui apud me juxta aequitatis leges tecum agere. Bold:
Some, I grant, expound this word justify, as used here by Elihu in a very bare
and barren sense, as if it employed only thus much, I will do thee right, or I
have no mind to do thee wrong; but surely the word is much more fruitful, and
bears the signification of a great willingness in Elihu to render Job as fair
as possibly he could, or as his cause would bear to all the world; he waited
to understand so much of him and by him, as might enable him to say, he had
neither spoken nor done any thing amiss.

Hence note, First.

A good man is glad to see any man's cause or case prove good, or better then he
thought it. The Apostle giving several Characters of Gospel love or charity,
says (1 Cor. 13.6.) It rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth.
As charity rejoices not in the doing of iniquity, so neither does it, when
others are found to have done iniquity. But it rejoices much, when any who are
either suspected or charged with iniquity, are upon due trial found clear and
acquitted. Paul wished that all who heard him had been not only almost but
altogether such as he, except his bonds, ( Acts 26.29.) It is a great argument
that a man is good and just, when he heartily wishes that he who has given
occasion to others to think ill of him, may at last appear better then they
thought him.

Secondly note.

A good man seeks not victory but truth, and the good of those he deals with.
When he contends earnestly with others, he desires as earnestly that truth may
gain by that contention. Where a spirit of strife and uncharitableness
possesses the minds of many men, they love to be vexing and trampling upon
those they deal with, rather then helping and enforming them. This evil
spirit is the familiar of this age; That which the Apostle spoke ( Phil. 1.15.)
of not a few who had the name of Gospel Ministers ( some preach Christ even of
envy and strife, and some also of good will; the one preach Christ of
contention, not sincerely) the same may be said of many disputers and
polemicall writers; they do it enviously, they do it out of love to strife
and contention, not out of love either to truth or to those with whom they
contend and strive; this is a bad spirit, a spirit far unlike that which ruled
in Elihu, who wished that the sharpest reprehensions he gave Job, might end in
his justification. There should be such a spirit in man contending with man, as
there is in God contending with man; who does not thunder against sinners,
because he would have them perish, or delights in their destruction; but does
it, first, to awaken them; secondly, to humble them; thirdly, to convert them;
fourthly, to justify them; and lastly, to save them for ever. I write not
these things (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.14.) to shame you, but as my beloved
sons I warn you. As if he had said, I intend not to asperse you, or throw dirt
upon you, but only advise you to wipe off the dirt that is cast upon you, or to
keep your selves out of the dirt. I would either be a means to cleanse you, or
provoke you to preserve your selves clean.

Note Thirdly.

It is our duty to justify those whom we oppose, when they can clear
themselves. As Elihu spoke very ingeniously, so not at all beyond his duty; we
should be glad when they whom we have suspected or charged appear fair, or
better then we suspected; he that does so must be justified: as we must not
hold the truth of God, so we must not hold the credit of our neighbor in
unrighteousness. We should have three ends in dealing and debating with others.
First, to convince them of their errors and sins. Secondly, to recover them
out of sin and error. Thirdly, to acquit them in what they appear and can
approve themselves not to have sinned or erred. Elihu aimed at and attained the
first and second in his debate with Job; and it would have been a greater
contentment to him, if (there being no need of those two) he had seen cause
only to have done the third. Speak (said he) for I desire to justify thee.

Verse. 33. If not, hearken unto me, hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee
wisdom.
Elihu having desired Job to speak, and he either refusing or having nothing
to say, he reassumed and reinforced his former counsel.

Hearken unto me, hold thy peace. These words were opened, ( v. 31.) therefore
I need not stay upon them here; If not, hearken etc. and indeed what should
they do but hear and submit, who have nothing to answer or reply? especially
when so gainful an overture is made them for their encouragement to hear, as
Elihu made Job in the next words, which are also the last of this discourse.

And I shall teach thee wisdom. Elihu may seem to take much upon him, and
show himself very confident, when he thus undertook and promised to teach Job
wisdom; yet doubtless the ground of his confidence was not in himself, but in
Gods assistance; and in Jobs humble silence. As if he had said, I see thou will
not speak, but hear, hear then, and I shall teach thee wisdom; for God (I
hope) will be with us in this matter, and both open my mouth to speak, and
thine ears to hear that which is wisdom indeed; having given thee a heart to
receive instruction, he will instruct thee to profit, and make thee wise to
know t^y duty and do it, by my ministry, though a weak and unworthy
instrument in his hand.

I shall teach thee wisdom. (...) In Kal dis^ere in Piel docere hinc Aleph
Paedagogus, antecassor dux, doctor, qui aliis solet praeire sicut Aleph prima
litera reliquas antecedit.
The word which we render to teach in another conjugation signifies to learn;
and the Nowne signifies a leader, or governor. As that first letter Aleph in
the Hebrew Alphabet is the leading letter to all that follow, so a Teacher
should be a leader, he should go before those that hear him, by good example
as well as by wholesome doctrine. Be thou an example of the Believers, says the
Apostle Timothy (1 Epist. 4.12) who was set up in the Church of Ephesus a
Teacher and an Instructor.

Further, when Elihu says, I will teach thee wisdom; his meaning is, I shall
acquaint thee with that which may make thee wise, or I shall show thee wherein
true wisdom does consist. And that consists chiefly in these two things.
First, in the knowledge of our selves; Secondly, in the knowledge of God; As if
Elihu had said, I doubt not but I shall make thee know more fully what thou
art, as also who God is. And it plainly appears in the close, that Job got a
fuller light in both by what Elihu said to him: He got a suller soul-sight of
the sovereignty and highness of God, and a deeper humiliation in the sight of
his own sinfullness and vileness. He that has learned and is in the power of
these two lessons, is questionless a wise man; and he that faithfully teaches
these two lessons does not at all over-rate his doctrine if he call it wisdom,
nor does he put too high a title upon his pains and endeavors, if he says to
his Auditors or Scholars, I will teach or have taught you wisdom.

Lastly, When Elihu said, I will teach thee wisdom; we must not conceive that
he looked upon Job as unwise or ignorant; Elihu knew well enough he had not to
do with a child or an idiot, but with a man of knowledge, with a man who was
skillful in the word of righteousness, whose senses (as the Apostle expresses
it, Heb. 5.14.) were exercised to discern both good and evil. His meaning
then, when he said I will teach thee wisdom, was only this, I will teach thee
to be wiser and more knowing in some necessary truths, then as yet thou art, or
at least, have appeared to be. Or we may give his sense in the language of the
Apostle, (2 Cor. 1.24.) I will teach thee wisdom, not as having dominion over
thy faith, but as a helper of thy joy.

Hence note, First.

There are none so wise, none so holy, but they may learn more wisdom, to be
yet more holy. It Is out of question, he was never good, who thinks he can be no
better; nor does he yet know any thing aright, who says he needs know no more.
It is very sad (which is the case of many, 2 Timothy 3.7.) to be ever learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth: Yet they who (through
grace) have been enabled to come to the knowledge of the truth must be ever
learning; and the more any man does know, the more he sees his need, and the
more willing he is, to be taught and know more. The fear of God that is
wisdom, says Job, (Chap. 28.28.) and to depart from evil, is understanding;
and God testified of Job that he feared him, and eschewed evil, in the first
verse of this Book; now if so wise, so good a man as Job might learn wisdom,
let none think themselves too wise or too good to learn.

Secondly, Note.

True wisdom consists in the true knowledge of our selves, and of God. This
was the theme or subject upon which Elihu insisted, he was not teaching Job
humane, philosophical, or natural wisdom, but heavenly and divine wisdom;
the greatest mere natural Philosophers in the world* (which title sounds
them, lovers of wisdom) were mere strangers to that, which we call true
wisdom; and (as the Apostle charge them, Romans 1.21, 22.) became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened, professing themselves to be
wise, they became fools.

Thirdly, Note.

There is nothing worth the learning or knowing, but that which makes us truly
wise. For that only shows us the way to be truly happy. It Is our wisdom to
work for a right end, and that work can never attain its end but by the choice
of right means. Through desire (says Solomon, Prove. 18.1.) a man having
separated himself, seeks and intermedleth with all wisdom. The desire of all
things (say Naturalists) especially of all men runs out to good. And the better
any man is, the better is that good which he desires, yea if any man be truly
good he desires that which is best; for the enjoyment of God wherein alone
happiness does consist, is his ultimate and highest end. But what does he to
reach this end? Solomon points us to two things: First, he separateth himself
from all those lets and impediments which stop up the way, or lie cross to his
desire. Secondly, He seeks and intermedleth with all wisdom, with all real
and substantial wisdom, (as the word there used signifies) for he knows
that nothing but such wisdom, acted in wise ways, is proper and successful
for the promoting of that noble end. Now if nothing but wisdom can lead us to
that end, what is there worth the learning or knowing except that which makes
us wise?

Fourthly, From that frame of spirit which Elihu observed in Job,

Note.

They that are humble and meek are fittest to learn wisdom. God resists the
proud, but gives grace to the humble. (Jam. 4.6.) The humble soul has
received grace already, and that grace received is the way to all grace. (
Psalm. 25.9.) The meek will he guide in judgment, the meek will he teach his
way. The way of God is wisdom, and they whom God teaches shall undoubtedly
learn it.

Lastly.

To teach spiritual wisdom, or to teach man how to be spiritually wise, is
the best lesson that can be taught. They are blessed Masters who make such
Scholars. The whole discourse of Elihu is about spiritual wisdom, not about
the wisdom of the world which God will destroy; not how to climb the
pinnacles of honor, and get high in the world, not how to gather riches, and
to lade our selves with thick clay; it was not how to be great or rich, but it
was how to be holy and humble, how to give glory to God, and be fitted for
glory with God; these were the lessons of wisdom which Elihu taught Job, and
these are lessons chiefly to be taught and learned by every man, who undertakes
to be a teacher, or desires to be a learner. Thus Elihu has concluded his
first discourse with a promise to teach Job wisdom, and how well he performed
and made good his promise, will appear, to his praise, in opening the
following Chapters.

JOB, Chap. 34. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. Furthermore, Elihu answered and said.

Hear my words, O ye wise men, and give ear to me, ye that have knowledge.

For the car tries words, as the mouth tastes meat.

Let us choose to us judgment: let us know among our selves what is good.


THe former Chapter concluded Elihu's first discourse with Job: and we may well
suppose that he had made some pause; to try whether Job would give him an
answer, as he had Invited him to do. But perceiving him silent, and forbearing
to speak; he himself proceeds to this second speech.

In which we may consider:

First, His Preface, in the four first verses.

Secondly, His charge or accusation brought against Job, from the 5th verse
Inclusively to the 10th Exclusively.

Thirdly, We have the refutation of what Job said of himself, and seemed to
charge upon God; this is prosecuted with much variety from the 10th to the 30th
verse of this Chapter.

In the four last verses, Elihu gathers up the strength of all he had said,
and makes his Conclusion.

The four verses now under hand, are a Preface to this second undertaking of
Elihu with Job: In which we have

First, His transition from what he had said, to what he was about to say, in
the first verse; Furthermore.

Secondly, We have his address or application to those about him for audience
and diligent attention to what he had to say, in the 2d and 3d verses; Hear O
ye wise men, etc.

Thirdly, We have his motion; and the motion which he makes, is, that the whole
proceedure of the business might be both fair and friendly, as also judicious
and just; or that they might to the utmost endeavor after a right
understanding and discerning of the matter before them: v. 4. Let us choose to
our selves judgment, etc.

Verse. 1. Furthermore, Elihu answered and said, or, and Elihu answered and
said.
It may here be questioned, by what propriety of speech it can be said that
Elihu answered, seeing Job made no reply to what he had said before.

To this query, I say, First, that in Scripture both the beginning of a speech,
and the continuance of it, where nothing has been interposed, is called an
answer; we find it so frequently in the Gospel ( Math: 11.25.) Then Jesus
answered and said: there was no question, no discourse antecedent, yet it is
called an answer. The like is observable in the 17th of Matthew, v. 4. and John
2.18.

Secondly, We may resolve the doubt thus; though Job said nothing now to which
Elihu made answer; yet he had said much which was yet unanswered, altogether
unanswered by Elihu; therefore Elihu might say, that he proceeded to answer the
many matters of Jobs former speech, to which as yet he had given no answer.
This may suffice to show how or why that which he said further, was an answer,
let us now consider what Elihu answered and said.

Verse. 2. Hear my words, O ye wise men, and give ear to me ye that have
knowledge.
As if he had said, I will not be my own Judge in this matter, I refer it to
the judgment of wise and knowing men, let them determine it.

We may here take notice; First, of the character given the persons to whom
Elihu spoke, or did address his speech, they were wise men, men that had
knowledge.

Secondly, We may take notice of the earnestness of his exhortation or
admonition, to mind what he had to say, Give ear, O ye wise men, O ye men that
have knowledge.

For the clearing of these words, we must enquire, first, who is a wise man?
who, a man that has knowledge? a wise man in distinction to a man that has
knowledge, is a man of mature judgment, of clear understanding, and solid
prudence, in the managing either of discourses or actions. A man of knowledge
is one that has improved his understanding by study, reading, or long
experience. Some men are wise, who yet have not much knowledge; and some have a
great deal of knowledge, who have very little wisdom. Now Elihu speaks to his
auditory, as consisting or made up both of wise and knowing men; O ye wise men,
that have great understanding and judgment; and, O ye men of knowledge, that
have attained to learning and skill in all things knowable, hear my words and
give ear. Here was a choice and select auditory, wise men, and men of
knowledge.

Secondly, It may be queried, whom Elihu intends by these wise men, and men
that had knowledge?

Some conceive, he takes in all that were present at that long and solemn
conference between Job and his friends; and that he deciphers the whole Company
under these titles of wise and knowing men, inviting them all to attend what he
had to say, they being so well fitted to judge what he had to say; It is not
good to give flattering titles to men, but it is good to give them winning
titles, such as may gain upon them for their good.

Yet I rather conceive, that Elihu speaks more specially to some that were
there present; namely, to Jobs three friends, who had had the matter in hand
before, and now stood out: to these men he now turns himself, and bends his
discourse, saying, Hear O ye wise men: hearken ye that have knowledge; that
is, ye Eliphaz, Zophar, and Bildad, who have all this while engaged with Job,
give me leave to speak a few words in your ears, and I pray attend unto me.

Thirdly, Supposing that they, specially, were the wise and knowing men to whom
he spoke. It may be questioned again, under what notion he called them wise
and knowing men.

Some say, he called them so Ironically, putting a close or secret scorn upon
them; As if he had said, Hear me, O ye wise men, and hearken, O ye knowing
men, ye that for years and age should be indeed knowing and wise men; and are
so in the reputation of others, as well as by your own profession and
pretention; Ye who came from far to undertake this weighty work, the
comforting and counselling of this your afflicted friend, see now how well you
have acquitted your selves, and answered the expectation raised both of you and
by you. Have ye not comforted him fairly, and counseled him wisely? Do ye
not see how short you are of your own proposalls? and how ill you have handled
the matter, he remaining as far from conviction, satisfaction, or
consolation, as when you first began with him? Thus some carry the sense, but I
shall not stay upon it, nor do I conceive that Elihu spoke Ironically, but
plainly, and in good earnest, not only calling them wise and knowing men, but
judging and believing they were so. Of these he beggs audience.

Hear and give ear. To hear is a natural act; a man that has ears cannot
choose but hear (unless he stop them) when any thing is spoken: but to give
ear, is, as I may say, an artificial act, a studied act, yea a spiritual act,
(...) est auribus percipere five aurizare, si fas esset ita loqui. Rab: Mord-
Et quia auribus velut brachijs staterae ponderantur quae audivimus, ipsae
bilances eodem quo aures nomine (...) appellantur. Et verbum audiendi ponderare
significat. Bold:
when the matter spoken of is spiritual. Elihu does not call for a bare
hearing of words, but for a studious hearing of the matter which should be
presented to them; hear and give ear; or as the Elegancy of the Hebrew may be
rendered, ear my words: for the word which we render to give ear, signifies
also the ear, ear my words. We say of a thing that we desire another would
reach to us, pray hand it hither, putting the denomination of the Organ or
Instrument upon the act; so by a like Elegancy, it is here said, Ear my words;
that is, hear studiously and diligently, with an holy art and skill. As there
is an art in speaking, so there is a great, if not a greater art in hearing;
ear my words, or, give ear to me ye men that have knowledge.

From the Consideration of the parties here spoken to, wise and knowing men.

Note.

The wise, and knowing, are to hear as well as speak. They that are wise,
need more wisdom, and they that are knowing, may improve their knowledge by
hearing; They who know many, yea most truths, may yet know more truths; and if
any know all truths, they may yet know every truth more. This caused the
Apostle to profess (2 Pet: 1.12.) I will not be negligent to put you always
in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be established in the
present truth. As the ignorant ought to hear that they may know, so they who
have knowledge, ought to hear, that they may be more knowing; as they that are
fools, ought to hear that they may be wise; so they that are wise ought to
hear that they may be yet wiser. ( Pro: 1.5.) A wise man will hear, and will
increase learning. Solomon having said in the former verse, that he spoke these
Proverbs, To give subtlety to the simple, to the young men knowledge and
discretion; lest any should say, if your Proverbs or wise sentences are so
plain and easy, that the simple may sound them, and young men comprehend
them, then what profit shall wise and learned men get by reading or hearing
them? shall not they loose their labor and mis-pend their time in the study of
them? No, says he, the greatest Clerks and ripest wits may gather instruction
from them, as well as the simple vulgar, and greener heads. Their depth will
not drown a lamb, and they are deep enough to swim a Leviathan. And therefore
as a wise man will hear, that is, is willing to hear, that he may increase
learning; so let not the wisest think themselves too wise to hear, for they
may increase their learning, how learned soever they are. And as the wisest may
learn every day, so they that are truly wise, do learn every hearing day,
as the same Solomon tells us ( Prove: 9.8.) Give instruction to a wise man, and
he will be yet wiser. Sapientum est velle discere.
They are the most foolish of all men, who think themselves so wise that they
need no more instruction, and so knowing that they need learn no more
knowledge. The word of God it is fitted for all sorts and sizes of men, it is
for the ignorant, and for the knowing; it is for the foolish, and for the wise;
it is milk for babes, and strong meat for men; it is for them that are out of
the Church to bring them in; and for those that are within the Church to build
them up ( Ephesians: 4.13.) Till we all come unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ; till we are wise and knowing to
perfection, and fullness of stature (which will not be on this side glory) we
have need to give ear, and hear, for the perfecting of our knowledge, and the
hightning of our stature.

Again, These wise men were called to hear and give ear, not only that they
might learn and increase knowledge by what was spoken, but to judge aright of
what was spoken; for this was not so much the hearing of a Sermon (as I may
say) as of a dispute, or the debate of a Controversy; and therefore wise men
were desired to hear it, that they might, he able to judge, and give their
opinion, (as it is said in the 4th verse) Let us choose to our selves judgment,
and know among our selves what is good.

Hence note, Secondly.

We had need to hear and give ear, or to hear diligently, before we judge
either of things or persons. Though we may judge rightly of that we have not
heard, or of that which we have heard slightly, yet we are not right Judges of
any matter till we have heard it. It Is possible to hit upon a right judgment
blindfold; but Judges must not be blind, nor judge blindfold. To judge right,
not knowing it to be so, shall have no better reward then a wrong judgment.
Yea they that are called to judge, must both hear and give ear, else they may
quickly give wrong judgment.

Again, Elihu is speaking here to wise and good men, yet how strictly does he
exhort them? Hear and give ear.

Hence note.

Good men are often dull of hearing, and had need to be put forward. Christ
tells his Disciples that many are judicially so, and we know that all are
naturally so ( Math: 13.15.) and the Apostle tells the Hebrews they were so (
Chap: 5.11.) where treating of Christ called of God, an high Priest after the
order of Melchisedeck, he concludes, of whom we have many things to say, and
hard to be uttered, seeing ye are dull of hearing. But how did their dullness
of hearing make those things hard to be spoken or uttered? may it not be easy
enough for a man to utter that which others are dull to hear? I answer, the
Apostles meaning seems to be this? It was hard for him to utter or expound
them so, as they might perceive the clear truth of those great mysteries,
because their internal ear, or apprehending faculty was weak and dull. There
is a stople in the ear of man, and it is hard to pull it out. When any one
speaks to purpose, it is the duty of those that are present to hear: and yet
he that speaks had need to invite and press all to hear, yea to hear and
give ear. The words of the wise are goads to provoke and prick us on to hear
the truth, as well as nails to fasten it ( Eccl: 12.11.) Elihu having called
wise men to hear or ear his words, shows the use or force of the ear in
the next verse.

Verse. 3. For the ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat.
In this verse Elihu gives the reason why he so earnestly exhorted them to
hear and give ear; The ear tries words, that is, by the hearing of the ear,
words are tried. It is the office of the ear to conveigh words to the
understanding, that so a judgment may be made of them, before they are either
received or rejected.

The word which we translate to try, (...) pericula fecit, probavit.
signifies to try as gold is tried in the fire: the ear is, as it were, a
furnace wherein words are tried, the ear will discover whether what is said be
dross or pure metal. The Prophet ( Zach: 13.9.) speaks of a third part of
men that should be brought through the fire and tried; as the fire of affliction
and persecution tries persons, so man has a fire and a touchstone in his ear
which tries words. The ear is given not only to hear a sound of words, not
only to understand the general meaning of words what they signify in any
language, but the ear is given to try the sense and soundness of words. And
when Elihu says words, speaking indefinitely, he includes all words of one
sort or other; it tries good words, and it tries bad words; it tries
heavenly words, and it tries earthly words; it tries natural words, and it
tries spiritual words, the truth or falsehood of words are brought to trial,
at the bar and tribunal of the ear. But in what manner or after what
similitude does the ear try words? The answer follows.

as the mouth tastes meat. In the 12th Chapter we had the same expression, and
therefore I shall not stay upon it here. Only there the sentence is made up by
a particle Copulative; The ear tries words, and the mouth tastes meat. Here
by a particle of likeness; The ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat.
There is a fair analogy or proportion, between the ear and the mouth, in
discriminating their proper objects. Hearing and tasting, are two of those five
excellent useful senses which God has planted in the nature of man, the other
three are seeing, smelling, feeling. Here we have a comparison between two of
the five senses; look what the mouth is to meat, the same is the ear to words.
In the mouth the sense of tasting is placed as a Judge to discern between good
and bad, savory and unsavory meats; and the ear of a man which receives
words, is accompanied with an understanding, whereby we apprehend what is true,
what is false, what is to be approved, and what refused. And the comparison
runs yet more clearly, while we consider, that as the food which the mouth
receives is prepared for the help of our natural or bodily life, so the words
of instruction which the ear receives are prepared for the food of our
souls, and the maintaining of our spiritual life.

Some conceive the comparison is not here made between the two senses of
tasting and hearing, but that both are compared to those wise and knowing men
spoken of, and to whom appeal is made in the former verse. For as all the
senses are not fitted to judge of words and meats, but only the ear and
palate; so all men are not fit nor capable to judge of weighty matters and
profound questions, but only wise and knowing men. And so according to this
interpretation, both or either of these sensitive faculties, and both or either
of their properties, are alike compared to wise and learned men, who are able
not only to understand the sound of words, but also exercise a judgment upon
them, both to discern and determine what there is of truth and right in them.
Sapientia est sapida scientia.
Hence that saying of the Ancient, Wisdom is a savory knowledge. Wise men taste
and savor the things which they know. He surely was a wise man who said of the
word of God ( Jer: 15.16.) Thy words were sound, and I did eat them, and thy
word was to me the joy and rejoicing of my heart. Hear, O ye wise men, and
give ear to me ye that have knowledge; the ear tries words, as the mouth
tastes meat; that is, as the ear of a man tries words, and as the mouth of a
man does taste meat; so wise and knowing men try and taste that which is spoken
and heard. Thus both these sensitive faculties, their properties and powers are
compared to wise men, who do not only hear the voice of him that speaks,
but sit down to consider it. The mouth having taken meat and chawed it, tastes
it, and makes a judgment of it; Thus wise men deal with all they hear; so
that, look what these two natural faculties do with natural things; with
words naturally spoken, with meat naturally eaten; the same, they who are wise
and knowing do to what is spoken spiritually and rationally, they try and judge
it.

But I conceive, we need not insist strictly upon this; For whether we compare
these two senses in their several operations to wise men, or whether we
compare them in their operations one with another, yet (according to the sense
of our translation) the meaning of Elihu is the same, namely, that those wise
men to whom he spoke, should not only hear but try what they heard, because
they had received a power so to do; for the ear tries words, even at the mouth
tastes meat.

There is a twofold ear, there is an outward ear, Auris interna dicitur
(...), quae vox alibi legitur in Graeca editione pro (...), cum sit ipsa men's,
quae verba et res dijudicat. Drus.
and an inward ear: And so a twofold trial: The outward ear tries words of
what signification they are, whether they are as we say good English, or
Latin, etc. It tries them also as to their grammatical sense, or the
construction of what is spoken in the letter: The inward ear or understanding
tries them as to their logical sense, scope and tendency, as to their use,
and force in the matter they are spoken to. Both ways the ear tries words,
as the mouth tastes meat; only with this difference, that the trial which
the mouth makes is merely sensitive, and both begun and perfected in the mouth;
but the trial which the ear makes is chiefly intellectual, it is begun at the
ear, but perfected by the understanding. It is the mind which judges, the ear
only brings in the report of things to the mind.

Hence Note.

First, The sense of hearing is a great mercy, and of great use to mankind. The
ear is the chief Gate or inlet to the soul; Aurem audientem dicit auditorem
verbi obedientem. Beda.
nor were our ears given only for an Ornament to the head, but for the
enriching and bettering of the heart. The naturally rational ear given to
hear and try words is a mercy; but when a spiritually rational ear is given
with it to hear and try words, that is a mercy indeed. Solomon says ( Prove.
20.12.) The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of
them. These natural senses are of Gods own creation, and the use of them his
blessing, yet common to all mankind good and bad; but the spiritual senses of
seeing and hearing, are a special privilege promised to the elect, and a
fruit of Gospel grace. ( Isa. 35.5.) Then the eyes of the blind shall be
opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. He means it not either
only or chiefly of the bodily eyes and ears (though Christ wrought miracles
upon them, and healed both the blind and deaf in the days of his flesh) but
of the eyes and ears of the soul, which are often dark and stopped while the
other are free enough in the exercise of their several faculties. The seeing
eye, which both Solomon and Isaiah intend, is the eye which so sees as that it
follows the good which it sees; and that is their hearing ear which
believes and obeys what it hears. A superficial seeing eye is a blind
eye, and a formal hearing ear is a deaf ear in the sight and account of
God. We say it is the symptom of some distemper or growing disease upon the
body, when the palate does not relish meat; Surely it argues a diseased and
sick soul, when we have no mind to hear nor find relish in the word of God.

Secondly, Note.

Words are not to be received nor submitted to, nor believed as true, till they
are tried. Itching ears are bad, (2 Timothy 4.3.) Trying ears are good. You will
not swallow your meat till you have chewed and tasted it; nor should you
swallow words, till you have tried them; why else have we ears to hear? why
are we trusted with reason to judge things with? or with rules to judge them
by? There is no greater Tyranny in the World, then to command a man to believe
(by an implicit faith) as others believe; or to impose our opinions and
assertions upon those that hear them, and not to give them liberty to try them.
This is to be at once (as the Apostle James expresses it, ( Chap. 3.1.) many
Masters, or many Masters where we should not be one.

But some will say, when the Word of God is preached, is that to be tried by
men? have we a liberty to take that into consideration or to take and refuse it
as we are persuaded in our own judgments?

I answer, The word of God is not to be brought to the bar nor to be tried by
man. The word of God is our Judge, therefore ought not to be judged by us; the
word of God is perfect, and how can we that are imperfect judge that which is
perfect. The word of God is truth, and all men are liars; we are not therefore
to judge the word of God, nor try that: Yet when any man speaks of or from the
word of God, we are to try what he speaks; that is, whether what he speaks be
according to the word of God, and his doctrine or interpretation grounded on
the Text. Every one that speaks about spiritual things professes he brings
the word of God, and it must be tried whether he does so or no. It is a truth
to which all are to submit (without dispute) by believing that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners, to wash away their sins with his blood.
This is the word of God: yet when this truth is Preached, we may consider
whether it be managed according to the word of God or no. This great doctrine,
which contains the sum of the Gospel, may have such things mingled with it,
as are not to be received for the word of God. Some in the primitive time
thought and taught that there was no salvation by Christ unless they still
kept the ceremonial Law and were circumcised; though they held that
fundamental truth, that Christ dyed to save sinners; yet when they came to the
explication of it, they destroyed it by urging a necessity of continuing the
ceremonial Law: whereas others judged rightly that faith only, without the use
of any Jewish ceremony, purifieth the heart. Therefore a counsel of spiritual
and godly wise men was called to consider of this matter. (Acts 15.6.) What to
do? not to try the Word of God, but to try which of those two different
opinions was according to the Word of God. Thus when we hear a Sermon, though
the Word of God and Christ crucified be the general subject of it, and that is
not to be tried, but received by faith and obeyed; yet what is spoken upon it
and delivered about it as the mind of God in the Scripture, that is to be
tried. (1 Cor. 2.15.) He that is spiritual, tries, or judges all things. And
again (1 Cor. 14.29.) the Apostle gives this counsel about prophesying, Let
one or two speak, and let the others judge; what? the Word of God, no! but
whether they speak according to the word of God, or no; In this sense every
one must judge sor himself, we must not take all for granted, but try what we
hear by the ear, as we do what we eat by the mouth.

Thirdly, Note.

A spiritually judicious and considerate man will take time to judge of things
that are spoken, as the palate does of meats that are eaten. The ear tries
words as the mouth tastes meat; God has given man a faculty for that end, and
he is to use his faculty. We commonly fay, Look before you leap. Surely then
we should taste before we eat, and prove all things whether they are good or
no, before we (electively) hold that which is good. (1 These. 5.21.) The noble
Bereans received the word with all readiness of mind; yet they would make no
more have then good speed to receive it, for (as the Text says, Acts 17.11.)
They searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so.

Fourthly, Here are two Organs of sense spoken of, the ear and the mouth, both
are of great use to man, but one of them, the ear is of a more frequent and
noble use. Beasts have both mouths and ears; but because theirs is only a
sensitive life, they make more use of their mouths then of their ears. Whereas
man whose life is rational, yea and spiritual too, must or ought to make more
use of his ears then of his mouth.

How does this reprove all those who are more in trying meats, then in trying
words? or more for tasting, then they are for hearing? It was a complaint of
some in the former age, that they made themselves like bruit beasts, which
having both those powers of hearing and tasting, have yet no regard to hearing,
but are all for feeding and eating. They carry it like beasts, and are more
brutish then a beast, who employ their mouths more then their ears. A beast
is made in that low form, to live to eat, and work, and so to dye; man is of
a higher form, next to that of Angels, and for him to spend his time in
eating and drinking, as if his work lay at his mouth, not at his ear, is to
degrade himself and lead a brutish life. The Apostle brings in such bruits
speaking thus, (1 Cor. 15.32.) Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dye;
not a word of using their ears: they say not, come let us hear the word of
God, let us seek bread for our souls, but come, let us eat and drink; now for
a man to be so much in eating, as to neglect hearing and meditating, what does
he but make himself like a beast of the earth, who should be like the Angels
in Heaven, daily rising up to a spiritual and heavenly life; God lifts us up
to Heaven (as I may say) by the ears. Our ears were not given us only to
hear delightful sounds, or to commune one with another about the affairs of
this life; the use of the ear is yet more noble, even to help us in the
receiving of all saving and sanctifying knowledge. Faith comes by hearing,
(Romans 15.17.) and so does every grace, both as to the implantation and growth
of it, till we come to glory. Therefore consider how you use this excellent
sense of hearing, and how you improve in spirituals by what you have heard. We
were made after the Image of God in knowledge and righteousness, and it should
be the great design of our lives to get this image renewed; and that is done
at the ear, it is wrought by hearing; faith, repentance, and every grace come
in and are wrought at the ear. Some scoff at this latter age, calling it a
hearing age, not a working age; we (say they) are much for ear-work, little for
hand-work; all for Preaching, nothing for doing; nor can this reproach be quite
wiped off, seeing with our plenty of Preaching, there is so little practicing;
as if men had turned all the members of their body into ears, and were nothing
but hearing: To do nothing but hear, or to hear and do nothing, to hear
much and act little, is a high provocation. To have a swelled head and a feeble
hand is the disease of Religion. Yet let not voluptuous Epicures who are all
for the palate and belly-cheere think to excuse themselves, for not hearing, or
for seldom hearing, because some who hear much are found doing little, or
seldom do what they hear: for as these shall be condemned by the word which
they have heard and not done, so shall these for not hearing the word which
would have showed them what to do. It has been anciently said, The belly has
no ears, nor will they either mind hearing, or mind what they hear, who mind
their bellyes (not for hunger and the support of nature, that is (as Solomon
speaks ( Eccles. 10.17.) for strength but) for drunkenness or surfeit. Cum eo
vivere non possum cui palatum magis sapiat quam cor. Plutarchus in vita Catonis.
When a voluptuous person desired Cato that he might live with him: No, said
Cato, I like not your society, I do not love to converse with a man who uses
his mouth more then his ears; who is busied more to please his taste in eating
and drinking, then to enrich his understanding by hearing and discoursing. The
Apostle ( Tit. 1.12. referring them to one of their own Poets) calls the
Cretians evil beasts, slow bellies. They were not slow to fill their bellyes,
but their full bellyes (their belly being their God, as he told some among the
Philippians, Chap. 3.19.) made them slow, yea reprobate to every good word and
work. Solomon gives man a great charge when he says ( Prove. 23.23.) Buy
truth, and sell it not. The mart for those most precious commodities grace and
truth, is kept (not at the belly, but) at the ear; there we buy without money,
and without price both grace and truth; to get these is to be wise merchants.
The best market we can make, the best trade we can drive is with and at our
ears: The ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat. And from this Elihu
infers

Verse. 4. Let us choose to our selves judgment; let us know among our selves
what is good.
This verse contains the second request which Elihu made to Jobs friends; The
sum of it is, that they might proceed judiciously and fairly in the cause
before them. As if he had said, Seeing it is the office of the ear to try
words, as the mouth tastes meat; let us see what we can do with our ears
toward the determination of this matter. Job has often wished to find one
with whom he might debate and try this cause in judgment; let us give him his
wish, and having thoroughly weighed the matter and merits of his cause, let us
see what justice will award him. Let us choose to our selves judgment, etc.

Let us choose. To elect or choose is the work of the will. And to choose what is
good, what is right, is a gracious work of a renewed will; as Gods Election of
us from Eternity, so our Election of God and the things of God at any time, is
a very gracious work.

This affirmative act, To choose to us judgment, seems to imply a negative,
the rejecting or laying aside of whatsoever is contrary to or a hindrance of
Judgment; that is, the laying aside, First, of all animosities or undue heates
of spirit; Secondly, of all prejudices and undue prepossessions; Thirdly, of
all groundless suspicions and jealousies of the person we have to deal with,
we can never choose judgment, till we are clear of all these.

The original word rendered to choose, signifies in the noune, a young man, a man
in the flower of his age, in the best of his life, when his breasts (as Job
spoke at the twentieth Chapter) are full of milk, and his bones of marrow; and
the reason is given, because our younger time is our choosing time, as to our
way in this world; it should be so much more for heaven, or the things of
another world. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, says
Solomon (Eccl: 12.1.) Some render those words expressly, In the days of thy
elections or chusings; As if he had said, Remember to choose God in thy choosing
days, when thou chusest thy calling in which to live, when thou chusest a
wife, In diebus electionum tuarum. Mont:
with whom to spend thy life, then be sure and remember above all things to
choose God. When Moses was a young man, he was famous for this Choice ( Heb:
11.25, 26.) He chose the reproach of Christ rather then the riches of Egypt;
when he had all the riches and honors of Egypt presented to him, and courting
him on the one side, and the reproach of Christ, affliction, poverty, disgrace,
threatening him on the other side, he chose these rather; who would think that
man wise who should choose the reproach of Christ (in appearance nothing but
dirt and dross) before the riches of Egypt? yet Moses never showed his wisdom
and learning so much in all the learning of the Egyptians, as he did in that
Choice.

Let us choose Judgment. Judgment may be taken two ways; First, Judicium est
causae inquisitio.

Judicium pro aequo. Merc.


for the act of enquiry, let us discourse and debate this matter, to find out
what is just; Judgment is the result or sentence given upon hearing and
debate. And most properly a right sentence is Judgment; and that by Judgment
Elihu means a right sentence, appears clearly from the next words.

And let us know among our selves what is good. Communis hic sit nobis
propositus scopus, ut accurata judicij lance quae hactenus in hac causa dicta
sunt probemus, and quod optimum est approbemus. Scult:
Let us know, that is, let us so try by the ear what shall be spoken, that we
may come to a right knowledge, to a right gust or taste of what is good. There
is a twofold knowledge; First, of simple intelligence, when we know any thing
as it is precisely in its own nature, true or false, good or evil; Secondly,
of approbation, when we conclude what we know, to be true or good. We may take
in both here, especially the latter; It being (doubtless) the desire of Elihu
to find truth and goodness (if it were to be found) on Jobs side.

And when he says, That we may know what is good; we may understand it either
Comparatively or Positively; that we may know what is good; is, first, that we
may know good from evil; Secondly, that we may know among good things, what is
better, yea what is best; let us not only distinguish between good and bad, but
between good and better, better and best. The reason of man is able to put a
difference not only between wheat and tares, but if you bring him several
samples of wheat, or other grain, he is able to judge which is the better,
which is best; a knowing man will judge to two pence in a bushel which is
best; so in all other commodities we not only judge between that which is good,
and that which is stark naught, but when we have many parcels and particulars
of any kind before us good and useful, we judge which is the best, which the
principal.

Thus in spiritualls, we are not only to judge of things so far as to know
good from evil (which yet is a very good piece of knowledge; for many put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter, as the Prophet complained ( Isa: 5.20.) that is, they huddle all things
together in a Chaos of confusion) but it should be our care to know good from
good, yea to know what excells among things that are excellent. It Is well when
we know truth from falsehood, but we should labor to know which among truths is
the most precious truth. Paul having spoken of what was good, yea of the best
gifts, says, Yet I will show you a more excellent way (1 Cor: 12.31.) As if he
had said said, This is a good way you are in, the exercise of the best gifts,
but here is a more excellent way, the exercise of grace. Thus here I take good,
not so much Positively as Comparatively, Let us know what is good, that is,
what is best, and what is best of all.

Let us choose to our selves Judgment: and know among our selves that which is
good. First, In that he says, Let us choose to our selves Judgment.

Observe.

We must consider deliberately and maturely before we pass Judgment. Judgment
is a choice thing, and must be made upon choice; it is not to be snatched up
hastily, but duly chosen. They that are upon the choice either of things or
persons, should be much in Consideration. How uncomely (besides unrighteous) is
it, to judge men or matters rashly, to be hurried on to election with passion,
or to judge upon heare-sayes and Conjectures? This is not to choose Judgment,
but to snatch it up; to choose Judgment is to do it with mature deliberation;
there must be much weighing, else properly no judging; rash judgment is
usually wrong judgment; and that lays us open to another judgment, Judge
not that ye be not judged, is Christ's warning ( Math: 7.1.) that is, do not
judge hastily, or harshly, do not judge rashly nor rigidly, much less
falsely, for if you do you shall be judged righteou^^y (indeed) as to your
case, but not comfortably as to your condition. They who will not choose
Judgment, do, in the issue, choose Judgment, that is, not using deliberation
in Judgment, they draw deservedly upon themselves a judgment of condemnation.

Secondly, Taking it more generally, Let us choose to our selves Judgment, or
that which is right.

Note.

It is not enough for us to do Judgment, or that which is right, but we must
choose it. It Is a work of no acceptance with God to do that which is just,
unless we choose it as well as do it, that is, unless our hearts close with
it, and pitch upon it. Solomon (Prove: 1.29.) charge the simple for not
choosing what was good; they did not choose the fear of the Lord. By the fear
of the Lord, he means the true worship of the Lord, or any work of obedience,
by which we testify a holy fear of him; possibly they might do the fear of
the Lord; possibly they worshipped the Lord, they prayed to him, and heard his
word, but they did not choose the fear of the Lord; they did not sit down and
judge that best, or most necessary, but took it up by accident, or by custom,
or for company, because they saw others do it. It will not turn to our
account to be found doing good, unless we choose to our selves that which is
good. Our elections are more eyed by God, then our actions, and the setting of
our hearts, then the work of our hands.

Thirdly, From the latter branch, Let us know among our selves what is good.

Note.

First, There Is nothing worth our knowing, but that which is good. Whatsoever
has a moral, or a spiritual good in it, is worthy to be known; the truths,
the works, the ways of God, are the most desirable good things to be studied
and known ( Psalm: 4.6.) There are many will say, who will show us any good?
What Is their good? Corn, wine, oil, gold, silver, houses, lands, etc. these
are their good, and these are all their good; but though a godly man knows
that these are good things, and blesses God for any portion in them; yet that
which he call's his good, and the good, is of a higher nature; We commonly call
worldly things our goods, but we mis-call them if we call them our good. The
Favor of God is our good, grace is our good, faith and love and hope and
righteousness are good above all, God himself is good, and to know and enjoy
him in Christ through the Spirit is our chiefest good here, and will be all our
good hereafter. Let us know what is good.

From the Comparative sense of the words, Let us know what is good, that is, if
there be a better to be had let us know that.

Observe.

It is not enough for us to have the knowledge of good things, but among good
things the best are to be sought out, to be known, and attained to. This was a
special branch of the Apostles prayer for the Philippians (Phil: 1.10.) That
ye may approve the things that are excellent; or the things that differ in
excellency; Some are contented to sit down in the lowest form of Christ's
School; if they have but any thing which they may call good, or true, right
and sincere, they look no further; any thing satisfies them, which will serve
turn to keep them from perishing; they have no holy aspirings, nor godly
covetous desires after the best things, and the best of the best. God is
willing and has promised to give us not only good things, but the best things
( Psalm: 81.16.) He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat, and
with honey out of the rock should I have satisfied thee; it is a mercy to have
wheat, but the finest of the wheat, and honey out of the rock, not ordinary
honey, but the best honey, the purest honey, are greater mercies. We, by our
sins, deserve that God should (as the Prophet speaks, Isa: 30.20.) give us the
bread of adversity, and the water of affliction; that is, either that he should
give us adversity in stead of bread, and affliction in stead of water, or that
he should feed us with the coursest bread, with husks and bran, and give us
bitter waters, the waters of Marah to drink, yet he in mercy gives us pleasant
bread, and wel-tasted water; yea were we better, he would give us the best
bread, the finest of the wheat, and our cup should be sweeter to us then the
sweetest honey. The reason why we have not of the best, is because we are no
better. Yea God now gives us not only good things, but the best of good things,
even himself, his Son and Spirit, who are best of all (O how excellent is this
loving kindness!) therefore let us not only look after good things, but the
best of good things, to honor God, and lift up his name to the highest in this
world; Let us labor to know and do the best things; and give God our best
services and purest praises, even the male of our flock, the firstborn, the
strength of our whole souls. To these highest seize, Elihu persuades
those wise and knowing men, promising to join with them in that search; Come
let us beat out the business with diligence, that we may at last choose
Judgment, and know among our selves what is good, what is best.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. For Job has said, I am righteous: and God
has taken away my Judgment.

Should I lie against my right? my wound is incurable without transgression.

What man is like Job, who drinks up scorning like water?

Which goes in company with the workers of iniquity, and walks with wicked
men.

For he has said, It profits a man nothing, that he should delight himself
with God.


THe Preface has been dispatched; the context of these five verses contains
the whole charge, or bill of complaint, drawn up by Elihu against Job,
consisting of many particulars. This charge is double; The first part whereof
is contained in the 5th and 6th verses; the second in the 7th 8th and 9th
verses. In the first charge he alleges four things against Job; two in the
5th verse, and two in the 6th; The two things alleged against him in the 5th
verse are.

First, That Job insisted too much upon his own righteousness, Job has said,
I am righteous.

Secondly, That he reflected too boldly upon the righteousness of God, yea that
upon the matter, he had accused God of unrighteousness, or injustice, God has
taken away my Judgment.

Verse. 5. For Job has said, I am righteous.
That Is the first charge, Job has said; Elihu gathers up, and collects those
passages of Jobs complaint, which he found most faulty, and lays them (as we
say) in his dish; Job has said; we may well remember, and he cannot deny it,
for he has said it, not once only, but often, not lightly, but seriously and
assertingly, I am just, or righteous; that is, I have sufficiently showed my
innocence, and the equity of my cause, but I am not permitted to declare and
hold it forth in such a way as I would, before my Judge; yea the Lord
proceeds with me, not in the ordinary way of Justice, but, being above law,
afflicts me, at his pleasure, though I am innocent. This is the sum of what
Job said, as often as he has said, I am righteous.

The first particle which we render for, imports, Vocabulum (...) quia
certitudinem et firmam asseverationem hic importat q.d. profecto equidem, vere,
cerie Job dixit, Justus sum. Pined: Vid: c. 33 8, 9. where this point is also
discussed.
the cleareness and truth of the charge; there is no avoiding the matter of
fact; It will fall upon him, let him take it off and answer it if he can, or as
well as he can. For Job has said, I am righteous.

But it may be questioned, where said he this?

For answer, I shall do two things.

First, Show from what passages in Jobs former answers this charge may be made
good, or at least made up.

Secondly, I shall show in what sense Job said this, and how Elihu and Job do
either agree, or differ in the thing.

To the first, where said Job, I am righteous?

I answer; We find not this direct assertion in terms, or in so many words,
but what he spoke in several places amounts to it; ( Chap: 13.18.) Behold, now
I have ordered my cause, I know I shall be justified, (Chap: 23.10.) But he
knows the way that I take, when he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.
(Chap: 27.6.) My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go; and he
insisted at large upon this point, his vindication from all unrighteousness
throughout the whole 31th Chapter. There we find him making frequent
imprecations ( v. 5, 6, 7.) If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot has
hasted to deceit; Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine
integrity; If my step has turned out of the way, and mine heart walked after
mine eyes, and if any blot has cleaved to mine hands, then etc. In all which
and many other passages of that Chapter, Job spoke highly of his own
innocence, and said in effect, I am righteous. His other friends had taken
notice of this before; Eliphaz hit him with it ( Chap: 4.17.) while he put
those questions; Shall mortal man be more just then God? shall a man be more
pure then his maker? And so did Bildad (Chap: 8.6.) If thou were pure and
upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy
righteousness prosperous. Nor was Zophar behind with him ( Chap: 11.4.) Thou
have said, my doctrine is pure, I am clean in thine eyes.

Secondly, In what sense did he speak this? For answer, when Job said, I am
righteous, we must consider a twofold righteousness; First, a perfect absolute
righteousness, and that may be twofold; First, the righteousness of
justification, which is an imputed righteousness; Secondly, the righteousness
of sanctification, which is an in-wrought or inherent righteousness; this
latter is not absolute, or perfect in degree, while we abide in this life, yet
it is daily growing up to perfection, and shall at last attain a perfect
growth. If any say; Why then does God call us to a perfection of sanctification
in this life, if it be not attainable in this life? I answer, he does it,
first, to show how holy he is; Secondly, to show how holy we ought to be;
Thirdly, he does it, that we might run to Christ, who is the Lord our
righteousness; and who is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption: we being altogether short of righteousness, and
short in righteousness, may go to him, and have a complete and perfect
righteousness. Now besides this absolute righteousness of justification, which
is attainable here, and of sanctification, which is not attainable here, but
shall be hereafter, there is a comparatively perfect righteousness of
sanctification, the righteousness of uprightness, and sincerity, when we strive
to the uttermost to please God in all things by doing good, and can say, we do
not please our selves in any way of doing evil.

It should seem that Elihu and Job did not well agree about the definition of
justice or righteousness. Job intending either civil righteousness toward
men, or a righteousness imputed freely by God; but Elihu understood him of
absolute perfect personal righteousness, which no man attaines unto in this
life. For when Job is charged with saying, Intelligitur justitia per fidem
mediatoris spiritus sancti Arrabone confirmata; Neque enim aliam potuit habero
Job, qui suam claris verbis amoliretur. Coc:
I am righteous, he said it either as a justified person, or as a sanctified
person. In the former sense, he might say he was perfectly righteous, and in
the latter he said he was so, as to the sincerity and uprightness of his heart
with God, and this he might say of himself without fault or blame; for God
himself had said of him ( Ch: 1.1.) that he was a man perfect, and upright.

I grant Job seems to say, (though he said it not, with that aim or
intention, yet he seems to say) that he was even absolutely righteous, not
only as justified but sanctified, while he said, ( Chap: 31.7, 8.) If there be
any blot cleaving to my hands, if my steps have gone out of the way, or my
heart been deceived, etc. This gave Elihu occasion to charge him, with saying,
I am righteous; he did not charge him with saying so, as justified through the
free grace of God, nor did he charge him for saying so as to his sincerity, but
he charged him in these two respects.

First, Because he spoke so much of the righteousness of his way, and of his
works; for though it were true he was righteous in the sense by him intended,
yet because he made it his business, and spent a large discourse to tell the
world, how good, how just, and how holy a man he had been, this was more then
became him in that condition.

Secondly, Elihu checked him for saying so, because (though he were fully
righteous as justified and sincerely righteous as sanctified) he complained of
his afflictions, as if God might not lay his hand heavy upon him, no nor touch
a righteous person with an afflicting hand; or as if he and all other righteous
persons, ought to pass all their days in peace, and have an exemption from
the cross. Whereas one great reason why God afflicted him so sorely, was to
make it known to all the world in his example, that merely upon his own
prerogative and sovereignty, he both may and will when he pleases, afflict the
most innocent person in the world. Yea, the intent of Elihu in urging and
burdening Job with those sayings, was to convince him, that though he was a
child of God, and had walked before him in righteousness and true holiness,
yet he ought to humble himself and bear with meekness and patience the forest
visitations of God. And that therefore he should not have pleaded his own
integrity, to privilege him from affliction, nor have said, Why do I suffer,
seeing I am righteous?

Hence note.

First, That, as it is altogether sinful for any man to say, I am altogether
without sin; (for 1 John 1.8.) If we say we have no sin, there is no truth in
us; and he who says (in that sense) I am righteous, does but declare his own
unrighteousness) so to speak much of our own righteousness and goodness
(though we are both good and righteous) is evil and very blameable. For
whereas Job said, I am righteous, he should rather have left others to say it,
he should have been satisfied that he was so without saying so; and though it
cannot be denied that Job was extremely urged to it (as has been showed more
then once in opening this Book) and it had been but necessary for him to say
it once or twice in his own defense, yet because he said it so often, it drew,
and that deservedly, this censure or charge upon him.

Hence take this corolary or inference.

If to speak much of our own righteousness be displeasing, then how
abominable is it to be proud of it or trust upon it? There is nothing more
pleasing to God, then to see man walking in ways of righteousness, nor is
there any thing more displeasing unto God, then to see a man lifted up with or
leaning upon his own righteousness. If we make our own righteousness our
staff, God will make it our rod. And though he is far from scourging us
because we are righteous, yet he will correct us if we proclaim our own
righteousness, yea if we think it much, or think much of it. We must have a
very great occasion when at any time we bear witness to our own
righteousness, and goodness; but if the heart be lifted up in pride, or trust,
at all, upon it, this renders man odious in the sight of God. God saved Noah
out of that common deluge, in which the old world perished; For (says the
Lord, Gen: 7.1.) thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation. Noah
was righteous before God, and was saved when others perished; but surely had he
vainly boasted or unnecessarily voted himself righteous before men, he had
perished as well as others. It comes much to one and the same account with God,
whether men be openly unrighteous, or whether (without a just cause and call)
they open their righteousness before men.

Secondly, Note.

How righteous soever we are in life, yea though we are righteous by faith,
(which is our righteousness unto life) yet we must not plead that for our
freedom from afflictions. We may plead the righteousness of faith against
condemnation, but not against correction; if any man be in Christ, he shall
never be condemned; but though a man be in Christ, and justified by the highest
actings of faith in the blood of the Covenant, yet he may be severely
corrected. This was (I conceive) the principal scope and intent of Elihu in
charging Job thus, even to convince him, that though he was a faithful servant
of God, and of a very unstained conversation among men, yet he must not think
himself above the cross, but quietly and meekly submit to it. Job spoke
sometimes fully to that point, He destroys the righteous and the wicked, if
the scourge slay suddenly, he laugheth at the trial of the innocent (Chap:
9.23.) yet at other times he forgot himself, and therefore he was (justly as
to his present case, and profitably as to the future issue) remembered of it by
this plain and home-dealer Elihu. Job has said I am righteous, And God has
taken away my Judgment.

As if he had said, Once thou did say, God destroys the perfect and the
wicked, but now thou seem to say, thou art greatly wronged, and thy
Judgment quite taken away, because being a righteous man thou art thus
afflicted.

Mr Broughton renders, But the Omnipotent keeps back my right. As Judgment is
right fully given, so there is but little difference between keeping back our
right, and taking it away; (...) est auserre declinare, divertere subvertere.
therefore the word signifies not only to take away, or cause to decline, to
divert and subvert, but to keep back or withhold any thing in any kind, as Mr
Broughton translates expressly. This is the thing (says Elihu) which Job has
said, God has taken away or kept back my Judgment.

But where did Job say this? he said it ( Chap: 27.2.) As the Lord lives, who
has taken away my Judgment, and the Almighty who has vexed my soul. Bildad
charged Job with it ( Chap: 8. 3.) while he put this question to him, Does God
pervert Judgment? or the Almighty pervert Justice? Implying that Job had
spoken words reflecting upon the Justice and Judgment of God, in taking away
his Judgment.

But you will say, What is Judgment? and what is it to take away Judgment? or
how is a man's Judgment taken away?

I answer; There is a threefold notion of Judgment in Scripture.

First, Judgment is the result or issue of a man's reason about any matter or
question propounded to him. God sometimes takes away man's Judgment in that
sense, and then he becomes a fool, and unable to judge. It Is a dreadful
judgment when God thus takes away man's judgment, and gives him up to a
Reprobate (or an unjudicious) mind, as he did the old Gentiles ( Rom: 1.28.)
for then he will quickly do those things which are not convenient; not being
able to distinguish nor discern between true or false, he must needs put light
for darkness, bitter for sweet, sweet for bitter; Elihu does not represent Job
complaining that God had taken away his judgment in this notion.

Secondly, Judgment is any angry dispensation or wrath powered out or executed
upon persons, nations, or Churches; If judgment begin at the house of God,
(that is, if trouble or wrath begin at the Church of God) what will the end of
those be that obey not the Gospel? (1 Pet: 4.17.) David's Song consisted of two
parts ( Psalm: 101.1.) judgment was one of them, I will sing of mercy and
judgment. This notion of judgment is every where found in Scripture, yet
neither is this the notion of it in this Scripture. God had not thus taken away
Jobs judgment; he begged indeed that God would take away this his judgment,
and it was the matter of his complaint, because he did not take it away.

Thirdly, Judgment is right done or right due; right due, is judgment due;
right done, is judgment done. Thus David prayed ( Psalm: 72.1.) Give the King
thy Judgments* O God, and thy righteousness to the Kings son; that is, give
him an understanding to do right, or to give every man his right. To do this
is a thing so desirable in all men, especially in Kings and Princes, that when
God at Gibeon sent young king Solomon a blanke from heaven, and bid him ask
what he would, he asked only this (1 Kings 3.9.) Give thy servant an
understanding heart, to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and
bad. This is properly the judgment intended here. Job complained, God has
taken away my Judgment; that is, my right, or has not done me right.

But how is Judgment taken away?

I shall answer it in three things.

First, When right is quite subverted, and over-throwne. This the Prophet
elegantly expresses and reproves ( Amos 6.12.) Ye have turned judgment into
gall, and the fruit of righteousness into Hemlock. Right done is sweet and
wholesome, but right denied is bitter as Gall, and banefull like Hemlock.

Secondly, When Judgment is deferred, stopped, or delayed, then it is taken away
for a time. To have judgment long delayed, is always next degree to the
denial of it, and sometimes delay is more cruciating and grievous then a
denial.

Thirdly, A man's judgment is said to be taken away, when the ground, or cause,
of Gods proceeding with him in judgment, is hid, or unmanifest; Judgment, as
to us, is not, when the reason of it does not appear to us, or when we see not
the reason of it. To feel Judgment and not to see the cause of it, turns it
into a torment; we say commonly, Things that appear not, are as if they were
not. When the reason or ground of our sufferings is not understood, it is as if
we suffered without any ground of reason.

When Job complained, God has taken away my Judgment, we are not to
understand him, as if Elihu intended it in the first or grossest sense, that
God had subverted his judgment, or had done him wrong. Elihu could not suspect
he had any such blasphemous opinion of God; for, that had fullfilled the
Devils prophecy of him, He will curse thee to thy face. But when he said, God
has taken away my Judgment; he meant it according to the two latter
interpretations, either that God deferred long to restore him, and answer his
prayer, or that God had hid from him the reason of his dealing with him, so
that he could not make it out, how, or why he was so sorely and grievously
handled. Job knew well his own innocence, but he did not well consider Gods
sovereignty, which alone answers enough for him, how much soever he in this
world afflicts the innocent. And therefore for as much as God held him long in
that sad condition, and in the mean time hid his judgment, or the reason of
it from him, this was Jobs grievance, and the burden of it pressed him to cry
out, God has taken away my Judgment. In this he was too bold with God, and
therefore he justly fell under this censure of Elihu: As if he had said, It
does not at all become thee, O Job, as a creature, as a man, much less as a
new creature, or as a godly man, to cry out (as thou have done) that God has
taken away thy Judgment; because he does not give thee an account, nor tell
thee, why he judges thee; therefore humble thy self that ever thou have said
(and take heed thou say it no more) God has taken away my Judgment.

Hence note.

First, God sometimes lets the goodness of his most precious servants l^e in
the dark. He goes unusual ways with many of his choycest servants; he does
not always declare their right, nor deal with them according to the ordinary
rule, in giving good to them that are good, (as not always evil to them that
are evil, the Lord is at his liberty in these present distributions, he is
supreme, and has power over all flesh) and so keeps their judgment in the
clouds, or a secret to himself.

Secondly, Note.

The Lord sometimes is pleased to defer and delay to do his servants right.
And thus he takes away their Judgment. Though he has a purpose to give it
them, yet he does not presently give it them; at last he will make even with
all men, each man shall have his judgment; he will reward every one according
to his work, and the righteous, shall (without doubt) have a good reward.

Thirdly, Note.

When God does either hide or defer the Judgment of a godly man, it does very
much affect, yea and afflict his heart. We are usually much afflicted with any
dark dispensation upon many accounts, especially upon this, because it makes us
obnoxious to every man's censure. When God takes away our judgment, we fall
under the hard judgments of men; And to lie under the ill opinions of men
unvindicated or unrighted, is no easy burden. We have that promise ( Psalm:
37.6.) He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment
as the noonday. The righteousness and judgment of a good man may be in a
midnight darkness as to man, and till that be brought to the light of other
men's knowledge, himself has, sometimes, little light of comfort.

Fourthly, Note.

It is sinful to complain, and to be troubled, as if God had not done us
right, because we see it not done, or because he deferrs to do it. In this Job
was most faulty, he uttered many passionate speeches about what God had done,
because things were not brought to an issue, nor his condition stated and
cleared up, either to the world, or to himself; This troubled him more then
the extremity of his pain, or the greatest of his troubles. How stiffely Job
stood upon it, that his Judgment was taken away, will appear yet further in
the next words, which Elihu makes further matter of accusation.

Verse. 6. Should I lie against my right? my wound is incurable without
transgression.
In this verse we have two other parts of the Indictment brought against Job,
near of the same nature with the former; wherein he yet more vehemently urges
his own integrity, and cries out both of the greatness and causelessness (on
his part) of his present sufferings. More distinctly Elihu in this verse
charge him.

First, That he did over-eagerly maintain his own cause, Should I lie against
my right?

Secondly, That he spoke of God as dealing over-harshly with him; My wound is
incurable without transgression; These things (says Elihu) thou have also said.

Should I lie against my right? We read the words as a Question; others read
them as a direct proposition; There is a lie in Judging me, or, In judicando
enim me mendacium est. Vulg:
There is a lie against my right; The word which we here translate right, is
the same which we translate Judgment in the former verse. And when he says,
There is a lie against my right; It is as if he had plainly said, I am falsely
charged, I am wrongfully accused, I am not such a man as I am supposed, nor
have I done those things whereof I am suspected. Every false accusation brought
against a man, is a lie against his right.

Secondly, Others read it thus, Super judi^ium meum faciam mentiri. i. e. falsi
arguam hominem qui volet m^cum contendere. Cajet: Item Chald:
I shall make liers against my right; that is, whosoever stands up to prove any
thing against me, as you have done, saying, I am wicked, unrighteous, or
hypocritical, I shall be able to prove him a lier. But neither the
Grammatical signification of the words will fairly bear this sense, nor does
it well correspond with the former verse.

In judicio meo mentior. Pisc. Probarem si mentiri hoc sensu de persona dici
inveniretur nam de re usurpari certum est. Drus:
Thirdly, Thus; I lie in my Judgment; that is, I am deceived in it, or I fail
of it. To lie in Scripture, is to fail, or to frustrate the hope of another.
Some insist much upon this sense; as if he had said, I come short of that which
I looked for as my right or Judgment; in this sense the word is often applied
to things, but not to persons, as some of the learned conclude upon this place.
( Isa: 58.11.) Thou shall be like a spring of water, whose waters fail not; we
put in the margin, lie not, or deceive not. It Is a promise made to those who
keep a true fast, and keep it truly, God will be to them as a spring whose
waters lie not. All our fresh springs are or should be in God, and he is a
spring whose waters are always fresh. No man ever came to him for matter, and
was frustrated of his expectation. Thus also the word is used ( Hab: 3.17.)
Although the labor of the Olive shall fail; that is, though when you come to
the Olive tree, you find no Olives there, nor see any hope of a drop of oil in
your whole Olive-yard, yet you may still rejoice in the Lord, he is able to
annoint and fill you always with the oil of gladness. Thus Job is conceived
complaining here of his deceived hopes, much in that sense as God himself in
the Prophet ( Isa: 5.7.) is said to be deceived. He looked for judgment, but
behold oppression, for righteousness, but behold a cry. I (says Job) looked
for better things, I looked for light, but behold darkness, I looked to be
acquitted, but behold I am hardly thought of and censured on every hand, I am
quite disappointed, matters fall out and are otherwise then I did expect.

In Jure meo mentior. i. e. quum innocentiam meam defendo putor mentiri. Pisc:
Fourthly, I lie in my right; is thus expounded, I am thought to lie, while I
maintain my right, or say I am righteous; I am judged a liar, for saying I
have walked in the truth.

All these readings of the text are given from the affirmative translation.

But we, as also several others translate by an interrogation, intimating the
heat and earnestness of his spirit, in wiping off this aspersion; Should I lie
against my right? I should not, I will not. As if Elihu had said; Job has
insisted so much upon his own righteousness, and right, that he will not be
taken off from it upon any terms, nay he has sa^d, what? should I knowing my
self to be innocent (because of this cry against me) cry guilty to this
indictment; and so betray my own innocence, or give away my right? Job stands
so much upon his own righteousness, An par est ut montiar super innocentia
moa? Vatabl:
that if he should but acknowledge himself faulty, he thinks he should lie,
or wrong himself by speaking against his knowledge and conscience. And indeed
Job (Chap: 27.4, 5, 6.) spoke fully to this effect, That it would be a wrong to
or a lie against himself, if he should not stand up to the uttermost in his
own right, and defend his innocence; and it is probable Elihu hits at that
passage, while he charge him with this passionate expostulation, What! Should
I lie against my right? Would you have me say as you say, and so bear false
witness, or be a false witness against my self? What ever comes of it, I will
not do that. I will not lie against my right, nor let go my integrity; I will
not in civility to any other man's understanding of me, subscribe to my own
wrong, or say I am, what I am not, or have done what I have not. Elihu brings
this as a strong proof of the height of Jobs spirit, as if to confess his
fault were to fall below himself, yea to belie himself; Should I lie against
my right?

Hence note.

First, To acknowledge we have done that, which we have not done, or that we
are what we are not, is to lie against our own right, or to wrong our selves.
As many lie, by speaking more good of themselves then is true, or by denying
that evil which in truth they are guilty of; so he that submits to that guilt
which he is free from, or confesses more evil of himself then is true, lies
against his own soul. So did that Amalekite (2 Samuel: 1.10. compared with 2 Samuel: 31.4.) charge himself falsely with killing Saul in hope of a reward from
David for his good news. As no man ought to lie against another, much less
against himself; And as that man does wickedly belie himself, who says he is
better then he is, (for that is horrible hypocrisy; all such God will unmask
one time or other, who thus cover themselves with lies, and say (like those in
the Prophet) they have dreamed when they have seen nothing, but the vain
phansies of their own brains, nor felt any thing but the presumption of their
false hearts; Now (I say) as he does wickedly belly himself who says he is
better then he is) so for any man to deny that good which God has done for
him, or wrought in him, or what he has done or wrought in the fear and power
of God, is a dangerous way of denying and belying his own right.

Hence secondly note.

No man ought to admit any charge against himself, wherein he is not guilty.
It is not in our liberty to give up our own integrity, we may not give up the
righteousness and innocence of others to a false witness, if we can detect it,
much less our own. Let no man lie against his right. It is our affliction
only to be wronged by others, but it is our sin to wrong either others, or our
selves. Yet

Thirdly, Note.

We may quickly over-act in standing upon our own right. That caution of
Solomon (Eccl: 7.16.) seems to carry this observation in it. Be not righteous
overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise: Why should thou destroy thy self.
Some expound this precept as a rule of policy, advising all to a moderation in
the practice of (that wherein there can be, indeed, no excess) true piety and
religion; as if it were a duty to study and comport our selves to a kind of
neutrality and indifferency in the things of God, lest we expose our selves to
the wrath and rage of men, who cannot bear it with patience to see any that
are better or do better then themselves. But I conceive the Spirit of God in
Solomon, was far from breathing any such cold blast, to nip either the
buddings or highest growths of godliness; and that he would not at all abate
any in the practice of holiness, but intends one of or all these three things.
First, to take men off from any opinionativenesse, about what they judge to be
righteous and themselves righteous in doing it, willing them to take advice,
and not to lean to their own understanding, nor to rest in their own dictates
as infallible; or Secondly, when he says, Be not righteous overmuch, his
meaning is, do not exact the utmost of others which the Law in the rigor of
it will allow; he that will not remit any thing of his right, is not only
over-righteous, but may soon do wrong; or Thirdly, when he says, be not
over-righteous, as he would not have men stand strictly upon their right with
others, so he would not have them speak much of their own righteousness; but
rather sometimes take blame to themselves, then (which was Jobs case) proclaim
themselves altogether blameless. As we are not to betray our innocence, so not
give a shadow of any boasting in it. We seldom lose by saying little of our
selves. And in most cases we should rather trust God (who has promised he will
do it, Psalm. 37.6.) to bring forth our righteousness as the light, then be
over-industrious in bringing it to light, or in bringing it out of that
darkness with which it lies obscured, either by or among men. As we ought
never to lie against our right, so it may not be convenient at some times to
speak all the truth of it which we can. This at least was Jobs fault, and it
will be any man's who does like Job, yea though he should be (which few have
been or are like to be) under as great sufferings as Job. The greatness
whereof he aggravated to the hight in the next words, with which Elihu charge
him.

My wound is incurable without transgression. An incurable wound is the worst
of wounds, and though to be wounded without transgression is best for him that
receives it, yet it is worst for him that gives it. My wound is incurable.

The Hebrew is, my arrow; the arrow is a wounding weapon, and in this Text it is
put for the wound it self. Job complained ( Chap. 6.4.) The arrows of the
Allmighty drink up my spirits; There are arrows of two sorts, and answerably
there are wounds of two sorts. There are first external, secondly, internal
arrows; God shoots his arrows both into the flesh, and spirit; the former
make a wounded body, the latter a wounded soul. Job may intend both, for he
received wounds in both; his flesh was wounded, and all that belonged to flesh,
his estate, his credit and good name were wounded, his soul and spirit were
wounded also, the arrows of God were shot thick at him, and hit him from head
to foot. The Archers (as dying Jacob said of Joseph, Genesis 49.23, Gravissima est
sagitta mea absque transgressione. Bez:
24.) sorely grieved him, they [all] shot at him, and (one of them Satan) hated
him; but though his bow (as to the maine) abode in strength, and the arms of
his hands were made strong by tht hands of the mighty God of Jacob; yet he
cried out as if there had been no help, no healing, no hope for him. My wound
Is incurable. Hanc sagittam Elihu vocat (...) i. e. gravem doloratam pessime
habentem hinc Enosh homo ab infirmitate et fragilitate dictus.


The word which we render incurable, signifies not only what is very dolorous,
or grievous, but mischievous, mortal, and deadly. And from this word man is
called Enosh in the Hebrew, to show how infirm and frail he is, sin having
given him a wound which is incurable, by any thing but the blood of Jesus
Christ. Job felt his wounds, and he spoke of them, as a man swallowed up with
desperation, and expected no cure of his present sad condition; My wound is
incurable, and he concluded with that which is yet harder, My wound is
incurable Without transgression.

Mr. Broughton translates, My stroke is sore without trespass. Job in saying
his wound was incurable, showed a defect in his faith, but in saying it was
incurable without transgression, he seems to show his defect in truth. For
surely had there not been transgression in him, there had never been a wound
upon him; God had never so much as broken our skin but for sin; Man had never
felt so much as the scratch of a pins point by the hand of God, if he had not
once prevaricated and Apostatized from God. We ow all our sorrows to our sins,
all our woundings to our transgressings. How then does Job say, My wound is
incurable without transgression? The word here used is not usually put to
signify sin in general (though some take it so) but some special kind of
sin, (...) denotat grave scelus vel Apostasi^m. Scult:
and that of more then an ordinary degree, a sin with a malignity, a provoking
sin; As if the meaning of Elihu were, that he heard Job say, Though his sin
were not great, though it were not any rebellion against light, nor dangerous
Apostasy, though his were a very curable sin, yet his wound was altogether
incurable, his wound was great, though his sin was little. Now, because Justice
does usually apportion the punishment inflicted both to the nature and measure
of the sin committed, therefore Elihu takes it (and he had too much occasion to
do so) as a great reflection upon the justice of God, when he heard Job thus
bemoaning himself, My wound is incurable without transgression. To receive the
least wound without transgression, is a great wound to justice, how greatly
then does he wound the Justice of God, who says he has received a great, yea
an incurable wound without transgression.

But where spoke Job these words, when said he, My wound is incurable without
transgression, (we must bring in that, Job has said, to every one of these
charges) I answer, Job spoke of the arrows of God ( Chap: 6.4.) and that they
were incurable, he says in other words ( Chap: 16.13.) His arrows compass me
round about; he cleaves my reins asunder; he powers out my gall upon the
ground. When a man's reins are cleft in sunder with an arrow, and his gall
powered on the ground, his wound is incurable.

But where did he say, My wound is incurable without transgression; Elihu might
collect that from (Chap: 9.17.) He breaks me with a tempest, and multiplyeth
my wounds without cause; and from (Chap: 16.16, 17.) My face is foul with
weeping, etc. not for any injustice in my hands. While Mary washed the feet of
Christ with her tears ( Luke 7.38.) she might be said to foul her own face
with her tears. Tears, which (in a qualified sense, or as a token of true
repentance) wash and cleanse the soul, do yet blubber and disfigure the face.
My face (says Job) is soul with weeping, though my hands are not foul with
sinning, or any evil doing. This was, in effect to say what Elihu here
censureth him for saying, My wound is incurable without transgression.

Hence note.

First, God has his arrows, he can wound us when and where he pleases. He
shoots and misseth not his mark. He has a quiver full of deadly arrows;
take heed how ye provoke him. Jbb had a whole quiver of arrows emptied upon him
for trial, for the exercise of his patience. Woe to those upon whom God
emptieth his quivers in vengeance. ( Psalm: 7.11, 12, 13.) God is angry with the
wicked every day; if he turn not, he will whet his sword, he has bent his
bow, and made it ready; he has also prepared for him the instruments of death,
he ordains his arrows against the persecutours.

Secondly, Note.

The wounds which God makes cannot be healed by any medicines but his own.
Jobs wound was incurable, there was no balm for him in the Gilead of this
world, no Physician there. And therefore the Lord bids Egypt, in scorn, seek
healing there ( Jer: 46.11.) Go up into Gilead and take balm, O virgin, the
daughter of Egypt: in vain shall thou use many medicines, for thou shall not
be cured. Who can heal where God will wound? ( Psalm: 38.2, 3.) Thine arrows
stick fast in me, there is no soundness in my flesh; even David complained that
the wounds which the arrows of God had made in him were incurable. Why is my
pain perpetual (said the Prophet, Jer: 15.18.) and my wound incurable, which
refuses to be healed? When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound,
then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to king Jareb to help him, yet
could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wounds. (Hos: 5.13.) God gives
states or bodies politic such wounds, as all the medicines and means in the
world cannot help; They may go to the Assyrian, and send to king Jareb, to
this and that power; They may call a whole college of State-Physicians or
deepest politicians for counsel and advise, yet neither one nor other can be a
healer to them. Therefore in the next Chapter ( v. 1.) the Church concluded
upon another course, and a better address, then either to the Assyrian, or to
king Jareb. Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will
heal us; only the Lord who gives the wound can heal the wound; the same hand
which smites us must cure us, else our wound is incurable.

Thirdly, Note.

To complain of our wounds as incurable, or past cure, is an argument of our
unbelief. It Is good for us even to despair of help from creatures, and to say
the least wound (if but the scratch of a pin) is incurable by all the art,
means, and medicines which this world can administer, but to say our wound
(though never so deep, dangerous, and deadly) is absolutely incurable, is our
sin. While we ruin our selves (that is, while we provoke God to ruin us, yet)
there is hope in God; O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is
thine help (Hos: 13.9.) despair as much as you will of creatures help, but
still hope in God.

Thirdly, In that he says, My wound is incurable without transgression.

Note.

The Lord may, and does take liberty to afflict those grievously, who have not
sinned greatly. There is no man lives and sins not, yet every man is not
(in strict sense) a sinner, that is, a great sinner, a rebel, a worker of
iniquity; yet the Lord when it is needful gives them great wounds, who have
not (comparatively) sinned greatly. Though no sin should be little in our eye,
yet there are degrees of sin, and some are less then others in the eye both of
God and man. Elihu charge Job, not as saying he had no sin, but because he
complained his wounds were great, though his sins were not; or that there was
not a due proportion between his offense and his punishment, his sins and his
sufferings.

Hence note, Fourthly.

Though the Lord takes liberty to afflict those greatly that have not sinned
greatly, yet they must not take liberty to complain of the greatness of their
afflictions, how little soever their sins have been. A gracious heart looks
upon the least of his mercies, as greater then the greatest of his good
deservings, and upon the greatest of his sufferings, as less then the least of
his ill deservings or demerits. And surely (besides that liberty which God
has, as he is supreme, and sovereign, to afflict whom he will, and in what
degree he will we must know, that, the least sin deserves the greatest wound.
An evil thought deserves all the evil that can be heaped upon us. Whatsoever
we suffer on this side hell is less then the least of our sins. And therefore
if we have reason to confess our little sins great, and our greatest wounds
little, compared with our little sins; how much more should we confess our
great sufferings little, compared with our great sins, as the Church did ( Ezra
9.13.) After all that is come upon us (our long and hard bondage in Babylon)
for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, thou O Lord, have punished us
less then our iniquities deserve.

Further, from the whole verse, in that Elihu charge Job with these several
sayings.

Observe, First.

A good man's sayings are often worse then his meanings. Elihu rebukes his
speeches, not his spirits; his words though in some respect true, yet were
dangerous, and because not well explained by himself, scandalous to others,
But his heart was not treacherous, not the bent of his mind wrong set, in
uttering them. Evil men may speak good words, but it is with a bad heart; Good
men sometimes speak bad and offensive words, yet with honest hearts; and when
their minds are serene, and they cleared from those clouds of perturbation,
which have darkened them, they (as Job) are ready to recant them, and repent of
them.

Secondly, Note.

It is an high offense to intimate any thing which does in the least entrench
upon the Justice, and righteousness of God. To say, God has taken away our
judgment, may call down judgments; To say, we are wounded without
transgression, is a great transgression; and the reason, why it is so, is
plain, because such sayings, tell the world, that we suffer, if not quite
without desert, yet more then we deserve; and what is this but to justify our
selves, and lay blame upon God, then which (as was showed at the 2d verse of
the 32d Chapter) nothing is more derogatory to God, or more blameworthy in man.

Thirdly, Note.

If we speak amiss, or indiscreetly about the dealings of God with us, we may
thank our selves if we are hardly censured, and soundly chidden for it. Though
Jobs heart was honest, yet his tongue was intemperate, and he too bold with
God; and you see how God stirred up the spirit of Elihu to lay it home to him,
and bring him upon his knees for it. They who vent unwarrantable speeches, must
not think much if they meet with sharp reproves and cutting censures.
Tongue-faults seldom escape without tongue-lashes; And it is a mercy to meet
with them from a faithful friend; Their lashing and cutting tongues prove
healing tongues, ( Psalm: 141.5.)

Fourthly, Note.

Every speaker is at the mercy of his hearers. No man knows what gloss his
words may have put upon them when once uttered. Here are four sayings brought
against Job, yet Job never spoke any of them expressly, or in so many words,
but such collections were made (indeed they were, as not false, so not
favorable collections) from what he had spoken. And he had but a poor remedy
left, to say he did not mean them so. Take heed what you speak, words are
usually judged as others understand them, not as you mean them. Indeed charity
does always incline to the best construction; and will not interpret that ill,
which may bear a better interpretation. But who knows whether his words
shall always meet with a charitable interpreter, our words do not often
meet with just and equal ones. Nothing, indeed, is more common with
uncourteous hearers, then to misconster those they hear, or to judge of what
is spoken rather as it may be taken to the speakers hurt and defamation, then
their own profit or instruction. And therefore though I would advise every
hearer to use as much charity as may be, yet I would also advise every speaker
to leave as little as may be to the charity of his hearers.

Thus much of the first part of the charge in these four sayings. In the three
verses following, Elihu prosecutes the charge, and stands in admiration, as
here at the sayings of Job, so there of his doings.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 7, 8, 9. What man is like Job, who drinks up scorning
like water?

Which goes in company with the workers of iniquity, and walks with wicked
men.

For he has said, it profits a man nothing that he should delight himself
with God.


THese three verses contain the second charge or accusation, which Elihu had
drawn up against Job. And in it we may distinctly consider; First, the form
of it; Secondly, the matter of it.

The form of it is by way of question; What man is like Job? The matter of it
consists of three heads.

First, That he was a man of a scornful spirit toward others, or that he had
subjected himself to the scorn of others; What man is like Job, which
drinks up scorning like water?

Secondly, Elihu charge him, as having fellowship with men of a vain and
offensive conversation ( v. 8th) Which goes in company with the workers of
iniquity, and walks with wicked men.

Thirdly, He charge him (which is indeed the ground of the former) That he
was a man, not only of unsound, but of blasphemous principles and opinions ( v.
9th) For he has said, it profits a man nothing that he should delight
himself with God. This 9th verse is the proof of the eighth; For some might
enquire, How does it appear, that, Job goes in company with the workers of
iniquity, and walks with wicked men? Elihu answers, It appears by his
words, or from his own mouth; For he has said, it profits a man nothing,
that he should delight himself with God. And if a man once judge that there is
no profit in the ways of God, he thereby declares his consent to the ways of
the wicked. That Is the sum of the charge, and these the parts of it.

(...) non pro quolibet homine sumitur sed pro claro and sepiente.
Verse. 7. What man is like Job?
The word rendered man, does not signify every ordinary man, but a great or
wise man, a famous or a powerful man. What great or wise man is like Job?
Possibly some may be found among the dreggs of the people or among the common
sort like himself, but among men of honor and reputation for wisdom, surely,
there are none to be found like him. Yet some take it (out of the strictness of
the original word) for a man of the lowest or meanest condition; What man is
like Job? that is, no man, no not of the meanest degree is like him. And so the
question may be carried under a threefold notion.

First, As a vilifying question, What man is like Job? Who is there that has
but the name and face of a man that would do or speak things as he? Job, in
this matter, is worse then any man, then the worst of men. He acts and speaks
at a lower rate of prudence and piety then many, if not then any of the lowest
among the sons of men.

Secondly, We may look upon it as an angry passionate question, a question
carrying in it highest indignation; What man is like Job? who so vain, rash,
foolish and inconsiderate as he? I have scarce the patience to speak or think
of him.

Thirdly, We may take it as an admiring question; What man is like Job? It is a
thing unheard of, even a stupendous prodigy, that a man should be or do as
Job. All sorts of men abstain from or decline, yea scorn scorning ('it is a
thing so unbecoming man) but chiefly they that are great, noble and honorable,
such as Job has been in his time, yet he is turned scorner. As if he had said,
Who has heard the like? was there ever such a man heard of, who either used
such scornful language against others, or laid himself so open to the scorn
and contempt of others! What man is like Job, Who drinks up scorning like
water?

That Is matter of admiration; Elihu might have found out many other matters,
wherein Job had no fellow, no parallel, scarce any like him in the world; who
so afflicted, so humbled, so broken, so deserted by his own relations, so
vexed with friends and comforters like Job? But he does not put the question
upon his sufferings, but upon his sin; What man is like Job, who drinks up
scorning, etc. Drinking is here used metaphorically, and so likewise are
eating, devouring, and swallowing up often used in Scripture, to denote that
which is done to be done with much greediness, and with a kind of delight. And
whereas there is a threefold measure or degree of drinking; First, soberly, or
for necessity: Secondly, plentifully or for moderate delight; Thirdly,
excessively, or for drunkenness, and the satisfying of a lust. This third
seems to be here intended, even an excessive drinking of scorn, till he was
as a drunken or madman with it, or (as we say) mad drunk; For the text says,
What man is like Job, who drinks up scorning. He does not only taste it a
little, and sip at the scorners cup, but drinks it up to a drop, or to the
bottom. He drinks up scorning.

Quis ita ridetur et sannis exxipitur ut Job? bibit subsannationem id est
subsannatur. Drus: Significat Jobux ad se ridendum omnes provocare cum talibus
sermonibus utitur. Merc:
And that is a strange kind of drink, one of the worst if not altogether the
worst of Natures brewing. Scorning may be taken 2 ways, either passively or
actively; some take it in a passive signification; What man is like Job, who
drinks up scorning like water? that is, who is so scorned, or who subjecteth
himself to the scorn of men as he has done. What wise or discreet man did
ever lay himself so naked, so open to contempt as he? or who like him would
render himself so ridiculous, such a laughing stock to all his hearers, who
are but rational and understanding men? It cannot be denied (nor does Elihu in
speaking thus coursely of him deny it) but that Job, moved doubtless by the
holy Ghost, had spoken many excellent things, full of divine light and
learning, yet moved with passion, he spoke sometimes much amiss, and is
charged for it, as if like a shameless person, he had proffered himself, by
lavish and intemperate language to the lash of every tongue.

Secondly, Scorning may be taken actively; What man is like Job, who drinks
scorning like water? That is, where shall we find such a scorner? who has
uttered so many reproachful speeches, as Job? He drinks scorning, as if he
thought he could never fill himself enough with scorning. This interpretation
may have a a double reference.

First, To his friends, who it seems, were very sensible that he put scorns
upon them. Zophar complains of it ( Chap: 11.3.) When thou mockest shall no
man make thee ashamed; As if he had said, when thou have mocked and derided us,
shall we let thee alone, and say nothing? shall we suffer our selves to be
abused and pass it by in silence? ought we not to tell thee of it, and rebuke
thee for it openly, and to thy face, that thou may see thy error and be
ashamed of it?

Secondly, (which is yet higher, and I judge too high) his scorning is referred
by some to the dealings and providence of God, Bibere subsannationem velut
aquam est esse plenum sermonibus ridiculis. Vatabl:
as if he had spoken of them with a kind of scorn, at least with that
irreverence, and slightness of spirit, which Eliphaz did early and earnestly
admonish him of ( Chap: 5.17.) Despise not thou the chastning of the Lord; and
which the Apostle calls The exhortation, which speaks unto us as unto children
(Heb: 12.5.) My son despise not thou the chastening of the Lord. Thus also
Elihu may in a qualified sense be understood charging Job with drinking up
scorning like water. As if upon the whole matter he had said, Job has drunk
scorn till he is almost drunken with it, at least, he is so full of it, that
he powers it out upon every one that comes near him, and which is worst of
all, he speaks so unbecomingly, that we shall not much wrong him, if we say he
has spoken or acted despisingly (which is a degree of speaking or acting
scornefully) concerning the chastenings of God upon him.

Further, When it is said, He drinks scorning like water.

It may imply three things; First, the frequency of his scorning, he does it
commonly, he is at scorning as often as at drinking; Secondly, the content
which he was supposed to take in scorning, water cools and refreshes the
heated and wearied body: Thirdly, it may note the easiness or naturallness of
it to him. To drink is natural to man, it puts him to no pains nor study. We
say proverbially of that which a man does without trouble; He does it as easily
as he drinks. But of this word drinking and drinking like water, the reader
may see more upon those words ( Chap: 15.16.) Man drinks iniquity like water.

Once more, whereas Elihu says of Job, He drinks scorning like water.

Some have made a critical observation or distinction about it; Elihu does not
say, he drinks scorning like wine, but like water; They who are provoked or
led on to sin by the delight and sweetness which they find in sin, are said to
drink it like wine (Prove: 4.17.) They drink the wine of violence; or they drink
violence like wine. It goes down sweetly and pleasantly; But (say they) such
as sin, not out of pleasure but out of will or out of an affected
maliciousness, are said to drink iniquity like water, which has little
pleasure in it, little sweetness or taste in it. There Is small savor in water
comparatively to wine and other delicate or delicious liquors. So that
(according to this notion) they drink iniquity like water, who sin for sins
sake. And indeed some are so delighted in sin it self, that they will sin in
that which yields them no delight. The very act of doing evil is more
contentfull to them, then any fruit or consequent of it. But we need not stay
in this nicity, the general sense falls hard enough upon Job, to drink
scorning like water, is to be much and often in scorning. Water is the cheapest
liquor, and of most common use; every man can go to the price of that which
costs nothing (in most places) but the labor of taking it up. What man is like
Job, that drinks scorning like water?

Taking the words in a passive sense, as Job was a person scorned, and drunk in
the scorns of men powered upon him, as the earth drinks in water.

Note.

He behaveth himself unlike a man, that lays himself open to, and readily
admits the scorn of men. It is an affliction to be scorned by others; But it
is a sin to render our selves a scorn to others, and not to be sencible of it.

Secondly, (which I rather adhere to) taking the active sense, he is charged
with speaking scornfully to his friends, or of the dealings of God with him;
how far this charge might reach Job, has been touched a little already; and
will be cleared yet further before the close of the whole matter brought
against him in this context. But in the mean time, from the general sense of
the words (not concluding Job broadly such a one)

Observe.

Scorners are the vilest sort of men. What man is like Job, who drinks
scorning? Not to do good is sinful, but either to scorn that which is good or
those that are good is far more sinful. That man is gone his furthest
length, or ascended to the highest step of sin, who turns scorner, or gives
himself a liberty to scorn others. The first words of David speak this (
Psalm: 1.1.) Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful.
Here are three degrees of sinning; walking, standing, sitting: He that sits
in the seat of the scornful, or has commenced scorner, has taken the
highest degree, and is the chief Graduate in the Schools of sin. And as to
sit in the seat of the scornful, is the highest degree of sinning, so they
that are got into that seat, care not how long they sit in it, yea, are hardly
ever got out of it. So much that chiding question or expostulation of Solomon
does fully import ( Prove. 1.22.) Ye scorners, how long will ye delight in
scorning? As if he had said, When shall it once be? will ye never have done,
nor give over that trade? Scorners are therefore the worst of men, because they
deride the best both of things and men ( Prove: 21.24.) Proud and haughty
scorner is his name, who deals in proud wrath. Scorners are the children of
pride. A proud spirit vents it self in scorning. Pride does not appear so
much in apparel, in gay clothes and new fangled fashions (all which are often
used as flaggs of pride and vanity) nor does pride appear so much in praising
our selves (though there it appears much) as it does in scorning others.
Proud scorner is his name. And as the scorner is a proud despiser of others, so
a quarrelsome contender with others, and till he is separated from men, there
is nothing but separation, no peace among men ( Prove: 22.10.) Cast out the
scorner, and contention shall go out; yea strife and reproach shall cease;
which plainly intimates, that strife cannot go out till the scorner be cast
out. And therefore Solomon (Pro: 24.9.) calls the scorner an abomination to
man. Thus the Scripture sets the scorner among sinners of the chiefest rank and
first form; I may say, he is of the first three, if not the first of that
three. Therefore take heed how ye drink scorning, especially take heed it be
not your mornings draught; for as it comes from the heart, so it will fly up
into your head, and unfit you for any good work, at least, that day.

Again, from the similitude here used, to drink up scorning like water, which
(as has been showed) holds out the readiness and connaturallness of an action
unto him that is charged with it.

Note.

The more easily any one sins, the greater is his sin. It is best to come
hardly off in sinning, and when it goes hardly down; Many sin as easily as
they eat or drink. They eat up my people as bread, (says God, Psalm: 14.4.)
that is (as we say) they make no bones of it; there is nothing sticks in their
throats, nor troubles their conscience. Where sin lives altogether unmorti^^ed
in any man (it does so in every mere natural or unregenerate man) it is no
more to him to sin, then it is either to live, or to eat and drink for the
maintaining of life. But they shall feel sorest pains for sinning, who have
sinned with greatest ease; they shall drink damage by scorning like Gall* and
Wormwood, who have drunk scorning like water, Elihu having thus taxed Job
with scorning at good men, proceeds to tax him with overmuch freedom and
familiarity with evil men.

Verse. 8. Which goes in company with the wor^^^s of iniquity, and walks with
wicked men.
Noscitur ex comite. etc.
As if he had said, you may know what he is, by the company he keeps.

He goes in company with the workers of iniquity, or he associates and puts
himself into the society of the workers of iniquity. Elihu does not say, he
dwells among the workers of iniquity; The best man in the world may dwell
among bad men; Let dwelt in Sodom. We must go out of the world, if we will
not be among the wicked; the world is every where full of the workers of
iniquity. But (says he) he goes in company with them. Which intimates the
activenes of his spirit with them; yea the election of his spirit, or that he
chose their company. Though a good man may be in the company of the wicked, yet
he does not choose their company; He is not of their body of their society or
gang. A wicked man does not content himself to be among the ordinary sort of
sinners, he is for, and best likes the worst of sinners, workers of iniquity.
All are sinners naturally, but some are sinners artificially; they study sin,
they contrive and plot mischief; They devise iniquity upon their beds, says
one Scripture; They weave the spiders webb, (...).
says another. Here Is artificial sinning. The Greeks call such, sin-workers,
and crafts-men in evil. I have had occasion to speak of these from other
passages of this Book. Here Elihu to highten the charge against Job, says, He
goes in company with (such or chooses such kind of company) the workers of
iniquity; And walks with wicked men.

As our holiness is expressed by walking with God, so our sinfullnesse by
walking with wicked men. To walk with God is all the commendation of Enoch, who
was so holy on earth that God took him up to Heaven, ( Genesis 5.22.) He had this
testimony (faith the Apostle, Heb. 11.15.) before his translation, that he
pleased God. To walk with God, is to please God, or to give up our selves
wholly to God. Can two walk together except they be agreed? is the Prophets
question, ( Amos 3.3.) They who walk together are supposed to have one will,
as they are seen to have one way. What God wills they will, and what God
wills not, they will not who walk with him. To walk with wicked men implies
an agreement with them, and a conformity to them, as being of their fraternity,
company and livery. They that walk with wicked men, declare their familiarity
with them, or that their mind and manners are the same. The Apostle tells the
Corinthians (1 Cor. 3.2.) Whereas there is among you envying, strife and
divisions, are ye not carnal and walk as men, that is, as men in their
natural and sinful condition walk. Though ye are spiritual in your state,
yet ye act as carnal men. Now, as it is sinful for a godly man to walk as a
man, or according to man, (as our Margin has it, for he should walk as God) so
it is much more sinful to walk with wicked men, or according to the worst of
men. Thus the Apostle describes the conversation of the Ephesians before
conversion. ( Ephesians. 22.) And you has he quickened who were dead in sins and
trespasses, in which sometime ye walked according to the course of this World.
That is, according to the tide, current and stream of the times and places
wherein ye lived. Qua itur non qua ^undum.
Man naturally does not walk where he ought to go, but where he sees the most
go. He is led by the worst of examples (such are the examples of the most or
of the many) rather then by the best of rules. It is our duty, and it should be
our delight to walk with those who delight in the Law and in the way of God.
David says of his deceitful friend, but real enemy. ( Psalm. 55.14.) We
walked unto the house of God in company. As if he had said, time was when he
and I were as if he had been I, both of us but one, in that one thing
necessary, the worship and service of God. It is a good argument, that man has
an heart for God, who walks with good men in the ways of God. To converse much
with or to be much in the company of good men, is a probable sign of
goodness; but when we walk with them to the house and worship of God, or
converse with them in the duties of holiness, this is a great (though no
infallible) argument of goodness. And to be sure to walk with evil men,
especially to join with them in doing evil is an argument that the man is
evil. Therefore Elihu may seem to bring a demonstration against Jobs
godliness (that he intended it not so I shall show afterward, but, I say, he
seems to say so) while he says, Job walks with wicked men.

The Hebrew Phrase used in the Text is more then (as we express) wicked men,
we may render it men of wickedness; the Scripture calls those men so who are
(as it were) transformed into wickedness, or formed up of wickedness. As some
men are so witty, that we call them men of wit, and others so judicious that we
call them men of judgment, as some are so skillful and cunning, that we call
them men of skill and cunning; so some are so wicked, that the Scripture calls
them men of wickedness; even with these very dregs of mankind, it seems Job
consorted. He goes in company with the workers of iniquity, and walks with
wicked men.

But here it may be questioned, was it indeed so with Job, or was Job such a
man as he is expressly charged to be both in this and the former verse? Did
Elihu judge him a scorner, a companion of the workers of iniquity, and a walker
with men of wickedness? Doubtless that is not Elihu's scope or intention; nor
could he imagine that Job, in strict sense, was either a scorner of good men,
or chose the company of wicked men. And surely all that knew Job could certify
(upon their knowledge) that he was a man of a gracious spirit and unblemisht
life; that he loved good men and sweetly conversed with them, and therefore was
far from closing with deboyst companions, or men of a profligate spirit. Why
then does Elihu speak thus? or spoke he the words of truth and sobriety while
he spoke thus?

I answer, this form of speaking does not always import a likeness of
conversation and disposition, as sometimes it does, ( Prove. 1.11, 15.) Come
with us, and cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse. My son, walk
not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path; that is, do
not hearken to the call of those workers of iniquity. Here in the Text to go
in company with the workers of iniquity, and to walk with wicked men, notes
only the doing or speaking that which carries some likeness to them, not a
being altogether like them. A man is said to go and walk with others, when he
speaks or does that which seems to suite and favor their principles, opinions
or practices, though in truth they are the abhorrence of his soul. Elihu durst
not, could not assert directly and properly that Job, who was a man famous for
piety in the days of his prosperity, and who in his affliction had not the
least degree of ability or opportunity for it, walked with wicked men: But
because in the anguish of his soul he spoke sometimes intemperately of the
dealings of God (which is the guise, spirit, and common language, in such
cases, of wicked and ungodly men) therefore he charge him as symbolizing or
complying with men of wickedness. So that when Elihu says, he goes with
wicked men, he does not accuse him for keeping bad company in his prosperity;
but with speaking hardly of God in his adversity, as ungodly men use to do,
when they are under his hand. He does not say, you upon such and such a day
kept evil company and conversed with men of wickedness; but you have spoken
much like the wicked in the day of your calamity. That this was his scope
appears plainly by the proof of this charge, which is also a new charge (
verse. 9.) For he has said, it profits a man nothing that he should delight
himself with God. Elihu does not say, Job walks with wicked men, for we have
seen him in their company, and he has been as vain and wicked as they. But
his proof that Job walked with the wicked was from his words; For he has said
it profits a man nothing, etc. This is the language of the wicked, thus they
use to speak about the ways of God; and Job has spoken thus; therefore, What
man is like Job that drinks scorning like water, which goes in company with
the workers of iniquity, and walks with wicked men. I need not stay here to
show how great an evil it is to keep evil company, for that was not the sin
which Job was accused of. Yet from the letter of the Text,

Note first.

To associate with wicked men, or to choose wicked men for our company, is the
mark of a wicked man. A godly man may be among wicked men, but he does not
choose their company. He while with them is as Lot was in Sodom, his righteous
soul is vexed. A godly man is among wicked men, as his graces are among his
corruptions; as his humility is with his pride, his faith with his unbelief,
these are all in his soul at once, but his faith does always strive against
his unbelief, his humility opposes his pride, his grace of self-denial,
resists his self-seeking, his meekness his passions, and his patience the
unquietness of spirit. A godly man is pained in the company of wicked men, as
David was ( Psalm: 120.5.) Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, and dwell in the
tents of Kedar. David was there but he did not delight to be there. To
associate with the wicked is proper to the wicked. The Apostle gives that
caution ( Ephesians: 5.11.) Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them. Seeing the works of darkness are unfruitful
of any good, it must needs be bad to have followship with them. As we must not
at all join with wicked men in spiritual communion or Church Fellowship (2
Cor: 6.14.) Be not unequally yoaked with unbelievers; for what communion has
light with darkness, and Christ with Belial, etc. Come out from among them, and
touch no unclean thing. So we should have as little civil communion or
fellowship with them as we can; and when we are necessitated to have civil
communion with them, we must utterly avoid all sinful communion with them,
that is, communion with them in their sins. It is both a shame to Gospel
profession and a great offense to the sincere professors of the Gospel, when
they who profess it are much in the company of the workers of iniquity, and
walk with wicked men.

Secondly, From the matter of the charge,

Observe.

While godly men behave themselves like wicked men, they may be said to go in
company with them. This heavy charge falls justly upon them whether they
demean themselves in their affliction (as Job in some sort did) like the
wicked, or in the days of their fullness and prosperity. If we speak or do
like wicked men, we have our amends in our hands if we are numbered with them,
though we are not really of their number. Some good men when they have got much
of the world about them make but an ill use of it. Are wicked rich men proud?
so are they in a great measure, you may see vanity in their houses, and
superfluity upon their tables, as if they also were making provision for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Now if a godly man, when he has the
abundance of this world makes himself more unfit for the next world; is he not
in this like the wicked? or if when God lays him low, he be full of
complainings and have risings of heart against the dealings of God; what is
this but to do like the wicked, who in their straits quarrel with God, and
blaspheme his name? ( Isa: 8. ult.) When they are hungry and hard bestead, they
curse their God and their King. Thus the wicked do; and it was the Devils
plot to make Job do so too; and because in the extremity of his sufferings he
spoke such things as savored of a murmuring spirit, Elihu taxes him as
walking with wicked men. For as when wicked men act and speak like good men,
it may be said they go in the company with the godly, and walk with the
workers of righteousness, though they are stark naught all the while, being
(as the Apostle gives their character, Tit: 1.16.) Abominable, disobedient, and
unto every good work reprobate; So some good men under temptation act and
speak like the wicked, yet retain their goodness, and are as to the general
state of their persons, and bent of their hearts, acceptable, obedient, and
inclined to every good work. It will do the wicked no good at last, that they
have thus gone in company with the good; but it is very sinful for and
hurtful to good men, to go in company or walk with wicked men, though it be
but (as Elihu makes his proof of it against Job) only in using their
Sibboleth, or speaking a language like theirs.

Verse. 9. For he has said, it profits a man nothing that he should delight
himself with God.
I shall, First, open the words a little, and then, Secondly, inquire, (as of
the former) how Job might fall under this accusation.

He has said, it prositeth a man nothing. That is, a man shall get nothing, or
have no advantage by it. As Christ says ( Mark 8.36.) What shall it profit a
man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? But what was this trade
which Elihu accuses Job to have called unprofitable? Surely that which of all
others is most profitable. It profits a man nothing that he should delight
himself with God.

This goes deep; Elihu does not tax him with saying it profits a man nothing
to do this or that good, which God commands, but (which is more) that he
should delight himself with God.

(...)
The word rendered to delight, has a threefold signification, and all very full
to this point and text.

First, To run, which is the speed of our pace. Thus the Septuagint render it,
Although he run with God (Cant: 1.4.) By reason of the savor of thy good
ointments, therefore do the virgins love thee, draw us and we will run after
thee. To run is more then to walk. To walk with God, notes our observance of
all holy duties, but to run the way of Gods commandments, notes us zealous in
them and for them. To run, requires not only an honest heart, but a large one;
and therefore David said ( Psalm: 119.32.) I will run the way of thy
commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. Thou (says Elihu to Job) have
said, (according to this reading of the word) it shall not profit a man though
he run with God, though he make never so much speed in his work and ways;
though he be (besides faithful and upright) forward and active for God.

Secondly, The word signifies To have or be of the same will or mind with
another. Thus also some render it here; It profits not a man, though he
wills with God, or be of the same mind with God. The Apostle exhorts ( Phil:
2.5.) Let this mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus. To will is an
internal motion, to run an external; How fast soever a man may run with God
in outward actings, yet, possibly, he does not will with God at all, nor has a
mind conformable to the mind of God. The hypocrite is thus set out ( Psalm:
50.18, 19.) When thou saw a thief, thou consentedst with him, etc. Thou
had a mind to be a thief as well as he. One wicked man minds and wills the
same things with another, and all godly men will the same things with God. Yet
(says Job) it shall not profit a man, though he have the same will with God,
or though he wills the same good things which God himself wills.

Thirdly, The word (according to our translation) signifies more then barely
to will, it takes in the affections and joys of the soul. He that delights
in God, has sweet content and complacency in God, he not only approves of all
the sayings and doings of God, he not only follows his counsel, and his
conduct, but is highly pleased and fully satisfied in God. Delight is the rest
of the soul. When we delight in God, and find every act of obedience our joy
and our song, our meat and our drink, then the heart is wound up to the highest
pitch of holiness. And therefore as his heart is fallen down to the lowest
pitch of unholiness, who says, it profits a man nothing to serve God, so is
his much more who says, What shall it profit a man though he delight in God?

But here again it may be queried, Where did Job say, that it should profit a
man nothing though he delight himself with God? If you read his discourse all
over, he never spoke these words directly or explicitly, they are the language
of hell. But Job had spoken words, which (unless taken in a very favorable
construction) might bear this censure. He spoke thus, in a manner, while he at
once justified himself so much, and cried out as much of the hard dealings of
God which him. And while in many passages of this Book he denies that the
godly have a present reward in this life, and also affirms that many wicked
men enjoy outward prosperity, and pass unpunished. These speeches might easily
be interpreted (by common and carnal men especially) that, Job thought it an
unprofitable thing to delight in God. For if All things in this life come alike
to all, to the godly, and to the wicked, what does it profit a man (as to this
life) that he should delight himself in God? who among the sons of men (that
knows of no profit beyond this life) can delight himself in that, which
brings no profit? Job also said ( Chap: 9.22.) God destroys the wicked and
the righteous, that is, he afflicts the good as much as the bad, this was a
principle which he held out all along. Now because the Scripture says, Vtdetur
principium undo ad omnia peccata feruntur improbi approbasso, est enim praemij
fides non tantum futuri sed et hujus vitae magnum incitamentum ad obsequium.
Coc:
He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
those that diligently seek him (Heb: 11.6.) and (1 Timothy: 4.8.) Godliness is
profitable for all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come; (which Scriptures though not extant when Job lived, yet
the truth contained in them was) Elihu might well be led into this
apprehension, that Job had brought up an ill report upon the ways of God, as
(in this life) unprofitable unto man. But though Job spoke thus, yet he was
far from speaking this to justify such an opinion, that there is no profit
for a man to delight himself with God. His meaning was only this, that a man
may want temporal present profit, notwithstanding his delighting in God. He
was full and positive enough, that they who now delight in God, besides the
present inward peace and profit which they find and feel, shall hereafter be
crowned with everlasting rewards and delights. Job should indeed have been more
in justifying God, more in setting forth the present profitableness of his
ways in the practice of an holy life; And because he was so sparing in this
point, and insisted so often upon the afflictions of the people of God. Elihu
charge him with saying, It profits a man nothing to delight himself with
God.

Hence note; First.

It is our duty, and the sum of all holy duties to delight our selves in God.
The very spirit of holiness consists in this; There is (as I may call it) a
body of holiness, but if you would have the spirit of holiness (as by
distillation we take the spirits of any liquor, or of any thing that liquor and
moisture has in it, if, I say, we would have the spirits of holiness) it is
delighting in God. For as it is the spirit of sinfullness to delight in sin; so
the spirit of Godliness is to delight in God.

Note.

Secondly, To account the service of God unprofitable, is wickedness bordering
upon blasphemy. Job himself is now charged with that, which he charged upon
the wicked ( Chap: 21.15.) What is the Almighty that we should serve him? and
what profit shall we have that we pray unto him? This grand profaneness the
Prophet rebukes ( Mal: 3.14.) Ye have said, It is in vain to serve God, and
what profit is there that we have kept his ordinances? Thus the carnal heart,
which would feign free or keep it self from keeping the ordinances of God, is
ready to question, whether there be any profit in keeping them. And while such
seem only to put the question, they indeed conclude, that there is no profit
in keeping them; yet the truth is, the very keeping the ordinances of God, as
it is an act of obedience to him, and of communion with him is very profitable,
though we should have no visible nor sensible profit by it. In keeping the
commandments of God, there is great reward (Psalm: 19.11.) that is, the keeping
of them is a reward, as well as a reward is promised to those that keep them.
The Reader may consult this point further, at the 15th verse of the 21th
Chapter.

Note, Thirdly.

Good men sometimes speak worse then they mean. Job never thought it was no
profit to serve God, yet he had let fall words which might bear that gloss.
As wicked men often speak better then they mean; They have golden words in
their mouths, when there is nothing but dross in their hearts; their words are
smoother then oil, yet they are drawn swords; their words sound well, while
they wound deep, (now as a carnal man speaks often better then he means, and
sometimes speaks purposely the best when he means worst) so a godly man
speaks sometimes worse then he means, or he may speak ill when he intends
nothing but good. Holy David (which comes up fully to the sense of what Job is
taxed for saying here) said (and what could he speak more unholyly) ( Psalm:
73.15.) Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, etc. What language was here?
would one think to hear David foul his mouth with such words as these? would
one think, that such a word could have dropped from the mouth of David, whose
mouth used to drop like an honeycomb, and whose lips were wont to be like a
tree of life feeding many? yet David in temptation, that is, in great
affliction (for he there complains that he was chastened every morning) spoke
thus with his tongue to the grief of his heart a little after. The tongue is
an unruly member, (as the Apostle James says, Chap: 3.8.) The tongue can no
man tame; we need a great command upon the heart to bridle the tongue, and tame
that unruly beast. Many a good man has been over-borne with his tongue. That
little member has sometimes crushed both soul and body very sorely. Jobs
tongue fell heavily upon him.

Observe.

Fourthly, Inconsiderate words render us obnoxious to severest censures. Thou
have said, It profits a man nothing to delight himself in God, is a very
severe censure; And though Joh did not deserve it fully, yet he might have
expressed himself more commodiously and profitably. Just consequences from
what we say, may be charged upon us as our sayings. Indeed to wier-draw words
or strain consequences from them, is very unchristian. Some deal so with the
holy Scriptures (2 Pet: 3.16.) Wresting them to their own destruction; They
torture and stretch them upon the tenters to their own hurt. And to wrest a
man's words, or as the Prophet speaks ( Isa: 29.21.) To make a man an offender
for a word, is an act of great uncharitableness toward man, and to God an high
offense (Not but that a man may be an offender for his words; nor can a man be
more truly an offender for any words, then when he speaks reproachfully or
slightly of the works of God) But when men speak such words as are real
offenses, and yield foul consequences, fairly, they must bear the burden. And
that was Jobs case here.

But some may say, If Job never spoke these words in terms, nor any words like
them, with such an intent, why does he suffer Elihu to to accuse him, and not
take off his accusation, nor give a word of answer for himself? Why did he not
vindicate himself, or make his Apology?

I answer, and my answer shall be the last note from this context.

A godly man will rather bear more blame then he deserves, then stand to
excuse himself when he has deserved any blame. Job replied no more, spoke no
more, but to show that he yielded to what was said, and submitted to this
dispensation of God in sending Elihu to charge him thus. He took more upon him
then he had said, lest he should seem to justify any thing that he had said
amiss. ( Chap: 40.5.) Once have I spoken, but I will not answer: yea twice,
but I will proceed no further. As if he had said, I will make no more pleas for
my self, nor excuses, I will cry guilty to the whole matter of my charge,
though I might clear and discharge my self of much of it. How far was the
spirit of Job from theirs, who though charged with that only which they have
directly done, or spoken, yet stand it out in pleading their excuse, and will
never fall down before reproves, though what they have done or spoken amiss,
be so plain, that it needs no proof.

We should be careful to speak and do such things as are not subject to
reproof, but when through ignorance or rashness we have run into an error,
either of speech or practice, we should be so humble as to subject our selves
to reproof, and take it well that we are rebuked for any evil. As it doubles
an offense to undertake the defense of it, so not to defend an offense abateth
and lesseneth it. And as he who goes about to cover his fault by finding out
arguments and pleas for it, shows that he has a will or purpose to continue
in it; so he that is silent, and has not a word to say for it, gives a good
testimony both of his sorrow that he ever committed it, and of his resolution
never to commit it any more. They are highly to be commended who live
unblameably, and they deserve no small commendation, who being sensible of
their own failing, can patiently bear the blame of it, without replying upon
their reprovers.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 10, 11. Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of
understanding: far be it from God, that he should do wickedness, and from the
Almighty, that he should commit iniquity.

For the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to find
according to his ways.


ELihu having done with Jobs charge for several unwarrantable sayings in the
former context, begins his refutation here, and directs his speech.

First, To Jobs friends, speaking to them from the 10th to the 16th verse.

Secondly, To Job himself, from the 16th verse of this Chapter to the 34th.

In the two verses now read, we have two general points.

First, A vehement denial of any unrighteousness in God, ( v. 10.)

Secondly, A strong proof or demonstration, that there is no unrighteousness
in God, at the 11th verse. He enters this confutation of Job, or the
vindication of the honor of God from what Job had said, with an inviting
Preface.

Verse. 10. Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of understanding.
Elihu like a cunning Orator often stirred up his auditors to attention, and
made frequent insinuations to wind himself and what he had to say into their
good opinion. Here he bespake not the promiscuous multitude or common sort of
hearers, but wise men, or men of understanding, such as are most fit to judge
the weight and strength of those arguments and reasons, by which any point is
proved and confirmed.

Hearken unto me, ye men of understanding. The Hebrew is, ye men of heart, so
the Margin has it; As the heart is the principle of natural life* so the
principles and powers of the rational life are often ascribed to the heart.
Job told his friends ( Chap. 12.3.) I have a heart (we render, I have an
understanding) as well as you; Egregie cordatus homo. i. e. valde sapiens. Cic:
1. Tuscul:
and in good Authors a hearty man signifies not only a man of courage, or a man
of spirit, but a man of knowledge and understanding, a man more then ordinarily
wise, a man of the highest Elevation for wisdom, is called a hearty man.
Naturalists have ascribed the moving of several passions, to several
internal parts of the body; laughter (say they) rises from the spleen, anger
from the Gall, love from the liver, but to the heart they give more then a
passion, understanding, which is the noblest faculty of reason. Here Elihu
calls upon men of heart, or of understanding to hearken to him.

Hence note.

First, The best may need to have their attentions quickened. Some will not
hear at all, they are like the deaf adder (Psalm. 48.4, 5.) that stops her
ear, which will not hearken to the voice of the charmtr, charming never so
wisely; The Prophet reproves such ( Jer. 6.10.) To whom shall I speak and give
warning, that they may hear; behold their ear is uncircumcised and they
cannot hearken; behold, the Word of the Lord is to them a reproach, they have
no delight in it; they cannot hearken, that is, they will not; or they cannot
hearken, that is spiritually and obedientially, though they have a natural,
yet they have not a gracious ear, as the same Prophet ( chap. 11.6, 7, 8.)
upbraided them; yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear. This sinful
deafness the Lord complained of also, ( Psalm. 81.8.) Hear O my people, (says
God) and at the 11 verse, My people would not hearken to my voice; Now as bad
men will not hear at all to purpose; so the best seldom hear so well or to so
good purpose as they ought and might. Men of heart or of understanding are
sometimes slow of hearing, and may need to have their ear awakened.

Secondly, note.

It is an encouragement in speaking to have understanding hearers. When a
people have not only ears, but hearts to hear, then the word is heard indeed.
We may suppose understanding men will probably prove the best hearers; the
Prophet was in hope to find it so, though he failed of his hopes. ( Jer. 5.4.)
Surely these are poor, they are foolish (men of low parts, and thin
intellectualls) for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of
their God. I will get me to the great men and will speak unto them, for they
have known the way of the Lord, (they are wise surely and understanding) yet
he was disappoynted in his recourse to them, as it follows in the same verse,
but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds. There is a
natural wisdom which hinders the hearing of the word, therefore the Apostle
says; Not many wise men after the flesh are called, that is, savingly called;
the word has its full effect upon few of them, they are not prevailed with to
believe and obey; they are called, but they come not. Though wisdom be an
advantage to profitable hearing, yet all natural wise men do not hear
profitably, nor indeed can any, by all the wisdom of nature.

Thirdly, note.

A man without understanding is a heartlesse man. Headless men are heartlesse
men. It is said ( Hos. 7.11.) Ephraim is like a silly dove without a heart. All
the people of God are or should be innocent doves, like doves for innocence and
gracious simplicity; but how unbecoming is it that any of them should be doves
for silliness or silly doves without a heart; that is without any spirit or
courage for God, and the things or ways of God. To be without a heart is to be
without a due apprehension of the mind of God, or any true conformity
thereunto; it is to have no knowledge either to do good, or to be good; all
such are silly doves without a heart, without understanding, and all such are
yet unfit and unprepared hearers. Hearken to me ye men of understanding, Far
be it from God that he should do wickedly.

The Septuagint turn the sense of the words into another channel; Absit a me
coram domino impie ager^ etc. Sept:
as if Elihu spoke here in his own vindication, and not in Gods; and so they
render the Text personally of Elihu; Far be it from me that I should do
wickedly before God; or, that I should pervert Justice before the Almighty; as
if Elihu had said; I am now to speak before God, or in Gods presence; God
being my witness, therefore I had need look to it while I am speaking before
the righteous God, that I speak righteously, and while I speak before the God
of truth, that I speak according unto truth; far be it from me that I should
do wickedly before God; there is a truth in this translation. But this is not
a true translation according to the Hebrew; nor is it the truth of this place.
Elihu speaking in so weighty a matter might well say far be it from me to
pervert justice so much as in a word, because I speak before God, and am in
the presence of the Almighty. We should not speak a word amiss in his sight or
hearing, who sees and hears what all men do and say, whatsoever they are
doing or saying, especially, when they are doing or saying that which is of
near concernment to himself. This rendering gives us a useful caution. But
doubtless Elihu's purpose here was not to show with what reverence of God,
himself was about to speak, but that he was about to speak for the vindication
of the righteousness of God, which he thought Job had wronged by that assertion
when he said, ( verse. 9.) It profits a man nothing that he should delight
himself with God. Hereupon Elihu with some heat of spirit turns upon him in
these words, Far be it from God that he should do wickedly.

The word rendered God forbid is often used in Scripture, implying the greatest
detestation and utter abhorrence of that which is extremely offensive to us;
(...) profanum aut pollutum esse. A deo procul est omne profanum. Affectionem
indicat animi, qui scelus aliquid a se, vel ab alio deprecatur et horret. Sanct:
the root of it signifies any thing that is profane, filthy, or polluted;
because all profane things and persons are far from God, that is, such as he
utterly abhors. Further, the verb signifies as to pollute, or to profane,
so to offer violence, to wound and kill uniustly or murtherously; which sense
complyeth fully with the business in hand. Job had complained that his
innocence, at least that he being innocent, was sorely afflicted and wounded,
and lay as it were weltring in in his gore and blood. Hereupon Eiihu stands up
to vindicate the righteousness and justice of God, Far be it from God, etc.
When a Judge does unrighteously he offers violence to the Law, and viciates
that chaste Virgin Justice, committed to his care and keeping. All acts of
injustice are therefore far from God, even the abomination of his soul,
because polluted and filthy in themselves, as also such as pollute and defile
all those that use them. Thus Abraham spoke to God ( Genesis 18.23, 25.) Will thou
also destroy the righteous with the wicked, that be far from thee, etc. He
spoke of it with indignation as a thing most unworthy of God, to wrap up good
and bad in the same common calamity. When all Joseph's brethren as one man (
Genesis 44.17.) offered to become his prisoners, God forbid (said he) that I
should do so, ye shall not all suffer for one man's sault; let that be far
from me, he that is found in fault only shall be my prisoner. Thus Elihu would
remove the remotest suspicion of unrighteousness from God when he says, far
be it from God that he should do wickedness.

Hence note.

We should reject all unworthy thoughts of God with indignation and
detestation. The Apostle showed a spirit full of this fire ( Romans 3.5, 6.) Is
God unrighteous who takes vengeance? (I speak as a man) that is, natural or
carnal men are apt to think so, but God forbid, or, let it not be once named
by those who name (that is, profess) the name of God. If every one who names
the name of Christ must depart from iniquity (2 Timothy 2.19.) woe to those who
say that Christ himself closes with any iniquity. As God himself puts all
evil far from him, so should we put the least thought of it far from God.
What can be more unjust then to have so much as the shadow of a thought that
God does any injustice! away with such blasphemous suggestions, can he who is
the very rule of righteousness do unrighteously? To throw this dirt into the
face of God has as much absurdity and irrationallity as blasphemy in it. None
but they who know not God, can have such apprehensions of him. To do
wickedness is far from God, and therefore let man be far, even as far as
the east is from the west, from saying or thinking that he does any. Far be
it from God That he should do wickedness.

(...) significat quodvis peccati genus, quod contra aequitatis sit normam,
omnique careat legis ratione. Bold:
The Text is, far be it from God from wickedness, we render that he should do
wickedness. The word signifies wickedness of the worst sort; that wickedness
which does not only break the Law (so every the least sin does) but slights it,
and denies it any reverence or regard. It is far from a godly man to sin at
this rate, to do wickedness. Then, O how far is it from God that he should
do wickedness, And from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity.

Elihu uses two Titles or Names of God, First, the strong God, the mighty God.
Secondly, Almighty, the Allsufficient God; far be it from the Allsufficient
that he should do any iniquity. He that has all things in his power, and can
command Heaven and Earth, heart and hand, he that is able to supply all
deficiencies in the creature by his allsufficiency, far be it from this
Allmighty God that he should commit iniquity toward man. Strength without
goodness is always unprofitable, and often hurtful. Goodness without
strength is very unusefull because so weak. But where both strength and
goodness mere and center in the same person, as he is able to do much good,
so he has no will to do evil or offer injury to others. How then should the
Allsufficient commit iniquity?

The word rendered iniquity signifies any crookedness or perverseness, any
distortion of right and justice. Now right or justice is distorted many ways,
chiefly these five. (...) fraudem aliquando innuit. Et generaliter diutur de
omni injuria omnique malo contra leges.


First, by a flat denial of it. Secondly, by a tedious delaying of it.
Thirdly, by punishing where there is no fault. Fourthly, by not rewarding where
there is desert. Fifthly, Justice or right is distorted, by giving the same or
a-like award to those who are unlike, or (in their acts or deserts, whether
good or bad) not the same. To do any of these perverse or crooked things is
the doing of iniquity, or the perverting of Justice. All these Elihu removes
far from God, while he says, Far be it from the Almighty that he should
commit iniquity. God will not, cannot commit iniquity, either by denying or
delaying justice, either by not punishing or rewarding where there is cause, or
by dealing out alike to those in whose doing and dispositions there is an utter
unlikeness. Far be it from the Almighty, that he should commit any of these
iniquities.

Hence note.

First, To do any act of injustice is wickedness. Elihu taxed Job, for
complaining of Gods Justice ( v. 9.) And here he says, Far be it from God,
that he should do wickedness. Injustice is wickedness against God, who
commands us to be just, and it is wickedness against man, who is always
wronged by injustice.

Secondly, As to that particular which Elihu charge Job with.

Note.

If the Lord should not reward those that serve him, and delight in him, he
were uxrighteous. (Heb: 6.10.) God is not unrighteous to forget your labor of
love; He is not unrighteous to forget it, that is, not to recompense it; by
forgetting it, he does not mean the letting of it slip out of his mind, but
the not making a due return to it, or the not giving it a just reward. It is
unrighteousness in God not to reward those who serve him, because he has
promised to reward them. Say to the righteous, it shall be well with him (Isa:
3.10.) The promises run to it, all the Scripture over; and as it would be
unrighteousness in God not to reward those that do well; so not to pardon them
that have done ill when they confess their evil deeds, because he has
promised to pardon them; and therefore the Scripture says (1 John 1.9.) If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. The
Scripture does not say, he is merciful to forgive us our sins, (though mercy
act to the highest in the forgiveness of sin) but he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins; and the reason why the Scripture says so, is because
forgiveness of sin (in case of confession) is under a promise. To come short of
our promises, is to be unrighteous; promises are bonds upon the promiser, and
oblige to performance.

Thirdly, Note.

The strong God, the mighty God, neither does nor can do any unrighteousness
or iniquity. I say, he neither does nor can do iniquity. God can do no
iniquity, because in him there is none. He is my rock (says David, Psalm:
92.15.) and there is no unrighteousness in him. As none can do
righteousness, but they that are righteous, so he that neither is nor can be
unrighteous, cannot do any unrighteousness. That in the Psalm is very
considerable, that while he says, There is no unrighteousness in God, he
immediately before said, He is my rock; implying that God can no more be moved
or removed from doing righteously, then a rock can be removed out of its
place. We find Moses also giving God the same attribute, when he spoke of his
indeclinableness in justice ( Deuteronomy: 32.4.) He is a rock, his work is perfect,
all his ways are Judgment. The ways of God are not all judgment, as
Judgment is opposed to mercy; some of his ways are mercy, and others of them
are Judgment; but all his ways are judgment, as Judgment is opposed to
injustice or unrighteousness, that is the signification of Judgment, when
Moses says, All his ways are Judgment, he is a God of truth, and without
iniquity, just and right is he. The Apostle puts this denying question with
much vehemence ( Rom: 9.14.) What shall we say then, is there unrighteousness
with God? God forbid. And it is very considerable that the Apostle put this
question with so much abhorrence, presently after he had spoken of that Act of
God which is so much quarrelled at by the sons of men, as unrighteous and
unjust; Esau have I hated, and Jacob have I loved, and that, when they had done
neither good nor evil (v. 11.) What (say some) will God do thus? will he hate
or love, before ever men do good or evil? yeas, such acts of love and hatred,
of election and rejection are gone out from God. And because Paul foresaw, that
men (according to their narrow apprehension) would be ready to say, surely God
is not right in this; therefore he subjoynes, What shall we say then? is there
unrighteousness in God? As if he had said, I know some men will be ready
enough to say so, and think they have reason enough to say so; They all must
needs say so, who measure God by their shallow brains, (such are the deepest
brains compared with God) and therefore Arminius, with his followers, (that
they may avoid this difficulty) carry the interpretation of this Scripture to
another point, as if it had nothing to do with the eternal purpose of God
concerning man, but only respected his dealings with them about temporalls, or
his dealing out temporalls to them. I urge that text because it has occasioned
(through man's corruption) great contending and quarrelling about the
righteousness of God; yea some have presumed, there can be no maintaining that
opinion of the absolute decree, without fastening unrighteousness upon God.
But the Apostle by the Spirit foreseeing this fleshly objection, has forelayed
and prevented it, concluding, O man, who art thou that replyest against God,
shall the clay contend with the potter, etc.

Now, as in this act of eternal Election, so in all providentiall acts, the
Lord is infinitely unmoveably and unspottedly just and righteous; he not only
does righteous things, but he cannot do any thing that is unrighteous. And
this seeming impotency is the real power of God; and his most glorious
perfection. For, as it is from the weakness of man that he can do iniquity, so
it is from the power of God that he cannot. That God cannot lie, that he cannot
do any unworthy thing, is an argument of his omnipotence. God can no more do
iniquity, then he can cease to be God; his righteousness, his justice is
himself; the Justice of God is the just God, the righteousness of God, is the
righteous God; he has not only a principle of righteousness in him, as man
may have, and every Godly man truly has, but he is righteousness. (...).
Homer:
A Heathen Poet had this apprehension of his Idol Gods; They love not
unrighteousness, but honor Justice. But Jehovah the true, the living God,
does more then affectionately love and honor Justice, He is is essentially
Just. That man who is in a state of righteousness, loves to be doing and will
do righteous acts; things and persons are in their working as they are in
their being; He that does righteousness is righteous, (1 John 3.7.) God is
righteous, infinitely righteous, in his being, or nature, therefore he cannot
but do that which is righteous; to do an unrighteous act were to offer
violence to himself, to destroy himself.

Again, God does not work by a rule without him, as men do (and therefore
men often go beside the rule, and do amiss, or act unrighteously, because
the rule is one thing, and they are another, the rule is without them) but God
himself is the very rule of all things, and hence it follows undeniably,
that every thing is righteous and just which he does, even because he does it;
it is enough to prove that right which is done, if we can prove God has done
it. The proud Monarch Nebuchadnezzar, was at last brought to this confession (
Dan: 4.34, 35.) At the end of the days (namely, of his seven years banishment
to the beasts) I Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine
understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the most high, etc. Who does
according to his will (there is the rule with him) in the Army of heaven, and
among the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, nor say unto
him, what do thou? Which is true upon a double account, First, as to his
sovereignty and dominion, he is supreme Lord, and none can give him a check or
countermand; Who may say unto him, what do thou? Secondly, with respect to
his righteousness. As he can do what he will; so he will do nothing, yea he
can do nothing but what is right, or what he may; Who can say unto him, thou
have done amiss? Who can see a fault, in any of his works? If God has done a
thing, there is no query to be put about it whether it be right or no? for he
is righteousness it self.

Abraham uses another argument to show that God can do no unrighteousness (
Gen: 18.25.) Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? God (says he) is
the Judge of all men, therefore he neither will nor can do wrong to any man.
Abraham did not plead there, as if he doubted that God might go wrong, unless
he by his intercession did take him off; but he brings an argument whereby he
was assured that God would do right, yea could not but do right. He is the
Judge of all the earth. So ( Rom: 3.6.) as soon as the Apostle had said, Is God
unrighteous that takes vengeance? I speak as a man; he subjoynes, God forbid,
how then shall God judge the world? God is Judge of all the world, and the
universality of his power puts him above all possibility of error in the
exercise of his power. The very reason why God does not, cannot exercise his
power beyond or besides the limits of justice, is because his power is
altogether unlimited.

Fourthly, Elihu here speaks of God under the notion of a Judge; Shall he do
wickedly? shall he commit iniquity?

Hence note.

It is an abomination for Judges to do unjustly. Judges have justice, as it
were, in their keeping, they have the charge of justice; is it not an
abomination for the keepers or protectors of Justice to violate it! Elihu
having thus denied unrighteousness or any iniquity in God, proceeds to the
proof of it. To deny had been enough in this matter, but he gives a
demonstration; as several have been held out already in prosecuting the former
observation, so the following text holds out another.

Verse. 11. For the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man
to find according to his way.
As if he had said, God does every man right, therefore he is righteous, and
there is no iniquity in him.

Elihu having denied any unrighteousness to be in God, here shows how he
exercises righteousness.

The work of a man shall he render to him. The work of a man is here put for
the reward, issue, or fruit of his work; God does not render every man's work to
him in kind, that is, the thing it self which he has done, but the work in
its result and reward. That which God returns to a man according to his work,
may be called a reward in a fourfold respect. First, because it has in it the
benefit of a reward to the worker. Secondly, because it is given in answer to
the work done. Thirdly, because God has given his people leave, yea a command
to believe and wait for good fruit to themselves, when they do good works.
Fourthly, because it is proportioned to the work or duty performed. For as good
is returned for good, so great good is returned for great good done. Though the
greatest good that ever was or can be done by a mere creature does not deserve
(by any intrinsic worth) the least good at the hand of God. Thus says the
Spirit ( Rev. 14.13.) Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, from hence
forth they rest from their labors, and their works follow them; not the works
which they did, but that which is by promise due to them for those works. The
Prophet assures us ( Isa. 32.17.) The work of righteousness is peace; we
cannot understand it as a direct predication, but peace is the fruit or issue
of the work of righteousness, or as the latter part of the verse clearly
expounds it, The effect of righteousness shall be quietness and assurance for
ever. Which as it is most true of the righteousness of Christ, who is our peace
(Ephesians. 2.14.) and our Peacemaker through the blood of his cross (Col. 1.20.)
So it is true of man's righteousness, the work whereof is (by promise) crowned
with the blessings of peace, both spiritual and corporal, temporal and
eternal. The work of a man Shall he render unto him.

The word signisies a full retribution, it signifies also, in the Noune, peace;
(...) reddero ad pacem pertinet; quae loquutio significat perfectam debiti
alicujus person lutionem. Bold:
because when accounts are fully returned or rendered all is settled and quiet;
when a man upon account is discharged, he has a quietus est, that is an
acquittance wherein he may be quiet; none can legally molest or trouble him.
That which God will return to all men, they must and shall rest in, though
that which he will render to man for his evil works unrepented of, will give
him no rest.

The work of a man shall he render unto him. The word is very general; he does
not say this, that, or 'tother work, but the work, which is as much as an
universal, every work of a man, his good works, and his bad works, his open
works, and his secret works, his great and lesser works, there is not the least
grain of a man's works, that shall be unanswered or un-returned to him; and,
when the Text says the work of a man etc. we are not to take works in an
exclusive sense, either first, as to words, as if God would render to man his
works, but not his words; man's words will come to an account as well as his
works; they must be answered for whether good or bad. ( Math. 12.36, 37.) For
every idle word, that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the
day of judgment; for by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned; that is, it shall be rendered to thee according to thy
words, or as thy words have been, so it shall be with thee. Nor secondly, are
we to take the works of a man, exclusively, or in opposition to his thoughts;
as if God would render to man what he has acted outwardly, but not what he
has acted inwardly, or would pass by his thoughts. We must give an account of
our thoughts, which are the spring of our works as well as of our words, which
are the publishers and proclaimers of them. God shall bring every work (says
Solomon, Eccl. 12.14.) to judgment, and every secret thing, the most secret
whispers of the tongue, and the most secret plottings, contrivings, devisings,
designings, yea the simple and single thinkings of the heart. These are not
only the moulds and principles of every work, but every one of these is a work,
and all of them the whole work of the inner man; whose work, or what is wrought
there, is chiefly, as well as only, under the inspection and eye of God.

Again, The work of a man shall he render unto him, etc. He does not say the
works of another man shall he render to any man, but the work of a man shall he
render to him; he that does the work shall have the reward; the works of one
man shall not be rendered to another, but every man's own works shall. As the
faith of another man shall not help us, if we have no faith; Abraham's faith
(who had a mighty faith) will do us no good, if we have no faith of our own,
so the good works of another man shall do us no good if we have none of our
own. And as not the good works, so the evil works of others, shall not be
rendered to us. The hurtful works of others shall not hurt us, if we do no
hurt. I grant we may partake of the evil works of others, yea, we may make
other men's works our own, either by consenting to them before they are done, or
by approving them after they are done, or by not reproving them, when we have
opportunity. In these and many other cases, we may make other men's evil works
our own; and so far as other men's works are our own, God shall render them
also unto us: Hence that caution given by the Apostle to Timothy (1 Timothy 5.22.)
Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins, keep thy
self pure. They that partake (in any of those ways mentioned before, or in any
other way) of any man's sins may also quickly partake of his punishment. Thus
John heard a voice from Heaven (Rev. 18.4.) saying come out of her (that is,
out of Babylon) my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues. Not only is that work ours which we do, but that
also may be ours, by participation, which others do. And by what title soever a
work becomes any man's, the work of the man shall God render unto him.

And he will cause every man to find according to his ways. This latter part
of the verse contains the same thing with the former in another clothing of
words.

In semita virt inveniet eum.
Some read the Text thus, and he will find every man in his way; let man go in
what way he will, God will meet with him. That Is a truth, God will meet or find
a man in a good way to encourage guide, assist and reward him. And God will
meet or find a man in an evil way, to stop, oppose and punish him. God will
find every man in his way, and man shall find God to him according as the way
is wherein he finds him.

We render very well, and fully to the sense, he will cause every man to find
according to his way.

I find an Interpreter over-curiously distinguishing between a man's work and
his way, which doubtless here, in effect, Cajetanus.
are the same, yet there may be a graduall difference; (...) via, actiones
significat quatenus ad finem diriguntur: Quemadmodum via initur metae et
termini causa. Emphatice via dicuntur actiones ad certum finem directa. Coc:
work being taken for this or that particular act, and way, for a continued
course either good or evil.

Again, The way of a man may be considered in association with his ends. Every
man goes such or such a way for some special end; no man takes a step in any
way without a purpose, nor does any wise or good man take a step in any way
without a good purpose. Yet there is (finis operis) an end or issue of the
work, as also (finis operantis) an end proposed by the worker. And oftentimes
that proves to be the end of a work which was not the end purposed by the
worker. The end of a man's work or way, proves sometimes better and sometimes
worser then he proposed. Possibly a man may not find according to that end of
his way and work which he intended not, whether good or evil. But assuredly
whatsoever good or evil end a man proposes to himself, when he enters upon
his work or way, God will cause him to find accordingly. So that when Elihu
says, God will cause every man to find according to his way, he intimates,
that God will not only render to man according to the matter of his work, or
outward path of his way, but well considers every man's scope and intendment,
or what he would have his work issue in, and causes him to find as he finds
that to be. As the end which man proposes to himself, has a great influence
upon his way, so upon his account with God about it. This is a good sense. God
will cause every man to find according to his way, both as his way is taken for
the matter or course of his actions, as also sor the scope and design of them.

Hence Observe, First.

Every man shall have according to what he has done. Our receivings will be
according to our layings out, whether good or evil. God is so far from doing
any man wrong, that every man shall have his due reward. ( Psalm. 62.12.) Also
to thee O Lord belongs mercy, for thou renderest to every man according to
his work. And lest any should hope to escape the evil which at least some of
their evil works deserve by the secrecy of them, that hope is quite dashed
because God is the searcher and seer not only of our works but of our hearts (
Prove. 24.12.) Does not he that pondereth the heart consider it, and he that
keeps the soul, does not he know it? (what follows?) and shall not he render
to every man according to his works? Solomon speaks in that place of such as
make excuses to shift themselves off from acts of charity; they will say, we
know not whether it be so with him or no; possibly he may not be in such want
as he pretends. Take heed of these cloaks of covetousness, and pitiful
pleas to save your purses from showing pity to the poor, for (says Solomon)
Will not God search it out, and render to every man according to his work? The
holy Scripture abounds in this point. Read Jer. 32.19. Ezekiel. 33.10. Romans 2.6. 2
Cor. 5.10. 1 Pet. 1.17. Rev. 22.12.

But some may say, how does God render to every man his work? Is it not said He
justifies the ungodly (Romans 4.5.) Are the works of an ungodly man rendered to
him, when he is justified?

I answer, it is one thing what God will do through free grace, and another
what he will deal out in strictness of Justice. The Apostle speaks in that
place of the free grace of God to sinners, not of his Justice against sinners.
Secondly, though God justifies the ungodly, yet he never justifies
ungodliness; or, though he justifies a man who has done many evil works,
yea all whose works are evil, yet he never justifies nor rewards the work
of an evil man. Thirdly, God acts according to justice and righteousness where
he justifies the ungodly; he does not show favor to the ungodly in his own
wrong. Acts of grace from God are not opposite to his Justice, much less do
they contradict or overthrow it. He does not justify an ungodly man in
himself, or merely considered in his ungodliness, but he justifies him in
the righteousness of another, even of Jesus Christ, who has given full
satisfaction to the Justice of God with respect to the ungodly whom he
justifies. Lastly, we may say, that God renders the work of an ungodly man to
him when he justifies him; for though then he has not done, nor ever can do
any works which deserve the justification of his person; yet God does render to
him, according to that present work of faith in closing with the promise and
the work of Christ's righteousness therein tendered to him, and applied by him
for his justification.

Further, that other Scripture seems to lie in the way of this observation (
Psalm. 103.10.) He has not dealt with us after our sins, or rewarded us
according to our iniquities. How then does God render every man his work?

I answer as before; Acts of mercy do not cross acts of justice. When the Lord
does not deal with any man according to his sins, it is because he has freely
pardoned his sins; and he does not reward a man according to his iniquity,
because his iniquities are done away; thus he deals with all his own people,
who are received to favor through Jesus Christ; but no wicked man, no
impenitent person in the world, shall have cause to say, that God has not
dealt with him according to his sin, or has not rewarded him according to his
iniquity. There may be some present stops of Justice, through the patience of
God to wicked men; their works are not always presently rendered into their
bosoms, but they shall. God will render to every man according to his work,
one way or other, one time or other; The full rendering to all men according to
their works will be at the great day; in this world the godly do not sometimes
receive according to their good works, nor do the wicked according to their
evil works; Good men are often rewarded with shame and reproach, with want and
poverty, with banishment and imprisonment, with tortures and with death in this
present world; but the Lord will have a time to render to them according to
their works, though at no time for their works; so look upon wicked men, and
their works, they go often unpunished at the present, yea many of them
prosper greatly (as I have had occasion to show more then once in opening this
Book) they have their good things, many good things in this life, but the time
will come when God will render to the wicked their work, and they shall be
forced to say, that he has caused them to find according to their ways. Take
two or three inferences from this general truth.

If God will render the work of a man to him; Then

First, Godly men have great encouragement to do good, yea to abound in doing
good works. That Is the Apostles argument (1 Cor: 15.58.) Be ye steadfast and
unmovable in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord; that is, the Lord will render to every man his
labor. Hence also that of Solomon (Eccl: 11.1.) Cast thy bread upon the
waters, for thou shall find it after many days. Charities done in faith as an
holy offering to God, produce a sure increase. To give with a right heart to
the poor, is the best way of growing rich. For God will render to man
according to that work. And as it may encourage to do good, so to do it
against all discouragements. We must not only do good when the Sun shines,
when it is fair weather with us, and all men applaud us; but though men frown
and scorn, though (which Solomon reports as one of the great vanities of this
world, Eccl: 4.4.) For a right work, a man be envied of his neighbor; let us
not hold our hand from doing good, though we are opposed and checked, though we
are traduced and slandred, though we are mis-interpreted and have the foulest
glosses put upon our fairest works, though men call our zeal madness and our
circumspect walking hypocrisy, yea though we are persecuted and suffer the
worst of evils, though men cast stones at us (as they did at Christ for his
good works) yet let us not be deterred from doing good. For howsoever men
deal with us, or what rendrings soever we find from the world, yet God will
render to us both according to the rightnesse of our work done, and according
to the uprightness of our hearts in doing it. Let this provoke us not only to
do the Lords work, but to do it with much patience, and perseverance, for in
due time we shall reap if we faint not; where there has been sowing, there
will be reaping; and where the seed time has been with tears, the harvest or
reaping time shall be with joy.

Secondly, This is a dreadful doctrine to evil workers; Some (as the Apostle
calls the Cretians, out of their own Prophet) are evil beasts, slow bellyes;
and as they are slothful, or slow bellyes at doing good: so they are very free
and forward, very quick, lively, and nimble beasts in doing evil. O how
should evil workers tremble at this Scripture, To every man will God render
according to his work; as a cup of cold water given to a disciple, in the name
of a disciple, shall not be lost, but have a reward, and the giver fully paid
for it; ( Math: 10.42.) so not any the least evil work, impenitently
continued in, shall be unpunished.

Further, God will not render to man according to the opinion he has of
himself. (A bad man and the worst of his works may be good in his own
conceit; He may flatter himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found
to be hateful, Psalm: 36.2.) But God will render unto man according to what his
works are in truth.

Secondly, God will not render to man according to the thoughts which others
have of him and of his work (some are high in the opinion not only of the
world, but of some Good men, they have a name to be alive while they are dead,
and their works dead works) but God will render to man according to that
clear, certain, and infallible knowledge, which himself (by whom actions are
weighed, 1 Samuel: 2.3.) has of them.

Thirdly, God will not render to man according to his good meanings, when his
works are evil; many will confess they have done amiss, but they had good
intendments in it. A right end will not excuse us, if our way be wrong; There
is no pleading of meanings against commandments; nor will sincerity of
intentions, cover the deformity and irregularity of actions. The Apostle
pronounces a fearful doom against those who said ( Rom: 3.8.) Let us do
evil that good may come, whose damnation is just.

Fourthly, As God will not render according to a man's good ends, if his work
be evil; so remember, God will not render to man according to, his good
works, if his ends are bad. Therefore, consider your end when you enter your
way, and begin your work. ( Pro: 21.27.) The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord; how much more when he brings it with an evil mind;
that is, when he has some bad end in doing it; A wicked man's sacrifice is an
abomination to the Lord at the best, but much more when he has base designs
in his sacrifices or holy services. Herod said to the wise men ( Math: 3.8.)
Go and search diligently for the young child, and when ye have found him bring
me word again, that I may come and worship him also: It was a good work to
enquire after Christ, and worship him, but his end was to destroy him. Jezebel
pretended a holy fast, but her end was to feast her self with revenge upon
innocent Naboth. The best works of hypocrites will have an ill return,
because they do them with an evil mind. There are three sorts of good works,
which will never turn to a good account.

First, Those good works which are done but for a season; temporary good
works, or the good works of temporary professors, such as are described (
Math: 13.5, 7.) by the 2d and 3d grounds, who bring forth for a while, but
afterward fall away; such good works (I say) shall not have a good reward. If
your goodness be as the morning cloud, and as the early dew it passes away, it
will do you no good. He that endures to the end shall be saved, and none but
he ( Math: 10.22.) Christ exhorts the Church ( Rev: 3.11.) Hold that fast which
thou have, that no man take thy crown. They loose the good works they have
done, who hold not out in doing them. It will not advantage us to begin in the
Spirit, if we end in the flesh.

Secondly, Those good works which are trusted to, or boasted of, will never
make a good return. Though a man should continue doing good all the days of
his life, yet if he builds his hope upon it, his hope shall be cut off, and
his trust (that is, what he trusts to) shall be a spiders web (that is, weak
like that, because like that, woven out of his own bowels) he shall lean upon
his house, but it shall not stand, he shall hold it fast* but it shall not
endure (Job 8.14, 15.) you and your works will perish together, if you depend
upon your works. Good works trusted to, are as dangerous to the soul, as
evil works persevered in.

Thirdly, Those good works which are done for base ends, to serve men, or to
compass a worldly interest, shall have no reward from God, but that, which
shall be upon every soul that sins and repents not, anguish and
tribulation.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 12, 13. Yea, surely God will not do wickedly, neither
will the Almighty pervert Judgment.

Who has given him a charge over the earth? or who has disposed the whole
world?


ELihu proceeds in the proof of this point, (the vindication of the
righteousness of God) with a strong asseveration.

Verse. 12. Yea, surely.
There is a mighty force of affirmation, in the original words, (...) Irgons
est in origi-nali assertionu vis.
we may parallel them, with those assertive speeches frequently used by our
Savior Jesus Christ in the Gospel, Amen, Amen, Verily, verily I say unto you;
Yea surely, is as much as verily, verily; as if Elihu had said, There is no
question to be made of what I affirm, that God is righteous, or will not do
wickedly; as the Apostle writ to Timothy about the great mystery of the Gospel,
God manifested in the flesh, (1 Timothy: 3.16.) without controversy great (or, as
the word imports, confessedly on all hands, great) is the mystery of
Godliness; so here Elihu might speak to Job, This is a truth beyond dispute or
controversy, an unquestionable truth, and such a truth that, if once
confessed, will quickly determine all the Questions, which are depending
between you and me. There are some Master-truths, ruling truths; such a one is
this in the text, Yea surely, or undoubtedly, God will not do wickedly.

Hence note.

It becomes us to grow up into highest confidences, about the truths of God,
especially about the truth and Justice of God. We should not be as meteors
hanging in the air, speaking with hesitation, possibly it is so, peradventure
it is true; but (as the Apostle directs the Collossians, Chap. 2.3.) We must
labor to grow up unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding; as
there is a full assurance of faith in believing, and of hope in waiting or
expecting, so also of understanding in apprehending the things of God. We
should be (in a sense) Masters of truth; and then we are so indeed, when truth
has fully mastered us, and prevailed upon both our judgment and affections,
and we are led captive by light to the love and obedience of it. We have cause
to bewail those (much more have they cause to bewail themselves) who are but
Scepticks or Questionests in Religion, never coming to a point, nor able (after
a due making up of their thoughts) to say, Thus it is, and by this we will
abide, as Elihu did in the then present case, delivering himself confidently,
yea surely, or verily, verily, God will not do wickedly.

To clear the meaning in this Negative assertion, we must take in the highest
affirmatives of the holiness and Justice, of the righteousness, truth, and
faithfulness of God; For it sounds like a flat and low commendation of God, to
say, he will not do wickedly; for so it may be said of every honest man, He
will not do wickedly; but seeing in this Negative commendation given by man to
God (as in all the Negative commandments given by God to man) all affirmatives
are to be understood; what can be said more to or more sound out his praise and
glory then this?

God will not do wickedly? (...) est aliquando impium pronunciare, condemnare;
aliquando vero impie agere vel inique quippiam facere. Merc:
The word here used for doing wickedly, signifies two things; First, to
pronounce any person wicked; and Secondly, to do any thing which is wicked;
both these often meet together. For in many cases to pronounce a person
wicked, is to do a wicked thing; he that condemns a just person, pronounces
him wicked, and what thing can be done more wickedly then that? Some take the
word in that sense here, as a denial that God either has done, or ever will
condemn the innocent. There are two things wherein men do very wickedly, with
respect to the persons of men, both which the Lord abhorres. First, when they
condemn the innocent. Secondly, when they acquit or clear the guilty. The
former way of doing wickedly, is chiefly removed from God here by Elihu, as the
latter is directly and expressly by himself ( Exodus: 34.7.) The Lord, the Lord,
etc. that will by no means clear the guilty. To pronounce a guilty person
innocent, or an innocent person guilty, if ignorantly done, is a great piece of
weakness, and if knowingly done, is a great piece of wickedness. Yet, because
the latter part of the verse speaks particularly to clear God from wrong
Judgment, therefore, I conceive, we may better expound this former part of it
more largely, as a general denial of any evil act whatsoever, done by God.
Surely God will not do wickedly, Neither will the Almighty pervert Judgment.

The Almighty, who has power to do what he will, has no will to do this
evil. He will not pervert Judgment. (...) detorquobit curvabit.
The word signifies both to pervert and subvert, as also to bow, wrest, or put
out of order, to mingle or blend those things together, which should be for
ever separated, or, as we say, to mingle heaven and earth, yea heaven and hell
together; so do they who mingle good and ill, right and wrong together. To
pervert Judgment, is, to do all this, for then (which Abraham assured
himself was far from God, Gen: 18.25.) The righteous are as the wicked, that
is, the righteous fare as ill as the wicked, or the wicked fare as well as the
righteous. But the Almighty will not pervert Judgment, that is, the right
which belongs to any man, and therefore, he will-doe every man right. We had
the same position in terms ( Chap: 8. 3d) and we have had this whole verse
equivalen^ly in the 10th of this Chapter, where Elihu said, Far be it from God,
that he should do wickedness, and from the Almighty, that he should commit
iniquity. Here, only one verse intervening, El^hu reports and repeats the same
matter again; but it is no needless or vain repetition, for which Christ
reproved the prayer of the Heathens ( Math: 6.7.) there are many repetitions in
Scripture, but not one vain one; how often soever the same truth is repeated
there, it has its weight and use, not only as it is still a truth, but as it
is a truth repeated. And therefore I shall give a threefold reason why this
truth is here again repeated, which will also lead us to a fuller improvement
of it.

First, Because this truth is (as it were) the hinge upon which the whole
controversy between Job and Elihu is turned. Job was unsatisfied because he
was so ill handled, and therefore Elihu tells him often that God is righteous,
and that he will not wrong any man. Hereby giving Job to understand, that God
had done him nothing, or done nothing to him, but right. Such grand swaying
controling truths should be often, and can scarce be too often repeated.

Secondly, Elihu repeated this again, because it is such a truth, as no man can
too much, no nor enough weigh and consider the value and worth of it. Now, that
which cannot be too often nor too much thought of, cannot (if rules of prudence
be observed) be too much or too often spoken of. There is scarce any man who
has not sometimes at least indirectly and obliquely some hard thoughts of the
proceedings of God, either in reference to himself or to others; Nor is there
any thing that we have more temptations about, then that, surely, we are not in
all things rightly dealt with, and that the dispensations of God are not so
even, as they might. These sinful suspicions are daily moving and fluctuating
in the heart of man, and therefore this opposite principle ought to be fastened
and fixed there to the utmost, that the will and works of God are all just and
righteous, yea that his will is the rule of all righteous workings; or, that as
whatsoever is done in this world, is done by the disposure of God, so God
(though the thing be evil and unjust) is just and good in the disposure of it.
Therefore unless we resist or contradict the will of God, we must say,
whatsoever comes to pass, comes righteously to pass, because it comes to
pass by the determinate will and counsel of God.

Thirdly, Elihu repeates this assertion, that he might the more commodiously
make his transition or passage to the matter following, and prosecute it with
greater success. And therefore I shall not stay longer upon those words, only.

Note.

First, This great truth, that God will not do wickedly, neither will the
Almighty pervert Judgment, convinces those, not only of injudiciousnesse, but
of wickedness, who, though they are ready to acknowledge in general, God is
just, yet as to those particular providence, which concern them, or wherewith
themselves are pincht, do not, cannot acquiesce and rest in the will of God,
with freedom and satisfaction. That which is just should not displease us,
though (in it self) it be very bitter and unpleasant to us.

Secondly, This truth is a ground of comfort to all the people of God, who are
under heavy pressures from this evil world, or who receive little reward or
encouragement (as to sense) from the good hand of God. Such are apt to say with
the kingly Prophet ( Psalm: 73.13, 14.) Verily in vain have we cleansed our
heart, and washed our hands in innocence, for all the day long have we been
plagued, and chastened every morning. David was under a temptation when he was
under hatches, he could hardly perceive it worth the while to take pains in
cleansing and washing either heart or hand while God was so constant and
frequent in correcting and chastening him with so heavy a hand. Yet David soon
after recovered out of this temptation, and concluded the Psalm, with this
particular assurance, ( v. 28.) It is good for me to draw near to God, as he
had begun it ( v. 1.) with a general assurance, Truly God is good to Israel,
even to such as are of a clean heart. God is good to those who have a clean
heart, even when they are in the greatest sufferance of evil, and therefore
they who are clean hearted, have no reason at any time to say, nor shall they
long say, they have cleansed their heart in vain. Though now they smart, yet
in due season they shall be well rewarded for their washing. The Judgments of
God are such, Judicia dei plene nemo comprehendit, just nemo reprehendit.
August: lib: 2. de Civ: ^ Dei. cap: 23.
as no man can fully comprehend, such as no man can justly reprehend. The
Almighty will not pervert Judgment.

Those four things which cause men to pervert Judgment, are at the furthest
distance or remove from God; whereof the first is envy at the good condition
of others. The second is groundless and unreasonable love or hatred of their
persons. The third is fear of frowns from those that are great, or fear of
after-claps; Many are deterred from giving but a just measure, either of reward
to good men, or punishment to evil men, lest themselves should receive hard
measure from those who like neither. The fourth is hope of gain, or their
private advantage. For as some pervert Judgment for bribes already received,
so others for bribes promised, or upon expectation of some future favors. Now
God (I say) is infinitely above these four, and all other imaginable
by-respects, upon which Judgment is perverted every day, by the sons of men.
God is above all envy, yea above all that hatred or love which perverts
Judgment; he is above all fear of evil, and hope of good. God has nothing
to fear, seeing none can reach him, much less hurt him; neither has he any
thing at all to hope for, seeing he is in the full possession of all happiness
and blessedness, that is, of himself. Why then, or upon what account should
the Almighty pervert Judgment? so that, if at any time, we have any unbecoming
thoughts of the Justice of God, either that he afflicts the good without
reason, or prospers the wicked against it; all this arises from our ignorance,
or the shortness of our sight. We have not a full or perfect prospect of
things, we see but a little way backward, we are not wise to compare what is
past with what is present, nor can we at all infallibly foresee any thing
future, or discern what shall be. Whereas God at once has all things before
him, he sees what is past as well as what is present, and what shall be
hereafter, as well as what has been, and so the compleatnesse and
indefectibility of his own Justice in all. And when we in the great day shall
see all the works of God in the world brought and presented together as in one
view, we shall then say from the evidence of sight, as now we ought from the
evidence of faith, that the Almighty has not in any one thing perverted
Judgment. And therefore the Apostle does most excellently and appositely call
that day, The day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God (Rom: 2.5.)

Elihu having strongly asserted, with a yea surely, that, the Almighty will not
pervert Judgment, yet stays not in a bare (though so strong an) assertion,
(which he might) but gives us the proof and confirmation of it; as he has
denied that God will, so he proves by undeniable arguments, that God will not
do wickedly, that the Almighty will not pervert Judgment. And this he does in
the next or 13th verse, and the two that follow.

Verse. 13. Who has given him a charge over the earth? or who has disposed the
whole world?
These words, (as was intimated before) are an argument proving that God
neither has nor can do wrong; That (as to the case in hand) he had not done
Job wrong, yea, that, (as to all cases) he can wrong no man. This argument is
grounded upon the sovereignty, supremacy, or absolute authority of God over all
men. The sum and force of it may be gathered up into this form.

He cannot do injustice to any, who of right has an absolute power arising
from and residing in himself to do what he will with or toward all men.

But God has such a power, Therefore he cannot do any injustice. That, God
has such an absolute power arising from and residing in himself Elihu proves
by a kind of Challenge.

Who has given him a Charge over the earth? Produce the man, let him show his
face, if he dares. It is an expression of the same importance with that of the
Apostle ( Rom: 8.33.) Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of Gods Elect? let
us see the man, let us see the devil, that shall so lay any thing to the
Charge of Gods Elect, as to prevail in his Charge; it is also like that other
triumphant query, in the same Chapter ( v. 31.) If God be with us, who can be
against us? That is, who can be so against us as to hurt us, or carry the day
against us? Thus here; Who has given him a Charge over the world? let us see
who; As if he had said, Are there any above God, from whom he deriveth his
power? Or have any committed the Government of the earth to him as his trust
and charge, for the mannagement whereof he is to be accountable unto them?
Surely no. And if no, then either God is just, or all the world must be in
confusion or under oppression without any redress or remedy. (...) sequento
(...) sumitur pro Jubere juxta morem Syriacu^ hinc (...) praefecti. Merc:
Mr Broughton renders, Who before him looked to the earth? We say, Who has
given him a Charge over the earth? The ordinary signification of the word, is
to visit, and that

First, In a way of favor, to see what others want (so we visit the poor) or
how they do, so we usually visit the sick, and sometimes those that are well
in health.

Secondly, It signifies to visit in a way of judgment, or to punish those
that have done amiss. Thus the Lord threatens to visit (that is, to punish)
the iniquity of the fathers upon the children ( Exodus: 20.5.)

Thirdly, The word signifies to command, to issue out orders, to give a
charge. This signification of the word is very frequent both in Scripture, and
in daily use. Visiters (we know) have power of Government; yea they have power
over Governors to order and give them a charge, that they do, or to examine
whether they have done the duty of their place. In this latter sense, we render
it here, Who has given him a Charge over the earth? And so we read it (2 Chronicles: 36.23.) Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, all the kingdoms of the earth
has the Lord God of heaven given me. And he has charged me to build him a
house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah; who is there among you of all his
people, The Lord his God be with him, and let him go up. God has charged me
(says Cyrus) or he has made that my business, a business incumbent upon me,
to build him a house in Jerusalem, that is, to further the work, to give the
Jews leave to build the Temple of Jerusalem; God has charged me with this
great trust, and I am willing to answer it. The same thing is recorded, almost
in the same words ( Ezra 1.2.) Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, the Lord God of
heaven has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has Charged me to
build him a house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. God gives Princes their
Charge, supreme sovereign Princes, yea he gives inferior Princes and
Magistrates, their Charge; but (says Elihu) Who has given him a Charge?
Certainly, no man. There is yet a twofold reading of this former part of the
verse, both considerable.

First, Thus; Who for him has visited the earth? As if it had been said, Has
God set any to visit, or to look to the earth for him, as if himself stood by
and did nothing; God uses the power of man, he sets up Magistrates to work
for him; but he never puts the work out of his own hand, nor does he need any
hand to help him in that work, though he uses many: and though he says, By
me (yea for me) Kings reign, yet we may say with Elihu (in the notion now
expressed) Who for him has visited the earth? that is a good reading.

Secondly, Who over him does visit the earth? Is God any man's Vicegerent? is he
a Lord Deputy, or a Viceroy? No, there is no man visits the earth over him,
for, (as we render clearly) Who has given him a Charge over the earth? As if
he had said, If God be an unjust Judge, is there any superior Judge to whom we
may appeal for remedy or redress of our injuries? Who over him visits, or,
who has given him a charge over the earth.

That is, over the inhabitants of the earth, or over the affairs of the earth.
The Earth, by a Synecdoche of the Continent for the matter contained, is here
put for all persons and transactions over the face of the whole earth. Who has
laid that great Charge, the disposal of all things and people in the earth
upon God? surely no man on earth, no Angel in heaven, nor all of them put
together. How should God derive a governing power from them, who derive their
very power of being from him? He governes in his own right, not by commission
or deputation. We have the same point affirmed at the 36th Chapter of this
Book, v. 23d, Who has enjoined him his way? God knows and takes his own
way, no man shows, much less commands him his way; Who has given him a
Charge over the earth?

Or who has disposed the whole world? This Question, as the former, contains
a Negation; no Creature, none besides God has disposed of the whole world, or
of all of the world. Mr Broughton renders, Who has settled all the dwelt land?
The word which we translate disposed, (...) posuit arto, cura, et ordine, quod
est disposuit.
signifies to place with a kind of art, exactly, orderly, carefully; Who has
thus disposed the whole world? There is a double disposition of the world.

First, In Creation; who has disposed, joynted, and put the whole world in
frame? who has marshalled the several parts of the world as they now stand
like the Host of God? The world as created is expressed in the Greek by beauty
and order; before God perfected the creation, all was a confused heap without
form and void; But that rude indigested matter was drawn forth in the
several works of that six-dayes Creation, into a most beautiful form and
order. Thus God once disposed all the world by Creation.

Secondly, God daily disposes the world by providence; And that is the
disposure which this text especially speaks of; (...) orbu habitabilis, (...)
vocant. i. e. h^mines degentes in orb habitabili. Pisc:
Who has disposed (in a providentiall way) the whole world? The word rendered
world, properly signifies, the habitable world; we find it opposed to the
wilderness or desert ( Isa: 14.17.) where few or none inhabit. That word is
very significantly used here for the world, because the habitable part of the
world, or where men inhabit, are the stages on which the providence of God
appear, and act most eminently and convincingly; Who has disposed of the
habitable world? which the Greeks call, The house of abiding: Mr Broughton,
The dwelt land, that is, the land wherein men dwell.

Again, As the earth, before, is put for the inhabitants and occurrences of
the earth; so whatsoever passes, or is brought to pass in the world, is here
called the world. Who has disposed the whole world? He that made the whole
world, disposes of the whole world, providence follows Creation.

But some may say, Is this a good Argument to prove that God is just, because
he has the supreme power over all the world? Will it follow, that he
administreth all things rightly, because he has a right to administer all
things? There seems but little of Argument in this, (may some say) many have a
great deal of power, who abuse it, and they that have most power, usually
abuse it most, and make it but a servant to their lusts and passions; therefore
how is it a proof, that the Lord is righteous and will do no iniquity,
because he has the power of all things in his hand, or is Lord over all?

I answer. This is a strong argument, and (as I remember a good Author calls
it) a peremptory argument, which can have no denial. The Lord is righteous,
because he is Lord over all; he is not King of some corner of the World, he is
not King of the whole World by election or vote of the World, he is not chosen
at all, much less (as many have been) by evil means and wicked combinations;
God is the supreme governer of all the world by natural right not choice; yet
not (as some Princes are) by natural right of succession inheriting after a
mortal father; but by the natural right of creation, himself being the father
of that world over which he is a governor. The Original of Gods power is
stated in himself; The eternal being of God, and his supreme authority are
inseparable.

Yea, God is not only thus supreme in administering Justice; but he is the
sum or fulness of Law and Justice, and therefore cannot pervert it. He
whose power and goodness gave the world its being, how should he act any thing
which is not good in the exercise of his power over the World! Jnjustice is the
breach of a Law, but how can God break a Law who is the source and fountain of
all righteous Laws? who then shall dare to suspect God of injustice, or
require a reason why he does this or that in the world, which himself has
made? yea, who has not reason to admire and proclaim infinite goodness mixed
with absolute power, as in his making so in his ruling the world? For whose
sake or for fear of whom should he pervert Justice, who has all men alike
under his power?

Earthly Judges may err in judgment, but the Judge of all the earth cannot.
God cannot do injustice through ignorance or mistake; for he is omniscient and
knows all things; nor can he have a will to do unjustly, seeing his will is
altogether just, and the rule or measure of all things that are just. As
therefore he is not an idle Idol-god but most active in governing the World; so
he is infinitely above the least failer in the government of it. The Sun shall
sooner be turned into a cloud, and the morning light darken the earth, then any
unrighteousness proceed from God; yea, when clouds and darkness are round
about him (that is, when we by reason either of the obscurenesse or
afflictivenesse of his dispensations can give no account of them, yet even
then) righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his Throne; that is,
his governing power abides unmoveably, or constantly (as in a habitation)
within that blessed line and glorious sphere of righteousness. So then, Ipse
quam potens est conditor tam pius est moderator. Hieron:
the reasoning of Elihu from the universality and independency of the governing
power of God, to the righteousness and equity of his government is not only
probable, but demonstrative and unanswerable. He is alike mighty as the sole
creator, and just as the supreme moderator of the World. If any man will
presume to charge God with perverting judgment in governing the earth, that man
says in effect that he has given God a charge over the earth; And if any man
be so impiously and impudently presumptuous as to say that, let him come forth
and answer this as peremptorily as truly denying question of Elihu; Who has
given him a charge over the earth?

Hence Observe.

The power of God is a primitive or underived power. His power is of himself;
yea, his power is himself; God does not rule by Commission or Deputation, all
ruling power is fundamentally in him, as also the rule of that power, both
which in God are one. Jesus Christ as Mediator rules by Commission; All things
(says he, Math: 11.27.) are delivered to me of my Father. And again, the
Baptist gave this testimony of him ( John 3.35.) The father loves the Son, and
has given all things into his hand. Jesus Christ as Mediator receives his
Charge from the Father, and he has received a Charge over the whole earth, as
Mediator. But consider him as God, so the government of the world is
fundamentally and essentially in him also. It is the highest honor of an
earthly Prince, when (as it is said of the Chaldeans (Hab: 1.7.) their
Judgment and their dignity proceeds of themselves; that is, when they rule
in their own right, not in the right or by the designement of any other. How
high then is the honor of God, who rules not only over all the people, but
over all the Princes of the earth, his Judgment and dignity proceeding purely
from himself!

Secondly, As the power of God is underived or proceeds only from himself; so
the power of God is absolute and unlimited. His is in the strictest sense
imaginable supreme power. Heathenish Nebuchadnezzar confessed this truth (
Dan: 4.35.) Before him (that is, before God) all the inhabitants of the earth
are reputed as nothing, and he does according to his will in the Armies of
heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand, and
say to him what do thou? There Is absolute power, none can say, that is, none
may presume to say to him, What do thou? no man ought to question, much
less to quarrel at the determinations of God, whether concerning persons or
nations; it is his right or prerogative to do what he will; and how much soever
he acts by prerogative, he will do only that which is right; we may consider
the absolute supremacy of God in a five-fold exercise of power.

First, In commanding; He commands what he pleases to be done; nor may his
commands be disputed; they must be obeyed, because his.

Secondly, In prohibiting he forbids whatsoever displeases him to be done.
And how pleasing, how right soever any thing is in our eyes, yet if he
forbids it, we must for ever forbear it. We all know by our own smart how
dangerous it is to eat of a forbidden Tree.

Thirdly, In suffering, I mean it not of any suffering evil in himself (God
is infinitely above that) but of his suffering others to do evil, or of his
suffering any evil to be done. God may and does permit, that which is naught,
wicked, and unrighteous to be done in the world; and yet himself remains
altogether holy, righteous, just, and good. This is a great part of the
transcendency of his power.

Fourthly, In rewarding; God has absolute power, to reward; First, whom he
will; Secondly, for what he will; Thirdly, in what kind he will; Fourthly, in
what degree or measure he will; Fifthly, for how long he will, he can give
(which none of the Princes of the earth can) everlasting rewards.

Fifthly, In punishing; God has absolute power to punish, and the absoluteness
of his power in punishing, may be exemplified in those five particulars,
wherein his power of rewarding (in the former paragraph) was. In all these
things we see the unlimitedness of the power of God, Who has given him a
Charge over the earth? or who has disposed the whole world? Himself alone
does it, and he does it of himself. And for as much as there is such a
supremacy, such an absoluteness of power in God, take these three inferences
from it.

First, How freely should we yield our selves to the commands of God, not
questioning this as unequal, nor saying that is hard? we are more apt to find
fault with the work which God requires us to do, then to remember that it is a
great fault not to do it. The heart of man naturally rises against the will
of God; It is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be (Rom: 8.7.)
the wisdom of the flesh thinks there is some unrighteousness, at least some
unreasonablenesse or rigor in the commands of God, and therefore such wise men
hope they have reason on their side if they omit them or act against them. Any
man will (at least he cannot but confess he ought to) be subject unto that
which is equal and right. Man has no color to disobey, till he has put some
blot upon the command. And seeing the commands of him who has the charge over
all the earth in himself and from himself, cannot possibly have any blot or
defect in them, let us take heed we be not found disobeying.

Secondly, Seeing God has the Charge of all the earth, we should as readily
submit to his dispensations, works and dealings, as to his commands. The Jews
of old complained ( Ezekiel: 18.29.) The way of the Lord is not equal; They did
even tell him to his face, his ways were not equal, and therefore they would
not submit. The Church in captivity spoke well ( Lam: 3.28.) Out of the mouth
of the most high proceeds not evil and good; that is, whatsoever the Lord
has pronounced to do or has done concerning us, is morally good and not
evil, though it be penally evil and not good. Eli spoke well also to this
point (1 Samuel: 3.18.) It is the Lord, let him do what seems good in his own
eyes; yet the thing which God was about to do, was such ( v. 11.) as at which,
both the ears of every one that heard it should tingle. To have the heart
quiet while the ears tingle, is pure submission. And any unquietness or
murmurings at the dealings of God, whether respecting our persons or our
familyes, Churches, or Nations, are in some degree rebellions against the
sovereign power of God.

Thirdly, If the Lord be supreme, and have the charge over all the earth, then
let us set him up as supreme in all things, let his ends be above our ends;
let us design God in all we do; He who is over all, ought to be honored by
all. All our actions as so many lines ought to center in his honor, who is the
Center of power. Of him and through him and to him are all things, says the
Apostle ( Rom: 11.36.) Because all things are of him, creating them, and
through him, governing them, therefore all things should be to him, that is,
all persons should in all things they do, yea in all things that are done,
aim at and design his glory, as the Apostle expressly concludes the verse
before cited; To whom be glory for ever.

Thirdly, Whereas it is said, Who has given him a Charge over the earth? or
who has disposed (not a part, or parcel, or canton, or corner of, but) the
whole world?

Observe.

The power of God is an universal power. It is extended throughout the world,
to every patch and inch of it. What David says of the Sun ( Psalm: 19.6.) His
going forth is from the end of heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it, and
there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. The same may we say of the circuit
of Gods power, there is nothing hid from, nor set beyond it. There is a
fourfold universality of the power of God.

First, In regard of persons ( Psalm: 97.9.) Thou Lord art high above all the
earth, thou art exalted far above all Gods; that is, above the Kings and
powers of the earth; whom the Scripture calls Gods. If God has a power over
the Kings of the earth, then surely over the people of the earth; yea God is
not only exalted and far exalted above this or that God or King, but above
them all; This is a supremacy with utmost universality.

Secondly, His power is universal, as to places, and nations; some places
claim privilege, and are exempt from the jurisdiction of Princes, if
obnoxious persons get thither, they are free from the course of the Law. There
were Cities of refuge among the Jews, and Sanctuaries in the days of old
among us, where evill-doers could not be touched. But the power of the Lord
reaches all places, even to the horns of the Altar ( Psalm: 83.18.) Thou whose
name alone is Jehovah, art most high over all the earth.

Thirdly, His power is universal, as in all places, so over all things; it
extends to the stars of heaven, and to the fowls of the air, to the beasts
of the earth, and to the fishes of the Sea; to whatsoever moves in this world;
they are all at the command of God, if he does but speak, they run and execute
his will.

Fourthly, His power is universal, in reference to time; it is never out, nor
shall ever end; he is King immortal, and King eternal, his Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom. The power of God is an universal power in all these
considerations: His power of Governing is of the same extent, as his power of
creating was; that which he created at once, he governes always. He did not
set up the fabric of this world, and then leave it to it self, but he
preserves and orders all things in it. The wel-being, the orderly being of
the creature, is as much of God as the being of it.

Some say, God made the world at first, and set all the wheels of it a-going,
but now things go on by chance, by fortune, or by accident, at least
particular events are not under his government, but come to pass as the
wisdom or folly of men is most active in the production of them.

I answer, to set up blind fortune, and chance, yea or the wit and policy of
man, as governing the world, is to set up other Gods in the world; if chance
and fortune, or the wit of man, govern any part of the world, then they had a
part in making the world. If you divide one power, you divide the other. For
those invisible things of God, his eternal power and Godhead, are as much or
as evidently seen, in the things which are done, as in the things which are
made. It Is true indeed God uses many hands in governing, ordering, and
disposing the things of this world. The Princes of this world, are eminently
his hand, but God does not use any power in governing this world, Non eget
alienis adjutorijs ad regendum mundum qui non eguit ad fatiendum. Greg: Lib:
24. Moral: ca. 26.
to diminish his own, nor does he withdraw his own power, what power soever
he uses; it is his power that acts effectually, and gives success in the
acting of all power. It was said to that King who prided himself in what he
had done in the world; Shall the Axe boast it self against him that heweth
therewith, or shall the saw magnify it self against him that shakes it?
(Isa: 10.15.) As if the Lord had said to that proud Assyrian Prince, Do thou
look upon thy self, as if thou did all, and governedst all? thou art no
more in the governing the world (though the chief earthly Governor of all the
world) then an Axe is in the hand of him that uses it; And though the
artificer cannot do his work without an Axe, though he cannot divide his
Timber without a saw, yet I the Lord am able to do my work without thee. At
best and most, men are but instruments in the hand of God; and he serves his
own turn by men, not to signify that he cannot work without them, nor that
his work is done either with more ease to himself, or more success as to it
self by their help (he is not so weak as to need help, nor is at all
strengthened by the help he uses) but only to show that as he has the command
of, so he has a use for every creature ( Isa: 7.18.) The Lord shall hiss for
the fly; if God do but hiss to the fly, or any creature on earth, yea to the
devils in hell, they are at his call, and do his will, though they intend it
not. Further; though God can do all himself, yet he uses various
instruments, that he may indear man to man, or that no man may say, he has no
need of another. Thus the Apostle argues (1 Cor: 12.21.) The eye cannot say
unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have
no need of you. Surely then the feet cannot say to the head, we have no need
of thee, nor the hand to the eye, we have no need of thee. That, Creatures may
show their love to one another, and see their need of one another, God is
pleased to give them a charge to work and dispose of the things in the world,
though the charge and disposure of the whole world be in himself.

Now if the Lord be thus invested with all power originally and essentially,
then I would mind those who are in power of two things, and those that are
under power of one.

First, Let them that have power remember to use it for God. They that have but
family power should use it for God; how much more they that have power over
nations. ( Psalm: 2.10, 11.) Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye
Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
When he says, serve the Lord with fear, I suppose he does not intend it in
that notion of serving the Lord, as serving him denotes our holiness and
obedience in general; but when he says, serve the Lord with fear, his
meaning is, serve him so in the exercise of your power, and in your places, as
you have power in your hand, as you have received a Charge or Commission from
God over this or that part of the earth, so serve him with fear, in the use of
that power. As man ought in all the service of God to be in a holy fear, so
especially when he serves God in the administration of power, because all
power is from God. And therefore (which is the next thing I would hence mind
those of that are in power)

Secondly, Remember, The day of account must needs be a sad day to those who
abuse their power to the oppression of man; and chiefly to those who turn
their power against God; that is, against the ways and truths of God, against
the servants and people of God, against the ends and designs of God. God will
call such as have had any charge over the earth to an account, and let them who
either of these ways abuse their power, consider whether such accounts will
pass as they must give. Surely when the day of the Lord shall be upon such
Oaks and Cedars, upon such mountains and hills, as the Prophet ( Isa: 2.13,
14.) calls the Powers and Princes of this world, they will even be forced (as
he describes them at the 19th verse) to go into the holes of the rocks, and
into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his
Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth. It is bad to be abused by
the power of man, but it is worst for that man who abuses his power. Thy
terriblenesse has deceived thee (says the Prophet, Jer: 49.16.) and the pride
of thine heart, O thou that dwell in the clefts of the rock, that hold
the height of the hill; that is, thou that art in high power, and also hold
thy height, thou art deceived, and thy terriblenesse has deceived thee;
because thou have been able to terrify many with thy power, therefore thou
have presumed that none shall ever terrify or trouble thee; This vain
confidence has deceived thee, for (as it follows in the latter part of that
verse) though thou should make thy nest as high as the Eagle, I will bring
thee down from thence, says the Lord; that is, I will bring thee to a
reckoning for terrifying those with thy power whom thou should have
protected by it.

Lastly, This is matter of great Comfort to all good men who are under power;
though rhey are wronged and oppressed by the power of man, this may support
them, God has power over all the earth, he has the Charge, and he will see
them righted one time or other. ( Eccles: 3.16, 17.) Moreover, I saw under the
Sun the place of Judgment, that wickedness was there, and the place of
righteousness, that iniquity was there; I said in mine heart, God shall judge
the righteous and the wicked, for there is a time for every purpose and for
every work. And if for every purpose and work, then surely for this, the
reviewing of the unrighteous judgments of the Princes and Powers of the earth,
who hold the places of Judgment and righteousness; to punish the perverting
of which, the Lord who is Prince of the Kings of the earth often powers
contempt upon Princes (Psalm: 107.40, 41.) and causes them to wander in the
wilderness where there is no way; yet sets he the poor on high from
affliction, and makes him familyes like a flock. For as the Holy Ghost says
( Psalm: 138.6, 7.) Though the Lord be high, yet has he regard to the lowly,
but the proud he knows a far of; hereupon his faith rises up to a full
assurance in the next verse; Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will
revive me: thou shall stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine
enemies, and thy right hand shall save me.

Thus much for the argument here used, the Lord is righteous, for he has all
power in his hand; and he has no reason upon any account in the world to
pervert power; yea for him to do any thing that is not righteous, were to act
against himself, even against his own being and blessedness, who is God
blessed for evermore.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 14, 15. If he set his heart upon man: if he gather unto
himself his spirit and his breath.

All flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn to his dust.


IN these two verses Elihu perfects the proof of what he lately asserted, that
God is just, and that there is no unrighteousness in him (v. 12.) yea surely
God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert Judgment; For, as
Moses in his dying song describes him; He is the rock, his work is perfect;
for all his ways are judgment; a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and
right is he. The first argument for the confirmation of this was opened at the
13 verse. And it was grounded upon the absoluteness and universality of his
dominion: Here we have a second argument from the sweet temperament of his
power and goodness. God has power enough in his hand at once to destroy all
flesh, and to command every man back into the dust. But he does not thus put
out his power. We live and live comfortably; we enjoy not only our lives, but
many mercies of this life; and therefore surely God does not deal rigorously,
much less unrighteously with man. He that does all men good beyond their
deserts, will not punish any man beyond his demerits. He that does not exercise
his power always where he might, will not exercise it all where he ought not.
That Is the sum and scope of Elihu in the context under hand.

Verse. 14. If he set his heart upon man.
To set the heart upon any thing or person, is a Scripture expression, often
used, noting more then barely to think upon or mind both or either. It
signifies to have deep and serious thoughts, to think with consideration and
attention, yea with some height and heat of affection. And all this whether
that thing which the heart and affections are set upon, please or displease, be
comfortable or grievous; for both love and hatred, hope and fear, are
thoughtfull of, and sollicitous about their several objects. Hence that
caution ( Psalm: 62.10.) If riches increase set not your heart upon them; we
naturally love riches, and therefore as naturally spend many thoughts, both how
to get and how to keep them. If a man have riches, or an increase of riches,
it is not unlawful for him to think or them, (yet we should be as sparing of
our thoughts that way as can be, our thoughts and the bent of our souls should
always be upon God) but that which the Psalmist forbids is the settling of our
hearts; As if he had said, Let not your thoughts stay or dwell there. Riches
are themselves transient things, therefore they should have but our transient
thoughts. Set not your hearts upon them, for they may quickly be unsettled.
Samuel bespake Saul in the same language about a worldly concernment, when he
went out to seek his fathers Asses (1 Samuel: 9.20.) Set not thy mind on them.
It Is like Saul was over-burdened with this thought, What Is become of, or what
shall I do for my fathers Asses? Be not sollicitous about them, says Samuel,
greater things are toward thee. Abigail uses the same form of speaking to
David concerning Naball (1 Samuel: 25.23.) Let not my Lord regard this man of
Belial, lay not to heart what Nabal has said or done. Thus Jonadab took off
David's fear, that in one day he had been deprived of all his Sons (2 Samuel:
13.33.) Now therefore let not my Lord the King take the thing to heart, to
think that all the Kings sons are dead, for Amnon only is dead. We are as apt
to set our heart upon our losses, as upon our enjoyments. And to show how
little Pharaoh regarded the heavy hand of God upon him, it is said (after Moses
had turned all the waters that were in the river to blood, Exodus: 7.23.) And
Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did set his heart to this also;
That is, he slighted what God had done. Let God speak, and strike once and
again, Apponere cor est vello, decernere, constituere. q. d. Si ei suus animus
suggererit. Vatabl:
yea a third time, yet hard-hearted men do not lay it to heart, nor set their
heart upon it. Thus here in the Affirmative it is said of God, If he set his
heart upon man; that is, if he do but intend and mind this matter, he can
quickly bring it about, even the perishing of all flesh.

If he set his heart upon man. (...) Valet contra. Si poneret concra eum cor
suum. i. e. si sibi proponeret hostiliter eum aggredi. Pisc:
The text is rendered also, If he set his heart against man: The Hebrew particle
signifies not only upon, but against ( Amos 7.16.) Prophecy not against
Israel, etc. And the general sense of that reading may be given two ways.

First, If he set his heart against man, to enquire strictly into his life and
ways, if he should critically mark all his errors, or faults, and so resolve
to proceed against him, he might soon make an end of him, as it follows in
the next verse. As the strongest, so the best and holiest of men are not able
to stand before him. Thus the words are an answer given by Elihu to that
frequent request of Job, that God would let him come near to judgment, and
hear his cause argued and debated before him, even at his Bar; but says Elihu
(according to this sense) If God set his heart against man, if he does but
strictly enquire into his condition, course, and conversation, it would be sad
with him; All men must perish. Those two places in the Psalms answer this
interpretation fully, ( Psalm. 130.3.) If thou Lord should mark iniquities, O
Lord, who should stand? That is, No man shall; We cannot stand in our
righteousness before God, how then shall we stand in our iniquities! And
therefore the second Text deprecates the Lord's severe enquiry into our purest
and most perfect services, ( Psalm. 143.2.) Enter not into judgment with thy
servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.

Secondly, If he set his heart against man, that is, If he have a general
purpose to destroy and ruin him by his absolute Sovereignty, he can easily do
it; what God has a mind to do, or only wills it to be done, he has power
enough to do it: He can make any man miserable, and not only strip him of the
comforts of this life, but of his life too: And as he has power enough, if he
would use it, so he has sovereign unquestionable authority enough to bear him
out in the use of his power. Now, seeing God who is clothed with this absolute
power, yet does not exercise such a power, but having given man a being,
continues to very many men a comfortable being in this world, and does not
willingly grieve or afflict any of the children of men, nor execute any
vengeance upon them without their desert; surely then God is righteous, he will
not do wickedly. Thus we have the importance of the Translation, If he set his
heart against man: We say, (which also bears fairly enough the same sense) If
he set his heart upon man. Si direxerit ad eum cor suum spiritum illius and
flatum ad so trahet, Vulg.


If he gathers unto himself his Spirit and his breath. Some render it thus;
If he set his heart upon (or against) man, he will gather unto him his spirit
and his breath: and then, as it follows, All flesh shall perish together.

We repeat the supposition according to the Hebrew Text; If he set his heart
upon man; If he gather to himself his spirit and his breath, then etc. Take
either reading, the general sense is the same, and in brief it is this; If God
have a mind to it, he can quickly thrust all men out of the world. He that
gave man his spirit and his breath, can at pleasure recall both, and then all
flesh perishes and turns again unto (what it once was) dust. (...)
The Hebrew word which we render to gather, signifies to add one thing or
person to another: When Rachel had conceived and bare a son, (Genesis 30.22, 23.)
she called (from this word) his name Joseph, and said, the Lord shall add to me
another son. Thus here, If God add, or gather to himself his spirit and his
breath, that is, the spirit and breath of man, etc. We may distinguish between
these two, Spiritus animam, and flatus vitam quae ab anima provenit and
conservatur significat; ego opin^r idem esse hoc loco. Sanct.
spirit and breath (Some insist much and curiously upon this distinction) The
spirit denoting the soul or the internal rational power of man, and the breath
that effect of life which follows or flows from the union of soul and body.
The life of man is often expressed by breath; Cease ye from man, whose breath
(or life) is in his nostrils; (Isa. 2.22.) If once man's breath goes out, his
life cannot stay behind; the spirit of a man is in this sense distinct from
his breath; for when the breath is vanished, and is no more, the soul or spirit
lives. The Apostle in his prayer for the Thessalonians (1 Thessalonians. 5.23.) puts
soul and spirit together: The very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I
pray God, your whole spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved harmless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. There ('it is most probable) by the soul, he
intends the inferior powers in man, or his affections, and by the spirit, his
higher powers of reason and understanding: yet the spirit is often put for that
whole part of man which is contradistinct to his body. Into thy hands I commend
my spirit: that is, my soul, not forgetting my body: And I conceive, we may
safely expound it here in that latitude, as comprehending the whole inner man.
Yet it is all one, as to the sense of this place, whether we take spirit and
breath distinctly or for the same; the spirit being so called from spiration or
breathing; If he gather unto him his spirit, and his breath. The gathering of
the spirit and breath of man unto God, is but a periphrasis or circumlocution
of death, or of man's departure out of this life; when man was formed or
created ( Genesis 2.7.) it is said, God breathed into him the breath of life, and
man became a living soul: And when man dies, his breath or spirit may be said
to be gathered or returned back unto God; so then, the meaning of Elihu in this
double supposition, (If he set his heart upon man, if he he gather to himself
his spirit and his breath,) is clearly this, if God were once resolved, or
should but say the word, that man must presently die, die he must, and that
presently.

Hence Note, First, God can easily do whatsoever he has a mind to do.

If he do put his heart upon the doing of any thing, it is done; Men often set
their hearts, yea and their hands unto that which they cannot do; if men could
do that which they set their hearts to do, or have a mind to do, and thereupon
set their hands to do, we should have strange work in the world. It Is a mercy
to many men, that man is often frustrated in his thoughts and purposes, in his
attempts and undertakings; and it is a glorious mercy to all that have an
interest in God, that God never lost a thought, nor can be hindered in any work
he sets his heart upon. He that can let or stop all men in their works, can
work, and none shall let or stop him. What God will do, is not defecible or
undoeable (if I may so express it) by any power in heaven or earth. And as God
can do what he will, and ask no man leave, so he can do what he will without
trouble to himself; it is but the resolve of his will, the turning of his hand,
or the cast of his eye (all which are soon dispatched) and it is done. Thus God
breathed out his wishes for the welfare of Israel, ( Psalm. 81.13.) O that my
people had hearkened unto me, etc. I should soon have subdued the^r enemies, and
turned my hand against their adversaries. As if he had said, I could and would
have eased them of all their enemies, even of all that rose up against them
easily, even with the turning of my hand: What is more easily done, or mo^e
speedily done, then the turning of a hand? Many things are hard to man, (and
indeed very few things are easy to him, except it be to sin, or to do evil, he
can do evil easily) some things are not only hard, but too hard, impossible for
man; but there is nothing hard, much less too hard for God, he can easily do
the hardest things; yea, the hardest things are as easy to him as the easiest;
for as ( Psalm. 139.12.) Darkness hides not from the sight of God, the darkness
and the light are both alike to him; so hardness hinders not the work of God,
hardness and easiness are both alike to him, if he set his heart upon it. From
this general truth, take two inferences.

First, How should we fear before this God? How should we tremble at the
remembrance of, and walk humbly (in our highest assurance) with this God? We
are much afraid to displease those men who can easily hurt us, and in whose
hand it is to ruin us every hour: But O how little are we in this thought to
fear the Lord, to take heed of displeasing the Lord, who can with ease either
help or hurt, either bring salvation or destruction, who in a moment can thrust
the soul out of the body, and cast both into hell.

Secondly, We may hence make a strong inference for the comfort of the people
of God, when their straits are most pinching, and their difficulties look like
impossibilities, and are so indeed, while they look to man; when their enemies
are strongest, and the mountains which stand in the way of their expected
comforts greatest, if then God will be entreated to set his heart, and cast his
eye upon them, their straits are presently turned into enlargements,
difficulties become easy, and mountains plains. If we can but engage the Lord,
(his own promise is the surest engagement, and indeed all that we can put upon
him, or mind him of, if (I say) we can thus engage the Lord) to be with us,
who can be (to our hurt, many will be to their own) against us.

Secondly Note.

Our life is at the beck, dispose and pleasure of God. He can gather the spirit
and the breath to himself whenever he pleases; ( Psalm. 104.29.) Thou hidest
thy face and they are troubled, and thou take away their breath, they die,
and return to their dust. If God hides his face from us, it is death while we
live; but if he take away our breath, we cannot live, but die. ( Psalm. 90.3.)
Thou turnest man to destruction, and say, Return ye children of men. Here Is
man turning and returning upon the saying of God; man turns to death, he
returns to dust, and shall at last return from the dust, and all this when
God says he must. Our life is a very frail thing, and it is in the hand of God
to continue or take it away; to let us hold it, or gather it home to himself.

Thirdly, From the manner of speaking, If he gather to himself his spirit and
his breath;

Note.

When man dies, he is gathered to God. When (as Solomon allegorizeth the death
of man, Eccl. 12.6, 7.) The silver cord is loosed, and the golden bowl broken,
etc. Then shall the dust (that is, the body) return to the earth as it was, and
the spirit shall return to God who gave it; that is, each part of man (when he
departs this world) shall go its proper way, and return to that which is most
congenial to it; his body to the earth, from whence it is; his soul to God, of
whom it is. God is a Spirit, the creating Spirit, and our created spirits are
gathered to God when they are separated from the body; yet remember there is a
twofold gathering or returning of the spirit to God.

First, To abide and be blessed with him for ever; thus the spirits of
believers or saints only are gathered to God when they depart out of this world.

Secondly, There is a gathering of the spirit to God, to be judged and disposed
of by him, to receive a sentence of life or death from him. And thus the spirit
of every man or woman that dies, is gathered to God, be they good or bad,
believers or unbelievers, ( Heb. 9.27.) It is appointed for men once to die,
but after this the judgment. It Is the Statute Law of God, man must die, and
the sound of Judgment is at the heels of death. That Text says, but after
this the Judgment. The general day of judgment shall not be till the
resurrection of man from the dead; But there is a personal judgment, or a
determining of every man's state when he dies; and for that end every man's
spirit is gathered to God to receive his sentence. The spirits of wicked men
are gathered to him and condemned, the spirits of the righteous are gathered to
him and acquitted: We are come, says the Apostle ( Heb. 12.23.) to God, the
Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. David knew he must
be gathered to God, but he earnestly deprecated such a gathering as most shall
have, ( Psalm. 26.9.) Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody
men. It is this word, when sinners die, they are gathered; but David would not
be gathered as they are gathered; They are gathered to God, but it is that they
may be for ever separated from him; they are gathered to a day of vengeance and
wrath: Therefore David prayed, Gather not my soul with sinners. Death is called
a gathering in a threefold reference.

First, A gathering to our people. Thus it is said of Aaron, (Number. 20.24.)
Aaron shall be gathered unto his people, for he shall not enter into the land,
etc. Death separates the people of God from their people, that is, from those
that are like them on earth, but it will be a means of bringing them into the
society of their people, or fellow believers who are gone before them into
heaven.

Secondly, Death is called a gathering to our Fathers, (2 Chronicles. 34:28.) Behold
I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and thou shall be gathered to thy grave in
peace. There Is a gathering to a more special company, and that with other like
Scriptures are an argument that we shall know our relations in heaven. For, to
be gathered to our Fathers, spoken of in the first part of the verse, is more
then to be gathered to the grave, spoken of in the latter; and by our fathers,
we are to understand more of our fathers then the grave has in its keeping
(which is but their bodies) even their souls, which are kept in heaven.

Thirdly, According to the phrase of this Text, death is called a gathering to
God; If he gather unto himself his spirit and his breath.

Whence Note, Fourthly.

The spirit or soul of man has its original from God. It is of him to whom it
returns; The soul or spirit of man is of God in a more special way then his
body is; for though God gives both, yet the Scripture (in the place before
named) speaks of the soul as the gift of God, but passes by the body; (
Eccles. 12.7.) The dust shall return to the earth, as it was; and the spirit
shall return to God who gave it. It Is God, not man alone, who has given us
these bodies, but it is not man, but God alone who has given us these spirits;
therefore men are called the fathers of our flesh, that is, of the body, in way
of distinction, from God, who is the father of spirits (Heb. 12.9.) We have had
fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we
not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live; that is,
shall we not rather be subject to God then to man? Father of spirits is an
Attribute or Title too high and honorable for any but God. One of the Ancients
in his gracious breathing after God, brake out into this holy Passion; My soul
(O God) came from thee, and my heart is unquiet or restless until it return to
thee again; God is our center, and our rest: He gathers to himself man's
spirit; and when he does so, what then? what is the issue of it? Elihu tells us
what in the next verse,

Verse. 15. All flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn again to his
dust.
As if he had said, As soon as ever the spirit is gathered, the flesh is
consumed, or, as we render, perishes.

All flesh, may be taken in the largest sense, not only for all men that live,
but for all living creatures: Thus largely Moses extends it, ( Genesis 6.17.)
Behold, says the Lord, I will bring a flood of water to destroy all flesh;
that is, all the Beasts of the earth, and Fowls of the air, together with
Mankind, except a few of each in the Ark: so ( Psalm. 136.25.) Who gives food
to all flesh, (that is, to man and beast) for his mercy endures for ever. Yet
some understand this first part more narrowly, for all flesh except man;
because he adds in the latter part of the verse, and man shall return again
to his dust: But I conceive we are to take all flesh here for all men, and only
for men, it being usual in Scripture to put the same thing twice, under
different expressions. So then

All flesh, that is, every man, be he who he will, shall perish. Thus as all
flesh is restrained to man, so it extends over all men, yea over all things
of man ( Isa. 40.6.) All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof as the
flower of the field; that is, all men are perishing, and all that man has,
merely as a man, is as fading and perishing as himself is.

Some take notice, that man was not called flesh till after his fall; It Is said
before, when God set him up in that primitive purity of his Creation, Man
became a living soul. He was not spoken of at first as flesh, but as a living
soul, (Genesis 2.7.) but as soon as man had sinned, he was called flesh, as if he
had no soul. There may two other reasons be given why man is called flesh, both
following from the former. First, Because man since his fall does most for his
flesh, and neglects his soul altogether, till being planted into the second
Adam, he is brought out of that wretched condition into which he fell by and
with the first Adam. Secondly, He is called flesh, because, since the fall man
is become weak and frail, both as to Naturals and Morals, ( Genesis 6.3.) My
spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh: As if the
Lord had said, Now man declares himself to be flesh indeed, he acts like an
impotent sorry creature, he acts as if he scarce had a soul in him, as if he
were no more then the beasts of the earth: My spirit shall not always strive
with man, for that he also is flesh; and therefore ( v. 30.) God told Noah, The
end of all flesh is come before me; that is, Man, and all his worldly glory,
shall all be swept away with a deluge of water, as here, All flesh shall perish
together.

There is a twofold perishing; First, By way of annihilation. Secondly, By way
of transmutation. When Elihu says, all flesh shall perish, we are not to
understand it of annihilating all flesh; (God can do that, he can turn man back
into that nothing out of which he was made) but the perishing in the Text
imports only a change. Death is called a change, and a change to perishing,
as that good and great woman said, I will go in unto the King, and if I perish,
I perish, (Hest. 4.16.) that is, If I die, I die. The Prophet laments ( Isa.
57.1.) The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart. All flesh shall
perish (...)
Together.

That is, without exception, one as well as another, rich and poor, high and
low, strong and weak, all are alike in the hand of God, ( Psalm. 33.13.15.) The
Lord looks from heaven, he beholds all the sons of men, etc. he fashioneth
their hearts alike, or together; that is, he fashioneth the hearts of all men:
God does not so fashion men's hearts alike, as to make them all alike, (faces do
not differ so much as hearts) but as he fashions one man's heart, so another;
he fashions the heart of a King, as well as the heart of a beggar: All flesh
shall perish together; none either by power or policy can stand against a
displeased God.

Again, We may take the word together, for all at once, God can make a total
devastation in the earth, and sweep all away as filth with the besome of
destruction; He can destroy all the world, of all men, who are the chief part
of the world, together, or at one blow; so that (as the Prophet Nahum speaks,
Chap: 1.9.) Affliction shall not rise up a second time. All flesh shall perish
together, And man shall return again unto dust.

Or he shall go back unto dust, that is, he shall dye: that is the sentence
which God gave upon man when he had sinned ( Gen: 3.19.) In the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it
wast thou taken, for dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return. Man was
dust before he sinned; yet he had not returned to dust, if he had not turned
from God by sin. Sin brought in death, and death brings us to the dust. All
flesh shall perish together, and man shall return again unto dust.

Hence observe.

There is no one man has more privilege then another, against the sentence of
death. The Greatest Prince dies as soon as the meanest peasant. Death can as
soon and as easily break into the strongest fort or tower of stone, as into
the meanest cottage of reeds. High and low shall perish together. Let none hope
to secure themselves by any thing of this world from going out of this world.
Riches avail not in the day of death (Pro: 11.4.) High Titles and honors
avail not, strength avails not, beauty avails not, none of these can be a
protection, if God send out a writ or summons to the grave. Happy are they who
get an assurance of life after death, for none have an assurance of life
against death.

Again, In that death is here expressed under this notion of perishing.

Observe.

Man is but in a perishing condition while he is in this world. As all the
things of the world are, so is man, while he abides (if I may say he abides)
in this world. Christ earnestly exhorts ( John 6.27.) Labor not for the meat
that perishes. Why should we labor, that is, set our selves with our whole
strength and might to pursue perishing things, seeing we our selves are
perishing? The more perishing we are, the more reason we have to look after
and labor for those things which do not, which cannot perish. When the
Apostle says (1 Pet: 1.18.) We are not redeemed with corruptible things from
our vain conversation, etc. He does not instance in flowers or fruits of the
earth, which quickly rot, but in gold and silver, which are the most durable
and lasting metalls; even these are corruptible; but we our selves as to this
bodyly life, are corruptible, not only as gold and silver, but as the most
fading flowers and summer fruits of the earth.

Further, From that other description of death, as it is called a returning
again unto dust.

We learn.

Man is of the dust. Unless man, as to his body, were of the dust when he
began to live, he could not be said to return unto dust when he dies, or
departs this life. Many men pore upon their pedigree, and heir minds swel with
pride, because they are of such or such a noble descent; but let them remember,
man is of the dust. The soul or spirit of man is indeed from above, as was
showed before; and the body of man is (I grant) a compound of all the four
Elements. Our bodyly spirits (say Naturalists) are of the fire, our breath of
the air, our blood of the water, and our flesh and bones are most properly of
the dust of the earth; yet the whole body of man is denominated dust or earth,
or as the Apostle styles it (2 Cor: 5.1.) It Is an earthly house; If our
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved. For though we may truly say,
there is water, and air, and fire in this house, yet because earth is the
predominant Element, the whole body bears the denomination of that. God is not
said to form man of the water, or air, or fire, but of the dust of the ground
( Gen: 2.7.) though all those as well as earth were ingredients in the
composition and formation of man's body. As man with respect to his spiritualls
and moralls, is denominated from that which is chief in him, so with respect to
his naturalls. Every man has the seeds and principles of all sin in him, yet
many men are known and expressed by some special sin. Thus one is called a
covetous man, another a malicious man, etc. because covetousness and malice
are their predominant sins in practice, though the principles of all other sins
are in them. So for grace, one is said to be a patient man, and another an
humble man, and a third, a self-denying man. Though where any grace is all
graces are, yet a godly man is known by that grace which acts most eminently
and vigorously in him. In this notion man is said to be of the dust, and to
return to dust, as if he were nothing but dust, because dust is the
predominant Element in the natural constitution of man.

And if so, then this is an humbling consideration. Some walk as if they
thought the ground or earth not good enough for them to go upon. Moses setting
forth the dreadfullness of famine, as a punishment threatened the Jewish nation
in case of disobedience, tells us it shall fall on all sorts, both of men and
women ( Deuteronomy: 28.56.) The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not
adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and
tenderness, etc. Some are loath to put their feet to the ground, whereas the
best foot that ever trod upon the ground, is dust as well as the ground trodden
on, and it is but dust to dust when they are in the dust, and dirt to dirt if
they fall into the dirt. The Apostle, among other reasons, for this also,
calls the body of man a vile body (Phil: 3.21.) Who shall change our vile
body that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. Our bodies are vile,
chiefly from the contagion of sin, that has made them most vile; But they are
comparatively vile, with respect to the very matter out of which they were all
representatively made when the first man was made, without the least taint or
touch of sin. Man at best as to the body is but a little breathing dust or
moving clay. And did we spiritually look upon the matter of our bodies, it
would exceedingly humble our spirits, and keep them low even when like Jordan
they are ready to overflow all the banks of modesty, and moderation. We hear
of a bird, who priding himself in spreading and perusing his fine feathers, is
presently as it were, ashamed by looking down upon his own black feet. Surely
did man often consider that his whole body is of the earth, it would be an
excellent means to keep his heart in a lowly frame, how highly soever
himself is exalted in the earth.

And as man, while he lives is from the dust; so when he dies (that is another
humbling consideration) his body not only returns unto dust, but turns into
dust. David, as the figure of Christ cried out ( Psalm: 22.15.) Thou have
brought me into the dust of death. Dust and death are near acquaintance, and
all that die, grow quickly into nearer acquaintance with the dust. It is said (
Psalm: 103.14.) The Lord knows our frame, he remembers that we are but dust.
But what advantage is that to us, that the Lord knows the one, and remembers
the other? I may answer as the Apostle does to another question ( Rom: 3.2.)
much every way, chiefly, because he will pity us and spare us and deal
tenderly with us, as considering how frail we are. Now as it may be our
comfort that God remembers we are but dust, so it is our duty to remember that
we are but dust, and that we must to the dust. Shall God remember that we are
dust, and shall not we remember it our selves? Did we more remember that we are
dust, we should more prepare for our return to the dust. Yea, I may say, we
should be more in heaven, if we were more in our dust; that is, the gracious
and serious meditation of our natural vileness and infirmities would provoke us
to look heaven-wards, and prepare for heaven, where these our natural bodies
shall become spiritual (1 Cor: 15.44.) that is, they shall be like spirits
(though not turned into spirits) living without food or sleep, living free from
weariness and sickness, from pains and languishments, yea free from the
remotest fear of ever dying or returning again into dust. Such as these and
many more would be our souls advantages, did we often (as becomes us) remember
that our bodies are of the earth, and must shortly be earth again. Thus to be
earthly minded, is the way to be heavenly minded. Many are earthly minded, that
is, they mind earthly things, but few mind that themselves are earth. In what
holy heights and elevations of spirit should we be, if we could spiritually
remember how low we once were, and how low, as to our bodies, we within a few
days shall be.

Lastly, This truth should take us off from all creature-confidence from
trusting in man. Cursed is the man (says the Lord, Jer: 17.5.) that trusts
in man, and makes flesh his arm. It Is a cursed thing for man to trust in man,
because trust is an honor proper to God; he alone is to be trusted: And as it
is a cursed, so it is also a foolish thing to trust in man. David a Great
Prince gives us this counsel from God ( Psalm: 146.3, 4.) Put not your trust in
Princes, nor in the son of man in whom there is no help; his breath goes
forth, he returns to his earth (or to his dust) in that day all his thoughts
perish, happy is the man that has the God of Jacob for his help. What can dust
do for dust? what can dust get by dust? that which is weak may become strong,
by trusting to, or leaning upon that which is strong; the weakest man is strong
enough, while he trusts upon the strong God; but if weak trust upon weak,
how shall it be made strong. Therefore let all flesh hearken to the words of
the holy Prophet ( Isa: 2.21.) Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his
nostrills; for wherein is he to be accounted of? Man himself is a
soone-ceasing creature (David uses the noune of this verb to express
himself so, Psalm: 39.4.) and therefore we have reason to cease from man, to
cease from any high estimation of the highest men, much more from any
confidence in them. What can we assure our selves of from any man living,
seeing he has no assurance of his own life? The Prophet would have us
understand that, while he says, his breath is in his nostrills; Man's life is
gone as soon as his breath is gone, and how soon may that be gone! David
describes a proud man, puffing at his enemies (Psalm: 10.5.) He is puffed up
and swelled with high conceits of himself, as if he had some great matter in
him, and he puffs at others as if he could do some great matter against them,
forgetting that himself is but (as to his being in this world) a puff of
wind, which passes away. As then, we need not fear what hurt man can do us,
so we should not hope nor have any expectation from him that he by his own
power (how great soever his power is) can do us any good. Wherein (as to
either of these purposes) is man to be accounted of? Man is an excellent
creature, a creature of high account, as bearing the image of God, his soul is
of more worth then the gain of the whole world ( Math: 16.26.) and thus he is
more to be accounted of, then all that in the world is most accounted of; But
consider him as to the fraylety of his life, and the possibility, yea
probability of his sudden passage out of this world, and then, wherein is he
to be accounted of? If we oppose man to God, or compare man with God, or trust
man in stead of God, he is as vain and worthless as any thing, a thing of
nothing, or less then nothing.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 16, 17. If now thou have understanding, hear this;
hearken to the voice of my words.

Shall even he that hates right, govern? and will thou condemn him that is
most just?


ELihu having thus far applied himself to Jobs friends, upon an Assurance
that they were men of understanding; for so he bespake them at the 10th verse;
Hearken unto me ye men of understanding. He now turns his speech particularly
to Job, and he does it upon a hopeful supposition, that he also was a man of
understanding.

Verse. 16. If now thou have understanding, hear this.
The word which we render understanding, is not a noune, but the infinitive of
a verb in the Hebrew: and it may be rendered thus; (...) cum accentu in
penultima non potest esse nomen verbale, sed infinitivus loco nominis. Si est
intelligere. i. e. intelligentia. Drus: Scire tuum nihil est, etc. Juven:
Videamus beato vivere vestrum quale sit. Cic: Hoc vereri perdidi. i. e.
pudorem. Plaut: Non caret aculeis Apostrophe quibus Jobi attentionem excitat.
Si vel mica est in te bonae mentu. Merc: Infinitivus intelligere, non plenam
intelligentiam indicat, sed vel tenuissimum intellectum, qui infinitivus
actionem praesentem non habitu^ significat. Stupidum ergo et vecordem Jobum
appellat, etc. Bold: Si quid sanae mentis habes. Bez:
If thou have to understand; that is, if thou have an ability to understand,
which in sense is the same with our translation, If thou have understanding.
This form of speaking by the infinitive for the noune, is frequent both in
Scripture and other Authors. Thus it is said, Your to know is nothing; that is,
your knowledge is nothing, unless another know it, or be made knowing by it.
Let us see (says the Orator) what thy to live blessedly is; that is, what
thou countest blessedness. And another, I have lost to be ashamed; that is,
shamefastness or modesty. Thus Elihu, If thou have to understand, hear this.

But it may be questioned, did Elihu indeed suspect whether Job did understand,
or were an understanding man? Every man has an understanding, as he is a man.
To understand is the property, the inseparable property of a reasonable
creature. Why then does Elihu put a doubt upon Job in this, and say, If now
thou have understanding, etc.

I answer; Elihu indeed deals with Job as if he were somewhat below man in
this business, at least, as if he were dull, and slow to receive, and
apprehend what had been spoken to him, and therefore by this Apostraphe, he
excites and stirs him up to set his understanding a-work to the utmost; As if
he had said, Although thou have a habit of understanding, yet thou have not
acted it like an understanding man; nor given such proof of it in this matter
as is expected.

Further, These words, If now thou have understanding, refer not to the
faculty, but to the special attributes of his understanding; chiefly to these
three.

First, To the soundness of it; If thou have any thing of a sound
understanding. The understandings of many are sick, and diseased, their
understandings are tainted and infected with errors and misperswasions. Now if
thou have any thing of a sound understanding left in thee, if there remain yet
any strength in thy understanding, to apprehend the force of those arguments
and reasons which I shall propose to convince thee by, hear this. Erroneous
understandings are altogether unfit to entertain truth. As there must be a
sutableness between the stomach and the meat, else it is not digested, so
between the mind and the object, else it cannot be received.

Secondly, To the uprightness or impartiality of it; If thou have
understanding; that is, if thou have an unbiassed understanding; Sometimes the
affections turn aside, and bribe the understanding; self-interest puts a
blind upon the understanding. When a man has a mind to that which is not
right, he will have a mind to understand any thing that opposes it.

Thirdly, To the spirituallness of it, If thou have understanding; that is, a
renewed, a spiritual, an holy understanding, or the understanding of the holy,
hear this. A man may have a great natural understanding, a deep judgment,
and yet be a very child, or a man of no understanding in the things of God.
Only a spiritual understanding is suited to spiritual things, (as the object
is, such must the faculty be) that faculty which deals a-right about
spiritual things, must be a spiritual faculty. The Apostle speaks
concludingly (1 Cor: 2.14.) The natural man (that is, the man unconverted or
unregenerate) perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. And therefore the same Apostle professes to the Colossians (Chap:
1.9.) We do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled,
with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding.
The will of God being spiritual, cannot be truly known but by a spiritual
understanding. According to this threefold attribute of the understanding we
may expound Elihu speaking to Job, If thou have a spiritual understanding, an
unbiassed understanding, a sound understanding, hear this. As if he had said,
I have spoken, and am about to speak such things as may call out the strength,
the best, the utmost line of a sound, impartial and spiritual understanding,
to sound the bottom and the depth of them. Thus he provokes him to attend, not
only with his ear, but with his understanding, with the best of his
understanding, with the best underderstanding to the things he was to speak.
And in this sense the most of men, all bad men have no understanding ( Psalm:
14.2.) and Job, though a good man, had much deficiency in his. If now thou have
understanding, hear this.

Hence note.

He that has not a right, a sound, a spiritual understanding, can scarce be
said to have any understanding at all. There are many understanding men, who
have not this understanding, or an understanding for this. While David says (
Psalm: 49.20.) Man that is in honor and understands not, he supposes, that a
man ascended to the highest pitch of honor, may yet be without understanding,
that is, without a right, a sound, a spiritual understanding; and then (as it
follows there) he is like the beasts that perish. Beasts have no
understanding at all, the rational or intellectual power is proper to man. A
man in honor, not having this honor, a right understanding, may be numbered
among the beasts. If thou have understanding, Hear this.

As if he had said, I am not calling thee to hear an idle story, or a trivial
matter; Hear this, there is an emphasis in the words both as to the Act and
Object.

It is questioned what Elihu particularly intends by this; some refer it to
what he had spoken before in Job's audience, though directed to his friends:
Hear what I have spoken to thy friends in the former part of the chapter, in
vindication of the righteousness of God. Secondly, Others refer it to what
Elihu was now about to say; I have not yet done, I have not yet brought out all
my reasons and arguments, I have not emptied my treasures, I have yet more to
say, Hear this: A third sort refer these hortatory words, hear this, in the
former part of the verse, to what he had already spoken, and those in the
latter part of the verse, hearken to the voice of my words, to what he had yet
to speak; but it is not much to the matter to which we refer them, it being
clear, that what he had said, and what he had to say, was matter of weight; and
so hear this, is emphatical, this great, this deep, this useful and necessary
point of Doctrine, which I already have declared, or am now about to declare
unto thee.

Hence Note.

That which we hear, we should labor to understand. (Col. 3.16.) Let the word
of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom; It is not enough to hear the word
with our ears, or to have it in our mouths, it must dwell in our memories, and
it must dwell there, not in a beggarly poor fashion, but richly; which it never
does, till we have a sound and clear understanding of it, and are both in heart
and life conformed to it, yea transformed into it; that is it which the Apostle
means by the dwelling of the word in us richly in all wisdom. And he further
assures them ( chap. 2.1, 2.) that he had a great conflict for them; that is
(as we put in the Margin) he had a great fear or care of them, that their
hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of
the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of
God, and of the Father, and of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. He had held forth those great mysteries, the mystery of
God considered essentially, the mystery of the Father considered personally,
the mystery of Christ considered mediatorily; and therefore he presses them
to get a full assurance of understanding about all these mysteries. When Christ
was discoursing with his disciples after his resurrection, ( Luke 24.45.) it is
said, He opened their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures;
and then they did not take in what he spoke only at the ear, but at the heart
also. Thus ( Acts 16:14.) The Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended
unto the things which were spoken of Paul; that is, he gave her an inward ear,
and caused her to understand the things which he spoke.

Secondly Note.

Whatsoever we hear is lost, and but scattered in the air, if we do not
understand it. Though we have it in our books, yea though we have it in our
memories, it is lost, if we understand it not; we read of a book, sealed within,
and on the backside, with seven seals, (Rev. 5.1.) we read also ( v. 4.) that
John wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read the book:
That sealing of the book was nothing else but the shutting of it up from the
understanding; and when Christ opened the book, he gave the understanding of
it: the whole book of God is a sealed book, unless we have an understanding, or
a saving knowledge of the truths therein contained. What John said ( Rev.
13.18.) of counting that mysterious number of the Beast, must be said in its
proportion of the whole mystery of godliness, let him that has understanding
count and consider them.

Note Thirdly.

Every understanding is not fit to receive the Truths of God. An unregenerate
man is not fit to receive any of the Truths of God; The natural man (that is,
the man who has nothing but nature in him) perceives not the things of God,
he has not a suitable faculty for them; and as a natural man's understanding
cannot at all receive the things of God, so every degree of a spiritual
understanding cannot receive all the truths of God, or not all the things of
God in all their truth. The Apostle distributes persons into several degrees,
and calls some babes, and others grown or perfect men; that is, such as have an
understanding fit to take in and digest the highest and deepest things of God;
and hence it is, that Christ told his disciples ( John 16.12.) who had a
renewed understanding, only 'twas in a low degree, I have many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now; I suppose the reason why Christ says
they could not bear those many things, was not because being many, they were
too great a burden for their memories, (though possibly there might be somewhat
in that) but their inability of bearing those many things, was chiefly in their
understanding. There are some truths, which though a man can remember, yet he
cannot bear them; and the more he remembers them, the less he can bear them;
the weight and mysteriousness of them even cracks his brain, till he receives
more light from God, and more strength of understanding, he cannot bear them:
If thou have understanding, hear this; And hearken to the voice of my words.

This latter part of the verse is but the repetition or further enforcement of
the same thing, we had the like expressions chap. 33.1.8. and therefore I shall
not stay upon this, only Note further from the whole.

The beginning of true wisdom is to have a readiness to hear, and to show our
selves teachable. Some overween themselves so much, as to matter of knowledge,
that they will not be taught; they judge themselves so learned, and fully
instructed, that they will hear no more instruction, nor learn any other
lesson, they are past the School; yet always they who know much in their own
conceit, are least knowing in truth and reality: there is nothing does so much
hinder the receiving of knowledge, as an imagination or proud prepossession of
it. The sluggard (says Solomon, Prove. 26.16.) is wiser in his own conceit,
then seven men that can render a reason: They which have least reason, are the
greatest neglecters of it; only an understanding man is willing to hear, that
he may gain more understanding. Therefore Elihu admonishes Job, If now thou
have understanding, hear this, and hearken to the voice of my words: What Elihu
would have Job hear and hearken to, follows in the next verse, and in those
which follow, to the end of the 33d verse.

Verse. 17. Shall even he that hates right govern? and will thou condemn him
that is most just?
This is matter indeed worth the hearing and harkening to.

Shall even he that hates right govern? Shall he? He shall not, or at least
should not, he ought not; he of all men is the unfittest man to govern, that
is, to do all men right, who hates right. The Interrogation leads us to this
strong Negation, or indignation rather; What! He that hates right, whose very
spirit is against it, whose affections withdraw from it, is he made up for a
Governor! (...) Judicium, significat ordinem quo quicquid in loco convenienti
constituitur; sic odiens judicium est, qui non subscribit divino ordini. Coc.
The Hebrew word notes right from man to man; Justice or righteousness consists
in the due order and comely disposition of things and affairs, transacted and
dispensed in this world from man to man, or between man and man; it imports
also that order into which the most wise providence of God places both things
and persons; we may take it here in both or either of these senses; Shall he
that hates right Govern.

(...) Ligavit alligauit Dominari etiam significat, quod qui dominatur suis
liget praeceptis legibusque transgressores. Pagn.
The word rendered to Govern, has a threefold signification in Scripture.
First, and most properly, to bind up: Secondly, by a Metaphor, to heal;
because there is so great a use of binding in healing; the skilful ligature of
a wound, or of a broken limb, is of so much consequence in Surgery, or the
art of healing, that binding alone is put for healing; that which is well
bound, is in a fair way to healing. We find both these acts put together in
that great promise of the Churches glory under the Gospel, ( Isa. 30.26.)
Moreover the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, etc. in the
day that the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke
of their wound.

Many learned Translators render the word here, by binding or healing, or by
binding, as it refers to healing. The Vulgar Latin gives it passively, Numquid
qui non amat judicium sanari potest. Vulg.
Can he who does not love right be healed? The sense of which reading is this;
God does not use to heal or bind up the wounds of those who hate Right or
Justice: Why should the wounds of those Magistrates be healed, who have no
care, by doing right, to heal the wounds of others? I shall not stay upon this
Translation, because the Original Text clearly carries an active
signification. And some who retain this sense of the word, translate it
actively; An etiam odio habentis judicium obligaret ( sc. vulnus.) Jun.
Shall, or will God heal him that hates right? Surely he will not: If a man
hate Justice, and right, how can he expect that God should be a healer to him?
And thus it is expounded in reference to Job, who complained that God did not
heal him of his wounds, his wounds, though great, were not cured: now says
Elihu, Will God heal him that hates right; that is, who does not approve of
that which is right; or, as it follows, An etiam is qui odio habet jus
obligaret vulneratum. Pisc.
who condemns him that is most just, as Elihu charged Job to have done.

Again, another renders, Will he that hates the right heal the wounded? The
sense of which reading is given thus; Surely God who is ready to bind up and
heal the wounds of those that are afflicted when they repent, is no hater of
right, no perverter of Justice, as thou O Job have said God does; seeing God is
ready to heal the wounds, and bind up the sores of humbled sinners, how
unjustly have thou charged him with perverting of justice? The Tygurine version
gives it thus, Will he that hates right, An qui odit judicium Chirurgos
imitaretur. Tygur.
act the part of a Surgeon? Will he bind up and heal? Doubtless he will
not, but will rather wound and afflict, vex and trouble more and more instead
of being a healer. Either of these renderings bear a good sense of this
Scripture; yet I shall rather take up our Translation, and insist upon it. And
therefore

Thirdly, The word signifies tropically to rule or govern; Verbum ligandi (...)
sumitur pro imperare vel rerum potiri, quia qui imperant ligant, etc. Merc.
Leges a ligando dicuntur.
and the reason arises clearly from the proper signification of it; because he
that is a Ruler or a Governor, is also a binder and a healer: Magistrates
bind the people that are under them to order, they bind them by their Laws.
Laws are as bonds, they have a binding power, they bind either to obedience or
to punishment; and therefore Magistrates are binders, they bind the unruly and
disobedient, they bind with the rule of the Law, and with the penalties of the
Law. When any break the rule of the Law, then they fall under the penalties of
the Law, so that every way a Magistrate is a binder; and as he is a binder, so
a healer; The Laws of Government by which people are bound, are for their
healing, for the healing of their manners and corruptions; as also, for the
healing of those whom they have oppressed or wounded by their evil manners and
corruptions. Further, all Governors should, and righteous Governors will
improve their power and authority for the healing of those differences that
arise among their subjects, or those over whom they are set: In all these
respects, Magistrates are healers and binders. Thus the Prophet ( Isa. 3.6, 7.)
expresses them, When a man shall take hold of his brother, of the house of his
father, saying, thou have clothing, be thou our Ruler, and let this ruin be
under thine hand: Here is a breach, a ruin in the State or Commonwealth, let
this be under thy hand, do thou undertake the cure of this; but in that day
shall he swear (v. 7.) I will not be a healer: We put in the margin, a binder,
that is, I will not be your Governor; your case is so desperate, and you are
so obstinate in your way, that I dare not undertake your cure, I will not be a
healer to you, or I will not be your binder; or as the reason of his refusal is
there given by the Prophet, from his own inability or incompetency for that
undertaking; In my house is neither bread nor clothing, make me not a Ruler of
the people. Thus the word very significantly holds out the office and use of
Governors; they are or ought to be binders or healers: the wounds of the Body
politic need a healer as much as those of the body natural; Governors are
State-Physicians: and therefore we read very well, Shall he that hates right
govern? Mr. Broughton says, Can a foe to Judgment rule well? taking this
sense, Elihu does two things in this verse.

First, He shows how unfit an unjust person is to rule; this he does in the
former part of the verse.

Secondly, He shows how unfit it is to condemn or censure a just Ruler; this
he does in the latter part of the verse. Shall even he that hates right
govern? He ought not. And shall he that governs rightly be hated? Shall he
fall under unrighteous condemnations, who condemns others rightly? He should
not. As he that is unjust is unfit to govern, so it is not only uncomly, but
abominable to condemn a just Governor. This is the sum of the whole verse.
From the former part of it already opened, Shall he that hates right govern?

Observe.

First, Some men are haters of Justice, Right, and Righteousness. What is there
so good, but an evil man hates it? and the better it is, the more he hates
it: How precious a thing is righteousness, yet it is hated; ( Mic. 3.1, 2.)
Hear, I pray you, O heads of Jacob, etc. Is it not for you to know judgment,
who hate the good and love the evil? How precious a thing is peace? and yet
there are peace-haters; My soul (says David, Psalm. 120.6.) has long dwelt
with him that hates peace. How sweet a thing is light? the light of the
Gospel, yet there are many light-haters, ( Joh. 3.20.) He that does evil;
(loving to do it) hates the light: How precious a thing is holiness? and yet
there are holiness-haters; how precious a thing is truth? and yet there are
truth-haters; how infinitely precious is God? and yet there are God-haters;
(Romans 1.30.) How lovely, how desirable is Jesus Christ, both as a Savior and
as a Sanctifier? yet even Jesus Christ (who has loved us, and washed us with
his own blood) is hated: There are many Christ-haters, as himself told the Jews
( John 15.24.) They have both seen and hated both me and my Father. And if
there be that principle of abomination in the heart of man to hate God and
Christ, what good is there that the heart of man may not set his hatred upon?
Elihu supposes that there are haters of Right and Justice, which are the most
amiable things in the world, and should attract the love of all persons to them.

Secondly, When Elihu says, Shall even he that hates right govern? How
disdainfully does he speak of such?

Hence Note.

To hate right is a most hateful thing. He is not worthy the name of a man that
hates right. When the Prophet Elisha told Hazael what strange things he should
do, what havoc he should make in the world, he said (2 King. 9.13.) But what,
is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing? as if he had said, to
do such a thing, renders a man as vile and contemptible as a dog: It Is a piece
of unrighteousness to reckon or number them among men, who are haters of that
righteousness which should be exercised among men, and is the preservation of
mankind; not to honor righteousness is a hateful thing, not to do right at
all times, and in all things, is a hateful thing; what is it then to hate
right? How justly hateful are Justice haters!

Some may say, are there any indeed so bad as to hate right?

I answer, First, There are some who profusedly, plainly, with a bold and bare
face hate the right; there is in all natural men a seed of this hatred, The
wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God; and surely, if it be enmity against
God, it must needs be enmity against all that is good; now as there is a seed
of that enmity in every man's nature, so there will be the workings and fruits
of that enmity in many men's lives.

Secondly I answer, He may be said to hate right that does not approve right,
that does not love and delight in it; not to love, not to delight in that which
is right, is to hate the right. As he that does not love God, is a hater of
God; the second Commandment speaks thus, I the Lord thy God am a jealous God,
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me, and showing mercy to thousands of them
that love me, and keep my Commandments. Hating of God, and loving of God,
divide the whole world; they that do not love God, hate him; there is no middle
of participation between these two, between the love and hatred of God: so
there is a hatred of Justice or Right in him who loves it not; though a man do
not make profession against it, yet if he has not an affection to it, he will
at last be found amongst that most hateful company, the haters of
righteousness: not to hate evil, is to love it, and not to love good, is to
hate it in God's account. Many stand as neuters in the days of this world, but
in that great day of the end of the world, there will be no neuters seen: all
shall stand in two parts, either among the sheep or goats; and among all the
sheep there will not be one found, who has not been a lover of goodness and
righteousness; nor one among all the goats, who has not been (in the judgment
and esteem of God) a hater of them.

Thirdly, They may be said (in a degree) to hate right, who though they have
some love to it, yet love it in a less degree then they should, or less then
they ought; a lower or lesser degree of love, is a kind of hatred in Scripture
language: The Law of Moses says ( Deuteronomy. 21.15, 16, 17.) If a man have two
wives, one beloved, and another hated, and they have born him children; both
the beloved and the hated, and if the first born son be hers that was hated;
then it shall be when he makes his son inherit that which he has, that he may
not make the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, etc.
But what does he mean by the wife that is hated? Surely the wife that is not so
much loved; though he loved both truly, yet not loving both in the same degree,
he is said to hate one of them: so I conceive that Scripture is to be
understood ( Luke 14.26.) where Christ gives the rule concerning Disciple-ship;
If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple: When Christ lays this charge upon his Disciples, to hate wife, and
children, etc. would he have his Disciples turn their hatred upon those
relations? the rule of the Word forbids that: So then, his meaning is only
this, if in case of following me, a man find any stop or hindrance by these,
he must not let out his love so to wife, and children, etc. as to hinder his
coming to, or following of me. Every man must take off so much love from these
dearest worldly enjoyments, as hinders men in following Christ; and he who
through grace is enabled to do so, is in a true and clear Gospel sense said to
hate them. That which we can leave for Christ, we hate in comparison of that
love which we bear to Christ. Thus in the Text and Point, they may be said to
hate the right, who bear not a due proportion of love unto it; not to love
righteousness with highest and warmest affections, is a degree of hatred. Some
love the right, but they love it lightly, they love it less then riches and
gain; and and therefore for self-gain they turn aside from, and forsake the
right. Some will speak fair for Justice, till the offer of private advantage
either put out their eyes, or stop their mouths; he that loves not to do right
to others more then to enrich himself, will quickly wrong others to enrich
himself: Now he that upon any terms or considerations whatsoever (though it
were to the advantage only of some others who are poor and distressed, much
more when its for his own advantage) is drawn to pervert the right, is a hater
of it. Remember, any lesser degree of love to that which is right, may at any
time be interpreted the hatred of it; and when we love it less then our own
concernments, we cannot resist temptations which entice us to do that which
will declare a direct hatred of it.

Thirdly, From the whole tenor of these words, Shall he that hates right
govern?

Note.

They that hate right, or righteousness, are altogether unfit to Govern, or to
be Governors? Nothing is more contrary to the state of Government, or the
qualification of a Governor, then to hate right; righteousness is the sphere
wherein he ought to walk, and never to move out of it; it is the business he
has to do, the trade which he has to drive; whatsoever he does in that
capacity, he must be doing righteous things. So far as any man has the power
of Government in his hand, if it be but over a family, much more over a Nation,
he ought to do right; David's prayer for himself as a King, and for his son who
was to succeed him in the Kingdom, was only and altogether this, ( Psalm. 72.1.)
Give the King thy judgments, O Lord, and thy righteousness unto the Kings son;
that is, teach both me and him what is right, give us a heart conformable to
it, and a readiness of mind always to do it: That Is the scope of his prayer
when he said, Give the King thy judgments, O Lord, and thy righteousness to
the King's son: Nor does he barely pray for the gift of judgment and
righteousness, but he puts the stamp of God upon them; Give them thy judgment,
and thy righteousness. It is possible for Kings to have a judgment of their
own, and a righteousness of their own, which are not the judgments nor the
righteousness of God. For as there is a righteousness of God, which some being
ignorant of, trust to a righteousness of their own for the justification of
their person; so there is a righteousness of God for the government of man,
which some neglecting, use only a righteousness of their own, both in
condemning and justifying other men's both persons and causes; Princes being in
Gods place, should exalt the righteousness of God in the governing of men. And
therefore the same David in his dying song spoke thus (2 Samuel: 23.3.) He that
rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God; who ever he is he
must be just, and he must be just in the fear of God, which he can never be,
but in giving out the righteousness of God; that is, in dispensing that for
righteousness, which is right according to the will of God. And if he must do
right thus, how shall he do it, if he hate it? no man will do that willingly
or constantly which he hates; he that hates right is so far from doing it
himself, that he cannot abide others should do it. Whereas a governor, is
not only to do right himself, but to appoint others to do it, and to see
that they do it, or else to punish them for not doing it. The Rulers of the
earth are said to bear the sword (Rom: 13.4.) And they are said to be Shields
(Psalm: 47.9.) They are shields to protect the good, and swords to take
vengeance of those that do evil; both which are the works of righteousness.
And if so, shall ever he that hates right govern?

And will thou condemn him that is most just? Fieri ne potest ut qui omnibus
imperat, juris amans non sit, aut quicquam injuste agat. Merc:
The scope of Elihu in the former part of the verse was to demonstrate that God
is no hater of right, or righteousness, for he is not only A Governor, but
The Governor, all the world over, or over all the world, and it were a most
absurd thing, to think that he should be the Governor of the world, and yet
be a hater of right; can it be imagined that he who rules all men, should
wrong any man? Now seeing God who rules all is always most righteous, will thou (O Job) condemn him (says Elihu) that is most just? God our governor is
so far from hating, that he is ever promoting justice, he that is so, is most
just, and will thou condemn him that is most just?

Will thou condemn? To condemn is to sit in Judgment, and give sentence
against another. Will thou condemn, or give sentence against God? Will thou
(as some translate according to the strictness of the Original) make him
wicked, that is most just? Et an justum insignem impium facis? Heb:
Elihu makes use of a very hard and severe word, and it is conceived that he
purposely pitched upon it, or picked it out, to convince Job, that it is no small
fault, or offense, to complain of or to quarrel with the dealings of God.
It Is indeed to condemn God, and to make him wicked, (...) validum justu^. i.
e. qui valde justus est. Drus: Number eum, qui (...) justus est, ut deus omnium
judicio est, in justitiae damnare sustines. (...) potest exponi validu^, number
justum et potente^ eum qui simul et justus et potens est damnare audes, sed
malo (...) exponere per (...) multum valde, q.d. eum qui sum justus est audes
damnare, de eo queri, quasi tibi sit iniquior. Rab: Sell: Merc:
as the word imports; Will thou condemn him that is most just?

Here are two words; in the Hebrew we put them together, and so render them by
a superlative, most just. Some translate, Will thou condemn him that is strong
and just? that is, strongly just, mightily just; God is full of strength and
might, so full that he, and he only is Almighty; yet his might never exceeds
right, nor his strength his justice. Strength and justice are commensurate in
God. And while he is so strong, that he can do what he will, he is so just
that he will do nothing but what is righteous.

Further, I find others joining the word strong, with the word condemn. As if
Elihu had said, Will thou so confidently, and pertinaciously, condemn the just
God? To condemn God, though but a little, to pass the easiest sentence of
condemnation upon him is bad enough; but will thou strongly condemn him? We
render clearly to the scope of the place, Will thou condemn him that is most
just?

Hence note.

First, God is most just, or altogether just. He is strongly just, mightily
just; as he is strongly merciful, putting forth a power in pardoning sin, and
showing mercy, so he is strongly just, or altogether just. The rule given to
Judges by Moses speaks thus, ( Deuteronomy: 16.20.) That which is altogether just,
shall thou follow. We put in the margin, justice, justice, shall thou do; that
is, thou shall do pure Justice, nothing but Justice, or justice without the
least mixture, tincture, or (if it be possible) without the least shadow of
injustice. I may say, justice, justice is God, that is, he is altogether just,
strongly just, everlastingly and unchangeably just. God is just under a
threefold notion.

(...). Phavor:
First, As to be just is taken largely, importing a person accomplished with
concurrence of all perfections, and virtuous qualities. In that sense, I
suppose, the Apostle uses the word (1 Timothy: 1.9.) The law is not given for
(that is, to terrify or condemn) a just man; that is, for a man who is holy
and good. Thus God is altogether just; for he has all the lines of perfection,
of holiness, and goodness centring in him, he is not only just and virtuous,
but justice and virtue it self.

Secondly, To be just, imports the keeping of promises, and the performance of
our word. He is a just man, who when he has spoken, you may know what to have
of him, and where to have him. Some give words, and you can get nothing of them
but words, that is injustice, because our words bind us and should be as laws
to us. A man may choose whether he will make promises, but when he has
promised, it is not in his choice, whether he will perform or no; his word
binds him. In this sense, God is altogether just. Whatsoever word you have had
from God, (and he has given us many comfortable words for every condition) God
is a just God, and will perform it to a tittle. That Glorious and everlasting
witness is borne to him by dying Joshua (Josh: 23.14.) And behold this day I
am going the way of all the earth, and ye know in all your hearts, and in all
your souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good things which the
Lord your God spoke concerning you: all are come to pass unto you, and not one
thing has failed thereof. In this sense, God is said to be, not only
merciful, but just in forgiving our sins (1 John 1.9.) If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. If we confess our sins spiritually and believingly,
deeply, humbly, and affectionately; if we confess thus, he is just to forgive;
why? because he has given a promise to forgive those who make such confessions
of sin. And thus it is in any other promise; he keeps his word, he keeps touch
with man, he will not fail nor come short in the least, therefore he is
altogether just.

Thirdly, He is just in the strictest acception of justice, giving every one
his due. It is possible for a man to be just in neither of the two former
notions, he may neither be virtuous in his actions, nor a keeper of his word as
a man, and yet he may be just as a Magistrate, just as in a cause committed to
his determination. But God is just in all these three considerations of a just
man, and therefore he is eminently, or altogether just. And I conceive, the
latter of the three is chiefly intended here; God is most just, that is, he
never did, nor ever will, give an undue or an undeserved sentence upon any man.

I might show distinctly, that God is just, and how just he is; First, in
rewarding those that do well; Secondly, in punishing those that do ill. And
that because he does it; First, by a law; Secondly, by a law published;
Thirdly, by a law possible (our inability of keeping the law is consequentiall
to the giving of it; man has drawn it upon himself) though now he cannot
perform it at all, yet God is just in punishing, because he sins against a law
that he had a power (in his head or representative) to have fullfilled.
Fourthly, God is just, because the penalties which he inflicteth slow from a
right and just law (as the Apostle speaks, Rom: 7.12.) The law is holy, and
just, and good; and therefore all the awards that are grounded upon it must
needs be just too. Fifthly, he punishes justly, because he never punishes but
upon proof, and evidence; yea he will make every man's Conscience a witness
against himself, or condemn him out of his own mouth. Sixthly, he punishes
justly, because he punishes impartially, neither fear, nor hope, nor favor,
can divert him ( Isa: 27.11. Jer: 22.24.) Seventhly, he does not only punish in
a proportion to the law, but often in a proportion to the sin, and that not
only to the measure of the sin, but to the manner of the sin; as that cruel
king Adonibezek confessed, when himself was cruelly dealt with (his thumbs and
great toes being cut off, Judge: 1.7.) As I have done so God has requited me:
As if he had said, God is just not only because he has punished me in measure
according to my sin, but after the very same manner in which I sinned, he has
as it were hit my sin in the eye of all beholders; what I have done may be
seen by what I suffer.

Note, Secondly.

To condemn God, who is most just, is the highest point of injustice. Will thou condemn him that is most just? will thou do such a thing? what? condemn
him that is most just! How great a wickedness is this, if we consider, First,
that whatever God does, we ought to be patient under it. Secondly, that
whatsoever God does, we ought to acquiesce or rest quietly and contentedly in
it; that is more then to be patient. Thirdly, that whatsoever he does, we ought
to approve and justify God in it. Fourthly, that we ought to magnify God
whatsoever he does, though his dispensations are bitter, and burdensome; and
if we do so we shall find the bitterest dispensations sweet to us. Now if we
ought to be patient under, to acquiesce in, to approve of, yea to magnify and
exalt the name of God in all his dealings with us and determinations concerning
us, then how sinful is it to condemn him? What? shall such poor creatures as
we, take upon us to censure and condemn the works of God! Some say it at
least in their hearts, if they had the reins of government in their hands,
they would carry things evener then God does; they would put all things right,
if they might have the rule; if they might a while do as they think fit, they
would do all things fitly. Some will talk thus arrogantly of their fitness to
govern the whole world, who have not wit enough to govern their own
familyes; nor any grace at all to govern themselves; yea they will presume
they could govern all men, who are scarce fit to govern a heard of swine, or
as Job speaks ( Chap: 30.1.) to be set over the dogs of a man's flock; such as
these will take upon them to govern the world, and say they could do it better
then it is done. Things should not go thus, if they might have their will.
Though indeed (like that rash and inconsiderate young man in the fabulous Poet,
who desired for one day at least to be Charioteere to the Sun) if they might
have their will, they would set the whole world a-fire, or put all into a flame
in one day. Thus, vain man would be wise (as Zophar said, Chap: 11.12.) Though
man be borne like a wild asses colt, that is, being altogether unwilling to be
governed by any right law, he would feign give the law to and govern all; what
is this but to condemn the most just? and how great, how blasphemously
impudent a wickedness is this!

But some may say, Did Job ever thus condemn God?

I answer; he did not condemn him in so many words, he did not formally sit
upon his tribunal, and condemn God, but he spoke such words as did show a
condemning of God, and Elihu justly condemned him for speaking them.

Hence note, lastly.

Not to submit freely to, or to complain of the dealings of God, is a
condemning of God. This is a hard saying, we may be almost astonished to hear
it, what? condemn God? yeas, so far as any man murmurs against the dealings
of God, so far he condemns God. The works of God must be submitted to, as
well as his word, his dispensations must be obeyed as well as his laws and
constitutions. Our complaints of what he does are censures of his person. We
question not only the sovereignty and power of God, but his very wisdom and
truth and justice, when we reluct against any of his actings or awards
concerning us, though they produce our greatest sufferings. This Elihu further
aggravates in the next words; Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked? and
to Princes, Ye are ungodly? If men will be mannerly to Princes, how much more
mannerly ought they to be toward God?

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 18, 19. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked, and
to Princes, ye are ungodly?

How much less to him that accepts not the Persons of Princes, nor regards
the rich more then the poor? for they are all the work of his hands.


THese two verses are both an Illustration and a Confirmation or proof of what
Elihu spoke last in the close of the 17th verse, Will thou condemn him that is
most just? Hereupon he infers

Verse. 18. Is it sit to say to a King, thou art wicked?
Those words, Is it fit; are not literally and expressly in the hebrew; and
therefore some connect these two verses immediately with the former; Will thou
condemn him that is most just? Who says to a King, O thou wicked? and to
Princes, O ye ungodly? That is, Qui dicit Regi Apostata, qui vocat Duces impios
etc. Vulg. An dicentem Regi O nequam, O improbe ingenuis, condemnares? Jun.
Quinquennium Neronis.
who is so just, that he spares not to tell the greatest Kings and Princes of
their wickedness and ungodliness? Or as the Vulgar Translation has it, Who
says to a King, O thou Apostate? I tell thee, Thou art fallen from that
Justice and Righteousness which thou did once exercise in thy Government. It
is said of Nero, he had his five years wherein he governed excellently, but
afterward he proved Apostate, cruelly tyrannizing over (instead of ruling) his
people; as there are Apostates in Spirituals, so in Civils; an apostate is an
hypocrite revealed, an hypocrite is an apostate veiled: God unvails hypocrites
of all sorts, and will not fail sooner or later to reprove their Apostasy. It
is better not to be good, then not to continue good: Backsliders are worse then
they who never set one step in the ways of God and goodness.

So then, according to this reading, the sense may be given out thus: As if
Elihu had said, How can thou (O Job!) possibly imagine that God should be
unjust, when he does not forbear to tell the greatest Kings of their injustice,
and convince them of it; he who calls degenerate Kings Apostates, and unjust
Princes wicked; he that is thus impartial in reckoning with Kings, and the
mighty men of the earth (as indeed God has always been, and will ever be) How
should he be unjust? Will thou condemn the most Just? Even him who is so just,
that he rebukes injustice wheresoever he sindes it, and who can find it
wheresoever it is? (Psalm. 105.14.) He reproved Kings for their sakes, (that is,
for the sake of his peculiar people, when they did them wrong,) saying, Touch
not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: implying, that he trusts Kings
with that great power to protect his anointed, and to save his Prophets from
harm; and therefore would not take it well at their hands, if they abused their
power to hurt and afflict them. This is a good reading, but I shall not insist
upon it, though some insist much upon it, because I would rather favor our own
Translation, and carry the Interpretation that way, as containing an argument
to prove, that it is a most wicked thing to condemn God as unjust, because men
are scarce any where found so presumptuous, or bold, as to say to a King, Thou
art wicked, or to Princes, ye are ungodly. It is much easier for any man, much
more for great men to do evil, then for others to tell them so: And as the
faults of Princes seldom find reprovers, so it requires a great deal of
wisdom, not to commit a fault in reproving them.

Is it fit to say to a King thou art wicked? Is this a comely thing? Or will
Kings endure it? And if so, does it become thee, O Job, to speak hardly of God?
Or will he endure it? Elihu did not charge Job with speaking evil of God
directly; but would intimate to him, that while he was so unquiet under the
afflicting hand of God, and pressed him so often for a further hearing of his
cause, he did very dangerously reflect upon his Justice; and that seeing we
stand in awe of Kings and Sovereign Princes, and dare not misbehave our selves
before them, nor let fall an unreverend word concerning them, how durst he
presume to speak any thing unseemly of God? Is it fit to say to a King, Thou
art wicked.

Kings are supreme, they are clothed with Sovereign power over all persons
within their Dominion; Is it therefore fit to use such course language, such
downright unhewen speeches in any address to them? Is it fit to say to a King,
Thou art wicked? The original word imports the worst sort, the most infamous
among wicked men; So Mr Broughton renders, Is it meet that one say to a King,
Belial? Some give it in the Vocative case, Is it meet for a subject to say to
his Sovereign, O thou Belial! O thou wicked one? Dare any speak thus to a King?

This word Belial is often used in Scripture, to note, not only a wicked man in
general, but an eminently wicked man, even a man in whom all wickedness is (as
it were) centred and settled, the very lees and dregs of all men, who may be
called wicked. When Jezabel procured and suborned two false witnesses against
Naboth, it is said, There came in two men, children of Belial, (1 Kings 21.13.)
and sat before him: and the men of Belial witnessed against him, even against
Naboth in the presence of the people, saying, etc. These witnesses were
perjured persons; to tell a lie is the worst of sins, what then is it to swear
a lie? no word could reach the height of this wickedness more fully, then to
call them children of Belial. When the Lord comforted the Church with the glad
tidings of the Gospel, ( Nah. 1.15.) Behold the feet of those upon the
mountains that preach peace; O Jerusalem keep thy solemn Feasts, perform thy
Vows; He subjoyns this promise as a reason, The wicked shall no more pass
through thee, he is utterly cut off: We put in the margin, Belial shall no more
pass through thee; that is, thou shall then be freed from those Belialists who
formerly interrupted thy peace, by vexing and persecuting thee, or profaned
thy holy Assemblies by mixing themselves with thee: But I give thee assurance
the time is coming, when Belial shall no more trouble thee. Yea Belial is a
Title so full of wickedness, that it fits the Devil himself, whom the Scripture
brands with that black mark, The wicked one, or the evil one. The Apostle puts
that question with much holy disdain; (2 Cor. 6.14, 15.) What communion has
light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? that is, Christ
with the Devil? They differ from the Devil only in flesh and blood, in nature
they are as bad as he, who bear his name.

This may yet further appear, if we look into the Grammatical derivation of it,
Belial, is commonly expounded a man without a yoke, or a man that will not be
yoked; that is, a man who will not come under command, a lawless person; so we
translate the Apostle's word, (1 Timothy 1.9. Aliqui a (...) sine, and (...) jugo
deducunt, qui nullis legum vinculis teneatur aut jugo.
) The Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient,
for the ungodly, and for sinners, etc. that is, for the sons of Belial, or, for
such as will not endure the yoke; the Law is a yoke, Christ calls the Law of
the Gospel his yoke, ( Matthew. 11.29.) and they that will not bear the yoke of
Christ, shall never have benefit by the Cross of Christ; we must take up the
yoke of Christ, if we would taste the fruit of the Cross of Christ. Now a
Beliallist, will not hear of, nor have to do with the yoke; he is like the
wild Ass described in the 39th of Job, who will not be taught to plow, nor be
bound in the furrow; you cannot make the wild Ass work like the Ox. Wicked
men have hard and stony hearts, yet such soft, tender, and delicate necks, that
they cannot abide the yoke; it is their bondage to be tied to obedience.

Again, The notation of the word Belial, Alii a (...) proficere deducunt, quasi
significet hominem qui ad nihil sit utilis. Merc.
imports a person of no use, or altogether unprofitable, a man that is good for
nothing, a mere unthrift, or spendthrift, a man that neither does good to
himself, nor to any others; as if he were born only to spoil and devour all
that is before him, as if he came into the world to eat other men's labors, and
not to labor that he might have to eat. Christ calls the idle or slothful
servant, an unprofitable servant, (Matthew. 25.30.) and to be an unprofitable
servant, is to be a son of Belial; one that has no good in his heart, nor does
any good in his place, neither in his private nor public capacity; neither in
his own family, nor in the neighborhood, and Nation where he lives. No man is
born for himself, nor ought any man to live to himself. It were better not to
live, then not to be doing good while we live. He that lives only to profit
himself, lives to little purpose; to what purpose then does he live, whose
life is altogether unprofitable to himself? And indeed, he that is not in some
respect or other a common good, or good to others, cannot be good, nor do any
true good to himself; yet such is the wicked man represented under the notion
of this Text. Seeing then there are such bad and base significancies in the
bowels of this word; is it sufferable by a King? Is it fit to say to a King,
thou art Belial, or wicked?

What can be said more unfitly? What greater reproach can be cast upon a King
(who ought to be a living Law, a breathing Law, as also the Keeper of the Law
by way of conservation and protection) then to call him Belial, or one that
will not keep the Law at all by way of observation? There are two ways of
keeping the Law, First, By Conservation; so Kings preserve the Laws that they
may have their free course to others, and be obeyed by others; in which sense
Kings are commonly called Keepers of both Tables. Secondly, By observation; and
as in the former sense it is the prerogative of Kings to be Keepers of the Law,
so it is their piety and their goodness to be Keepers of them in the latter.
It Is possible a King may be a Keeper of the Law by Conservation, and yet not be
a Keeper of it by Observation; but then he shines most bright in the sphere of
his Royal Sovereignty, when he is every way a keeper of the Law of God, and (so
far as they respect himself) of his own.

Further, Is it fit to say to a King, Belial? As Belial designs an unprofitable
person, a man good for nothing, a man of no use; what? Upon the Throne, and yet
of no use to a Nation? How high an indignity is this to Regal dignity? Kings
are set up for the greatest use, for the most important services, even for the
profit and advantage of mankind, especially of all within their Kingdoms and
Dominions; as all are to serve them in their state, so they count it their
chiefest honor to advance the peace and profit of all their peaceable and
profitable subjects: Therefore nothing can be said more dishonourably to a King
then this, Thou art good for nothing, an unprofitable person, Belial. Is it fit
to say to a King, Thou art wicked?

And to Princes, ye are ungodly? The word rendered Princes, signifies
munificent, bountiful, free, willing; Principes hic vocantur (...) a
liberalitate and munificentia: quasi tu dicas (...), Drus.
so Princes are called, to show what they are or should be, men of bountiful,
noble, munificent, heroic, free spirits, open hearted, and open handed; they
who are so, are Princes in truth as well as in Title. The holy Spirit of God,
or God the holy Spirit, is called a Princely Spirit, (Psalm. 51.12.) we read it
Free Spirit; and this free Princely Spirit of God, makes all his people of a
free Princely spirit, of a large heart, both as to duty Godwards, and as to
charity man-wards; ( Psalm. 110.3.) In the day of thy power the people shall be
willing; they shall be as Princes; they shall serve thee as sons, not as
slaves; a Royal Spirit is conveyed into them by the Spirit in the day of the
Power of Jesus Christ, or when he conquers them to the obedience of himself. By
this appellation, worldly Princes, the Princes of this world are expressed in
sacred language, that so their very names might mind them of being such, and
of doing such things as are the ornament both of their persons and places.
These two high Titles in the Text, Kings and Princes, are sometimes taken for
the same; and in strictest sense, Princes are the next degree, or but one
remove from Kings.

Again, There are some called Princes, who have the supreme power within their
own Territories. Others are called Princes, who have a delegated or derived
power from Kings. The Apostle speaks of such, (1 Pet. 2.13.) charging the
Church and people of God, to submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, whether to the King as supreme; or unto Governors as sent by him, for
the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Elihu
brings in both, for the fuller confirmation of his point, and the stronger
conviction of Job, Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked? and to Princes
(who stand about his Throne, and serve him in his Government) ye are ungodly?
Ye regard neither right nor reason, neither what is fit to be done, nor what to
be advised? That Is the sense of the words as they are an argument from the less
to the greater; If it be an uncomely and undecent thing (says Elihu) to say to
a King thou art wicked? and to Princes ye are ungodly? How much more to him
that accepts not the persons of Princes? etc.

Hence Note.

First, Men are not all of a rank, or all are not of an equal state in this
world. This Text speaks of Kings and Princes; and the most of men are inferior
not only to Kings, but to Princes. God has not made man upon earth as minims
in writing, all of a height; but as in the alphabet of Letters, some are longer
and deeper then others; so in the Alphabet of mankind, some men are bigger and
higher then others. Kings and Princes are but men, yet they are men in a great
letter, or they are among men as the Aleph among the letters, which as it is
first in order, so it signifies a Prince, a Chief, a Leader. And if the most
wise God had not ordered such an inequality among men, how should order have
been kept among men? Nothing (considering the corruptions and lusts of men) can
be more unequal then that equality which some have vainly contended for among
men. All men would fall down into confusion, if some were not above. That which
keeps all up, is, only that some are uppermost, Kings and Princes.

Secondly, (which is here principally aimed at,) Note.

It is most uncomly and sinful, to revile or give reproachful words to Kings or
Princes. When we say It is not fit, we say less then the thing is, or then the
Text intends; there is more evil in it then a bare unfitness, it is indeed a
very great wickedness, and ungodliness, to say to a King, thou art wicked, and
to Princes, ye are ungodly. To say so, is expressly against the Rule, ( Exodus
22.28.) Thou shall not revile the gods, (or, as we put in the margin, Judges)
nor curse the Ruler of thy people: And the Apostle Paul quotes this Text ( Acts
23.5.) when himself had slipped in that point, as he stood before the Judgment
seat, and pleaded his own integrity; for when Ananias the high Priest commanded
them that stood by to smite him on the mouth; Paul said unto him, God shall
smite thee, thou whited wall: This drew a reproof upon him presently from them
that stood by ( v. 4.) Revilest thou Gods high Priest? And what does Paul
answer? ( v. 5.) I wist not Brethren, that he was the high Priest; for it is
written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. There has been
much dispute about that answer, I wist not that he was the high Priest:
Certainly Paul saw and knew that he was the high Priest; and it is as certain,
that he did not tell a lie, when he said, I wist not that he was the high
Priest: His meaning I conceive was only this, as if he had said, having
received such unjust usage in the Court, as to be openly smitten in time of
hearing, I confess I was in a passion, and did not consider, (...).
as I ought, that it was the high Priest; I spoke rashly and unadvisedly. I
wist not, that is, I deliberated not with my self who it was I spoke to, for I
ought not to have used such language; the Scripture also having forbidden it,
which says, Thou shall not curse the Ruler of thy people. It will not bear us
out, to use ill words to Magistrates, though (as Paul's case was) we are ill
used by them. Shimei taking the advantage of David's affliction, rose up to
this height of impudence against him, mentioned with indignation by Elihu in
the Text, he openly and to his face called him Belial, (2 Samuel 16.5.7.) Come
out thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial: But we know what the issue was, he
paid dear for it at last; though David forgave him at present, and did not
suffer Abishai to take a sudden revenge, yet upon his deathbed he delivered
him over to his son Solomon, to deal with him as he should see good. And so
great is the offensiveness and unfitness of speaking thus unto a King, that the
Jews joined it with blasphemy against God himself. We read (1 Kings 21.13.)
how two false Witnesses came against Naboth, saying, Naboth blaspemed God and
the King; as much as to say, we heard Naboth say of the King, Belial; And as
soon as these two had brought in their evidence against him, that he had
blasphemed God and the King, they drew him out, and stoned him: Blasphemy
against God was death by the express letter of the Law, ( Lev. 24.15, 16.) It
was also death by the same Law for any man to curse his Father or his Mother (
Exodus 21.17.) And because the King is (Pater Patriae) the father of his
Country, it seems the cursing or blaspheming of him, was also punishable by
death. The Apostle Jude uses an equivalent word in the Greek ( Ep. of Jude, v.
8.) reproving a wicked Sect in those times; They fear not to blaspheme, or
speak evil of Dignities: There is blasphemy against Princes, who are titular
Gods, as well as against the only true God. Kings are to be feared, to be
submitted to, they are to be prayed for, therefore not to be reviled. Is it fit
to say unto a King, Belial?

Yet this does not stop the mouths of all men from telling Kings and Princes
their faults, nor does it justify a silent dissembling of them; much less does
it open the mouths of any to dawb Kings and Princes with the untempered mortar
of flatteries; Kings are no more to be flattered then they are to be
reproached. Dignities must not be spoken evil of, yet they may be prudently and
humbly told of their evils, and informed of their failings plainly. When Eliah
met Ahab, who said, Art thou he that troubles Israel? Eliah answered, (1 Kings
18.18.) I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that ye
have forsaken the Commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed Baal. And we
read how boldly Elisha carried it to the King of Israel, (2 Kings 3.13, 14.)
What have I to do with thee? Get thee to the Prophets of thy father, and to the
Prophets of thy mother: And Elisha said, as the Lord of Hosts lives before
whom I stand; Surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the
King of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee. Thus the Prophets
dealt with much gracious severity toward mighty Princes. The Prophet Isaiah
feared not to say ( Isa. 1.10.) Hear the word of the Lord ye Rulers of Sodom,
Give ear unto the Law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah; implying, that the
Rulers of Jerusalem were then but such as the Rulers of Sodom once were, and
that the people were no better then the people of Gomorrah; and it is
conceived, that for this plainness and liberty of speech, which the Prophet
Isaiah used toward the Princes and Rulers of Judah, he was put to death, being
cut or mangled asunder with a wooden Saw. One might think that Ezekiel did
much forget himself, when he gave those opprobrious terms to Zedekiah King of
Judah, ( Ezekiel. 21.25.) And thou profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is
come, when iniquity shall have an end; yet he sinned not in this harsh reproof
of his sin, because commanded of God to do it, and specially directed by the
holy Spirit. The Prophets might not diminish a word, but must give out what God
gave in. John the Baptist reproved Herod for Herodias his brother Philips wife,
and for all the evils which he had done, (Luke 3.19.) And Jesus Christ himself
called Herod, Fox; (Luke 13.32.) The Prophets were often Instructed and
Commissioned to prophecy against the mountains; that is, against the Princes
and Powers of the world; and therefore take the state of the point, and of our
duty about it, in these few conclusions, that we may not run upon the rocks
either way; neither upon the rock of blasphemy against Kings and Princes on the
one side, nor upon the rock of flattery on the other.

First, The Power or State of Princes must never be reviled nor evil spoken
of; kingly Power and Authority is always to be reverenced and honored; though
the Prince be wicked, yet his Power is to be reverenced, and that is the purest
reverence. Regia per se dignitas, nunquam non est colenda, etiam cum princeps
iniquus est.
For to reverence the power of Princes, only, because, or when they are good,
and do us good, and rule every way according to our mind, this is but a piece
of selfishness; but when Princes are evil and bring evils upon us, yet to
bear respect to the Power and Authority which they Exercise; this is to honor
God, and to give true submission to his ordinance. Whatsoever the person is,
the power must be reverentially submitted to.

Secondly, It is high wickedness to speak evil of the persons of just and
righteous Princes; that every man will acknowledge.

Thirdly, Kings and Princes must not be reproved for personal or private
faults publicly. To do so is against the rule in any man's case; much more in
the case of Kings and Princes.

Fourthly, Kings are not to be reproved for any of their faults, but by those
who have a Call to it; that was the reason of the liberty which the old
Prophets used toward Kings, they were specially commanded and Commissioned by
God for it, and the peril was upon their own heads if they did it not; it is
not for every one to reprove Princes, but for those that are called to it.

Lastly, Even those that are called to it must do it with much submission;
though they must not do it to halves and deceitfully, yet they are to do it
respectfully. It is not fit to say to a King, Belial; such rough and unhewne
language is not for Princes: their faults must only be insinuated, if that may
serve, as Nathan dealt with David, who though he knew what his sin was, yet he
did not say to him, Thou murderer, thou Adulterer, but intimated the matter by
a parable, and made him covertly, or in a third person charge himself, before
he charged him, or applied the parable personally to him, with, Thou art the
man. When Miriam the Sister and Aaron the Brother of Moses spoke against him,
because of the Ethiopian woman whom he had married ( Numb: 12.1.) though they
were thus nearly related, yet speaking irreverently of Moses the Chief
Magistrate, the Lord said to them ( v. 8.) Wherefore were ye not afraid to
speak against my servant Moses? Yet how common is this sin? the tongues of men
walk exceeding loosly in their discourses about the persons and powers of
Princes; And we every where find most pleased to hear well of themselves, and
ill of others, or to speak well of themselves, and ill of others, and the
higher they are who are spoken of, or of whom they speak evil, the more they
are pleased both in hearing and speaking evil of them. How unruly are their
tongues, who cannot forbear their rulers! Thus much of Elihu's question, as it
is resolved into a Negative proposition, It is not fit to say to a King, thou
art ungodly. We may further consider it as an argument from the greater to the
less, to prove, That it is a most wicked thing to speak a word unduely of
God. Is it fit to say to a King, Thou are wicked? and to Princes, ye are
ungodly?

Verse. 19. How much less to him that accepts not the persons of Princes?
Who is that? The words are a clear Periphrasis of God, he accepts not the
persons of Princes. As if Elihu had said; the Kings and Princes of the earth,
expect such great respect from their subjects, that no man should dare to
censure them or speak evil of them, though they do evil, or deal unjustly;
how much more unfit is it to speak evil of God, or to charge his government
with injustice, who never does any evil, all whose ways are not only just,
but justice. He that accepts not the persons of Princes, who are the greatest
of men, can have neither will nor motive to deal unjustly with any man. I
shall not stay to show what it is to accept persons? because that has been
showed at the 7th verse of the 13th Chapter, as also Chapter 32.21. only I Will
give it in one word; To accept persons is to have more respect to the man then
to the matter; and that is a very common fault among men, and as commonly
condemned by God. It Is a received axiom, He that would or does put on the
person of a Judge, must put off the person of a friend; that is, he must not be
swayed by any respect whatsoever of friendship, or alliance, but must judge
purely as the cause deserves.

Nor shall I stay to urge the greatness of the sin of speaking any thing
uncomely of God, that also has been spoken to in many former passages of this
Chapter. Only from these words, How much less to him that accepth not the
person of Princes?

Note First.

That which ought not to be done or spoken to the greatest of men, ought much
less to be either done or spoken to God. The reason is, because, first, God is
infinitely more to be reverenced then any man. Secondly, because God is
infinitely more able to take vengeance, and certainly will, of any that shall
do or speak evil to him, then the greatest among the children of men. Yet
how many are there who dare not offend a man, not a great man especially,
either by word or deed, who are not afraid by both to offend and provoke the
great God? O remember, the force of this text; If it be not fit to speak
unduely of Princes, How much less of him that accepts not the persons of
Princes?

Hence note, Secondly.

God is no accepter of persons. He has no respect to Princes in prejudice to
truth and righteousness, but in every nation he that fears him and works
righteousness (be he never so poor) is accepted with him, (Acts 10.35.) and
in every nation he that fears him not, but works unrighteousness (be he
never so great) is unacceptable yea abominable to him. The Scripture often
attributes this glory to God, ( Deuteronomy: 10.17. 2 Chronicles: 19.7. Gal: 2.6. Col:
3.25.) And as it is the glory of God, that he is no accepter of persons, so it
is the duty of man ( Deuteronomy: 1.17.) Judgment must proceed and conclude with
respect to the rule, and command of God, not with respect to the persons of
men, or our relations to them. Levi was highly commended for this ( Deuteronomy:
33.9.) who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him;
neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children, etc. When
man accepts not the persons of men he acts most like God, of whom Elihu
says, He accepts not the persons of Princes, Nor regards the rich more
then the poor.

That Is a further description of God; He does not regard, (...) aguoscere,
familiariter tractare.
that is, acknowledge or know the one more then the other; He is (in the best
things) as communicative to, and converseth as familiarly with the poor as the
rich; yea, he does not value or prize the rich man more then the poor; the
poor man is worth as much as the rich man in Gods account; suppose the rich man
worth thousands, yea ten thousands of gold and silver, and the poor man so
poor that he is not worth a shilling, yet in the account of God the poor man
is worth as much as the rich man.

The Scripture speaks of two sorts both of rich and poor men; There are men
rich in spiritualls, such Christ intimates, who are ( Luke 12.20.) rich toward
God, or as he speaks of the Church of Smyrna (Rev: 2.9.) rich in grace, I know
thy poverty, but thou art rich; That is, I know thou art poor in earthly pelf,
but rich in spiritualls. The Apostle James puts the question ( Chap: 2.5.) Has
not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom. Now, it is most certain, that God regards the rich in spiritualls,
more then the poor in spiritualls, he highly regards those that are poor in
spirit, and pronounces them blessed (Math: 5.3.) for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven; But he regards not those who are poor in spiritualls; not them
especially who boast of their spiritual riches when they have none (they that
have them are thankful for them, they do not boast of them) as the Church of
Laodicea did, of whom Christ said ( Rev: 3.16, 17.) I will spew thee out of my
mouth, because thou say I am rich and increased in goods, and know not
that thou art poor. Thus you see, there are a sort of rich men, whom Christ
regards more then the poor of that sort. But as poor and rich are
distinguished merely by abundance and want, by the smallness and greatness of
their portion in the things of this world, as Dives and Lazarus in the parable
were, so he regards not the rich more then the poor. When a poor man is
gracious as well as poor, God regards him more then any rich man who has no
grace; And when either both have grace alike, or both are alike without grace,
he regards them both alike. When rich and poor have grace, they are both
greatly regarded, and when neither of them have grace, neither of them are at
all regarded by the God of all grace. Thus it is plain, God regards the rich
no more then the poor, nor the poor any whit less then the rich.

(...) est dives opalentus; quidam volunt deductum a (...) servando quod multos
servare et juvari possit, vela (...) clamando quod ^pulenti liberius et
audacius loquantur.
The word rendered rich, signifies also bountiful (Isa: 32.5.) It Is also
rendered, The helpful, the saving man; for though rich men are not always
helpful with their riches, nor ready to save others in distress; yet rich men
may do both: they have always in their hand power and usually opportunity to
be helpful to the poor, and to save the distressed. And surely, as the Lord
regards not the rich more then the poor; so he regards those rich men
least of all, who have no regard to help and save the poor. Once more, Some
derive the word which we translate rich, from a root which signifies to
clamor, or to speak out and boldly, which complyes well with that sentence of
Solomon (Pro: 18.23.) The poor uses entreaties (that is, he speaks humbly
or by way of supplication) but the rich answers roughly. And as God regards
not the rich more then the poor, so he regards those rich men least, who
speak loudly and roughly to the poor. Having thus opened the assertion of
Elihu, that God regards not the rich more then the poor; let us consider,
The reason of it in the next words.

For they are all the work of his hands. As if he had said, God cannot but deal
impartially with all, because all are the work of his hands: what reason has
he to respect one more then another, seeing the one is no more to him then
the other, they are all the work of his hands. Man as man is the offspring of
God (Acts 17.28.) He is also the work of his hands; that is, man is made by his
power; As man descends from man, so he is called the fruit of the womb; but
as man is the offspring of God, so he is called the work of his hands, and
his hands have wrought the poor man as well as the rich; They are all the work
of his hands in a twofold respect.

First, In their natural constitution; God has molded them in the same
fashion, he has given each of them a body and a soul; A body framed of the
same parts, a soul consisting of the same powers. God has bestowed as much
care and cost upon the making of a poor man's body and soul, as upon the rich
man's. The richest man in the world, cannot boast that he has any one member in
his body or faculty in his soul, more then a poor man has.

Secondly, Look upon the rich and poor in their Civil state, and so likewise
they are the work of his hands: and that I conceive, is here intended as much
as, if not more, then the former; not only is God the maker of the poor and of
the rich in their natural state, soul and body; but as poo^, and rich, he is
the maker of them; that is, he makes one man poor, and another man rich, as
himself pleases. ( Prove: 22.2.) The rich and the poor meet together, the Lord
is the maker of them all. He has made them men, and he has made them rich or
poor men. There is as much of the power and wisdom of God seen in making
some men poor and others rich, as there is in making them men; yea God thinks
himself as much honored in our acknowledgements that the poor with their
poverty, as that the rich with all their riches, are the work of his hands.

Hence Note.

First, Poor men are as much the work of God as the rich. As they have the same
nature, and are of the same matter, as they are both made of the same stuff, or
are both of a piece, so they have the same maker; and their maker has been at
as much charge in the making of the one, as in the making of the other; yea,
and usually, the poor man yields him a better rent, and brings more into his
Treasury then the rich man does.

Secondly Note.

It is the Lord who makes men poor, and makes men rich. Agur prayed ( Prove.
30.8.) Give me neither poverty nor riches. Agur knew poverty was a gift of God
as well as riches. It has been said (though profanely) Every man is the
fashioner of his own fortune, or the contriver of his own condition. Some who
acknowledge God has made them men, think they have made themselves rich, or
great men; and we commonly look on those who fail in their worldly Estates,
that they have made themselves poor and low in the world. I grant, there is a
sense wherein men make themselves rich, and make themselves poor; that is, when
they do either by their sins. God is not so engaged in the making of a man
rich, when he enricheth himself by his sin, by deceiving or oppressing his
brethren, as when he grows rich in a way of righteousness: He that is
enriched by oppression, or deceit, or sets his nest on high by flattery, or by
fraud, cannot thank God for his riches, or honors; and if he does, he
blasphemously makes God a partner in those sins by which he has got his riches
and honors. For though it be a truth that there is a hand of God in his
gettings, (for all the craft, and policy, and oppression which men use, will
never be able to make them either rich or great, if God did not permit and
order it so) yet the heart of God is not with him in it, and God will not own
his own hand in giving them wealth or power, further then as they are a
testimony against them, of his goodness, and their ingratitude. We may also say
of some poor men, they have made themselves poor, not God; He made Job poor,
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, was his humble acknowledgement (
chap. 1.21.) but there are some, of whom we cannot so much say God has made
them poor by his sad providence to them, as that they have made themselves
poor by their idleness and improvidence, or by their prodigality and vain
profuseness; yet even of such poor men we may truly say, there be a righteous
hand of God upon them in leaving or giving them up to the lusts of their own
heart, their laziness, or lavishness, which produce their utter undoing, and
bring them to a morsel of bread. So that let men be in what condition they
will, the Lord is the former of it. The diligent hand makes rich, but it is
with the blessing of God; and when an indiligent man becomes poor, it is the
curse of God upon him for his sin, as well as the consequent of his sin. Yea,
when an honest diligent man becomes poor, (that is the case of some) it is the
Lords withholding of his blessing, which makes all his labors fruitless and
successless; such a man is indeed one of God's poor, or a poor man of God's
making; and God will surely make the poverty of such a man (if he continue in a
believing dependence upon him, and in an humble submission to him, if he know
how to want as well as to abound, how to be hungry as well as to be full, and
in every estate has learned therewith to be content, as the holy Apostle had,
then (I say) God will surely make the poverty of such a man better to him then
riches, or the largest portion of this worlds enjoyment. The poor of God's
special making, are under his special keeping and blessing: As they have but
little, so they want nothing; God himself will always be not only enough, but
all to them.

Take two further inferences from the whole verse.

First, Princes, great and rich men must not expect to fare better with God
because of their greatness or riches. For,

He does not regard the rich more then the poor.

Secondly, The meanest man needs not fear that he shall fare the worse before
God for his meanness.

The most high God will not overlook those in a low estate, he regards the
poor as well as the rich; and that is matter of great comfort to the poor, when
disregarded by the rich. Though the Lord does not make all men of an equal
respect in the world, it is his will that some men should be more regarded by
men then others are, yet himself (in the sense opened) bears an equal respect
to them all; He regards not the rich more then the poor, for they are all the
work of his hands.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 20, 21, 22. In a moment shall they die, and the people
shall be troubled at midnight, and pass away: and the mighty shall be taken
away without hands.

For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees all his doings.

There is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may
hide themselves.


IN these three verses Elihu does two things principally; First, He sets forth
the judgments of God; Secondly, He gives an account of the equity of them. He
sets forth the judgments of God,

First, More generally, Upon People and Nations.

Secondly, Upon Princes and Governors; All this in the 20th verse. And in this
judgment of God upon Nations, we may take notice,

First, Of the nature of it, and how it is described: and that is laid down
three ways. First, They shall die. Secondly, They shall be troubled. Thirdly,
They shall pass away. Under these Notions the judgment of God upon People and
Nations is expressed.

Secondly, We may here consider the suddenness of all this, In a moment they
shall die.

Thirdly, We may consider the season, (or rather as to man, the
unseasonableness) of it, it shall be (though in a dreaming time) when they
little dream of it; The people shall be troubled at midnight. Thus we have the
judgment or sad dispensation of God described in this 20th verse, both as to
the acts of it, and likewise as to the manner of it upon the people.

Elihu having showed the judgment of God upon the people in the former part of
this 20th verse, declares also his judgment upon the Princes in the latter end
of it; The mighty shall be taken away without hand. Where we see, First, How
Princes are expressed or called, They are the mighty. Secondly, What kind of
judgment befalls them, They are taken away. Thirdly, The manner how this is
brought about, They are taken away without hand.

From the matter of the judgment of God both upon people and Princes, Elihu
proceeds to give the reason why the Lord deals thus with both; This he does in
the two verses following.

First, Because of their sin; They are workers of iniquity; in the close of the
22th verse.

Secondly, Because, as they are workers of iniquity, so God is fully acquainted
with all their iniquity, etc. He sees all their works, and the iniquity of
their works, nothing can cover it or them from his fight; and therefore, as
Elihu asserts the omniscience of God positively in the 21th verse, so
negatively in the 22th verse, There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where
the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. Now seeing the works of those
Nations and Princes were naught, and the naughtiness of them was evident to
God, how could he but punish them? And how just and righteous is he in
punishing of them? By all this Elihu clears his general Assertion, or the point
he drives at all this chapter over, namely, to prove that God is righteous;
against which position, he tells us before, Job having spoken dangerously, he
was engaged to maintain it vigorously; which he does here, especially in that
eminent branch of it, mentioned at the 19th verse, That he accepts not the
persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more then the poor. For, Princes as
well as common people fall under his hand. So much for the parts and resolution
of these three verses, as also for the general scope of them.

Yet before I go on to the particular explication of them, I would only mind
the Reader of another Translation of the whole 20th verse, which varieth
somewhat from ours, rendering it as a description of the judgment of God upon
Princes, by the violence of the people; whereas according to our Translation,
it is a description of the judgment of God both upon people and Princes. The
Translation I mean, is that of the Vulgar Latin, which runs in this form.

Verse. 20. Suddenly shall they die, Subito morientur and in media nocte
turbabuntur populi, and per transibunt, and auferent, violentum absique manu.
Vulg.
at midnight the people shall be in a tumult, and shall pass over, and take
away the violent man without hand.
This Reading, and the expositions given upon it, prove, That God is so far
from accepting the persons of Princes, that he does not only tell them their
own, and reprove them to their face for their wickedness and Apostasy (as was
showed from the former reading of the 18th verse) but deprives them also of
their dignity, and pulls them from their power; And he does it in such a
manner, that every man may understand and see the hand of God in it, because
they see no hands in it. The less of man appears in any work of providence,
whether it be in a way of mercy or of judgment, the more of God is to be
acknowledged in it: and where nothing of man appears, all, or the whole must
be attributed unto God. The judgment which Elihu speaks of here, seems
(according to this Interpretation) to have much of man in it; yet because the
men supposed to be in it, are looked upon as such as can do little in it, or
ought to do nothing in it, therefore it is said to be done without hands.
Histories have given many examples, and dreadful instances of such calamities
falling upon Princes by the rising of the people; and then they are said to be
taken away Without hand,

That is, Without any foreseen appearance of such a mischief; a hand which was
not thought of being lifted up against them. It is said of wicked Zimri, who
slew his master, that when he saw the people conspire against him, and the City
taken, he went into the Palace of the King's house, and (in the heat of his
rage) set it on fire, and burnt the Kings house over him, and died, (1 Kin.
16.18.) Justine reports the like conclusion (upon a like occasion) of
Sardanapalus, that effeminate and voluptuous Monarch of the Assyrian Empire.
They who prosecute this Translation, conceive Elihu reflecting upon Job in all
this, who was very uncivilly treated by his own people, from whom he had
deserved highest respects, as he complained at the 30th chapter, they raised up
against him the ways of their destruction; they used him very rudely, even
despightfully; and he was in a pining consuming condition, as a man taken away
without hand. But I shall not insist upon this reading, but take the words
according to the scope before given, as a description of a mixed judgment from
God; a judgment partly upon the people, and partly upon Princes, a judgment
upon the many, and a judgment upon the mighty; In a moment shall they die.

(...) Punctum momontum, tempus exiguum: Illipsis praeposition^
In a moment. The Text is, a moment they die; Not, that they shall die but a
moment, or be only for a moment dead, but they shall die before a moment is
over; there is an Elipsis of the preposition [Beth,] in the Hebrew, which we
supply in our Translation, In a moment they shall die: A moment is the least
particle or parcel of time; we cannot imagine any thing shorter then a moment,
it is the very point of time, ( Psalm. 30.5.) His anger endures for a moment,
(says David, when he would show how very short (comparatively) the anger of
God toward his people is) but in his favor is life: Thus Solomon (Prove.
2.19.) He that speaks truth, his tongue shall be established; but a lying
tongue is for a moment: A lie cannot last long; he that speaks truth, what he
speaks to day, is good to morrow, and to morrow, and will be good for ever; but
a lying tongue is for a moment; that is, his lies will be discovered, and
usually they are quickly discovered; though he live long to tell lies, or does
nothing but tell lies as long as he lives, yet his lies are not long lived.
Job describing the joy of the hypocrite ( chap. 20.5.) says, It is but for a
moment; like a fire of thorns, a blaze and gone: when the Apostle would
strengthen and encourage the hearts of believers against all the troubles and
sorrows of this present life, he calls them, (2 Cor. 4.17.) First, light,
Secondly, short; Our light afflictions that are but for a moment, work for us a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. And that we might know how
quick the devil was at his work with Christ, the Scripture says ( Luke 4.5.)
He showed him all the Kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. As to show the
instantaneousness of our change from death to life in the resurrection, it is
said, (1 Cor. 15.52.) In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
Trump, we shall be changed: So to show the extreme suddenness of these men's
change from life to death, it is said here, In a moment They shall die.

They? Who? Both great and small, one and another of them shall die, or be
swept away by death in a moment. There is a twofold death;

First, Natural; When either sickness or old age dissolves the earthly house of
this tabernacle. The natural death of some is very lingering and slow, others
are suddenly snatched away, they die in a moment.

Secondly, There is a violent death; thus many are taken away by the sword
Martial, or Civil, others casually: The Text is true both of natural and
violent death, either of them may overtake us in a moment, yet I conceive the
latter is here chiefly intended, In a moment shall they die; that is, some
sudden destruction shall come upon them, they shall be surprised by an unlooked
for disaster, and removed out of the world, while they had not a thought of
their removal.

Hence Note.

First, Death of any sort, may befall all sorts of men. None can plead exemption
or privilege from the grave. It is appointed to men once to die; most die a
natural death, and any man may die a violent death; who knows how he shall go
out of this world? Christ told Peter, (John 21.18.) When thou shall be old,
thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee
whither thou would not. This spoke he, signifying by what death he should
glorify God. And what kind of death was that? The Church History assures us,
'twas a violent death. He (as his master Jesus Christ) was nailed to a Cross,
and dyed. We come but one way into the world, but there are a thousand ways of
going out.

Note Secondly.

Death comes suddenly upon many men, and may upon all men. The whole life of
the longest liver in this world, is but a moment, compared to eternity; and
there is not any moment of our life, but (with respect to second causes) we are
subject to death in it: We always in some sense (though at some times more)
carry our lives in our hand, and how soon, or by what hand they may be snatched
out of ours, we know not.

Now if our whole life be but a moment, and we subject to death every moment,
how should we stand prepared for death every moment? And how sad is it to
think, that they who may die the next moment, should for days, and weeks, and
months, and years, never prepare for death? Most are loath to think of the end
of their lives, till they are nearer the end of them; yet no man knows how
near he is to the end of his life. Many put off the thoughts of death till it
comes, yet none can put off the coming of death; they would remove the
meditation of death to the fall of their leaf, to the winter, and worst of
their old age, yet they are not able to remove death one moment from the Spring
and best of their youth.

Note, Thirdly.

Violent death, by the sore and severe judgment of God, often sweeps
multitudes away in a moment. God can thrust whole throngs of men, yea whole
Nations into their graves together; it is said ( Numb. 16.21.) of Corah and his
companions, The earth did cover, or swallow them up in a moment: And the Lord
commanded Moses, to say unto the children of Israel (Exodus 33.5.) ye are a
stiff-necked people; I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and
consume thee: As if the Lord had said, I will take no long time for it, I can
quickly dispatch you; how many soever there are of you, I will do it in a
moment. We have a like description of the sudden and quick dispatch of men at
the Lord's word of Command, ( Psalm. 73.19.) How are they brought into
desolation, as in a moment, they are utterly consumed with terrors? The final
ruin of Babylon was thus prophesied ( Isa. 47.9.) These two things shall come
to thee in a moment, in one day, the loss of children and widdowhood, they
shall come upon thee in their perfection; Thou shall utterly be destroyed, and
perish at once for ever. The Prophet Jeremiah (Lam. 4.6.) bewailed the
destruction of Jerusalem, whose calamity was greater then that of Sodom and
Gomorrah, which God destroyed in a moment: Sodom and Gomorrah were great
Cities, yet how soon consumed! In some sense, there is a greater evil in a
lingering destruction, then in a speedy one; so the Prophet aggravates death by
famine, beyond death by fire; because to die by famine is a lingering death.
Caesar being warned that some lay in wait to destroy him suddenly, slighted it,
and said, unexpected death is most desirable. And that is the lot of many great
men; to which some conceive the Psalmist had respect, when he said, ( Psalm.
82.7.) Ye shall die li^e men, and fall like one of the Princes; that is,
suddenly. But though in some sense a speedy death is more eligible then a
lingering one, yet in many respects, to die suddenly, or in a moment, may be
concluded a far greater judgment, then to see death coming by degrees, and
destruction walking toward us step by step. Solomon (Prove. 1.27.) speaks of
swift destruction, of destruction coming like a whirlwind; swift destruction
overtakes them who are slow paced to receive and obey instruction. Thus the
Lord can deal both with persons and with Nations; he needs not make any delays,
nor take time to do it, their destruction shall come (if he will send it) in a
day, in an hour, yea, in a moment shall they die, And the people shall be
troubled at midnight.

(...) Populus consociatio hominum.
That is, the body, or generality of the people, the many shall be troubled;
they shall be as men amazed, or as the Metaphor imports, they shall be
disjoynted; Men associated under due Laws of Government, are as so many members
of a well compacted Body; (...) a verbo (...) videtur significare laxationem
compagum.
but when broken and scattered, they are like a body whose members are
dislocated, or out of joint, unfit for any use or service. And as there is a
laxation of the members of the body, a disjoynting of the bones, so there is a
disjoynting of the faculties of the mind; In times of great trouble, not only
is the body Politic, which consists of many men, but the mind of every body,
or of every single man is much out of joint. The word is applied to those great
concussions of the world ( Psalm. 18.17.) The earth shook and trembled, the
foundations also of the hills were moved, and were shaken at the presence of
the Lord, because he was wroth; which we may interpret of the Princes and
Powers of the earth, who are as hills and mountains; if the Lord do but touch
them in anger, they move, yea tremble. The word is applied also to the waves of
the Sea, ( Jer. 5.22.) which roar, and toss themselves: we commonly say, as in
the Text, the Sea is troubled, or it is a troubled Sea, a tossing Sea. That
expression is also common among us, when we see a man much disquieted, he is
(we say) in a great toss; even as a ship at Sea upon the proud waves. Thus
says Elihu, the people shall be in a toss, they shall feel a storm in their
minds, sudden gusts of fear and sorrow shall carry them they know not whither;
or they shall be lifted up to heaven in vain confidences, and then fall down to
hell in despairing thoughts, as the tempest at Sea is described in the 107th
Psalm. There is yet another rendering of the Text, in allusion to Drunkards, who
are overcome with wine, ( Jer. 25.16.) And they shall drink, and be moved, and
be mad; the word which we translate move, is that in the Text; now we know
drunkenness moves men, and puts all into disorder and disquietment: Thus the
people (through the fierce anger of God, and the wine of astonishment which he
gives them to drink) shall be moved, they shall reel to and fro, and stagger
like a drunken man. Great troubles and afflictions are called in Scripture the
wine of astonishment, because they make many say and do they scarce know what;
great troubles bereave men not only of their comforts, but of their reason;
they do not only straiten them, but astonish them. They who have drowned their
wits in cups of worldly pleasure, may soon have them drowned in full and
overflowing cups of worldly sorrow.

Besides this Exposition of the peoples being troubled with perplexity, fear,
and doubt, with anxiety, and uncertainty of spirit what to do, I say, besides
this, there is another way of being troubled, upon which some Expositors
specially insist. The people shall be troubled; that is, shall be in a tumult;
they shall rise up seditiously, and (as, we say) make a commotion, they shall
gather together as many waters, with a roaring noise. Many people, are compared
to many Waters; and there is sometimes a confluence, a great confluence or flood
of them tumbling together: The Poet tells us elegantly what rude work a people
make when they rise up like a flood of troubled waters. Ac veluti magno in
populo cum saepe coorta est Seditio, saevitque animis ignobile vulgus, Jamque
faces and saxa volant furor arma ministrat. Virg. Aeneid. 1.
Their rage (says he) finds out weapons, one throws stones, another throws
firebrands, till all is in a sad combustion: These waters, if let alone, may
quickly put all into a flame. The Psalmist ascribes the quieting of the Sea,
and the quieting of the people to God in one verse; yea, I conceive the one is
but the explication of the other, ( Psalm. 65.7.) Which stilleth the noise of
the Seas, the noise of their waves, and the tumult of their people. Thus says
Elihu, the people shall be in a tumult, (this suits with that exposition first
given) ready to destroy whomsoever they meet next, or those especially who
never did nor meant them any other hurt but to keep the peace, or bridle their
headstrong fury.

Yet, I rather adhere to the former Interpretation, The people shall be
troubled, that is, they shall be in a great consternation of spirit, neither
being able (which they seldom are) to advise themselves what to do, nor fit to
receive (which they seldom will) advice from others. And (as Elihu adds) they
shall be thus troubled At midnight.

Or, In the half of the night, as the words may be rendered; that is a great
aggravation of the judgment. The night is a time of rest, and midnight is the
time of deepest rest; so that for the people to be in a tumult, or troubled at
midnight, is to be overtaken with matter of fear, when fear seemed furthest
off, or when they suspected nothing to make them afraid. David says of some, (
Psalm. 3.5.) There were they in great fear, where no fear was. To fear at
midnight, is to fear when usually no fear is, that is, when people are at rest
in their beds: And so to say, the people shall be troubled at midnight,
signifies either, First, the coming of trouble upon a secure people, Cum
maxim securi.
upon a people who thought themselves, and while they thought themselves not
only out of the noise, but reach of danger: Or secondly, It may signify the
coming of trouble upon a people altogether unfit to help themselves; when a man
is asleep, he cannot give counsel how to prevent danger, and while he is in his
bed, he is in no posture to oppose it. All this may well be included in what
Elihu says, The people shall be troubled at midnight.

Hence Note. First, There are National troubles as well as personal.

God can scare not only a family, or this and that particular man, but a whole
people at once; he cannot only make a child, or a woman, but a multitude, yea
an Army of mighty men tremble like a child, and faint as the weakest woman. A
people are many, yet every man shall be as if he were alone, or but one in the
midst of innumerable dangers, and of a thousand deaths. Moses in his Song
foresaw the dread of Nations upon the report of the Lord's miraculous conduct
of Israel through the red Sea, ( Exodus 15.14, 15, 16.) The people shall hear,
and be afraid; sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina, all the
inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away. And when Christ speaks of those dreadful
Prognostics of his coming, he not only says, There shall be signs in the
Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, but upon the Earth distress of Nations,
with perplexity, (Luke 21.25.)

Secondly, Observe.

Both personal and public troubles are at the command of God, as both public
and personal peace are. A people as well as a person, may and shall be
troubled, even at the midnight of their greatest security, if God give the
word. I make peace (says the Lord, Isa: 45.7.) and create evil; that is, the
evil of trouble. There will be occasion afterward to speak further of this
point from those words ( v. 29.) When he gives quietness, who can give
trouble, and when he hides his face, who can behold him? Whether it be done
against a nation, or against a man only; trouble of all sorts is at the command
of God; if he says to such or such a mischief, go to a nation, it will go;
if he bid the sword trouble them, if he bid pestilence trouble them, if he bid
famine trouble them, if he bid their own divisions trouble them, the people
shall be troubled; yea, they shall be troubled at midnight.

Whence note, Thirdly.

Trouble takes or seazeth upon many when they least expect it. God can send
trouble when no man thinks of it. At midnight every one is in bed, all are for
rest and quiet. The Lord usually executes his judgments upon the unwary world,
upon a secure people ( Exodus: 12.29.) At midnight the Lord smote all the
sirstborne in the land of Egypt, etc. And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and
all his servants, and all the Egyptians, and there was a great cry in Egypt. We
read also (2 Kings 19.35.) In that night the Angel of the Lord went out and
smote in the camp of the Assyrians, an hundred four-score and sive thousand.
It was not a day-battel, but a night-battel; When they were all gone into their
tents, and were at rest, when the Army was secure; In that night did the Lord
fight them by an Angel, and made a mighty slaughter among them. Belshazzar king
of the Chaldeans was slain in the night ( Dan: 5.30.) even in that night
wherein he made a feast to a thousand of his Lords, and drank wine before the
thousand (v. 1.) In that night not only of his security, but of his jollity and
sensuality, when he had even drowned himself and his great Lords with wine and
belly-cheare, in that very night the City was broken up, and Belshazzar slain;
History tells us what dreadful work was made upon the Babylonians that night.
The great Judgment day is so described; Jesus Christ will, at last, trouble
the world at midnight; The Day of the Lord so comes (says the Apostle, 1
These: 5.2.) as a thief in the night; when they shall say peace and safety,
then sudden destruction comes upon them, etc, Christ himself shadowing his
coming under the parable of the ten Virgins, who all slumbred and slept, tells
us ( Math: 25.6) At midnight there was a cry made, Behold the Bridegroom
conteth, go ye out to meet him. Though some were in a better condition then
others, some wise, some foolish, yet all slept, and it was a kind of midnight
to them all. Christ will come, and the people shall be troubled at midnight,
and then there will be a dreadful Cry among the secure drowsy world.
Therefore the Counsel of Christ is most proper ( Math: 13.35.) Watch, because
ye know not at what hour your Master may come, whether at even, or at
midnight, or at Cock-trowing, or in the morning. It is hard to be put to it at
midnight, it is sad to be in a sleepy or slumbring condition when evil comes.
The Gospel shows us, how much that man was troubled, when his neighbor came
to borrow bread of him at midnight ( Luke 11.5.7.) Trouble me not, my children
are with me in bed, I cannot rise and give thee. If it be matter of trouble to
be called out of our bed to do a courtesy for a friend at midnight, O what
will it be to be called up to Judgment, or to be surprised with any Judgment
at midnight! Therefore prepare and be ready for all changes. At midnight the
people shall be troubled, And pass away.

These words are a third part of the description of the Judgment of God upon a
people; they shall die, they shall be troubled, they shall pass away; that is,
some of them shall die, all shall be troubled, others shall pass away. There
is a threefold notion of passing away.

First, Some expound it thus, They shall be carried captive out of their own
Country; This with the former two make up a perfect Judgment upon any people;
Some shall die, or be slain, all shall be troubled and vexed, they shall be at
their wits end, and the rest shall be carried away captive.

Secondly, They shall pass away; that is, they shall pass into their graves;
the form of speech here used may well bear that sense, for death is a passing
away, a passing out of this world ( Psalm: 37.36. Transire intelligo, non pro
migrare alio, sed pro abire in sepulchrum. Merc:
) Lo he passed away and was gone, that is, he died; And that which is as death
to the heavens and the earth (their great change when ever it shall be) is
called a passing away (Math: 5.18.) Till heaven and earth pass away, one jot
or one tittle shall in no wise pass away from the Law till all be fullfilled;
that is, the Law shall stand in force as long as the world stands. Thus to
pass away is to die. But I conceive, we are to expound this third branch of
the Judgment distinctly from the former two, and therefore for as much as we
have death in the first words, it will not be proper to take in death here
again, or to expound passing away by dying. The third notion, of, they shall
pass away, is, they shall run or flee for it, they know not whether, they
shall flee for their lives from the danger impending over them. As some shall
die, and all be troubled, so not a few shall endeavor to save their lives by
flight. Christ in the Gospel foretold the great troubles and afflictions which
should come upon Jerusalem, and in them there was a sad concurrence or meeting
of these three Judgments in the text. For when after forty years the Romans
invaded and ruined their City, many dyed and were destroyed by sword and
famine, all the people were troubled; Oh in what a hurry were they to see the
Roman Eagle displayed before their Gates! and then they passed away; that is,
as many as could, withdrew and got out of the danger. It is reported in
history, that before the Seidge of that City, a voice was heard in Jerusalem,
saying, (Migremus hinc) let us pass from hence, they who believed that
warning, departed soon after; And as some passed away before the Judgment
came, so when it was come, many were striving to be gone, or to pass away.
Therefore Christ admonished them ( Math: 24.20.) Pray that your flight be not
in the winter, nor on the Sabath day. I conceive, we are to understand this
text distinctly of such a passing away. In a moment shall they die, and the
people shall be troubled at midnight, and pass away; they shall do what they
can to secure themselves by out-running the danger.

Note from it, First.

God has variety of means to humble a sinful people. Into how many ways do
the Judgments of God divide themselves; several persons bear several parts;
here is death to many, trouble to all, flight to some. That, in the Prophet,
answers it fully ( Jer: 15.1.) where the Lord protesting that nothing (no not
the intercession of Moses and Samuel) should take him off from his resolve
against that people, says, Such as are for death to death, and such as are for
the sword to the sword, and such as are for the famine to the famine, and such
as are for the captivity to the captivity. There Is pestilence, and sword, and
famine and captivity ready at the call of God to take away a provoking people.

Secondly, Note.

To pass away, or to be put to our flight, is a grievous Judgment. To flee
from the face of the pursuer, to run for our lives, who knows the trouble and
terror of it, but they that have been in it? what a mercy is it that our
dwellings are continued to us? that we abide in our places, that we neither die
in a moment, are not surpised by midnight-feares, but rest quietly in our
beds, though fears at midnight have been ready to surprise us. What a mercy is
it, that we are not passing away, running, fleeing into the wilderness, as the
poor Churches of God have done in several ages?

So much of Judgment upon the people in that threefold notion of it. We have
here also Judgment upon Princes.

And the mighty shall be taken away without hand. Not only the many, but the
mighty shall feel the Judgments of God; For as it is said in the former verse,
He accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more then the
poor; The mighty and the meanest of men are alike to God, when they are alike
in sinning against God: If they do evil alike, they shall suffer evil alike;
God accepts no man's person.

The mighty shall be taken away. (...) fortis robustus excellens fortitudine;
pluraliter Abirim in genere forte significat.
The word rendered, mighty, taken plurally, is used in Scripture to denote not
only mighty men, but any creature that excells in might. And therefore
according to the exigence of the place, it signifies sometimes Angels, who
being spirits, exceed all flesh in might. The people of Israel in the
wilderness did eat Angels food (Psalm: 78.5.) the food of the Abirims, of the
mighty or strong ones: And as it is applied to Angels who exceed the strongest
men in strength, so it is applied to any sort of strong beasts, to the horse (
Jer: 47.3.) to Bulls, ( Isa: 34.7. Jer: 50.11. Psalm: 22.13. Psalm: 68.31.) Thus
the word rises above man to Angels, and falls below man to the beasts of the
earth; here it is applyable only to strong and mighty men, of whom yet there are
three sorts.

First, Some are men of a mighty arm. Secondly, Others are mighty in Arms.
Thirdly, There are men mighty in Authority.
The first of these is a natural mighty man, he has a mighty arm, a strong
body, or he excells in bodily strength. The second is a marshall mighty man, a
soldier, a man of war. The third is the Magistratical mighty man, he is
clothed with power both to punish and reward: Possibly he may have no bodily
might, yea, possibly he is no soldier, yet a man of such power he is, that he
commands whole Nations. Now take the word Mighty in any of these three senses,
and it is a truth, the mighty shall be taken away, the mighty in strength of
the Arm, the mighty in strength of Armies, the mighty in power and dignity,
are by the hand of the Almighty God taken away.

They shall take them away (says the Hebrew text) that is, (...) et amovent
potentem, impersonaliter. Pisc:
say some (according to the first translation mentioned) the people shall
violently take away the mighty. But by an usual Hebraisme we may read it
Impersonally, the mighty shall be taken away, concealing or leaving it to be
understood by whom. Like that speech to the rich man ( Luke 12.25.) This night
do they require thy soul of thee, (so we put in the Margin) that is, (as the
text has it) this night thy soul shall be required of thee, they shall take
thy soul, that is, it shall be taken away; so here they shall take away the
mighty, that is, the mighty shall be taken away or removed. We may take notice
of a twofold remove or taking away.

First, There is a remove out of place and power; Thus a man is taken away when
his authority is taken away.

Secondly, There is a removing or taking of a man out of the world; Thus they
are taken away whose persons are destroyed, cut off, and perish. The mighty,
both ways or either way are often taken away. The persons of many mighty men
have fallen, and many more of them have fallen from their places and powers.
Here they are under a general threatening, They shall be taken away. But how
shall they be taken away? the text answers without hand.

It is somewhat strange that they who are mighty, and have such power in their
hand, should be taken away, and no hand touch them, or without hand. We use to
say of a thing strangely gone, or gone we know not how, It cannot be gone
without hands; yet thus the Lord deals judicially with the mighty of the
world; They shall be taken away without hand. There may be a threefold
understanding of that expression.

First, Thus; The mighty shall be taken away without hand; that is, they shall
have no hands to help them, or they shall be destitute of all humane help.
Sometimes God leaves or strips the mighty naked, they who have had great power,
and many thousands standing up to defend them, Frequenter manus pro ministerio,
sed frequentissime pro op^ et auxilio ponitur, Pin:
have not a hand for them, and so are taken away without hand, no man drawing a
sword or striking a stroke for them.

Secondly, To do a thing without hand, is to do it with the smallest
appearance of second causes or instruments. We are ready to say, there must be
a great deal of tugging to get the mighty down, who like Oaks are strongly
rooted and highly grown, who look like mountains, which cannot be removed,
yet (says Elihu) the Lord can take them away without hand; that is, easily,
without any trouble at all, little means or very improbable means being used
to effect it. So then to do a thing without hand, is to do it as if we put no
hand no stresse to it when we do it. As they who move swiftly or lightly are
said to go without setting a foot on the ground ( Dan: 8.5.) the He-Goate came
and touched not the ground, he did rather fly then go. So to do a thing, as
if we did not put a hand to it, is to do it with the greatest ease imaginable.

Absque manu armatorum. Aquint.
Thirdly, To do a thing without hand, is to do it without any visible means
at all, even by the immediate stroke or power of God. There is a hand of God
in all things that are done in the world, but some things are done without any
other hand, and are therefore most properly said to be done without hand. Thus
the Lord is able to do the greatest things, even to take mighty men from the
earth, no hand of man appearing or joining with him in the action. Nutu tantum
dei. Merc:
Now, because God usually sets instruments a work to effect his will in the
world, and to bring about his counsels, therefore in what work soever he either
quite leaves or seems to leave instruments out, that work is said to be done
without hand. The stone which shall grow up to be a great mountain, that is,
the kingdom of Christ, is called a stone cut out without hands (Dan: 2.34.)
that is, without humane power. The kingdom of Christ shall be set up so much
by the power of God without any earthly contribution, that it shall confessedly
be said to be set up without hands. Though we ought not to neglect the coming
and advancement of the kingdom of Christ in the world, yet we should not be
anxiously careful about it, when we see little or no means for it, yea though
we see great very great means set against it, because a stone cut out without
hands shall do it.

The Apostle uses this form of speaking, both as to eternalls and
spiritualls. Concerning the former he is express (2 Cor. 5.1.) We know that
when the earthly house of this tabernacle is dissolved, we have a building of
God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens; that is, a house of
Gods own immediate making, a house to the making whereof man has added
nothing. The fabric of this visible world is a house made without hands, much
more is heaven, and the glorious unseene state which Saints shall have
hereafter. The house above, or state of Glory is wholly of Gods making. And as
our eternal estate is expressed by a house made without hands, so our
spiritual estate is called by the same Apostle, A work done without hands
(Col: 2.11.) where having asserted our compleatness in Christ ( v. 10.) he
adds, In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands.
The external literal circumcision was made with hands; there was an operation
of man in it, the cutting off the foreskin of the flesh, but in the spiritual
circumcision, man has no hand, it is the work of God alone; as also that
effectual faith is which always accompanies it, and is therefore called ( v.
12.) the faith of the operation of God. There is a temporary faith which we may
call a faith of the operation of man, but true saving faith is the operation of
God, and may be said as the spiritual circumcision (which was signified and
shadowed by the corporal) to be made without hands.

Now as the Scripture speaks both of spiritualls and eternalls which are made
without hands, Indicatur divinum supplicium, cujus nulla humana causa
assignari, aut quod nulla humana vi declinari potest.
so this text speaks of externalls and providentialls in the same language,
The mighty shall be taken away without hand, that is, without any
creature-helpe or visible humane hand; what ever is done without a visible
hand, is done by the hand of God. Elihu intimates a punishment upon the mighty,
which (as to the effecting of it) cannot be assigned to any thing in man, much
less can the effecting of it, be hindered by man. The hand of God is most
visible, in doing that which no visible hand has done, or can undo. They
shall be taken away without hand.

Hence note.

The mightiest have no might against God. That cannot be avoided by any humane
power, which is done without humane power. God slew the firstborn of Egypt,
and destroyed the Assyrian host without hand, he did it by his Angel, no hand
appearing against them. The Lord smote Herod, and he died without hand ( Acts
12.23.) Immediately (that is, presently, as the Greek word imports, it is true
also, immediately, that is, without humane means, as our English word also
imports) the Angel of the Lord smote him, and he was eaten of worms, and gave
up the Ghost. What a poor worm was that mighty man in the hand of God, when
God slew him without hand, and commanded the worms to eat him? Jesus Christ,
who is also the mighty God (Isa: 9.6.) called himself a worm and no man, in
his humiliations for the redemption of lost man ( Psalm: 22.6.) What are the
mightiest men but worms to God, who is so mighty, that if he say the word,
worms become their Masters. The mighty Giants are before God but pigmy's,
punyes, or children. The Prophet gives a good warning ( Jer: 9.23.) Let not the
mighty man glory in his might. Let him not glory in the might of his arm, Let
him not glory in the might of his arms or Armies, though man have an Army of
mighty men about him, yet let him not glory in them, no nor in the might of his
power or authority. If any man uses his might against God, what is his might
unto God? ( Psalm: 58.1.) Why boastest thou O mighty man, that thou can do
mischief? If a man be mighty, and have a mind to do mischief with his might,
especially if he boasts in his might, because he can do mischief with it,
he is not only sinful, but weak and foolish. There is no greater moral
weakness then to boast either of natural, martial, or civil strength. Could
any of the mighty men of this world stand before the might of God, they had
somewhat to boast of. Read the word of the Lord against the mighty ( Isa:
2.10.) Behold the Kings and Captains of the earth trembling before the
presence of the Lamb ( Rev: 6.15.) and then judge how weak the strongest are
before the Lord? All ages are full of teaching examples, that there is no might
to his who is Almighty.

Secondly, Note.

What ever God will do he can easily do it. He can effect it with a look,
with a cast of his eye, he can do it with a breath of his mouth, he can do it
with a word. It is said ( Exodus: 14.24.) God looked unto the host of the
Egyptians through the pillar of fire and through the cloud, and troubled the
host of the Egyptians, and took off their Chariot wheels, that they drove
them heavily. To look upon them was an easy thing, God did not give them a
stroke with his hand, but only a look with his eye, and that overthrew them.

Thirdly, Note.

God can do the greatest things alone. He can subdue the mighty, though none
come forth to his help against the mighty; they are cursed who do not help the
Lord against the mighty, when they set their might against the Lord; ( Judge.
5.23.) Curse ye Mero^, (says the angel of the Lord,) curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof, because they came not forth to the help of the Lord, to
the help of the Lord against the mighty. But though it be the sin of man not to
help the Lord against the mighty, yet the withdrawing of their help does not
hinder the Lord in his purpose against the mighty: For, He takes away the
mighty without hands. Though men stir not, though angels should not stir to his
help, yet his own arm can bring either salvation or destruction. It is said of
the Lord ( Isa. 44.24.) He stretched out the heavens alone; there was none to
help him to unfold that vast canopy of heaven, he stretched out the heavens
alone. As in the Creation he made all alone, so in Providence he can act and
effect all alone. It is a great glory to God, that he has many instruments to
help him, many tongues to speak for him, many hands to work for him; but it is
a greater glory to God that he needs none to help him, none to speak or work
for him. In this the glory of the Lord infinitely outshines the glory of all
the mighty Kings and Princes of the earth. They have done, and can do mighty
things, but not without hands, and therefore they have the hands of thousands
at command for them; it is not their place to put their hand to the work, it is
enough that they give commands and orders, it is the duty of others to execute
all their righteous commands, and fulfill their orders. But the Lord has not
only a commanding power, but an executing power too in himself; though no hand
move, yet his affairs stand not still. God, and all creatures put together, are
no more then God alone without any creature: Many are useful, but none are
necessary unto God. Take two inferences from it.

First, This is matter of terror to wicked men; though they see no hand in the
world against them, much less any able to match them, least of all to check
them, yea though they see all hands for them, yet this is no security to them,
this is no assurance of one hours safety, seeing the Lord takes away the
mighty without hand, and he usually does it when they see not which way any
hand can reach them. It is the conclusion of one of the Ancients upon this
place in reference to a mighty oppressor; He is invisibly pulled down,
Invisibiliter rapitur, qui visibiliter rapiebat, Gregor.
who did visibly pull down; He ruined others with hands, but himself shall be
ruined without hand; he saw him whom he took away, but he shall not see him who
takes him away. Let them who live without fear of any hand, remember the
Apostles admonition, ( Heb. 10.31.) It is a fearful thing to fall into the hand
of the living God, who takes away the mighty without hand.

Secondly, This is matter of wonderful comfort, to all that fear God, and trust
upon him, whether Princes or people, whether mighty men or mean men. What
though ye see no hand for you; yet it is enough if he be for you who saves you
without hand. The protecting and saving power of God, is as great and as
effectual as his destroying power is; yea, he oftener saves without hand, then
he destroys without hand. As the Kings of the earth, so the great King of
heaven and earth, loves to deal his favors, and bestow his rewards immediately
with his own hand, but usually afflicts and punishes by the hands of others.
That Is a most pregnant Scripture to this purpose, ( Hos. 1.7.) where the Lord
promises to save Judah; But Judah might say, I am in a very low condition, and
no help appears: Therefore he adds, I will save them by the Lord their God;
and will not save them by Bow, nor by Sword, nor by Battle, nor by Horses, nor
Horsemen. Judah shall be saved, though there be no hand to save them. I will
save them (says the Lord) by the Lord their God. I will do it immediately. And
the Lord does not only say (in the affirmative) he will save them without hand;
but he says also (in the Negative) that he will not save them with hands, But
I will not save them by Bow, nor Sword, nor Battle, nor Horses, nor Horsemen;
there shall be no appearance of these helps, I have heretofore destroyed you by
Sword, and Bow, by Horses, and Horsemen, but I will have all the honor and
thanks of your salvation to my self. Though the Lords people have neither
horses nor horsemen, though they are as helples as is imaginable, yet the Lord
is able to save them, and he will do it in the fittest season. As this is true
in reference to Princes and Nations in their public capacity, so private
Christians may take up the comfort of it. What though great distress and
affliction be nigh, and no hand to save you, yet the Lord can save without
hand; if you are low, he can raise you, though none lend a hand to raise you;
if poor, he can enrich you; if weak, he can strengthen you, though you have no
means for either: It is an everlasting spring of comfort, that the Lord can do
all things without hand, that he needs not be beholding to the creature, nor
stands in need of their help to effect either threatened judgments against
Babylon, or his promised mercies unto Sion.

Thus we have seen Elihu describing the righteous, though severe dealings of
God, both with people and Princes, who despise his counsels, and provoke his
wrath: The reason why they fall under his wrath, is further discovered in the
next words.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 21, 22. For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he
sees all his goings.

There is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may
hide themselves.


IN the former verse Elihu reported the judgment of God both upon the people
and upon the Princes of the earth, In a moment shall they die, etc. In these
two verses, he gives us a proof that the Lord is righteous in judgment both
upon Princes and people, or he assigns the ground of it. That the words are a
reason of the former, the Causal Particle in the beginning of the 21th verse
puts it out of question.

Verse. 21. For his eyes are upon the ways of men.
As if he had said, God does not these things, he troubles not Nations, and
Nobles, People, or Princes, by an absolute and sovereign power, or because he
will, but he finds just cause to do it; What men do, is enough to justify God
in what they suffer: He has always power enough in his hand to destroy all
men, and to turn this world back into its first nothing, but he never uses his
power, nor puts it forth without cause.

For his eyes are upon the ways of man, etc. God is a Spirit, the simplicity
of his Essence is his first and highest perfection, he is purely incorporeal;
yet as the passions of man's mind, so the members of his body are often in
Scripture attributed unto God; we read of the face of God, of the hand of God,
of the ear of God, and as in many other places, so in this, of the eyes of God:
Now as the ear of God notes only his power of hearing, and the hand of God his
power of working, so the eye or eyes of God note only his power of seeing,
knowing and discerning the ways of men. And when Elihu says, his eyes are
upon the ways of man, his meaning is only this, he clearly discerns and
understands the ways of man.

These words, his eyes are upon the ways of man, intimate, First, A present
act, he does not say, they were, or they will be upon the ways of man, but
they are. Secondly, They imply as a present, so a continued act; his eyes are
so upon the ways of man, that they are never off them. The eyes of God dwell,
as it were, upon the ways of man: His eyes are said indeed to run to and fro
through the whole earth, (2 Chronicles. 16.8.) yet they do not wander from one
object to another, but are fixed and settled upon every one. Thirdly, they imply
an intentive act, or the seri^usness of the heart of God upon the ways of man.
We may behold a thing, and yet take no great notice of it; but when our eyes
are said to be upon any thing, this imports they are busied much upon it.
Fourthly, This manner of speaking signifies not only a clear sight, but that
which is operative, carrying with it a most exact scrutiny or disquisition of
the ways of men, according to that expression of the Psalmist, ( Psalm. 11.4.)
His eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men. God does not only
behold, but his eyelids try the ways of men; that is, he so looks upon them,
that he looks through them, and discerns what they are to the utmost. God
does not only behold the body and bulk of our actions, but the soul and spirit
of them, and while he sees them, he sees into them. All this, and much more
then we can apprehend, is comprehended in those words, His eyes are upon The
ways of man.

The word is plural, not way, but ways; which shows the extensiveness of the
sight or knowledge of God: The word being put indefinitely, is to be taken
universally: His eyes are not confined to this or that object, to this or that
place, to this or that person, but his eyes look over all, His eyes are upon
the ways of man.

Yet further, the ways of man may be distinguished; First, As they are either
internal or external. The internal ways of man, are the ways of his heart, as
the Prophet has it, ( Isa. 57.17.) He went on frowardly in the way of his
heart. And these ways of the heart, our inward ways are, first, our thoughts,
what we imagine and conceive; secondly, our affections, what we love, and what
we hate, what we rejoice in, and what we mourn for, declare the way of our
hearts. Thirdly, The ways of the heart are a man's purposes, resolutions, and
intentions what to do. Fourthly, The ways of the heart are man's designs, or
his aims, what he drives at, or proposes as his end in all that he does. In
this latitude we are to understand the present Text; when Elihu says, the eyes
of God are upon the ways of man, remember they are upon his thoughts, upon his
affections, upon his purposes, upon his designs and aims, all these are
before the Lord; as it is said of Christ, ( Joh^ 2.25.) He needed not that any
should testify of man; for he knew what was in man; that is, both the state of
his heart, and all the movings of it. And if the Lord's eyes be upon the
internal ways of man, then certainly they are upon the external ways of man;
if he knows what work the heart is at or about, certainly he knows what the
hand is at or about. He that knows which way the mind goes, cannot but know
which way the foot goes. His eyes are upon the external ways of man, but it is
his chief glory that his eyes are upon the internal ways of man, ( Genesis 6.5.)
The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great upon the earth: He saw man's
actions or outward ways were very wicked, but besides that, says the Text, He
saw, that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually. He saw the ways within, what was formed up, or (as the word there
notes) what creatures were made and fashioned in the mind of man. Thus, if we
take the ways in that distinction of internal and external, the eyes of God
are upon them.

Secondly, Take the ways of man as differenced in their kinds, as they are
either good or evil; the eyes of the Lord are upon both. They are (says
Solomon, Prove. 15.3.) in every place, beholding the evil and the good: that is,
the evil ways and the good ways of men. But says not the Prophet ( Habbak.
1.14.) Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil? Which may seem, at first
reading, to imply, that God does not behold the evil ways or actings of men. I
answer, if we distinguish the word behold, we shall soon reconcile these
Scriptures. To behold, is either to discern what is before us, or to behold,
is to approve what is before us. There is a seeing of knowledge, and there is a
seeing of contentment; now when the Prophet says, the Lord is of purer eyes
then to behold evil, his meaning is, he does not, he cannot behold evil with
contentment or approbation, otherwise the Lord beholds evil, even all the evil
in the world; both good and evil are before him, who is himself only and
altogether good. His eyes are upon the ways of Man. (...)


Not only upon the ways of this or that man, but of every man; let man be what
he will for a man, let him be a great man, or a mean man, let him be a rich man
or a poor man, let him be a wise man or a fool, let him be an ignorant or a
knowing man, let him be a holy or a profane man, let him be a subtle or a
simple man, his eyes are upon him. Those things which difference men among
themselves, make no difference at all among them, as to the eye of God. His
eyes are upon the ways of (whomsoever you can c^ll) man.

And he sees all his goings. This latter clause of the verse is of the same
sense with the former, therefore I shall not stay upon the opening of it. The
Scripture often uses Synonoma's, and repeats the same thing in other terms, to
show the truth and certainty of it; and surely the Spirit gives a double stroke
here, to strike this truth home into our hearts, and fasten it in our minds,
He beholds the ways, and he sees al^ the goings of man. The word translated
seeing, (...)
signifies a very curious or critical sight, as was opened before.

Again, these latter words say, he sees All his goings.

Where we have the universal particle expressed, which was only understood in the
form. And though these two words, ways and goings may be expounded for the
same thing, yet in this conjunction we may distinguish them, by understanding
the word ways, for the constant course of a man's life, and the word goings,
for his particular and renewed motions in those ways. (...) incedore cum
pompa, proprie deambulare.
The Original word rendered goings, signifies sometimes going with much caution,
yea with a kind of state or pomp, yet frequently any ordinary going.

Now, when Elihu asserts, The Lord sees all his goings; we may sum up the
matter under these five considerations; He sees First, Where he goes, what
his path is. Secondly, He sees whether he is going, what he makes the end of
his journey or travel. Thirdly, when he goes, or sets out, what time he takes
for every undertaking. Fourthly, how far he goes, the Lord takes notice of
everystep, what progress he makes in any business good or bad. Fifthly, he
sees in what manner he goes, with what heart, with what mind, or frame of
soul he goes. Thus distinct and exact is the Lord in beholding the ways, and
in seeing all the goings of man.

Hence note, First.

Surely the Lord is a God of knowledge. If we could conceive a man to have his
eyes in all places, and upon all persons, an eye upon all hearts, and an eye in
all hearts, as well as an eye upon all hands, you would say this man must needs
be a knowing man, especially if he have such an eye, as the eye of God is, a
discerning eye, a distinguishing eye, a trying eye, an eye which sees to the
bottom of whatsoever it sees. Hannah said this in her song (1 Samuel 2.3.)
Speak not so proudly, let not arrogance come out of your lips; for the Lord is
a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. It Is not a slight
superficial knowledge which God has of things or persons, by him actions are
weighed, and so are the Actors. God puts all into an even balance, and he will
weigh both persons and actions to a grain, yea every word and thought shall
go into the balance. It was said to that great Monarch Belteshazer, by a
handwriting upon the wall, Thou art weighed in the balances. The Lord weighed
that great King, he weighed all his power, and the exercise of it; and he that
weighs Kings, will not leave the meanest subject unweighed; by him actions
are weighed. We many times pass over our actions without consideration, and
never take the weight of them, at least, we never weigh them in the Sanctuary
balance. If they will bear weight in the balance of the world, we presume
they will in Gods balance also. But as the Lord is a God of knowledge
otherwise then man is, so by him actions are weighed otherwise then by man. It
is said of Idols ( Psalm: 115.15.) They have eyes and see not; but we may say
of the Lord Jehovah the true God, the living God, he has properly, no eyes,
yet he sees; and his faculty of seeing is infinitely above that which himself
has planted in man. The Atheist while he is about the worst work in the world,
the breaking in pieces of the people of God, and afflicting his heritage, while
he is slaying the widow, and the stranger, and murdering the fatherless, while
he is (I say) at such kind of work as this, he says ( Psalm: 94.7.) The Lord
shall not see; neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. But what says the
Psalmist to him and such as he ( v. 8, 9.) Understand ye brutish among the
people, he that formed the eye, shall not he see? Those words of the Prophet to
King Asa (2 Chronicles: 16.9.) The eyes of the Lord run too and fro through the
whole earth, are an allusion to a man who having a desire to know much, or to
see all in the world, runs up and down, travels from place to place, from
Country to Country for information. The Lord would have us know that he knows
every thing as exactly, as they who run from place to place to see what is done
in every place. It is prophesied of the latter times ( Dan: 12.4.) Many shall
run too and fro, and knowledge shall be increased; that is, many shall be so
graciously greedy of knowledge, that they will refuse no labor nor travel to
attain it. They will run too and fro, to inquire and search for it, they will
not think any time or labor lost, if they may but gain that precious
commodity by it, called true knowledge, or the knowledge of the truth. And that
expression of running too and fro, may well be expounded, they shall by
discourse and arguing bear out the truth; In discoursing the mind runs too and
fro faster then the feet can in traveling; In discourse we run from point to
point, from reason to reason, from objection to objection, from question to
question, till we come to solid answers and conclusions, and so knowledge is
increased. The Lord is surely a God of knowledge, whose eyes run too and fro
without motion, and see the bottom of all things, without discourse or
argumentation.

Secondly, Note.

The Lords knowledge of man never abateth, he is always observing and alike
observing what men do and what men are. The best the most waking men, have
their slumbrings and sleepings; but the Lord neither slumbreth nor sleeps,
his eyes are upon the ways of man. And when the Scripture says, The Lord does
neither slumber nor sleep, we may understand it in a twofold reference. First,
as to the protection of his people ( Psalm: 121.4.) Behold he that keeps
Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep; that is, he watches over them so
uncessantly, so unweariedly, that no danger can approach them without his
knowledge. Secondly, he never slumbereth nor sleeps as to the observation and
consideration of all people, he never takes his eye off from the ways of man.

Thirdly, Note The Lords knowledge or sight of man's ways, is universal and
everlasting.

The All-seeing God sees all our ways, and he sees them always. And he
sees them all always by one act. The Lords view or prospect of things is not
successive one after another, but conjunctive, all at once. The Lord has a
large eye, and an everlasting eye, yea is all eye. He knows all things; First,
past or that have been; Secondly, present or that are; Thirdly, future,
possible or that shall be. Thus says the Lord in the Prophet ( Isa: 46.10.) I
am God, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, and
from ancient times the things that are not yet done. And upon this read the
Lords challenge of all the Idols in the world ( Isa: 41.21, 22, 23.) Let them
show the former things what they be, that we may consider them and know the
latter end of them, or declare us things to come; Show the things that are to
come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods. As if the Lord had said, if
ye can tell us all that is past, or any thing that is to come, as I can, then ye
may take the honor of God, otherwise ye are but lies and vanities. Again the
Lord knows all things; First, without distraction; and secondly, he knows all
things with clearest distinction; it is no more trouble to the Lord to see all
things then to see one, and he sees all things as if he had but one thing to
see.

From the consideration of this knowledge of God, let me give four or five
inferences for instruction.

First, (which is most natural to the text) if, the Lords eyes be upon the
ways of man, if he sees all his goings, then all the Lords Judgments are
right. The Judges of this world, may have a principle of righteousness in
them, and we may call them just and righteous Judges, yet all their Judgments
are not always right. For, as some men are so ignorant, that they know nothing
at all, so there are none so knowing as to know all things; the clearest
sighted Judges do not see all that may concern them in giving Judgment; even
among them some may be blind, and many blinded, some are blind and cannot see
much, others are blinded and will not see all that they see, they are blinded
possibly with bribes and gifts, with hopes or fears, with passions and
prejudices. And how cleare-sighted and honest-hearted soever any are, yet they
cannot see all, somewhat may lie out of their sight. Hence it comes to pass,
that a just Judge may do that which is unjust, he cannot see quite through
every matter, though he set himself to search the matter before he gives
Judgment. But as the Lord is all righteousness in his principle, and bears
an everlasting love to righteousness; so he has a clear sight of all things
and persons, and therefore he must needs give a righteous Judgment concerning
all things, actions, and persons; Though he overthrow nations he is righteous,
though he overthrow Princes he is righteous, because he sees into all things,
and proceeds upon certain knowledge of every man's case and condition. He
cannot err in Judgment, who has no error in his Judgment, nor any deviation
in his will.

Secondly, If the Lords eyes are upon all the ways of men, then, certainly
sinners, whose ways are evil, shall never go unpunished. For if he have a
principle of righteousness in him, and an eye to see all their unrighteous
ways, they cannot escape his justice; Say to the wicked, woe to him, for he
shall eat the fruit of his doings (Isa: 3.11.) The righteous God knows the
unrighteousness of man, and therefore woe to the unrighteous man.

Thirdly, Take this conclusion, Then no godly man, no good man shall go
unrewarded, or loose the reward of that good which he has done. The Lord is
righteous, and he sees every one that does right, or the righteousness of
every man's way; and it is his promise to reward the righteous, therefore they
shall be rewarded. This is matter of strong consolation, and great
encouragement to all that are righteous; If the Lord sees all they do,
nothing which they have well done shall be lost in the dark, or lie in the
dust. God will bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their just
dealing as the noone day: And as the knowledge which God has of their ways,
assures the righteous that they shall be rewarded for, so that they shall be
assisted and protected in their doing righteousness. The Prophet makes that
inference in the place before-cited (2 Chronicles: 16.9.) The eyes of the Lord run
too and fro through the earth (what follows?) to show himself strong in the
behalf of them, or (as we put in the Margin) strongly to hold with them whose
heart is perfect toward him. The Lord is always strong, and alike in
strength, his hand is not shortened at any time, that he cannot save, yet he
does not always show his strength; but as he is strong, so he will show
himself strong for the perfect or upright in heart; that is, he will act his
strength to the utmost for the safety and assistance of those whose hearts are
perfect with him. So then, as they that are good, and do good, shall be
rewarded for the good they have done, so they shall be protected in the dangers
and evils they incur while they are doing good. Another Prophet speaks both
these inferences from this principle of the knowledge or sight of God ( Jer:
32.19.) He is great in council, and he is mighty in working, for his eyes are
upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give to every one according to his
ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

Fourthly, If the eyes of the Lord are upon all the ways of the Children of
men, then the Lord will call all men to an account for their ways. Why does he
take notice of their ways, but to bring them to a reckoning? That Is the
Apostles conclusion ( Rom: 14.12.) So then every one of us shall give an
account of himself to God; God would not take an account of our ways while we
live, if he did not intend to bring us to an account when we dye. As the
omniscience of God fits him to call every man to an account, so it is an
evidence that he will. Why should our ways and works be strictly observed and
recorded, if they were not to be judged?

Fifthly, This truth that the eyes of God are upon all the ways of man, should
awaken every man to take heed (as David resolved he would, Psalm: 39.1.) to his
ways. Did we walk as remembering we are under his All-seeing eye, O how
circumspectly should we walk! does the Lord inspect our ways, O how should we
inspect our own ways! It argues a great deal of Atheism in the heart, if
not the grossest Atheism, yet Atheism (quo-ad hoc) as to this or that thing:
while that which some are afraid to do, if a man, yea if a child see them,
they are not afraid to do though they hear that God sees them. To fear to
do a thing when the eye of a creature is upon us, and yet to do it
notwithstanding God sees us, what is this but either an unbelief that the eye
of God sees us, or a contempt of his All seeing eye? This Divine Attribute,
the All-seeing eye of God, well wrought upon the heart by faith, is enough to
over-aw the sinfullnesse of our hearts. And though the people of God have a
higher principle, upon which they forbear the doing of evil, then this,
because God will see it, and punish it, yet to keep the heart in a holy fear
of doing evil upon that principle, is both needful and our duty. The Apostle
would not have servants do their Masters commands with eye-service as
men-pleasers. It is indeed a baseness in a servant to do his duty merely
because his Masters eye is upon him, or to forbear to do what is against or
beside his duty, because his Master sees him; but how great is the impudence
and wickedness of that servant who will not keep to his duty, when his Masters
eye is upon him! So, in this case, merely to forbear doing evil, because we
hear God sees us, is eye-service, but how great is their wickedness, who will
not forbear to do evil, though they hear and know that God sees it? Which
Elihu confirms yet further in the next words.

Verse. 22. There is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of
iniquity may hide themselves.
This verse holds out that truth negatively, which the former held out
affirmatively. There Gods knowledge of man's ways, was asserted, here his
ignorance or nescience of the ways of man is denied.

There is no darkness, etc. The words seem to be the prevention of an
objection. For some possibly might say, It Is true indeed, God has a large
knowledge, his eye sees far, but we hope we may sometime be under covert, or
compassed about with such darkness, that the Lord cannot see us. Therefore
(says Elihu) there is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of
iniquity may hide themselves. The Prophet gives a parallel proof and testimony
of this knowledge of God both in the affirmative and negative part of it. (
Jer: 16.17.) where he first asserts that God sees all, mine eyes are upon all
their ways, and then denies, that any thing is a secret unto him, They are
not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes. These
latter words of the Prophet are of the same signification with these of Elihu,
There is no darkness, etc.

We may take darkness two ways; First, for natural darkness, that darkness
which spreads it self over the face of the earth upon the going down of the
Sun, it is the privation of Light. Secondly, there is artificial darkness, that
darkness which men make to hide themselves, and their actions in, from the eye
of God or man; many are very skillfull, yea and successful in making
shadows to hide their actions from men: They cover the evil which they have
done with such cunning excuses or flat denyalls, and they cover what they
purpose to do (how foul soever) under such fair trappings of words, and
specious pretenses, they gloss their worst actions and intentions with such
appearances of good, that the wisest and best sighted men cannot find them
out. When Absalon had a most unnatural as well as a most disloyal purpose to
raise a tebellion against his king-father, he colored it with a devout
profession of performing a vow; This was artificial darkness. It Is reported by
the natural Historian, of a little fish, which seeing its enemy near, casts
out a kind of blackness from it self, which darkens the water, and so escapes
the danger. Thus men indeed hide themselves from man, and they would hide
themselves from God too; but there is no darkness, neither natural nor
artificial, that can cover their ways from his eye; No, Nor shadow of death.

The importance of this expression has been opened more then once in this
book, ( chap. 3.5. chap: 10.21. chap. 12.22. chap. 28.3.) therefore I shall not
stay upon it here; only consider, when he says, There is no darkness nor
shadow of death, by shadow of death, he means extremest darkness. If there
be any darkness (as Job speaks chap. 10.22.) like darkness it self, and whose
light is as darkness, that is it. The metaphor is taken from the grave, where
the dead being buried, have not the least glympse, ray, or shine of light
coming in to them, death wraps us up in extremest darkness. And we find in
Scripture, the shadow of death put first, to express the extremest of
spiritual darkness, or the darkest spiritual state, ( Isa. 9.2.) The people
that walked in darkness, have seen a great light, they that dwell in the land
of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined: that is, they that
were wrapped up in the ignorance and utter unbelief of God in Christ, to these
is Christ, the true light of God, the Sun of righteousness preached and openly
revealed, and they pressed to the receiving of him, that their souls may live
further as the shadow of death is put for the worst of spiritual evils, or to
note man's natural state before conversion, so likewise, it is used in
Scripture to note the worst of his spiritual evils, who (being converted) is in
a spiritual state; He that is in a spiritual state, may be under great
spiritual evils, great soul afflictions and troubles may fall upon him; which I
conceive David intended while he showed such high confidence, ( Psalm. 23.4.)
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
evil: as if he had said, Though I were in the worst of soul-afflictions, having
no light of the favor of God shining upon me, nor any comfort in my spirit,
though (as Heman bemoans his deserted condition ( Psalm. 88.3.) My soul is full
of troubles, and my life draws nigh unto the grave, though I am laid in the
lowest pit, in darkness, in the deep, yet I will fear no evil, for thou art
with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. Again, the shadow of death is
often put in Scripture for the worst of outward worldly evils, ( Jer. 13.16.)
Give glory to the Lord your God before he cause darkness, etc. and while ye
look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death; that is, while ye expect
good times and things, ye fall into the worst, or the worst befall you. Now as
these words, the shadow of death, signify the worst of, both in spirituals
and temporals; so here they signify the closest concealment of moral evils;
some sinners think themselves, as much out of sight as a buried carcass, and
they vail their wickedness with such darkness as is like the very shadow of
death. Sin is it self a shadow of death, yea death it self, and they who are
dead in sins and trespasses, will do their best that their sins may be no more
seen then the dead are. But there is no darkness nor shadow of death Where the
workers of iniquity may hide themselves.

What it is to be a worker of iniquity, was opened at the 8th verse of this
chapter, and thither I refer the reader. Only in general know, Workers of
iniquity are more then ordinary sinners, they are cunning at the committing,
and cunning at the hiding of sin. Some are but bunglers at sin, they cannot sin
with such an hellish skill as others do, and when they have sinned, they have
not the art of hiding it; but others are (as we say) their crafts-masters both
ways, and they are properly called workers of iniquity. Yet (says Elihu) the
very workers of iniquity, they that make it their profession, their study, and
their business to do evil, and to hide the evil they have done, to work
mischief in the dark, and to keep their works in the dark, even they cannot be
hid in any darkness. And when the Text says, there is no darkness, etc.
wherein the workers of iniquity may hide themselves; the meaning of it is, they
stand naked, and in the open light before the eyes of God.

For though Elihu does not say from what they cannot hide themselves, yet we
may take it two ways; they cannot hide themselves, first, from the sight of
God; he will discern them. The Prophet says of God ( Isa. 45.15.) Thou art a
God that hidest thy self, (it is the word of the Text in another construction)
that is, as I conceive, it may be expounded, Thou art an invisible God. God
hides himself naturally, or in his own nature, for that is invisible: likewise
God sometimes hides himself voluntarily, as sometimes he manifests or shows
himself voluntarily; but he is a God always hid as to his nature, because he
is invisible; and so he is called a God that hides himself, in opposition to
Idols or false gods, who are obvious to the eyes of men; Idols have eyes and
see not, but themselves are seen by every eye. Jehovah the true God sees, but
has no eye, neither can any eye see him; Thus he is a God hiding himself in
the spirituality of his own being, which gross Idols cannot: the following
words in that Text in the Prophet seem to make out this sense, ( verse. 16.)
They shall be ashamed and confounded all of them, (that is, all Idol-makers,
and Idol-worshippers, shall be ashamed and confounded) they shall go to
confusion together, that are makers of Idols. Now, as God hides himself both
these ways, sometimes voluntarily, or in his will, he resolves to hide himself
from his people, as David complained, ( Psalm. 13.1.) How long will thou hide
thy face from me?) always in the spirituality of his own nature; so sinful men
would be hidden too: though they cannot be hidden as to their nature, that
being corporeal, yet they would hide themselves in their will, their wits are
bent upon it, to make covers and shaddows for themselves, that they may keep
out of the sight of God, or that they may not be seen of him, who cannot be
seen, but is, in that sense, a God that hides himself.

And as men cannot hide themselves from the sight of God, so not, secondly,
from the revenging power of God: This follows the former; for he that would
keep out of the sight of another, does it usually that he may be hid from that
danger and evil which he fears that other might bring upon him. Thus it is with
the sinner, he has his hiding places, he would withdraw himself from the
revenging power of God, like a malefactor, who is unwilling to appear and come
to the Bar before his Judge, but all in vain.

Mere natural or unregenerate men are much hidden from themselves; that is,
they see little what themselves are, they know not their own condition, nor
upon what terms they stand; even a godly man is much hidden from himself, his
life is hid with Christ in God, (Col. 3.3.) his life is not only hidden from
the world, but in a great measure from himself: the excellency of his spiritual
state surpasses his present sight: but a wicked man is much more hid from
himself, he does not see the wickedness of his own heart, nor the danger, the
desperate danger he is in, he sees not that he is within a step of the pit, or
that there is, as it were, but a wainscot between him and hell fire; he sees
none of these things. Thus a wicked man is hidden from himself, and it is his
work to prepare darkness and shaddows of death to cover his dead works from
God. But there is no darkness will serve his purpose, nor shadow of death
wherein he may hide himself.

Hence Note.

First, It is usual for, and natural to sinners, to seek hiding places.

When Elihu says, There is no darkness, etc. he plainly intimates, that it is
the design and business of sinners, to make darkness to hide themselves; it is
as much their business to hide themselves when they have done evil, as it is
their business to do evil. while the workers of iniquity confess in general the
eyes of God behold their ways (they deny not in word that God is All-seeing)
yet, as they often blear the eye of man, so they are not out of hope to put
darkness and raise a mist between themselves and the eye of God; Or if they
rise not to this vain thought, that they can hide themselves from God, yet they
come to this, that God hides himself (as not regarding what they do) from
them. Hence David affirms of the wicked man, ( Psalm. 10.11.) He has said in
his heart, God has forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see it. Many
say in their hearts, God sees them not, while with their tongues they confess
he is an all-seeing God. The heart has a tongue in it as well as the head, and
these two tongues seldom speak the same language: While the head-tongue says,
we cannot hide our selves from the sight of God, the heart-tongue of wicked men
will say, God will hide himself from us, he will not see* But if their heart
speak not thus, then as the Prophet says, ( Isa. 29.15.) They dig deep to hide
their counsels from God; surely they have a hope to hide their counsels, else
they would not dig deep to hide them. Their digging is not proper, but
tropical; as men dig deep to hide what they would not have seen in the earth;
so they by heir wits, plots, and devices, do their best to hide their counsels
from God, and they say who sees, who knows? We, surely, are not seen either
by God or man.

Now it is very natural for sinners to endeavor the hiding of themselves from
God upon a twofold account; First, To avoid shame; All sinners are not
altogether deboist, all have not altogether baffled their own consciences, they
have a kind of modesty, they would not be seen sinning; it troubles them not
to do evil, but a fear to be detected in doing it is their trouble. Secondly,
Sinners hide themselves for fear; so Adam did, he wa^ afraid as well as
ashamed, I was afraid (said he) because I was naked, and I hid my self, (Genesis
3.10.) The Prophet tells us of such ( Isa. 2.21.) They shall go into the clefts
of the rock, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and
for the glory of his Majesty, when he shall arise to shake terribly the earth.
We find all sorts call to the hills to hide them, for fear of him that sat on
the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, (Rev. 6.15, 16.)

Secondly, Observe.

How much soever sinners attempt, yet they cannot hide themselves from God. Let
them study never so long, and dig never so deep, they cannot be hid: Where can
a sinner be hid from him who is every where? Or, what thing can be our covering
from him, in whose sight all things are open? Then let none think they have
made a good market in sinning, when they have hid their sins from the eyes of
men; what will it avail to hide your selves from men, when you lie open and
manifest to the eye of God? read Psalm. 139.12. Amos 3.2. The Apostle says (1 Timothy 5.24, 25.) some men's sins are open before hand, going before to judgment;
(that is, other men quickly see what they are, and can judge what they have
done) and some men, they follow after; though they were hidden at the first,
yet they are afterward discovered unto men often, as always unto God: As they
are not hid from God now, so he will bring them forth at last, in the sight of
men: that the Apostle adds in the next verse, Likewise also the good works of
some are manifest before hand, and they that are otherwise cannot be hid. The
word otherwise may have a twofold reference; First to the word manifest: As if
he had said, though the good works of a man be not presently manifest, yet they
cannot be long hid, they shall be opened and revealed. Secondly, The word
otherwise may refer to good works, and so it reaches the point fully; that is,
those works which are not good, or otherwise then good, cannot be hid, though
men labor much to hide them. Sinners, leave off your hiding, leave off your
hiding, for you shall not be hid. There is no way for sinners to hide
themselves from God; they may hide themselves in God, in the love, in the
favor and mercy of God. Thus sinners may hide themselves in God, but from God
they cannot be hid. Christ is a hiding place unto his people, and he is so in a
double respect; First, from trouble, or in time of trouble; thus David spoke (
Psalm. 32.7.) Thou art my hiding place: The name of the Lord is a strong Tower
(says Solomon, Prove. 18.10.) the righteous runs into it (for shelter in
time of trouble) and is safe. The Prophet is express in this, ( Isa. 32.2.) A
man (that is Christ) shall be for a hiding place from the wind, and a covert
from the Tempest: Christ is truly so, as to the outward troubles and storms
which men raise against his people in the things of this life; he is so,
especially as to those internal troubles and storms which Satan, or our own
unbelieving hearts raise against us about the things and concernments of the
next life. That man who is also God, who is God-man, is the hiding place of
humbled sinners, against the assault of all evils, whether temporal or
spiritual. Secondly, As Christ is a hiding place from those troubles which men
bring us unto for righteousness sake, or which Satan and our own hearts bring
us into by raising questions about our interest in the righteousness of Christ;
So he is a hiding place for us against our own unrighteousness. Sinners or
unrighteous persons cannot hide themselves from Christ. And as Christ is the
best hiding place from bodily dangers, so he is the only hiding place from
soul-danger: Any sinner may hide himself in Christ, as to the guilt of sin,
whose eyes are opened to see and acknowledge his sin. Or more distinctly,
sinners under a fourfold consideration may hide themselves in Christ; First, if
humbled sinners. Secondly, if confessing sinners. Thirdly, if reforming
sinners. Fourthly, believing sinners Christ is a hiding place to all such
sinners. Cum videri nos non credimus, in sole clausos oculos tenemus. Illum a
nos abscondimus, non nos illi. Greg. l 25. c. 6.
And seeing no sinner can hide himself from the wrath of God by any means of
his own devising or contriving: Let all sinners give over such vain
contrivements, and learn that Gospel wisdom, to hide themselves in Christ from
that wrath which is to come. When we labor to hide our selves any other way,
we lose our labor, and do not hide our selves from God, but God from our
selves; that is, we hide the favor and mercy of God from our selves.

Lastly Observe.

Men are not easily persuaded that they cannot hide themselves from the sight
of God. That has much hold of us, which we are often warned to avoid. This is
not the only place of the whole Scripture, no nor of this particular book where
this truth is held forth. There are many and many Scriptures wherein this
common truth is pressed upon us. And does not this (if not strongly infer, yet)
intimate at least that man does not easily believe it? Yea, Is it not an
argument that man is apt to nourish himself in those vain hopes, that he can
hide himself from God, or that he shall be hid from God? I may cast the foolish
presumptions of men about this thing into four sorts. First, Some hope to be
hid in the crowd, or that they shall not be taken notice of among so many.
Secondly, The eyes of others are so darkened, that their sins are hid from
themselves, yea they take their vices for virtues, their evil acts for good;
and because they see no evil in what they do, they are persuaded, or presume
God does not. Thirdly, Many are never so well pleased as when they are
flattered, or when others not only hide the sinfulness of their ways from
them, but commend and extol them as virtuous and praise worthy. And because
their evil ways appear good to some men, they cannot be convinced that there is
any evil in them appearing to God. Lastly, As all impenitent sinners put their
sins out of their own sight, so nothing pleases them more then this
imagination, that they shall never come into the sight of God.

Surely the Lord would never urge this matter so often upon the children of men
if it were not so. But let sinners consider what they will do, and what will
become of them, seeing, as it is impossible that they should be hid, so it will
be most intolerable for them them to appear and stand before God in the day of
judgment, ( Psalm. 1.5.) All must come to judgment, and appear at the Bar, but
it will be an inexpressible grief to appear, and not be approved, or to appear
and then be condemned. Therefore be wise, and hide your selves where you may be
hid; do not attempt to hide your selves (which is the attempt of most sinners)
where you cannot be hid: They who will needs hide themselves in that darkness
and shadow of death, here spoken of, shall be cast into utter darkness, and
abide for ever in that infernal valley of the shadow of death, in which there
is no ease to be had, and from which there is no release to be got. Darkness
and death will be the portion of those sinners in the next world, who have
studied to shadow their sins with any kind of darkness in this.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 23, 24, 25. For he will not lay upon man more then right,
that he should enter into judgment with God.

He shall break in pieces mighty men without number, and set others in their
stead.

Therefore he knows their works, and he over-turneth them in the night, so
that they are destroyed.


IN the 23d verse, being the first of this context, Elihu further justifyeth
the severest proceedings of God with man; He that lays upon man no more then
is right, may be justified in whatsoever he lays upon him; But God lays
upon man no more then is right, Therefore etc. The Assumption is express in
the text.

Verse. 23. For he will not lay upon man more then is right.
The text strictly rendered, is, He will not lay upon man more. Our translaters
supply the words, then is right to determine what that more is which God will
not lay upon man.

The words have a twofold sense.

First, Some interpreters render them as a direct denial of any power seated
in or liberty given unto man, to plead, capitulate, or to come in judgment
with God; Elihu charging it upon Job, that he had not done well in taking or
using such a liberty to complain about his condition; adds here (according
to this interpretation) God neither has nor will indulge man a liberty (as he
has not given him a just cause) to complain as if he had don him wrong. Quia
non ultra unquam ponet deus super virum. i. e. potestatem homini nunquam
faciet, ut de se ille queri possir. Merc: Neque enim ultra in hominis potestate
est, ut veniat cum deo in Judicio, Vulg:
And if man when God has once declared his mind, and published his sentence,
should make his defense or offer to produce his reasonings against it, the Lord
will not suffer it, he will not permit man to proceed in such a way, seeing the
sentence of God and what he does upon it is always just, and the right stands
ever on his side, as well as the sovereignty is ever vested in him. Master
Broughton translates the whole verse to this sense, Therefore it is not for man
ever to purpose to enter into judgment before the Omnipotent; there is no
appeal from God, nor will he admit sinners by any artifices, or delays, to
interrupt the progress of his justice.

Secondly, The words (as we render them) carry both an assertion, that God is
just, and a demonstration of it; For he will not lay upon man more then is
right, that he should enter into judgment with God; that is, man has no cause
to enter into judgment with God, if God should give him leave, and let him be
at his liberty in that point; for God will not lay upon man more then is right.

There is another supply of a word which also bears a good sense, and suites
well with this exposition; thus, Non imponet ei amplius quam ferro possit. Drus:
God will not lay upon man more then he can bear, (or has strength to bear)
that he should enter into judgment with him; if we read the text so, then
that of the Apostle (1 Cor: 10.13.) is a clear exposition of it, There has no
temptation taken you, but such as is common to man; but God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted, above that you are able, but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. A
temptation or affliction common to man, is but such as man may bear; God will
not overburden his people, he knows what flesh and blood, as also what Grace
can bear. As a man would not lay such a weight upon a child, as would burden
a man, (we lay a child's burden upon a child, and a man's burden upon a man) so
the Lord measures and weighs out his judgments in proportion to every man's
strength, he will not lay upon him more then he is able to bear. That Is a good
sense, and has a clear reason in it, why man should not complain of what God
lays upon him, it being only proportionate to his strength.

But I shall rather prosecute the text according to the supply given in our
translation, which makes the reason why all such complaints should be forborne
and silenced, to be this, because the sufferings of man are never proportioned
beyond his desert.

He will not lay upon man more then right. That is, more then he has deserved,
or is equitable in his case; whatsoever is laid, or imposed upon man beyond
right, he has cause to complain of, and may traverse the Judgment, or desire
another hearing, yea he may appeal to some higher Judge if there be any; But
if what is awarded against him be right according to Law, and suitable to
Justice, let the sentence be what it will (let him be able to bear it or no,
much more if he be able also to bear it, as in this case it is) he has no
cause at all to desire a review of it. Thus it is (says Elihu) in all the
dealings of God with man, He will not lay upon man more then is right, that he
should enter into judgment with God.

To enter (or go) into judgment (as the word is) is either to begin or renew
a suit, and to desire the hearing of the cause again. God makes no faulty
Judgments, why then should any cause determined by him come to a second
hearing? there may be reason enough among men to hear a cause again, but what
God resolves, needs not be reviewed much less reversed. Here then Elihu meets
with those frequent complaints of Job under his afflictions, and likewise with
those his several motions, and earnest petitions, to have his cause heard
afresh, as if God had pressed him too sore, or, at least, had not done him right
in suffering him to be so sorely pressed by men. Thus Elihu seems to say; God
never gave any man any just cause, to plead his cause over again with him, nor
has he given thee (O Job) any cause to desire it of him. It Is true, carnal
men, yea and sometimes godly men, when (as Job here) they are greatly
afflicted, are ready to think and say they are over-severely dealt with; But
the reason of Elihu stands good and firm against all these thoughts and
sayings. For he will not lay upon man more then is right.

Hence note.

God never wronged, nor will wrong any man. There are two special cases, in
which God never did, nor ever will wrong man; First, he will not wrong man by
denying him that reward, which he has freely promised, no man shall serve God
for naught; he shall not say, God has promised, but he has not performed. The
experience of his people seal to the truth of his promises, as well as their
faith imbraceth it. That hope of man which is anchored in a promise of God,
never miscarried not made any man ashamed. Secondly, God will not wrong man, by
laying upon him a greater punishment then he has threatened. The Magistrate
cannot be charged with laying more punishment upon an offender, then is right,
if he punishes him not more then the Law allows. There may be a great deal
of severity (I grant) in punishing up to the rigor of the Law, but there is no
unrighteousness in it. The Mosaical law allowed of forty stripes; now if they
had laid forty-one upon any offender, they had laid upon him more then was
right, because they exceeded the Law; and to have laid full forty stripes,
which was the utmost they could by Law, had been severe, therefore they usually
abated one stripe at least; Hence the Apostle Paul says (2 Cor: 11.24.) Of the
Jews five times received I forty stripes save one; if they had given Paul
forty stripes they had done no wrong as to the Law, though one had been too
many for and a wrong to him who had not broken their law. Seeing the Lord lays
no more upon the worst of sinners, then the law allows, he does not lay upon
man more then right, Yea not only the chastisements which the Lord lays upon
his own servants, but the greatest punishments which he lays upon the worst
of the wicked, in this world, are much less then might with Justice be
inflicted. This was Ezra's humble acknowledgement before the Lord ( Ezra 9.13.)
And after all that is come upon us, for our evil deeds, and for our great
trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us less then our iniquities
deserve. The punishment that was upon the people of Israel, was exceeding
great, in so much that Daniel says in his prayer ( Chap: 9.11, 12.) Under the
whole heavens, has not been done, as has been done upon Jerusalem, yet Ezra
speaking of that very dispensation, says, Thou have punished us less, then
our iniquities deserve. In this life the greatest of our punishments, are less
then the least of our sins. Every sin, or transgression of the Law, deserves
eternal death; therefore in this life the greatest punishments that fall upon
sinners, are less then their sins. As the least mercies which God bestows
upon them, are greater then the greatest of their deservings. (That was Jacobs
free confession ( Gen: 32.10.) I am not worthy of the least of (or I am less
then) all the mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy
servant) So the greatest punishments that fall upon them in this life, are
less then the least of their sins: And in the next life, where sinners shall
have full measure, heaped up, pressed down, running over, and that for ever,
yet then they shall not have one grain more, either of weight or measure, then
they have deserved. The Lord lays upon no man in this life so much, nor in
that to come more then is right.

Hence it follows, Secondly. Man has no cause to complain of God, or God
has not given any man any cause to complain whatsoever his sufferings are.

Why should he complain who has but his right? As God has not given any man
a liberty to complain, so he has not given any man just occasion, or a true
reason to complain. If the burden of punishment be heavy upon any man, let him
thank his own sin, or self for it, he has but his due from God. We are often
cruel to and wrong our selves, God is usually merciful, and never but just to
us; yea how great soever any affliction is, it is a mercy that it is no greater;
and God can quickly make it greater, how great soever it is, and still be just.
As he never does more then he may, so he never does so much as he can in
punishing us. The Lord has more in the treasures of his wrath, then yet he
has powered upon the worst of sinners. Nor indeed can the most capacious
vessels of wrath, hold all his wrath; it is, as himself is, infinite. Cain
said, My punishment is greater then I can bear (Gen: 4.13.) yet God could have
made his punishment greater then it was. Therefore Jeremy confessed ( Lam:
3.22.) It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not. Whatsoever is less then utter consumption, has some
mixture of compassion in it, every punishment has somewhat of compassion in
it, except that of everlasting damnation. O then let all flesh fear and
tremble to enter into Judgment with God, to complain or take offense at any
of his proceedings with them.

There are four things considerable in God, which should stop all men's mouths,
from daring to do so.

First, He is most powerful; there is no escaping out of his hands.

Secondly, He is most wise and sees quite through all that man has done with
his hand, yea all that has been contrived in his heart.

Thirdly, He is most just, and will not be taken off from doing less, neither
can he be provoked to do more then is right to any man.

Fourthly, How should man fear to enter into judgment with God; seeing his
judgments are past finding out; they are, as the Scripture says, a great deep,
we are not able to fathom them; therefore woe unto those that complain of, or
murmr against them: we should always pray with David, (Psalm. 143.2.) Lord,
enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified: and we should always be afraid to enter into judgment with God,
for he will not only justify, but magnify himself and his works in the sight
of all men living. We should be so far from entering into judgment with God
(which many do when they think they do it not) that we should continually beg
him, not to enter into judgment with us; for we are not only unable to stand
before him, but must certainly be broken before him; as it follows,

Verse. 24. He shall break in pieces mighty men without number, and set others
in their stead.
As Job had often complained of his own troubles, so he had sometimes of the
prosperity of wicked men, or that God suffered them who were not worthy to
live, yet to live in pomp, power, and pleasure. Thus he expostulated the
matter, ( chap. 21.7.) Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are
mighty in power? etc. We may conceive Elihu removing that stumbling stone, and
answering him in these words, while he tells us what work the Lord often
makes in the world in those his lesser and particular days of judgment,
among the mighty of the world. He not only strikes and wounds, troubles and
vexes them, but breaks them, yea, breaks them in pieces. (...) est ictibus
subigere and mollire.
The words are a comparison between the mighty, and a potters vessel, of whom
David says ( Psalm. 2.9.) Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall
(not only give them a knock, or a crack, but) dash them in pieces as a potters
vessel; and he can break them so small, that there shall not be found in the
bursting of them (as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 30.14.) a sh^rd to take fire from
the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit. Thus the Lord shall break
in pieces, not the poor, and weak, and mean, but M^ghty men.

Or as some render, He shall break in pieces many men; Hieronymus interpretatur
multos.
the Hebrew word refers to both quantities, to great in bigness, and great in
number; but because we have their innumerableness mentioned distinctly in the
next clause, (...) ad utramque quantitatem refertur, sed malo fortes. Merc.
it is best to render the word by greatness in power or might here. For least
any should think God could break only a few mighty men, therefore it is said,
he shall break in pieces mighty men, in all the notions of might, the mighty in
corporal strength, the mighty in civil strength, power, or authority, yea
martial mighty men, if they stand in his way, and hinder his work, Without
number.

All these God breaks in pieces like a Potters vessel, as if they were but a
swarm of flies, and sweeps them away in a moment: As if he had said, (...) pro
(...), ita ut numerus eorum investigari non possit, Pisc. Certo numero
contineri non possunt, quos propter peccata Dei justitia conteret, Aqui.
God will give innumerable examples of his infinite power and unbiased justice
in destroying the wicked, he has and will destroy so many of them, that no man
knows how many he has destroyed, or will destroy.

There is another reading of the words, Our Translators put it in the margin of
our Bibles, He shall break in pieces mighty men without searching out, which
may have a twofold interpretation.

First, He shall break them in pieces, and no man ought to search or enquire
into his doings, or say unto him (as that mighty Monarch confessed, Dan. 4.35.)
What do thou? And thus it answers what was said in the former verse, They
shall not enter into judgment with God. Some have a privilege at Sea to pass
without searching, no man must enquire what they carry, or what their lading
is; surely when the Lord breaks mighty men, no man may search into his
doings, or enquire into his actions, further then for his own instruction and
admonition, that he may answer the purpose of God in them, and give him glory.

Secondly, He will break them in pieces without searching; that is, Deus cui
omnia nota sunt, non opus habet, in facta hominum inquirere, Drus.
without any formal examination or usual ways of Process, at least without any
known to us. The Lord needs not to stand searching as men do, to find out
matters against the mighty, to frame articles, or to bring in his Bill of
Attainder against them; God needs not search to know, because he knows all
things without searching, and therefore may justly break men in pieces without
this kind of searching; or, He will break them in pieces without inquisition;
that is, without showing cause why. God does not always publish the reasons of
his proceedings, his judgments are often secret, though never unjust. We
render well, He will break in pieces mighty men.

Without number. That is, how many soever they are, or though they are
innumerable, yet he will break them in pieces as one man: Thus the word is used
( chap. 5.9. chap. 9.11. In both which places the Reader may find the extent
and emphasis of this expression, without number, further explained) only
consider, that these mighty men without number, may be taken two ways.

First, Collectively, as combined by leagues, or as marshalled by orders into
an Host: as if he had said, though an Army of them be gathered together, even a
numberles Army, yet the Lord can break them in pieces, ( Isa. 8.9.) Associate
your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird your selves, and ye shall
be broken in pieces.

Secondly, We may take these mighty men singly or personally; Thus the Lord
breaks in pieces mighty men without number, one after another, one at this
time, and another at that time; how many of them soever arise up one after
another to oppose him, to oppress his people, or to do wickedly, they shall
surely be broken. Mr Broughton renders to this sense, He bruiseth, mighty men
without end, he does not break them without end, as having no end in breaking
them, but as without end, notes his breaking them endlesly, or for ever. If men
will sin without end, he can break them without end; he can renew destruction,
as fast as they renew transgression.

Hence Observe, First, God can easily ruin the mightiest men of the world.

He can break them in pieces, as an earthen vessel, with an iron rod, and how
soon is that done? Both the holy Scriptures, and humane Histories abound with
such examples. What a number of mighty men inhabited the old world? There were
Giants in the earth in those days, (Genesis 6.4.) yet God overthrew them all by a
flood, they sank like lead in those mighty waters. What mighty men inhabited
Canaan, before the children of Israel came to possess it? The searchers of the
land brought in a report, that they were but as Grasshoppers to them, and they
had Cities walled up to heaven, yet the Lord broke in pieces all those mighty
men, Sihon the King of the Amorites, and Og the King of Bashan; and when David
came to the Crown, he (in Gods strength) destroyed the rest of them. What
mighty men were they that sat upon the Throne of the four Monarchies? They had
in their days the rule of the whole world, yet the Lord brake them in pieces.
First, the Assyrian, then the Persian; the Grecian, and the Roman Monarchs were
also broken in pieces: This was revealed to the golden head in a dream, ( Dan.
2.35.) Then was the Iron, the Clay, the Brass, the Silver, and the Gold broken
in pieces, and became like the chafe of the Summer threshing floor. The mighty
men of Israel, (when they sinned mightily) the mighty men of the ten Tribes,
yea the mighty men of the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, God brake in
pieces; his own mighty people could not stand before him, when they corrupted
themselves, and would not be made clean. God breaks mighty men, as easily as
they break his commandments: And usually when mighty men come to that height of
sinning, to sin, or break his Commandments with ease, he commands them (for his
own ease, as he is pleased to speak Isa. 1.24.) to be broken in pieces. To sin
with ease, is a sure sign of a hard heart, yea of a profane heart. He was a
mighty man of this temper, whose breaking in pieces the Lord threatened in such
wrathful Rhetoric by his holy Prophet, ( Ezekiel. 21.25, 26, 27.) And thou
profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is come, when iniquity shall have
an end; thus says the Lord God, Remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown:
this shall not be the same, Exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high.
I will overturn, overturn, overturn, and it shall be no more, until he come
whose right it is, and I will give it him. What breaking words are here! Even a
treble overturn denounced against the mighty. Thus said the blessed Virgin
while her soul was magnifying the Lord, and her Spirit rejoicing in God her
Savior, ( Luke 1.52.) He has put down the mighty from their seats, and
exalted them of low degree.

Secondly, In that, he breaks in pieces the mighty without nmuber,

Observe.

It Is no matter to God either how mighty or how many the wicked are. I have
heretofore spoken of the multiplied acts of Divine Justice, and of the
unwearied outgoings of his powerful providence to abate the pride of man, and
therefore I shall not stay upon it, but only caution the mighty ones of the
earth, in the words of the Psalmist upon this point, expressed in the very words
of this Text; for, God having said to his Son, to whom he had given the Nations
for an inheritance, ( Psalm. 2.9.) Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, and
(in case of their non-submission to his Scepter) dash them in pieces like a
Potters vessel, he presently adds, ( ver. 10.) Be wise now therefore, O ye
Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth; serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling; Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the
way.

Yet though God be often at breaking work, he is not always at it; for when he
has broken in pieces mighty men without number, he (as it follows in the
Text) will Set others in their stead.

We may suppose these words given in upon a twofold account.

First, To show the absoluteness of the power of God, as well in setting up, as
in casting down:

Secondly, To show that we need not be dismayed nor discouraged, when we see
God breaking in pieces some or many mighty men, for he can find out others to
supply their room, Ne ex hoc credatur deperire humani generis status, addit and
stare facit alios, Aquin.
and fill up the breaches which he has made. He sets others in their stead.
The force of the Hebrew is, He shall make others to stand; and that is more then
barely to set another in the stead or place of those that are removed and
broken. God is able not only when many fall to raise up others, but he can also
establish and settle those whom he raises up. That Is the meaning of Elihu,
when he says And set others in their stead.

Elihu does not determine who or what these others are; God may make his choice
where and of whom he pleases, in what family or tribe he pleases, to set up
in the place of those mighty men, whom he, at any time, is provoked to break in
pieces. The words are plain; Note only two things from them.

First, God has as absolute a power to set up, as to pull down when and whom
he pleases. (Psalm. 75.6, 7.) Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from
the West, Nor from the South, but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and
sets up another. The same Sovereignty of God is asserted ( Dan. 4.17.) To
the intent that the living may know, that the most high rules in the Kingdom
of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest
of men. God sometimes sets up those that are base in their conditions or
manners for a scourge or punishment; sometimes he sets up those that are base
in their state or condition, being either men of meanest birth, or men laid
lowest by affliction, ( Psalm. 113.7, 8.) He raises up the poor out of the
dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill; that he may set him with
Princes, even with the Princes of his people. No man is so poor, but the Lord
can enrich him; no man so low, but he can raise him up. He can bring a man from
a dunghill to a Palace, and from the dust to a Throne. Saul was cast down, God
broke him in pieces, though a mighty man, and set up David in his stead; He
chose David his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds, from following the
Ewes great with young, he brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
Inheritance: (Psalm. 78.70.71.) When God pulled down Haman (the great favorite
of Ahasuerus) who had plotted to advance Mordecai to the gallows, and ruin the
whole seed of the Jews, God did not only break him and his plot, but really
advanced Mordecai into greater favor and confidence with his Prince then ever
Haman had before.

Secondly, Note from the force of the word, to make to stand.

The Lord can establish those whom he sets up. The Lord does not only set
up, but keep up whom he pleases. Though they are weak whom he sets up, yet
he can keep them up; though they whom he sets up, are opposed by the strong,
yet he can keep them up. He can make a shrub stand fast, though opposed by a
Cedar; and a reed to stand firm like a rock, though opposed by an Oak.

Thirdly, Note.

The Lord takes care of the Government of the world. He is not for breaking
work only, he is for setting and settling too. God will not let the body of a
people perish for want of a head; but when in judgment he has broken one in
pieces, he in mercy sets up another. Mighty men are like pillars, which bear
the weight of a whole Commonwealth or Kingdom. God rarely deals with Nations,
as Sampson did with the house wherein the Philistims were assembled, who at
once pulled away the pillar, and pulled down the house; but if he pulls away
one pillar, he puts in another, that the house may stand. God will not leave
the world without rule or rulers: when he takes with one hand; he gives with
another; when Judas the Traitor was broken, Christ found out (a better man)
Matthias to set in his stead. And when the whole Nation or Church of the Jews
was broken and rejected, God called in the Gentiles, and set them up for a
Church and people to himself in their stead; and (which is the greatest
instance of all) when Jesus Christ was taken from the earth, when he left the
world, who was the mighty one (he was first broken in pieces for our sins, and
afterward taken away) yet he gave a supply, and left us another in his stead;
I will not leave you comfortless, (says he John 14.18.) I will come unto you,
though not till the great day in person, yet every day in the gifts and graces
of my Spirit. I will pray the Father and he shall give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever; (John 14.16.) Again, ( John 16.13.) When
he the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all truth. God sent the
Spirit in Christ's stead; he does that for us which Christ did for us while he
abode on the earth: and therefore the holy Spirit is not unfitly called the
Vicar of Christ here on earth, he feeds the flock of Christ, he looks to his
people, he teaches, he comfort them in Christ's stead. And thus in Nations,
when God breaks one Governor, he sets up an other in his stead; he will not
leave Nations without guides and leaders, nor suffer the staff of Government to
be utterly broken, which is the greatest plague that can come upon any people.
From the whole verse take these tree deductions.

First, There is a vanity and an uncertainty, at least the vanity of
uncertainty in all worldly greatness and powers. God blasts and breaks them as
he pleases: The most substantial things on earth are but as a shadow; or like
the Land-sea's continually flowing and ebbing. One is cast down, and another is
exalted; one is broken, and another is set up; yea, the same man who was lately
exalted and set up, may quickly be cast down and broken. There is no assurance
to be had of the best things here below, but only this, that we cannot be sure
of them: and it is good for us, that we cannot be sure of the best things here
below, both because we are so apt to say, It is good for us to be here, where
yet our best things are not to be had, as also because by this consideration we
may be provoked to look after, and make sure of better things then any are here
enjoyed, even those best things which are under hope.

Secondly, Great examples of God's judgments, are to be eyed and marked. Why
does Elihu call Job to this consideration, but that he might be humbled, and
give God glory; it is not for naught that God breaks in pieces the mighty ones
of the earth, (1 Cor. 10.11.) All these things have happened unto them for
ensamples; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the
world are come. As all those things among the Jews were Types; so all that God
does to this day upon the Princes, and Powers of the world, Nunquam culpam suam
reprobi nisi in poena agnoscunt. Greg. lib. 25. Moral. cap. 9.
are but as types and ensamples; they are for admonition, that we should
consider those sins which have brought such judgments upon men, such breaking
judgments, and avoid them* some will never see sin in it self, but in the
judgments of God all may see what sin is; when mighty men are broken in pieces,
what will God do with the rest, if they sin against him, and provoke the eyes
of his glory? Zenacharib that proud Prince, who invaded the land of Israel in
the time of Hezekiah, being broken in pieces by his own bowels (his sons slew
him) it was ordered to be writ upon his Tomb, In me intuens pius esto. Herod.
lib. 2.
Let every one that sees me, learn to fear God, and not to defy him, as I
have done. The breaking of the powers of the earth, should exceedingly exalt
the fear of God in our hearts. Quicunque celsa dominatur aula me videat and tu
Troja, nunquam documenta dedit sors majora, quam frogili loco starent superbi.
Senec. in Troad. de Hecuba, Act: 1. Sc. 1.
It is better to learn wisdom by the punishment of others, then by our own.

Thirdly, If God will break the mighty, though many, yea though innumerable;
This is comfort to the people of God when they are oppressed, and broken by
oppressors, let them remember God is able to break their oppressors, though
they rise up like Hydra's heads one after another; read the whole fifty and
second Psalm, as also the 39th and 40th verses of the 107th Psalm, as a clear
proof of this. Elihu having showed what sad breaches God makes upon mighty men,
makes a fourth inference in the words following.

Verse. 25. Therefore he knows their works, and he overturneth them in the
night, so that they are destroyed.
For as much as God breaks them, it is an argument that he knows what they
are, and what they have been doing; There is a threefold reading of these words.

First, Some read them as implying God's making others to know their works, God
makes the secret sins of men visible, Propterea facit ut nota sint facta
ipsorum. Bez. (...) cognoscit aliqui exponunt faci, cognoscere, sc. facit ut ab
omnibus eorum scelera cognoscantur. Merc.
by his visible judgments. Wrath seen, may give us a sight of sin. Some insist
much upon this exposition; and it is a truth, the Lord by his judgments brings
to light, and does as it were spread open, as in the face of the Sun, the
wickedness and wicked deeds of mighty men: that all may know his judgments are
deserved by their works, he makes their works known.

Secondly, Others render, He makes them know or acknowledge their works; The
Lord at last by sore, and severe judgments, will extort confessions from the
worst of them, he will make the mighty acknowledge that their works have been
naught, and their ways perverse. In Scripture the same word signifies to know,
or to confess and acknowledge. Thus here, he makes them to know or to
acknowledge what their works have been.

Thirdly, Rather take it, as we render, (...) non significat notum facio quod
sciam, sed tantum cognosco, ideo transtuli cognoscit. Drus.
of Gods act in taking notice of all they had done; Therefore he knows their
works: As if Elihu had said, these mighty men of the earth, thought themselves
under covert, or that the Lord took no notice of them, nor of their works,
their works were done in the dark, and they supposed the Lord could not pierce
into them; but he will make it appear, that he knew their works, when he makes
his justice appear in punishing them for their works.

Hence Note.

We have an assurance that God knows the works of all mon, because he
punishes all wicked works, or the works of the wicked so punctually and
exactly. He punishes many of them here, and will punish them all hereafter:
when we see him breaking the mighty men of the world, it is a proof that God was
in their Cabinet counsels, and saw what was done there, we may conclude he knew
their works, though men knew them not; he could never lay his judgments so
exactly upon them as he does, if he did not know their works: That God knows
the works of all men, is a point I have met with before, and therefore pass
from it here.

And he overturneth them in the night. There are several readings of this
clause.

First, Some thus, Therefore the Lord knows their works, and turns into
night; that is, he turns their prosperity into adversity, he brings trouble
and affliction upon them; they lived before in a day of prosperity, in a day of
power and worldly greatness, but he turns them into night.

Secondly, Or, as others thus, He turns the night, that is, he changes the
night into day, Simul atque mutavit noctum etc. Jun. i. e. Lucem protulit, qua
revelantur omnia in judicio ejus. Id.
he takes away the dark and close covers of their sins, and makes them as
manifest as the light; Now, as the Apostle says ( Ephesians. 5.13.) That which
makes manifest, is light; If God were not light, he could not bring to light
the hidden things of darkness, nor manifest the counsels of the heart.

Thirdly thus, Therefore he knows their works, and when the night is turned,
he destroys them; that is, they are destroyed and perish as soon and as
easily as the day takes place of the night; or as soon as the night is turned
into day, so soon does the Lord destroy them, he can quickly make an end of
them, he can destroy them with the morning light.

We render, and I judge that best, He overturneth them (their persons) in the
night; and so Elihu points at the season, or time, of Gods breaking and
overthrowing them, he does it in the night. We may take it strictly, as in the
case of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, ( Exodus 12.29.) as also in that of
Belshazzer, (Dan. 5.30.) or, in the night, that is, suddenly, unexpectedly;
Though a man be destroyed in the day, yet if it be done suddenly, he looking
for no such matter, we may say it was done in the night; because then men are
most secure: This way of expressing an unlookt for evil, the coming of in the
night, was opened at the twentieth verse, therefore I shall not stay upon it,
He overturneth them in the night.

So that they are destroyed. Elihu said before He shall break in pieces mighty
men; Here he says, they are destroyed; that is, they shall be broken to
purpose, or thoroughly; God does not break them in pieces for correction, but
for destruction; there are great breakings upon the persons and estates of some
men, and yet it is but for correction; others the Lord breaks for utter
ruin, (as here) so that they are destroyed. The Original word signifies to
destroy as it were by pounding in a Mortar; (...) contrivit, atirivit, contudit.
and the same word is used to signify a contrite heart, a heart broken by
godly sorrow under the sense of sin. They are destroyed, or, as it were ground
to powder; you may break a thing into many pieces, yet not grind it to powder
or dust, as corn in a Mill; or spice in a Mortar; but these (says Elihu) are
not only broken to pieces, but beaten to dust, that is the strength of the word
which we render, they are destroyed.

Hence Note.

What God has a mind to do, he can do it certainly, and will do it thoroughly.
He breaks men in pieces, so that they are destroyed and brought to dust; When
the Prophet declares the breaking of the four Monarchies, it is said ( Dan.
2.35.) They shall be as the chafe of the Summer threshing upon the Mountains;
if the Lord will destroy the mightiest, they shall certainly be destroyed; as
Balak said to Balaam; I wo^ that whom thou cursest are cursed; as if he had
said, thou can curse effectually, if thou will set thy self to it; it is not
in the power of all the Balaams in the world to effect a curse, though they
pronounce a curse, it is only in the power of the Lord to curse effectually; he
can bless whom he pleases, and they are blessed; he can curse whom he
pleases, and they are cursed. Thus as Ephraim lamenting his sin and sorrow
confessed, ( Jer. 31.18.) Lord, thou have chastised me, and I was chastised;
God paid him home (as we speak) if we chastise a child, he is chastised, but)
when Ephraim says, thou have chastised me, and I was chastised; his meaning
is, I was greatly and effectually chastised; that is, first, In a literal
sense, I found thy hand heavy upon me, it was a sore affliction that I was
under. Secondly, In a spiritual sense; Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised; that is, my heart was humbled and broken under thy chastisements; in
either notion we see the effectualness of the Lords work; Thou have chastised
me, and I was chastised. And therefore Ephraim invited the Lord to another
work; Turn me, O Lord, and I shall be turned; if thou will but turn thy Spirit
upon this hard heart of mine, it will be effectually turned, it will be not
only broken for sin, but from sin: As if he had said, I have received reproofs
and counsels from men, and they have not turned me, but Lord, if thou will
reprove and counsel me, I shall be turned; thus the Lord carries his work home
to conversion, in his spiritual dealings with some, and to confusion in his
temporal punishments upon others. Thus he threatened his own people for their
confidence in Egypt, and contempt of his holy word ( Isa: 30.13.) This iniquity
shall be unto you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose
breaking comes suddenly at an instant. And he shall break it as the breaking
of a potters vessel, that is broken in pieces, he shall not spare; so that
there shall not be found in the bursting of it, a sherd to take fire from the
hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit; that is, ye shall be made
utterly useless and unserviceable. That piece of a vessel is of no use, which
will not serve for either of those little uses, the taking of a little fire
from the hearth, or a little water out of the pit. And if God sometime break
his own professing people thus small for their sins, how small will he break
his professed enemies! read for this the last breaking and downfall of Babylon
(Rev: 18.21, 22, 23.) Therefore take heed how you fall into the Lords hand; for
he can not only break you in pieces, but break you to powder, he can break you
to destruction: The Lords purposes, and the effects of them, his works, are
never without effect, for good or evil, for the better or for the worse.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 26, 27, 28. He strikes them as wicked men, in the open
sight of others:

Because they turned back from him, and would not Consider any of his ways.

So that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto him, and he hears the
cry of the afflicted.


ELihu having in the former words showed the impartial vengeance of God upon
the wicked, proceeds to show two things further about it in these words.

First, The manner of it, v. 26. He strikes them as wicked men in the open
sight of others.

Secondly, The causes, grounds, or reasons of it in the 27th and 28th verses;
why does God strike them? it is because they turned back from him, and would
not Consider any of his ways; (...) percuss^t volam ad volam, adversas manus
collisit. Significat aliquid cum sono deijcere vel co^plodere; unde aliqui de
ejectione ignominiosa cum sibilis exponunt. Alij volunt peti metaphoram a
vesica vento turgente, quae pede compressa cum sonitu rumpitur. Scult: Pro
improbis complosit eos. Tharg: In loco improborum complodit eos. Jun:
So that they cause the Cry of the poor to come unto him; their impiety in
turning from God, and their iniquity in oppressing the poor, provoked the Lord
to strike them as wicked men in the open sight of others.

Verse. 26. He strikes them as wicked men.
The word which we render strike, specially notes the striking of one hand
against the other; our hands clasht, or struck together, make a sound, or
noise: Thus some Interpret the word here, He strikes them with an Ignominious
sound. Many rejoice and clap their hands when they fall; They are destroyed
with shouting. Others take the metaphor from a bladder filled with wind, which
being cast on the ground, and stamped upon with the foot, breaks with a noise,
or gives a crack in the breaking: Wicked men, in all they think, and purpose,
and do, are but wind, and when they break, they break like bladders, which
have nothing of solidity, only breath and fume in them. Such an Elegancy there
is in this word, hitting the vanity and vacuity or emptiness of wicked men, all
their filling being but like that of a bladder, which puffes them up, but never
makes them wise or solid men.

Further, I find this word used for striking in a threefold sense.

First, For striking with sorrow and shame; such was that of repenting Ephraim
(Jer: 31.19.) Who when he thought on his ways, was ashamed and smote upon his
thigh.

Secondly, For striking with scorn and derision ( Lam: 2.15.) All that pass
by clap their hands at thee, they hiss and wagge their head at the daughter of
Jerusalem.

Thirdly, There is also a striking with anger and indignation; Thus Balak being
vexed, because he could not have his purpose to bribe Balaam to curse the people
of God, Smote his hands together (Numb: 24.10.) and the Lord himself is
expressed expressing his angry indignation against his own people the Jews, by
this gesture ( Ezekiel. 22.13.) Behold therefore I have smitten my hands at thy
dishonest gain, etc. There is then a special Emphasis in the smitting or
striking here intended, besides the general meaning of it. (...); Extin^it
autem impios. Sept: Pro impijs strinxit eos. Bold: i. e. vinculis funibusque
ligare fecit eos tanquam impios atque ^^a spectandos palam deduci et proponi.
Bold:

(...) causalis est, propterea quod impij sunt. illud quasi saepe non
similitudinem sed veritatem significat; et idem valet quod utpote, etc.


The Lord destroys wicked men in such a manner, that all who behold it are
filled with the admiration of his righteousness, and with a detestation of
their lewdness. The Septuagint say, He has Extinguished wicked men; As if
they were but smoking firebrands, or the stinking snuff of a candle. Another
renders it, He binds them, the word signifying also to bind or straighten^ The
Lord brings forth evil men, as it were, bound hand and foot to Judgment. We
say clearly, He strikes them, and that in no ordinary way, but As wicked men.

So we translate; yet the particle which we render, as, may (here according to
its frequent use elsewhere) carry in it a reason, He strikes them because they
are wicked; so some read the text, not as we by way of similitude, how God
strikes them, but as giving an account why God strikes them, even because
they are wicked men. Mr Broughton says, For the wicked he makes plentiful
riddance of them, which has a good sense in it, but takes somewhat too great a
liberty with the original text; And because the reason of this striking is held
forth in the verses following, it is more distinct to say he strikes them (not
because they are wicked men, but) as wicked men; that is, as wicked men use to
be stricken, or as they use to be proceeded against in a way of Justice. God
strikes the mighty men (of whom he spoke before) as common offenders or
malefactors; Though they are great on earth, yea though they are (in title)
Gods upon earth, yet God strikes them as the basest of wicked men, they shall
not only dye (as it is said, Psalm: 82.7.) or fall like one of the Princes, but
they shall dye like the worst of men, like wicked men.

Hence note.

First, They that do like the wicked, shall be dealt with by God as the
wicked, how high, or mighty soever they are in this world. And as they who are
openly wicked shall be dealt with as wicked men, though they be high in the
world; so they that are really wicked shall be dealt with as wicked men, though
they make a high profession of godliness in the Church, even them will God
strike also as wicked men. Christ speaks of some ( Math: 7.22.) who made a
l^^d profession of religion, with whom yet he dealt as with wicked men: Depart
from me (says he) I know ye not, ye workers of iniquity. Though God does not
deal alike with all wicked men, yet he deals with them all like wicked men.
There is not one wicked man in the world, but he shall be dealt with according
to his kind, that is, as a wicked man, and shall have that for his portion
which is the portion of their Cup, who are wicked. As the Godly, so the wicked,
whether profane or false and hypocritical, shall be esteemed and handled by
God like themselves, or as they are.

Secondly, From the first word, as it is taken causally, (upon which many
insist) Note.

The reason why wicked men ^ne stricken is because they are wicked. Were not
men wicked they should never feel such strokes from the hand or rather iron
rod of God. If any smart and are ruined, they may thank themselves for it, that
is, their sins for it; their sufferings are the fruits of their sin. The
Prophet told the sinful Jews so ( Jer: 4.18.) they had an affliction upon
them, which did reach even to the heart, God made their hearts ache, he struck
them to the heart; but why did he so? the answer is, Thy sin and thy doings
have procured those things to thee, etc. He strikes them as wicked men.

In the open sight of others. Locus videntium, locus patens frequens celebris,
omnium oculis expositus. Par: Importat visionem paradigmaticam et exemplarem.
Merc:
These words are a further description of the manner how God strikes the wicked,
he does it openly, or (as we put in the margin) In the place of beholders, that
is, in such a place, and in such a manner that all may behold it: we say, He
strikes them in the open sight of others; that is, he punishes them in an
exemplary way, or that they may be an example of warning unto others. For, The
place of seers, or of beholders, is some open and eminent place opposed to a
Corner; as Paul said pleading his cause before king Agrippa (Acts 26.26.) This
thing was not done in a Corner; no, it was done, as upon the housetop, even in
the place of beholders. The Lord will not have to do with wicked men only in a
Corner. He will have witnesses of his doings with them. There shall be enough to
take notice how he handles them, therefore he often takes open vengeance on
them, in the frequent assembly and concourse of many beholders, both approving
and reverencing, yea adoring the impartial equity of the supreme Judge, and
his care of humane affairs. So then, the words are an allusion to the
execution of Common malefactors, who dye by the Judgment of the Magistrate,
such being condemned and sentenced by the Judge, are not put to death in the
prison, or in a hole, but are taken out and carried to some noted place of
execution, or a Scaffold is purposely erected, where a multitude of spectators
are admitted to come and behold the Tragedy. When our Lord Jesus Christ, who
(to deliver us from our transgressions) was numbered with transgressors, when he
(I say) was crucified, The Evangelist says ( Luke 23.35.) The people stood
beholding, and the Rulers also with them derided him. Christ himself was
stricken as a wicked man in the place of Beholders. And so have many thousands
of his faithful witnesses. The wicked deal with them often, as the Lord
deals sometimes with wicked men, they are brought forth from prison to death,
and executed in the open sight of others. All things (in this world) come alike
to all, no man knows love or hatred by all that is before them (Eccl: 9.1,
2.) The Apostle Paul speaking of himself and his fellow-Apostles (to show the
public disgrace which they were put to) says, We are made a spectacle to the
world, to Angels, and to men (1 Cor: 4 9.) The Greek is, we are a Theater to
the world, etc. As if he had said, all see how we are used; And as bloody
persecuters make the faithful servants of Christ a spectacle, so Christ will
at last make wicked men a spectacle to the world, to Angels, and to men. Thus
it is prophesied ( Isa: 66.24.) that all flesh who come to worship before the
Lord, shall go forth and look upon the carcasses of the men that have
transgressed against him, etc. They shall be stricken in the place of Beholders
or Seers.

Some expound that word Seers, Videre saepe significat cum. voluptate aliquid
spectare. Scult:
as implying more then ordinary seers, or more then barely such as see what is
done; namely, such as are delighted and pleased with what is done, yet not as
it is a suffering of pain by man, but as it is an act of Justice from God.

Hence note.

God oftentimes does Justice upon sinners openly. The Judgments of God are of
two sorts: Some are secret, others are manifest; he can do execution upon men
when none see it; nay he does the severest executions upon some men when they
themselves do not see it (that is the sting and severity of the Judgment,
that) they have not so much as any sense of the wrath of God, when the full
vialls of his wrath are pouring out upon them. But many of the Judgments of
God are open; As he strikes some so secretly, that none can see it, so others
so visibly that all may see it. Thus the Lord commanded Moses (Numb: 25.4.)
when Israel had joined themselves unto Baal-peor, Take all the heads of the
people and hang them up before the Lord against the Sun. By the heads of the
people, we may understand either the capital offenders, those who were most
active and ready in that wickedness; or their principal Rulers, who in stead
of stopping them from or punishing them for those offenses, gave way to them or
at least wincked at them: These must be hanged against the Sun, that is, as
Elihu speaks here, in the open sight of others, or, in the place of seers.
Thus they were made an example of caution that all might see and fear and do
no more presumptuously. Read the like executions of divine Judgment threatened
(2 Samuel: 12.11, 12. Isa. 26.11.) John in the Revelation (Chap: 15.4.)
prophecyeth of the Saints triumphing at the fall of Babylon, and singing the
song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy
works, etc. for thy Judgments are made manifest: God has now stricken
Babylon his great enemy in the open sight of others; his Judgments were right
before, (they are always right) but till then not manifest. David says (
Psalm: 9.16.) The Lord is known by the Judgment which he executes: now if the
Lord be known by the Judgment which he executes; then the Judgment which he
executes must be known; it must be an open Judgment; and such are very many
of the Judgments of God, they are acted as upon a stage. And I may give you an
account in three particulars why the Lord will sometimes do Justice, in the
place of beholders, or in the open sight of others.

First, That there may be witnesses enough of what he does, and so a record of it
kept, at least in the minds and memories of faithful men for the generations
to come.

Secondly, The Lord does it not only that he may have witnesses of his
Justice, but also that his Justice and the proceedings of it, may have an
effect and a fruit upon those who did not feel it, nor fall under it. This was
the reason why the Lord threatened to punish Jerusalem in the sight of the
nations ( Ezekiel: 5.5, 6, 7, 8, 14, 15. Jerusalem dicitur medium terrae, ut pote
quae su in quarto climate ideo autem urbem in medio mundi constitutam et quisi
in loco videntium elegit deus, ut sicut beneficia ita et supplicia eorum
omnibus essent conspicua. Pined:
) Thus says the Lord God, this is Jerusalem, I have set it in the midst of the
nations and Countries that are round about her. God is said ( Psalm: 74.12.) To
work salvation in the midst of the Earth; that is, in Jerusalem, or among his
people, who were placed as it were in the Center, and middle part of the world:
not that Jerusalem stood exactly in the midst of the world, but because many
Nations stood about it, that might well be called a City standing in the midst
of the nations; and therefore it is added ( v. 8.) Thus says the Lord God,
Behold I, even I am against thee, and will execute Judgment in the midst of
thee, in the sight of the nations. God would execute Judgment in Jerusalem a
City placed in the midst of the nations, that as the nations had taken notice
of the extraordinary favors, benefits, deliverances, and salvations which God
wrought for Jerusalem; so they might also take notice of his judgments and
sore displeasure against them. Jerusalem was not seated in some nooke, corner,
or by-place of the world, but in the midst of the nations, that both the
goodness and severity of God toward them might be conspicuous; And that the
nations round about seeing the sufferings of that people for their sin, might
fear and tremble to sin as they had done; for if Jerusalem the seat of
instituted worship and Gods peculiar people were not spared when they provoked
God, their neighbors might well conclude, surely we shall not be spared: As
the Lord himself argued it against those uncircumcised nations ( Jer: 25.20.)
Behold I will bring evil upon the City that is called by my name, and should
ye go utterly unpunished? Certainly no! If God punish his own people in the
sight of the heathenish nations when they do wickedly, what then are heathen
nations to expect, who do nothing but wickedness?

And this (by the way) may give the Alarm, and be a very awakening
consideration to all the Churches and people of God at this day throughout the
world. If God did strike Jerusalem of old, that is, his people there, as wicked
men even in the open sight of others; if the Lord was so wroth with his people,
that he polluted his inheritance, and gave them into the hand of the Chaldeans
(Isa. 47.6.) If he forsook his house and left his heritage, and gave the
dearly beloved of his soul into the hands of her enemies (Jer: 12.7.) and
said ( v. 9.) Mine heritage is to me as a speckled bird, the birds round about
her are against her; yea if he (in the close of that verse) invited the worst
of men under the name of beasts to spoil them, Come ye, assemble all the
beasts of the field come to devour; Now (I say) If God struck his ancient
people, the Jewish Church, as wicked men, by wicked men, in the open sight of
others, O let the Gentile Churches take heed, lest they also be stricken after
the same manner. Many Churches in Germany and elsewhere have been stricken so
already in this last age, let the remnant both there and elsewhere remember
themselves and give glory to God, before he cause such darkness to come upon
them, and strike them also as wicked men in the open sight of others.

God lets some sinners suffer or punishes them openly, both because he would
have all others take notice that he dislikes what they have done, as also
because he would not have others do the like, lest they be made like them,
both in the matter and manner of their sufferings. It Is a favor (as well as
our duty) to be taught by other men's harms, and to be instructed by their
strokes, to prevent our own.

And as the Lord strikes some wicked men openly, that others may fear and not
do the like, so, that they who have done the like may be humbled for, and
repent of what they have done. God does not always power out the same
Judgments upon all those that have done the same wickedness, (the whole world
would be in blood if he did so) but he takes here and there one that the rest
bethinking themselves, and (with repenting Ephraim) smiting upon their thigh,
may prevent the Lord from smiting them at all, especially from striking them as
wicked men in the open sight of others. It is said ( Rev: 11.13.) that, after
by a great earthquake the tenth part of the City fell, and in the earthquake
were slain of men seven thousand, the remnant were affrighted and gave glory
to the God of heaven. And surely the reason why after one man has been
chastised or stricken, others take their turns too, is because they did not
take warning by his chastisements and sufferings. Did we but mind the scope of
God in punishing any openly, the striking of one might save hundreds, or
thousands from being stricken; but because men are so secure and so slow to
take warning by what God does to others, therefore they are called forth one
after another, to suffer and feel his heavy hand in their own persons.

Thirdly, God strikes some wicked men in open view, or in the place of
beholders for the comfort of his own people, and for their encouragement (
Psalm: 58.10, 11.) The righteous shall be glad when he sees the vengeance; not
that he shall be glad of the vengeance, purely as it is a hurt, or a suffering
to the creature, but the righteous shall be glad when he sees the vengeance of
God, as it is a fulfilling of the threatening of God against the sin of man, and
an evidence of his own holiness. ( Psalm: 64.9, 10.) God shall shoot suddenly at
the wicked, all that see them shall flee away; that is, they that see how God
deals with them, shall get away, least ruin overtake them, or they shall flee
away (which is their best course) from such courses and practices as procured
them that ruin. Thus the righteous rejoice when they see the vengeance, yea
they wash their feere in the blood of the ungodly; that is, they get comfort
and encouragement by seeing the Lord avenge their cause against their
adversaries. It is said ( Exodus: 14.30, 31.) that God having overwhelmed the
Egyptians in the red Sea, the Israelites saw the Egyptians dead upon the shore;
God did not suffer the carcasses of the Egyptians to sink to the bottom of the
Sea, but caused them to lie upon the shore, that the Israelites might see them:
And when Israel saw that dreadful stroke of the Lord upon the Egyptians, It is
said, The people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord and his servant Moses:
Thus they were confirmed in their faith by Gods open Judgments upon the
Egyptians; They were smitten in the place of beholders, or in the open sight of
others.

There are yet two other interpretations of these words, which I shall touch.

He strikes them in the place of beholders, In loco videntium. i. e.
exiflentes in statu in quo videre poterant tum per naturalem rationem tum per
sacram doctrinam quid esset faciendum et quid esset vitandum. Aquin:
that is (says my Author) in such an estate or condition wherein themselves
might see, both by that natural light which every man has, and especially by
the light of doctrine and instruction, what they ought to do, and what to shun
or avoid. In this sense to be smitten in the place of Seers, is, to see and
behold, to have light and understanding what to do, or forbear doing, and yet
to act against that light, and so provoke the Lord to strike us; which is a
great aggravation both of the sin, and punishment of man.

A second gives it thus, He strikes them in the place of seers, or where they
saw; that is, he strikes them in the eye of their understanding, or in their
Judgment, he strikes them with spiritual blindness, as the Sodomites were
with corporal, so that they are not able to see their way, or what becomes
them to do. This is a most severe stroke. There are many who when they have
abused the light, and would not do what they saw they ought, God has struck
them with such blindness, that they should not see what they ought to do. Both
these are rather tropologicall Expositions then literal, yet they may have
their use and improvement by way of allusion. In this place Elihu having thus
held out the openness and exemplariness of the judgments of God upon wicked
men, proceeds in the following words, to show the equity and righteousness of
them.

Verse. 27. Because they have turned back from him, and would not Consider any
of his ways.
Here, I say, lest any should surmise that God takes vengeance without cause,
the cause is named and assigned why God takes vengeance; it is because they
turned back from him, they in the pride and stoutnesse of their hearts (which
great men especially are much subject to) refused to obey and follow God, and
therefore his wrath followed and brake them.

They turned back from him. (...) Verbum e verbo; de post eum sic alibi,
scortati sunt, de post dominum. i. e. deserto domino.
There is a twofold turning back; First, Corporal; Secondly, Moral or
spiritual, none can corporally turn back from God, though some attempt it; to
what hiding place soever we turn our selves, we cannot be hid from him who
fills every place? But there are many who morally turn back and depart from
the living God. Sinners would turn their persons back from God, and hide their
heads, they would get quite out of his sight and reach, though they cannot; but
all of them turn back from God in their hearts.

In two respects sinners in general, may be said to turn back from God;
First, when he commands and they will not obey him, or withdraw their obedience
from his commandments; Secondly, when he entreates and invites them, and they
will not come to him, nor accept his tendered respects and favors. Thus the
Lord complained of his own people ( Psalm: 81.11.) Israel would none of me; God
wooed them, but they had other lovers, and after them they would go; even
Israel lightly regarded the God of Israel, yea they made a defection from him.
More distinctly.

There is a threefold turning back from God, or they who turn back from God
are of three sorts.

First, There is a turning back from God, by those who have openly followed
him, or made profession of his name; Thus hypocrites and formalists turn back
from God. This the Scripture calls backsliding, revolting, and going a whoring
from God. Such as these, are like perfidious Soldiers, who enter and list
themselves in an Army, marching with them for a while, and taking their pay,
yet soon after forsake their colors, and turn to the enemy: Thus many
apostatize from God to the Devil, and to the creature, or (as Paul said of
Demas) they forsake Christ and embrace this present world. Luther was charged
by his enemies that he was an Apostate, and he acknowledged, he was, but he
thanked God for it, he indeed turned back from what he did once profess, but
it was to a better profession; he did not turn from God to the world, but he
turned from the world to God, and that is a blessed Apostasy; he did not turn
from truth to error, but from error to truth; he did not turn from pure worship
to Idolatry and superstition, but from Idolatry and superstition to pure
worship. How wretched is their condition who are indeed Apostates! who turn
from God to the world, from truth to error, from pure worship to Idolatry and
superstition, from a holy conversation to profaneness, looseness and
libertenisme, to a compliance with the world, and a symbolizing with them in
their lusts and wickedness. This abominable apostasy is a fruit of hypocrisy,
Hypocrites turn only their faces to God, and Apostates turn their backs upon
him, or, turn back from him. And all they who turn only their faces unto God,
will for their own advantage, or to save themselves turn their backs upon him.
Hypocrites when put to it, when the storm comes, ever prove Apostates.

Secondly, There is a turning from God found even in the best followers of God;
who is there among the Saints on earth that keeps constant un-interrupted
communion with God? The least degree of inordinate letting down or turning the
heart to the creature, is, a degree of turning back from God. As holiness is
our motion toward God, and to act holyly is to keep the eye of the soul
always upon God; so, unholiness, is an aversion from God. David did not say,
nor could he say (though as holy a man as lived) that he had never turned from
God; he could only say that he had not wickedly departed from God (Psalm: 18.21.)

Thirdly, There is a turning back from God, proper to all unregenerate persons,
whether they be such as are civilly honest and possibly such as do not decline
the outside of that religion wherein they were borne and bred; or such as are
flagitious in their lives and ways, scorning to own religion, and being even
ashamed of the ways of God. These may be said to turn back from God, because
they have many calls to God, and are invited to come unto him; which yet they
either neglect and mind not at all, or refuse and reject, and so thrust away
God from them; and when the light comes, they love darkness rather then light,
because their deeds are evil (Joh: 3.19.) Such were they of whom Job spoke (
Chap: 21.14.) They say to God depart from us: he does not intend it of
Apostates in a strict notion, who once made profession of godliness; but he
speaks of common and profane persons, who have no mind at all to obey or walk
with God, but mind only the fullfilling of their lusts, or the affairs of this
present life; and so their whole life is nothing else but a turning from God.
Qui quasi ^d industria recesserunt ab eo vulg: sc: a deo peccantes ex certa
malitia. Aquin:
Thus the vulgar translation renders the text with a good significancy, though
not with a clearness to the Hebrew; who have purposely turned from God;
distinguishing them from those who through daily Infirmity turn from God, as
the best of his people do; whereas, these sin willingly, yea wilfully and
resolvedly against God. I conceive, the words of Elihu in this text are to be
understood of turning from God in this third sense; For he is not here speaking
of those who were eminent professors before, and did Apostatize; much less of
those that turn from God by daily failings in duty, or some neglect of duty;
but he is speaking of such, whose whole course of life is as a continued
turning from God, themselves never having been wrought upon by the grace of
conversion, or savingly turned to him. This third sort of turners back from God
are most proper to the present text, though such also are within the reach and
compass of it, who do wickedly after they have made fair pretensions to the
best things. This is the reason why God strikes the mighty to destruction;
They have turned back from God. The reason being thus explicit and express,
teaches us,

First.

God never punishes any man without cause. God does not always show the cause
why he punishes this or that man, but he never punishes any man without
cause; if he strikes, it is because men turn back from him, either by a plain
apostasy from what they once professed, or by a notorious course of impiety,
refusing so much as to own his ways or make profession. God electeth some, and
passes by others without respect to any thing in them; Jacob have I loved, and
Esau have I hated; God has mercy on whom he will have mercy (Rom: 9.13, 15.)
thus, I say, God electeth us without respect to any good in us; but God never
strikes or punishes us, but with respect to some evil in us or done by us.

Secondly, Note.

It is the duty of all men to follow after God. To follow God in his way, and
to propose God as our end, contain the sum of all duty. That, God has made
man and given him a being, that, he placed man in the highest form of his
visible creation, should draw man after him. We ought to follow God because we
are his creatures, because we have our all from him, or because in him we live,
and move, and have our being, as the Apostle speaks of mankind in general,
even of the heathens ( Acts 17.28.) And forasmuch as we are his offspring (v.
29.) our hearts should spring, or rise up to him in love and thankfullness; as
the rivers, because they come from the Sea, go back thither: so we being the
offspring of God, and derived from him, should be always returning to him.
This nature tells us; And therefore the Apostle says ( Acts 17.27.) God has
made of one blood all nations of men, that they should seek after him, etc. The
light of nature, though dim and dark, shows that a man should feel after God,
as a man in the dark does after his way. And if all men ought to follow God,
because they have their natural life and breath from him; much more should
believers, who have a new, a spiritual life breathed into them, and bestowed
upon them, be always following after God; And the truth is, where true faith,
or the life of grace is, that soul cannot live without daily returnings back
to and breathings after God, even as mere carnal men, who are alienated from
the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, are daily turning back
from him.

Hence thirdly, Note.

The whole life of every unconverted soul, and notorious sinner, is a turning
from God. They who set their faces sin-ward, turn their backs Godward. They
who pursue their lusts, their covetous, their ambitious purposes, they who
gratify the flesh, their pride, their luxury, their wantonness, their malice,
what do any of them, what do all of them, but turn back from God? The best of
Saints have their turnings from God, but they do not make it their business to
turn from him; their business is, to draw near, to keep close to God, to keep
as it were in his eye; but as for the natural man and gross sinner, his
business is a departing from God ( Heb: 3.12.) Take heed (says the Apostle)
lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the
living God. He gives Caution to the Church, search your selves, lest there be
found in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, etc. Where unbelief remains in
any measure unmortified, it may quickly do a great deal of mischief. And
where it remains in full power or altogether unmortified, it does all manner
of mischief. All which is wrapped up in that one word, a departure from the
living God. Unbelief is the root of Apostasy; The reason why sinners turn from
God, is, because they give no Credit to the word of God; they are not persuaded
God is such a one as he has declared himself to be, and will either do that
for the obedient which he has promised, or that against the rebellious which
he has threatened. They who believe not in God cannot but depart from God; And
therefore the life of an unbeliever is a continual departure from God. He sets
out with his back upon God; the very first step he takes into the world is from
God. As soon as we are borne we naturally go astray speaking lies; we are ever
out of our way, till we look toward God, and aim at him; which we never do,
till he by his mighty power changes our hearts, turns our course, and
brings us home to himself.

Further, Consider, how did these mighty men turn back from God? they might
say, where did we see God? where did God appear to us? that we are thus
charged with turning back from him?

I answer; First, God manifests himself to man in his works, or in his
providence. Secondly, He manifests himself in every part of his word,
especially in his Commands, in his promises, and in his threatenings; in his
Commands, he manifests himself a holy God; in his promises, a gracious and
bountiful God; in his threatenings, a just and righteous God, who will neither
do wrong nor suffer himself to be wronged. (...). Quia declinaverum de leg^
del. Sept:
The Septuagint make this Exposition the text, translating these words of
Elihu, thus; Because they have turned from the Law of God.

Hence note.

They who turn from the word of God, turn back from God. When a Command comes,
if you slight the authority and obligation of it, you turn back from God; when
a promise comes, if you do not believe the truth of it, and hope for the good
of it, you turn back from God; look what of the mind of God is manifested to
you in the dispensation of the word, if you do not obedientially close with
it, you neglect to close with God himself, and while you turn from it, you
turn from God himself. Thus the Apostle speaks concerning back-sliders (2
Pet: 2.20, 21.) If after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ they are again entangled
therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the beginning. For
it had been better for them not to have known the way of God, then after they
have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them; so
that, a turning from the Commandment of God, is a turning from God himself;
He turns back from the holy commanding God, who turns back from the holy
commandment of God, and he turns back from the God of the promise, who
turns back from the promise of God.

Fifthly, Note.

As it is exceeding sinful to turn back from God, so they who do so, grow
every day more and more sinful. If a man be once upon a course of backsliding
and Apostatizing from the commands and promises of God, he will find himself
worse and worse day after day; for still the further from God any man goes,
the more vain he grows; and the more does lust get a hand over him. As
unbelief is the root of Apostasy from God, so Apostasy increases all that
wickedness which is in man. As the cause of all evil, whether of punishment
or of sin, is our departure and turning from God; so the very nature of sin is
a turning from God; and therefore the more we turn from God, the more sinful
and the fuller of sin we are. As the nearer we come to God, the more holy and
spiritual and heavenly we are ( while we with open face as in a glass (says
the Apostle, 2 Cor: 3.18.) Behold the glory of God (that is, while we draw
near to him in his holy ordinances) we are changed into the same image, that
is, we become more like to God) so the more we keep at a distance from God, the
more unlike we are to him, that is, the more unholy we are. And as persons
unconverted, or in an unholy state, are wholly alienated from the life of God,
and cannot endure to come near him; so it is in a degree by any of our
withdrawings or turnings from him: we are made more unholy, and are changed
more into the image of those carnal and earthly things which we behold, and
with which we over-intimately converse in the time of those withdrawings.

Lastly, Note.

A holy life consists in following of and keeping close to God. To keep close
to God is both a holy and a comfortable life; It Is the perfection of Saints to
walk with God: Enoch walked with God, and that was his holiness ( Gen: 5.24.)
Caleb followed God fully, Optima vivendi ratio est deum sequi. Religiosissimus
dei cultus est imitari quem colis. Lact: lib: 5. Instit: cap: 10.
and that was his holiness. A spiritual life, is nothing else but our
following God. The most religious worship of God is to imitate whom we worship.
And our imitation of God is our following of God, no man can imitate any thing
but when his eye is upon its pattern, or the Idaea of it abides in his mind.
And therefore it is said of the ungodly man ( Psalm: 10.4.) God is not in all
his thoughts (then follows, v. 5.) his ways are always grievous. If God be
not in the thoughts of a man, nothing of God is stamped upon the ways of that
man. In vain are we called Christians, unless we keep close to Christ, and in
vain do any pretend to godliness, unless they walk with God. Jesus Christ
has called himself the way (Joh 14.6.) chiefly upon this account, because by
him we go to the Father, and have acceptance with God by the grace of
Justification; but Jesus Christ is the way also, of our Sanctification; we must
walk in him, and as he walked (1 John: 2.6.) that we may be holy: every
departure from God lets the heart loose to sin. That which shall maintain the
Saints holiness to Eternity, is, They shall always behold the face of God;
they shall never turn back from God, they shall never be taken off one moment
from the actual vision, enjoyment and contemplation of God in glory; therefore
they shall never be taken off from actual holiness and purity, now in
proportion, as we keep our hearts and spirits steady upon God, and do not turn
back from him, such is our holiness in this life; and as our holiness is, such
will our comfort and peace and joy be in this life. For as because when we
arrive at glory, we shall never turn back from God, much less turn our back's
upon him, therefore in glory there is fullness of Joy, and pleasure for
evermore; so the nearer we keep to God, and the closer we walk with him in
this life, the fuller and more lasting will our joys and pleasures be.

As in this former part of the 27th verse, we have had the first cause opened
why God strikes the mighty as wicked men in the open sight of others, namely,
their apostasy from God, Because they turned back from him. So in the latter
part of this verse we have another reason assigned why God does it, and that
is, because They would not Consider any of his ways.

The word which we render Consider, signifies also to understand or know, which
is an act precedent to consideration; (...) intellexit cognovit co^templatus
est. Hinc Maschil, carmen erudiens ode didascalica, Tit: Psalm: 32.
Consideration is a contemplative act; by consideration we become more knowing,
but we cannot consider any thing till we have some understanding or knowledge
of it. And this word is often (in another Conjugation) used in the title of
some special Psalms. The 32d Psalm, as also the 42d Psalm, is called
Maschil, as much as to say, a teaching, or an instructing Psalm, a Psalm
giving understanding and requiring deep and serious consideration. Thus in the
text, they would not consider, nor understand, nor know, nor contemplate any of
his ways.

The Hebrew is, all his ways; that is, none at all of them. The ways of God
in Scripture are taken in a twofold notion; First, for those wherein he would
have us walk; such are the ways of his commandments: they are called the
ways of God, because he directs us to walk in them. A holy life consists in
our walking with God, and we cannot walk with God any further, or any longer,
then we keep in the ways of his commandments. It is said of the children of
Israel, after the death of Joshua (Judge: 2.17.) they turned quickly out of the
way, which their fathers walked in, obeying the commandments of the Lord; but
they did not so. To obey the commandments, is to walk in the way of them.
Taking the ways of God in this sense, when Elihu says, They would not
consider any of his ways, his meaning is, they did not intend nor had any
heart to set themselves to learn the mind of God revealed in his word
concerning their duty, or what they ought to do; they know not the ways of
God practically. The word properly denotes the wisdom and prudence, which
stays not in notion, but proceeds to action. These men lived as if they had
never heard of, (...) ad prudentiam and sapientiam practicam rerum agendarum
pertinet.
at least never understood the Law of God, which is the rule of life. They
considered not the ways of God to walk in them, as Moses exhorted the people
of Israel (Deuteronomy: 29.9.) Keep therefore the words of this covenant to do them.

Secondly; The ways of God are those wherein himself walks, the works of God
are the ways of God; the works of his providence either in mercy or in
judgment, either in doing good or in doing evil (that is, poenal evil) these
are the ways of God; in these God shows himself as in a way, in these he
goes forth in his power and goodness, in his mercy and justice. All these
divine glories and perfections are discovered in the works of God. Thus David
is to be understood when he says ( Psalm. 25.10.) All the ways of God are
mercy and truth, to them that fear him, and keep his Covenant; that is, all the
providential works of God are mercy and truth; though all of them are not mercy
in the matter, or precisely taken as works done, though none of them are mercy,
respecting some persons to whom they are done, for many of them are materially
chastisements, afflictions, and crosses to good men, and all of them are wrath
and judgment to evil and impenitently wicked men; yet they are all mercy in
the issue or result of them to good men, or to those who fear God, and keep his
covenants. For whether he do good, or whether he do evil, whether he wounds, or
whether he heals, all these providential ways of God, are as truth in
themselves, so mercy to his people; or, as the Apostle concludes ( Romans 8.28.)
They work together for good to them that love God, and are the called according
to his purpose. In both these senses we may expound this Text, They would not
consider any of his ways; that is, they would neither consider the Laws of
God, which were the way wherein they should walk toward him, nor would they
consider the works of God, which are the ways wherein himself walks toward
them. This was the spirit of that evil generation intended in this Scripture;
they had not much understanding in, and less consideration of the ways of God.

Hence, first we may take notice, Elihu does not say, they did not consider his
ways; but, they would not; It was not so much an act of carelessness and
negligence as of contempt and rebellious resolution.

Hence Observe.

Evil men have no will to consider or understand the good ways of God; yea,
their will is against such an understanding. A natural man likes not to retain
God in his knowledge, (Romans 1.28.) Now, he that does not like to retain God in
his knowledge, or had rather think of any thing then of God, he can never
(while such) like to retain the ways of God in his knowledge; he that lays
God out of his thoughts, will much more lay the law of God out of his thoughts.
The natural man has not only a blindness in his mind, which hinders him from
discerning the things of God, (they being discernable only by a spiritual eye)
but he has an obstinacy in his Will; or, he has not only an inability to
know, but an enmity against the knowledge of that which is spiritual: He shuts
his eyes, and draws a curtain between himself and the light which is ready to
dart in upon him; away with this light, says he; Thus he rebelleth against the
light, and as his understanding is dark, so his affections are corrupt. Solomon
gives us all this in the expostulations of wisdom with wicked men, ( Prove.
1.20, 21, 22.) Wisdom cries, etc. How long ye simple ones will ye love
simplicity, and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate
knowledge? That which a man hates, he has no will, no mind to know. An
impotency or inability unto God, argues a very sad condition, but a rebellion,
a frowardness, a wilfulness against it, demonstrates a condition much more sad;
not to know because we have no means of knowledge, will make us miserable
enough, but not to know because unwilling to receive, or because wilfully set
against the means of knowledge, renders any man's condition most miserable. Such
were these in the Text, They would not consider any of his ways.

Secondly, Elihu says not, they did not know any of his ways, or they knew
not which way to go; but they would not consider them. There is no man but
knows some, yea many of the ways of God, that is, of those ways wherein God
would have him to walk; these ways of God are written in the heart by nature,
there is an impression of the Will of God upon every soul, though not such an
impression or writing as grace makes there (that is another kind or manner of
work) for, when once through grace the Law of God is written in, and impressed
upon the heart, then the heart is suited to the Law, yea, the heart is not only
conformed unto, but transformed into the Law of God, whereas by nature the Law
is written only so far as to give us the knowledge of the Law, and a conviction
of that duty or conformity which we owe to it. The men here intended by Elihu,
knew the Law or ways of God, by the light of a natural conscience, but not by
the light of a renewed conscience, and therefore they would not consider any of
his ways, which is a farther description of the heart of man in a state of
Nature.

Hence Note.

That which a natural man knows of the will of God, he will not consider,
unless it be to reject and turn from it. I (says Wisdom, Prove. 1.24, 25.)
have stretched out my hand, (as a Teacher does to his hearers or disciples) and
no man, (that is, no mere natural man) regarded, they set at naught my counsel,
and would none of my reproof. Let me say what I would, they would at most but
give me the hearing, they would not consider it; though the light shined in
upon them, and they could not choose but see something, yet they would not sit
down and roll it in their thoughts, and work it upon their hearts, to find out
the excellency of what they saw. It is a very great measure of sinfulnes not to
know the ways of God, but not to consider what we know, but lightly to pass it
by, that is a greater measure of sinfulness.

Thirdly, comparing this assertion concerning wicked men, they would not
consider any of his ways, with their practice in the former part of the verse,
they turned back from God, and with the effect of it in the verse following,
they made the cry of the poor to come up to him, etc.

Observe.

The reason why men are so wicked, and act so wickedly, is, because they mind
not the Word of God. They who consider not the rule of the Word, are far both
from righteousness toward man, and holiness toward God. If once a man throw
aside the Word of God, where will he stay? He will neither abide in any ways
of holiness, nor will he abide in any ways of righteousness; they cannot make
conscience of the ways of God, who will not consider the ways of God. We have
this clear character of a wicked man, ( Psalm. 50.) he is one that will possibly
take the covenant of God in his mouth, he will be talking of it, his tongue may
be tipped with it, but ( verse. 17.) he hates instruction, and casts the words
of God behind his back. He that would consider a thing, holds it before his
eye, and keeps it, as much as he can in sight; therefore the Lord, when he
would assure Zion how much he did consider her case, though she had said a
little before, God has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me, yet
presently the Lord says, ( Isa. 49.15, 16.) Can a woman forget her sucking
child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they
may, yet will not I forget thee; (what follows?) Behold I have graven thee upon
the Palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me. As if the Lord had
said, you may be sure I will consider your case, for I have you here pourtrayed
upon the palms of my hands, and am always viewing your walls, either as ruined
and demolished, to move me to pity, or in that strong and beautiful model
according to which I purpose to raise them up again, or re-build them. Thus I
say, both God and man intending to consider any thing, have it always before
them; but what a man has no mind to consider, he casts it behind his back;
thou castest my words behind thy back, says God to the hypocrite, and when
once the hypocrite has got the word behind him, then he is ready for any
wickedness ( verse. 18, 19, 20.) When thou saw a thief, thou consentedst with
him, and have been partaker with the adulterer, etc. Whence was all this? he
had cast the word behind his back. It is David's question, ( Psalm. 119.6.)
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? The answer is, By taking heed
thereto according to thy word; that is, by continual eying of the word, and of
his way, and by comparing them together. They that will make right work, must
be always eying the rule; if once you lay by the rule, you will make but
crooked, or bungling work: When the rule of righteousness is laid by,
righteousness is laid by too. These mighty men of whom Elihu speaks would not
consider any the holy ways of God, and you see what ill favored work they
made, what soul ways they walked in.

Fourthly, The Text does not say they would not consider some, or such and such
of his ways, but any of his ways.

Hence Note.

A wicked man likes, delights in, or loves no one way of God better or more
then another. He is as much out with all as with any, they are all alike to
him, that is, he likes none of them; they would not consider any of his ways.
He that hates one truth of God, hates all truth, though possibly his hatred
is not called out or acted against some truths; and he that hates one law of
God, hates all his laws, though possibly his lusts are not drawn out against
some of them. The reason why the Apostle James says, ( chap. 2.10.) Whosoever
shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all, is,
because if a man has a mind to sin against one branch of the law, that evil
principle will carry him to sin against any branch of it: If he be not stopped
from without, he finds no stop within against the worst of sins, as it is a
sin.

Fifthly, We translate any, the Original word is [all] his ways, which imports
a refusing of every one of his ways; there are several Scriptures of a like
sense ( Psalm. 103.1, 2.) O praise the Lord, and forget not all his benefits;
that is, forget not any one of his benefits; not that a man shall be excused,
though he forget many of the benefits of God, or half his benefits, if so be he
forget not all, or remember some: but when that Scripture says, forget not all
his benefits, the meaning is, forget not any one at all. Thus here, they
considered not all his ways, (that is the letter of the Text, and so Mr
Broughton translates,) that is, none of them. Taking that reading, and the
Scripture sense given of it, it gives us this useful Observation.

That unless all the ways of God be considered and obeyed, there is not any
one of them considered or obeyed. God will not be obeyed by halves; he must
have entire obedience, universal obedience, or he owneth none; there is a band
or tie between all the commandments of God, and unless you keep them all, you
break them all; they that submit not to all, submit to none of his laws. It is
not enough for a man to say he is no adulterer, if he be a thief; or to say he
is not a murderer, if he bears false witness. He that does the one in act, does
the other in his heart; nothing hinders him but the absence of a temptation, or
of an opportunity, the Law does not.

Further, [they] would not consider any of his ways. Who were they? No fools I
dare say, either in their own opinion, or in the opinion of men. Doubtless
those mighty men spoken of by Elihu, were worldly wise men; they were the
mighty, the great men of the world, and they are commonly very considering men,
as well as very considerable men; they are knowing men, as well as men much
known; they are men of counsel, and sit in council to debate difficult matters,
and of greatest outward concernment; these things they could consider exactly,
and weigh them to a grain; but they would not consider any of God's ways.

Hence Note.

There is nothing so little regarded by ungodly men, as the ways of God are.
Though they have wisdom and ability to understand and consider earthly things,
yet they will bestow none of it upon the things of heaven. Christ rebuked
Martha when he saw her so busy about worldly business, ( Luke 10.41.) Martha,
Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things, one thing is needful;
Martha had some care about the one thing needful, but because not so much as
she should, Christ gave her a gracious check and reproof for it: How much more
may Christ come and rebuke the men of the world, ye are careful about many
things, ye are wife considering men about your profits and preferments, those
ye can think of all night long; but there is one thing needful, my ways, my
word, my commandments are to be considered, what account can ye give of or
concerning them?

Farther, this non-consideration of the ways of God is brought as a charge, as
a high charge against those mighty men; not only were they bad men who did not
consider the ways of God, but this was a part, yea I may say the whole of
their badness, that they did not consider the ways of God.

Hence Note.

Not to consider the ways of God, is in it self a very great sin. The
omission, or nonperformance of what is good, is as sinful as the commission or
doing of that which is evil. Not to do good is to do evil; especially when it
is the not doing of such a good duty as opens a way to the doing of all evil.
Should we suppose a man not chargeable with the breaking of any commandment of
God, yet if we could charge him that he did not consider the commandments of
God, this were the breaking of all the commandments. For as they are all to be
considered that we may keep them, so if we consider them not, we cannot keep
them. It Is the description of a godly man, ( Psalm. 1.2.) His delight is in the
Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and night. Meditation is
nothing else but consideration. A godly man meditates or considers day and
night what the Law or Word of God is; not that he thinks of nothing else but
the Law of God day and night, for then he must throw off his Calling; but the
meaning is this, he is very sedulous and watchful of all opportunities both
night and day, to get and keep his heart up in holy meditation; and why is he
so much in holy meditation? It Is surely, that he may be much, yea always in
holy action; and when it may be said of a man, that his meditation is not in
the Law of God, neither day nor night, or that he never considers the ways of
God, this is an undeniable evidence that he neither keeps in the way, or
observes any one line or letter of the Law at any time. It is our sin, and that
no small one, not to consider our own ways, how much more is it sinful not to
consider the ways of God! To consider our own ways, is a great part of our
work: If we consider not our own ways, they will soon be crooked ways. The
Prophet advises the Jews, ( Hag. 1.5.) Consider your ways; the Text is, Set
your heart upon your ways; that is, ponder your ways; as if he had said, the
reason why your feet are so often in bad ways, is, because your hearts are so
seldom upon your ways. Now, if not to consider our own ways be so sinful,
and subjects us to every sin, then much more is it sinful not to consider the
ways, the word and truths of God, and much more does the neglect of this lead
or lay us open and obnoxious to every sin. This neglect is not only a special
sin in it self, and an effect of sin, but the general cause of all other sins:
What sin is not, or may not be found in the ways of those men, who consider
not the ways of God?

Lastly Observe.

Sin makes men stupid, and transforms them into fools. He that is not a
considering man, is a weak and a foolish man; every wise man is a considering
man; and the more a man is versed in consideration, the more wise he is, and
the wiser he grows. The wicked man is often called a fool in Scripture, and he
deserves no better a title; when he is called so, he is both served and called
in his kind ( Psalm. 14.1.) The fool has said in his heart, there is no God.
The thoughts of the heart are the sayings of the heart; and sin has made a
wicked man so much a fool, that as he knows not how to say any thing of God,
which is honorable, with his tongue, so all that his heart can say, that is,
think of God, is, that God is not; which as it is the highest blasphemy, so the
deepest piece of folly and irrationallity that ever was hatched in the heart of
man. Sin makes dull-heads, it stupifies the soul; sinners consider not that, at
any time, which is their interest as much as their duty to consider of at all
times, the ways of God, as taken for the ways wherein man ought to walk
toward God.

Again, If we take the ways of God in the second notion, for the ways wherein
himself walks toward man, usually called his works, or the ways of his
providence.

Note.

It is the mark of an ungodly man, not to consider the works and providence of
God, how God walks toward him, or what he does in the world. (Isa. 1.3.) I
have nourished and brought up children; that is, I have done for my people as a
father for his children; but what follows? My people does not know, Israel does
not consider: They consider not what I have done for them, as well as not what
I have spoken to them; they consider not how I have nourished and brought them
up, as well us not how I have instructed and given them counsel; and from this
neglect God infers, ( verse. 4.) Ah sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity,
a seed of evil doers, etc. they quickly proceed to the doing of all evil
against God, who consider not of the good which God does or has done to them.
Read this sin, the not considering of the works of God, with the sinfulness of
all the works of those unconsidering men, ( Psalm. 28.4, 5. Isa. 5.11, 12.) The
Scripture makes frequent mention how extremely ill the Lord takes it at the
hands of men, when his works are not considered by them, when they regard not
the operation of his hands. Indeed God does much in the world, he walks in
many dark and hidden ways, which though we consider, we cannot fully
understand; Thy way (says Asaph, Psalm. 77.19.) is in the sea, and thy path in
the great waters, and thy footsteps are not known. God has many invisible
works both of mercy and of judgment; yet we should be, though not curiously,
yet seriously searching, as much as possibly we can, Arcana imperii.
even into those ways of God which are unsearchable; we should consider,
though we cannot search them out. But as for those works of God that are
visible and plain, which are written as it were with the beams of the Sun,
which are so plain and obvious, that he who runs may read them, to neglect the
consideration of these, or lightly to pass them by, how sinful is it! Those
works of God which are most plain, have wonders in them, if we could find them
out. As in the plainest Text of Scripture there is a world of holiness and
spiritualness; and if we in prayer and dependence upon God did sit down and
consider it, we might behold much more of those wonders then yet appear to us:
It may be at once reading or looking we see little or nothing, as Elijah's
servant, when he went once, he saw nothing, therefore he was commanded to look
seven times; What now, says the Prophet? O now I see a cloud rising like a
man's hand; and by and by the whole surface of the heavens was covered with
clouds. So you may look lightly upon a Scripture, and see nothing, and look
again, and see little, but look seven times upon it, meditate often upon it,
and then you shall see a light like the light of the Sun. It Is thus also with
the works of God, we pass many of them by as small matters, but when thoroughly
considered, there is a wonderful depth in them; now not to consider those ways
of God wherein he is so visible, and which are the actings and exercising of
his power, goodness, wisdom, and faithfulness, this must needs be a very great
sin, ( Isa. 26.11.) Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, (they
take no notice of it, much less lay it to heart) but they shall see, (they
shall be made to see one way or other,) and be ashamed for their envy at the
people, or (as the margin has it,) toward thy people. As godly men see the
hand of God, and are both confirmed and comforted for his mercy to his people,
so wicked men shall see, and be both ashamed and confounded, because they both
envyed the people of God that mercy, and opposed it. They who will not see the
works of God to give him glory, shall see them to their own shame. God has
given us his works of Creation, that we should consider them daily, as David
did ( Psalm. 8.3.) When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the
Moon, and the Stars which thou have ordained; What is man! etc. How was the
Psalmist ravished with that contemplation? And so may we, while we consider the
works of Providence, whether works of judgment, or works of mercy; whether
vengeance upon the wicked, or deliverance for the godly.

Let us therefore set our selves to this soul-ravishing, and God-exalting work,
the consideration of the works of God: And we are the more engaged to do it,
because God has fitted man, among all creatures in this lower world, (and he
has only fitted man) to give him glory by considering his works. The beasts of
the earth cannot glorify God by considering his works; it is true, both they,
and the fowls of the air, with the fifh of the sea, according to their kind,
praise God; but man only is fitted and furnished with an intellect or
understanding faculty to consider, and so to draw out from all the works of
God, those peculiar excellencies which make his Name glorious: Now, for man to
leave such a faculty unexercised and unacted, (as they who consider not the
works of God do) is not only a dishonor to God, but a degradation of himself.
As it is the privilege and happiness of a man to enjoy the benefit of the
works of God, so it is his holiness and his duty to consider the beauty of
them. And to all who brutishly lay by the works of God without consideration,
let me add this consideration; God considers all your works or ways, and will
not you consider the works, the ways of God! Of this be sure, whether you
consider the ways of God, his Word-wayes, or Work-wayes (of this be sure) God
will consider your ways, certainly he will; those ways of yours which in
themselves are not worth the considering or looking upon, your sinful ways,
though they are so vile, so abominable, that if your selves did but look upon
them and consider them, you would be utterly ashamed of them, yea though they
are an abomination to God while he beholds them, yet he will behold and
consider them. The Lord who is of purer eyes then to behold any the least
iniquity, to approve it, will yet behold the greatest of your iniquities, and
your impurest ways to consider them. Thou (says David, Psalm. 10.14.) Thou
beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it: God beholds the foulest dirtyest
ways of men, their ways of oppression and unrighteousness, their ways of
intemperance and lasciviousness, their ways of wrath and maliciousness, at
once to detest, detect and requite them. If the Lord thus considers the ways
of men, even these filthy and crooked ways of men; should not men consider the
holy the just and righteous ways of God? And that God considers all the ways,
the worst of ways of the sons men appears further in the next verse.

Verse. 28. So that they cause the cry of the poor to come up to him, and he
hears the cry of the afflicted.
If the ways of men come up to God, then surely God considers the ways of
men, even their vile and base ways, their wicked and unworthy ways; how can
he but consider those ways, the cry of which comes up to him?

So that they cause the cry of the poor to come up to him. Effectum hujus
malitiae affectatae ostendit. Aquin:
Here Elihu expounds to us or gives us more particularly what those ways of God
were which those men would not consider, as also what the sin of those mighty
ones was, which provoked God, to strike them as wicked men in the open sight of
others. The ways of God which they would not consider, were the ways of his
righteousness and justice, of his compassion to and care for the poor, they
went quite cross to those ways of God. For they caused the cry of the poor
to come up to him. But do ungodly men bring the cry of the poor up to God?
Certainly they have no such purpose, and therefore those words, So that they
cause the cry of the poor to come up unto him,

Note only a consequent, of what those men did, not the intent of those men;
they aimed at no such thing by their oppressing the poor, as that God should
hear the cry of the poor, yea they hoped the cry of the poor should never
come up to God. They would willingly have stopped the mouths of the poor, that
they should not have cried to God, and presumed the ears of God would be stopped
against their cry, let them cry as long as they would: they do not say to the
poor, go and appeal to God, go make your moan to God, (yet some have been
thus impudently blasphemous, when they have oppressed the poor, to bid them, go
cry to their God) but here we are to understand it as the issue of the
oppression, not as the desire of the oppressors. Their cruel and unrighteous
dealing with the poor (like that of Pharaoh with the Israelites) caused the
cry of the poor to come up unto him.

Further, Some render the text, not as expressing (though supposing) the cry of
the poor coming up to God, but as reflecting or turning back in sad effects
upon their oppressors; So that they cause the cry of the poor to come upon
him; that is, upon every one of them, meaning the wicked themselves; they cause
the cry of the poor to come upon them, or pull down vengeance upon their own
heads. Several learned Interpreters give that reading, taking the relative Him
as a singular put for a plural distributively, upon him, that is, upon every
one of them; Inducendo super eorum quemque clamorem tenuis, quum clamorem
pauperis exaudit. Jun:
taking also the cry of the poor by a metonymie of the effect, for that
punishment which they deserved by their oppression, who caused the poor to
cry. As if he had said; By this their wickedness they draw down the wrath of
God upon themselves.

But I shall only pursue our reading, and give the sense accordingly. They
cause the cry of the poor to come unto [him] that is, unto God. The cry of the
poor is their mournful cry, their pitiful lamenting cry; yet this cry may
possibly be, not so much vocal as real, not so much what the poor did make
formally or directly to God about their wrongs, but the very wrongs and evils
which they suffered cried to the righteous Judge of all the earth. Their
affliction had a cry, a voice, a tongue, a thousand tongues in it. They cause
the cry of the poor.

The word properly signifies those who are exhausted and drawn dry;
oppressors will squeze and suck such as they get into their power, till they
have drawn out every drop; they will empty them from vessel to vessel, till
they become empty vessels, and then like empty vessels the poor sound most and
make the greatest cry. When oppressors have got all the money out of the purses
of the poor, when they have pulled the bread out of their mouths, and even
drawn the blood out of their veins, then they (poor souls!) sound out and
send up their cries to purpose. So that they cause the cry of the poor to come
up unto him.

Hence note.

First, One sin makes way for another. Turning back from God, brings in the
non-consideration of the word and works of God; The word and works of God, not
being considered, brings in the works of unrighteousness toward men, or
oppression of the poor. One sin given way to, makes way for many more. No man
knows where he shall end in doing evil, when once he begins to do evil.
David having defiled the wife is led to the murder of her husband. Peter having
first disowned or denied his Master, proceeded to forswear him. If good men
are thus hurryed from sin to sin before they come to repentance, whether will
sin carry wicked men, who go onne and onne impenitently?

Secondly, Note.

They are the worst sort of wicked who make poor men cry. Oppression is a sin
against the light and law of nature, as well as against the light and law of
God; every sin is the more sinful, by how much it is committed against more
light of any kind, or against more kinds of light; And those sins are
extremely high, which are committed against the lowest and most common light,
that of Nature. They who sin against the light of grace, against the light of
the Spirit, sin (as the Prophet speaks, Hos: 6.7.) like men, but they who sin
against the light of nature, sin as if they were not so much as men but very
beasts, yea worse then many beasts, there being scarce any of them who (as
oppressors do) devour those of their own kind, though of some of them it be
said and experienced (especially of the fishes in the Sea) that the Greater
devour the less, as the mighty men of whom Elihu spoke did the poor, causing
their cry to come up unto God.

Thirdly, Note.

Oppression will quickly cause a Cry. ( Isa: 5.7.) I looked for Judgment, but
behold oppression, and for righteousness, and behold a cry; that is, the cry
of the oppressed. As the act of oppression is a crying sin, so the effect of it
is crying; Oppression cries loud, though the oppressed shut their mouths in
silence and say nothing, yet usually the oppressed cannot forbear crying. The
Apostle James (Chap: 5.3.) schools the wicked rich men of the world, with, a
Go to now weep and howl, etc. Your riches are corrupt, and your garments
moth-eaten; Behold the hire of the laborers which have reaped down your
fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries, and the cries of them which
have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. As the poor
laborers cried, so their hire that was detained cried also. The loud cry both
of the oppressed and of oppression is often reported and recorded in Scripture,
read ( Exodus: 2.23. Lam: 1.17. Chap: 2.18. Psalm: 86.14.) The oppressed who cry
are in a sad condition, but the condition of oppressors who make the poor cry
is much more sad; For, as the text has it, The cry of the poor comes up to
God.

Though God should not come down to that, yet that comes up to God. And when
it is said the cry comes up to him, and not he at the cry. This intimates the
cry of oppression, a very loud cry, that is a loud cry that ascends up to
heaven; Cities walled up to heaven, are high-walled Cities, and cries reaching
up to heaven, are high-strained cries. The breach of a commandment makes a
great crack, especially when it is such a breach as makes the poor cry too. If
a Great house, or a Tower fall suddenly, what a noise does it make? Certainly
the unjust pulling down of any poor man, is like the fall of a great house,
or of a tower, it makes a noise that reaches up to heaven; he does not speak
of Gods coming down. When Cain had slain his brother Abel, the Lord said (
Gen: 4.10.) The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the ground; and
so the cry of Sodom came up to God, ( Gen: 18.21.) The fall of a poor man
makes a report as far as heaven. Among men the fall of Princes and mighty
men, makes a huge noise, all the world is filled with the fall of a Prince,
it is told every where, A great Prince is fallen. But I tell you the fall of a
poor godly man, of the meanest of the servants of God, makes a greater cry
then the fall of the greatest Prince in the world who is not so. The fall of a
poor man by the oppression of the wicked, possibly is not heard a mile from
the place where it was done on eatth, yet it reaches up to heaven; oppression
has not only a voice, but a very loud voice. To wrong a rich man, who can
bear the wrong and be a rich man still, is a sin which has a voice in it; but
the sin which the Scripture says has a cry in it, is the oppressing of a
poor man. There is no liberty given to wrong a rich man, and that would be
considered; Some take a kind of liberty, if he be a rich man that they are to
put a reckoning upon, they think they may do it somewhat largely, and say, he
is able to bear it. But be the man never so rich and able to bear it, yet to
wrong him is a sin, and a sin that God will take notice of to punish. And
though he can bear the wrong done, yet the wrong-doer will hardly be able to
bear it when he comes to reckon with God for it. Thus (I say) to wrong the
rich offends God; but to wrong the poor cries to God; and as it follows in
the text.

He hears the cry of the afflicted. Many cries come up to God which he does
not hear, he does not regard them, and it is possible for a poor man to cry to
God and God not hear him, in the sense here spoken of; Some poor men cry (as
we say) before they are hurt; they cry rather out of discontent then want, they
cry because they have not what they desire, not because they have not what they
need. God will not hear the cry of such, though poor: but when a poor man is
afflicted, when a poor man that is humbled (as the word here signifies) and
laid low in his state, is low also in spirit, and lowly in mind, God hears
the cry of such a poor man. If a poor man have a proud spirit, or is
humorous, God will not hear him, though he cry. The word here rendered,
afflicted, signifies not only a man destitute of help, of strength, of
friends, of assistance, (...) inopes id est, destituti open, nec valentes
resistere, sed malum potius tolerantes et subjicientes se dei. Coc:
(such is the reach and strength of that word) but he is one of a submitting
patient spirit, or it notes a man not only first, unable to resist his
oppressor, but, secondly, unwilling at least not forward to make resistance,
but sitting down by the loss quietly, or possessing his soul in patience
when he has lost all that he possessed by oppression. The Lord hears the cry
of this afflicted man; he will not reject his cry, nor stop his ears against
it. And when Elihu says, He hears the cry of the afflicted, his meaning is,
he yields or grants him the thing he cries, for.

Hence note.

First, God graciously hears the cry of humble oppressed ones. Whosoever cry
to him upon just cause; being indeed oppressed, though they are not godly, yet
God will take notice of their cry; for he will right the oppressed as
oppressed, and therefore the Jews had those cautions ( Exodus: 22.23. Deuteronomy:
24.15.) not to wrong any servant or stranger, let him be who or whence he
would, lest he cry to me (says God) and it be sin to thee. But when any are
not only oppressed and suffer wrong, but are also godly, of humble and lowly
spirits, they are heard much more; when it is not only a cry of nature, but a
cry of grace; not only a complaining cry, but a praying cry, God will certainly
hear, ( Luke 18.12.) Shall not God avenge his own elect that cry to him day and
night? when it is not only a complaining cry that they are under oppression,
but a believing cry to be, or that they shall be delivered from oppression,
when it is a holy cry, the cry of the elect, God cannot but hear their cry. He
hears other cries, he hears the cry of the Ravens when they call upon him,
and provides for them, much more will he hear the cry of Saints, the cry of
believers, the cry of the humbled and humble.

Secondly, as hearing notes granting,

Observe.

The cry of the oppressed brings vengeance upon oppressors. Read Psalm. 12.6.
Eccles. 10.26. Isa. 33.1. Jer. 22.16. All these Scriptures teach this truth,
that the cry of the oppressed brings vengeance on oppressors: Let the mighty
remember, It Is dangerous meddling with Gods poor; it is dangerous meddling with
any poor, but most dangerous meddling with Gods poor. Some will say, there is
such a great man, it is dangerous meddling with him, and they are afraid to
wrong him, they dare not do it; if ever (say they) he should come to know it,
he may break our backs, sit on our skirts, and crush us with his power; but if
they can get an underling, a man below them, they presume there is no great
danger in oppressing him; what can he do? if he bark, he cannot bite; if he
has a tongue, he has no teeth; we can deal with him well enough. Thus, I say,
men think it dangerous to wrong great men, but conclude they may do what they
please with the poor, and those that are underlings; but we should more fear to
wrong a poor man, then to wrong a rich man, though we ought not to do either;
yet, I say, we should more fear to wrong the poor then the rich, because the
poor are under the special protection of the great God; they are under more
promises of protection then the great men of the world are. Therefore Solomon
gives that serious caution, ( Prove. 23.10, 11.) Enter not into the Vineyard of
the fatherless; (do not oppress the poor fatherless,) for his avenger is
mighty, and God will plead his cause for him. You think you may do any thing
with the poor and fatherless; O says wise Solomon, take heed, do not invade
the heritage of the fatherless, (we are not to take the fatherless there in a
strict sense, for those whose parents are dead, but any that are poor and low,
are fatherless, as the Prophet calls them Hos. 14.3.) In thee the fatherless
finds mercy; beware says he how you deal with the fatherless, for his
Redeemer is mighty: though he has no might, yet he has a mighty Redeemer, and
he will plead his cause for him. Possibly the poor man cannot plead with thee,
he cannot try it out with thee in Law, he cannot see an Advocate, but God can
and will be his Advocate. Therefore you that dare not wrong the mighty for fear
they should crush you, be much more afraid to wrong the poor, for God is their
avenger, and how easily can he crush you?

Lastly, This is matter of comfort to the godly poor, to the humble and meek;
they may look for help from God in all their afflictions and hard usages they
meet with in this world from the hands of men; when men even eat them up as
bread, and ride over their heads as if they were but dirt, they may appeal to
heaven and there have audience, they may r^fer their cause to God and be
righted, He that is their Redeemer is mighty, and he will plead their cause;
The expectations of the poor shall not perish for ever, (Psalm. 9.18.) that is,
it shall never perish.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 29. When he gives quietness, who can make trouble? and
when he hides his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a
Nation, or against a man only.


THis verse is an argument or proof of what Elihu affirmed in the former, that,
God hears the cry of the poor: He doubtless hears the cry of the poor, when
he stops or takes away the cry of the poor, when he sets the poor in a quiet
state, or settles them in peace, in such a peace, as their proud and wrathful
oppressors shall not be able to disturb. Thus the Lord deals graciously in
reference both so persons, and Nations, that cry unto him; and that is an
undeniable argument, that he hears their cry, the cry of distressed persons,
the cry of distressed Nations.

Verse. 29. When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he
hides his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a Nation,
or against a man only.
The first part of the sentence, rendered, when he gives quietness, is but one
word in the Hebrew, we had it before ( chap. 3.13.) where Job supposes if he
had died in his infancy, then should he have been still, and been quiet, he
should have slept, and been at rest. The grave is a silent and quiet abiding
place, the dead are quitted of all worldly unquietness. And at the 26th verse
of the same chapter, Job says, I was not in safety, neither was I quiet: (that
is, secure) yet trouble came. So then, as this word notes, the quietness of the
dead who have no sense of trouble, so it notes such a quietness of the living
as has no fear of trouble, When he gives quietness, or as Master Broughton
translates, when he makes rest, who etc. The Italian version is, if he sends
home in peace, (...) quievit in Hiphit, quiescere fecit.
etc. As if it had been said, If he by his sovereign sentence freeth out of
slavery and oppression, as he did the children of Israel out of the bondage of
Egypt etc. If he commands rest and quiet, then, as it follows, Who can make
trouble?

Or, as Master Broughton renders, who can disturb? Who can disease those to
whom God gives ease, or oppress those to whom God gives protection? The words
bear the signification of a divine challenge, like that, ( Romans 8.31.) If God
be for us, who can be against us? or like that ( verse. 34.) Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect? Let us see the man, or the devil, that can
charge the elect and prevail. Such is the Emphasis of the present (...), When
he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? Where is the man, high or low,
great or small that can do it?

Further, the word which we translate make trouble, has a threefold eminent
signification in Scripture.

First, It signifies to be wicked, or to do wickedly; thus we read it at the
12th verse of this chapter, Surely God will not do wickedly. He that is
altogether holy and righteous, does all things holily and righteously. The same
word signifies to do wickedly, and to make trouble, because to do wickedly
brings trouble often upon others, always upon the doers.

Secondly; it signifies to condemn; thus we translate, at the 17th verse of
this chapter, Will thou condemn him (as one that has done wickedly) who is
most just? The same word may well signify to do wickedly, and to condemn,
because they who do so, are worthy to be condemned. In this sense also we
translate it, in that famous Prophecy of Christ, Ipso enim concedente pacem,
quis est qui condemnat. Vulg.
( Isa. 50.9.) He is near that justifies me, who shall condemn me? or make me
wicked and unrighteous. Thus some render the mind of Elihu in this place, if
he gives peace or quietness, who can condemn?

Thirdly, The word signifies, as we render, to trouble, molest, or vex; so we
translate (1 Samuel 14.47.) where it is said of Saul, that he fought against all
his enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and
against E^om, and against the Kings of Z^bah, and against the Philistines; and
whither soever he turned himself, he vexed, or troubled them. The word may be
taken in these three significations with a subserviency one to another; for he
that is wicked, or does wickedly, deserves to be condemned, or, men are
condemned because they do wickedly; and he that is condemned by a righteous
sentence is punished, and cannot but be troubled; a legal sentence of
condemnation, brings a legal penalty upon the person condemned; we translate
clearly to the sense of the Text, who can make trouble, when God gives
quietness? for here the word is not opposed to well doing, or acquitting, but
to quietting and pacifying; when he gives quietness, who can make trouble?

And when he hides his face, who then can behold him? The face of God, by a
well known Hebraisme (very frequent in Scripture) signifies the favor of God;
Master Broughton reads, when he hides favor. The favor which we bear to
others, is most visible in the face, and therefore the face may well signify
favor. David over-looking all the good things of this world, prayed for a good
look from God in this expression, ( Psalm. 4.6.) There be many that say who will
show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance (or of thy
face) upon us: that is, show us favor, or be favorable to us. And as the
greatest good of Saints in this world, so all the good of the next world is
comprehended in this one word ( Psalm. 16.11.) In thy presence (the text is, in
thy face, that is, in the full enjoyment of thy benign and gracious presence)
is fullness of joy. In like sense the word is used Psalm. 21.6. Psalm. 67.1. So
then, to hide the face, is to withdraw favor, and kindness, love, and respect;
more distinctly, this phrase of hiding the face, has a threefold importance,
or may hold out these three things.

First, a distaste either against persons or things; we turn away our face from
him, or that which we do not like, or is displeasing to us. The hiding of Gods
face is a manifestation of his displeasure; In a little wrath I hid my face
from thee for a moment, says God to the Church, ( Isa. 54.8.) This form of
speaking is borrowed from their usage or practice, who refuse to admit into
their presence, or so much as look upon such, whom they either really hate, or
would seem at least to be much displeased with; As David gave command
concerning Absalom (2 Samuel 14.24.) Let him turn to his own house, and let him
not see my face. When God withdraws the wonted expressions of his love and
kindness from a person or a people; then (according to Scripture sense and
language, he is said to hide his face from them, Deuteronomy. 30.20. Psalm. 30.7.)

Secondly, The hiding of Gods face, notes a refusal to help those who in
straits cry to him for relief and deliverance: For if we will not give a man
our eye, we will hardly give him our hand; if we will not so much as look upon
him, we will hardly assist him. When God hides his face, it is as much as his
denial of succor; Thus David bemoaned himself, ( Psalm. 13.1.) Why hidest thou
thy face? that is, Lord, why withdrawest thou thy help from me? That he was
sensible of such withdraws, is plain by the prayer which he made, ( verse. 3.)
Consider, and hear me, O Lord my God; and by the reason of it given ( verse. 4.)
Lest mine enemies say, I have prevailed against him. We find David deprecating
the hiding of Gods face upon the same ground, ( Psalm. 44.24. Psalm. 69.17.) The
Prophet is very express in this point, ( Isa. 59.1, 2.) The Lords hand is not
shortened that it cannot save, neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear; but
your iniquities have separated between you, and your God, and your sins have
hid his face from you, that he will not hear: that is, as he distasteth, and is
displeased with you, so he denies you his usual help and assistance, because
ye have great-sinned against him.

Thirdly, the hiding of God's face, notes not only some distaste, and a denial
of help; but a total slight, or refusal of any care concerning us, ( Isa.
40.27.) Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak, O Israel, my way is hid from
the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God; that is, Why say
thou, the Lord takes no care at all of me, and in that sense Job spoke, ( chap.
24.1.) Why seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know him
not, see his days? that is, why seeing God does not neglect times, and
seasons, and how things go in the world, (there time is put for things done in
time, why (I say) seeing God has not cast off the care of the things of this
world) is it thus with me? Why am I as a man forlorn, and utterly cast off? We
may expound Elihu in all or any of these senses; when he hides his face, or
withdraws his favor that is, when God is displeased and refuses to help,
when God throws up the care of a man's person, or condition, it cannot but go
and be ill enough with him; for as it follows, Who then can behold him?

The face of God as taken for his essential being, cannot at all be seen, nor
can we at all behold him; There shall no man (says the Lord, Exodus 33.20.) see
my face, and live; But, as the face of God is taken for any manifestation of
his being, whether in wrath or in love, in judgment or in mercy, so it may be
seen: Now when God hides his face, that is, his favor, and will not give out
any pleasing manifestations of himself, who can behold him? that is, who can
behold him with comfort? who can stand before an angry God? or abide his
presence? As the gracious presence of God is the sweetest, so the wrathful
presence of God is the most bitter thing in the world. When he hides his face,
who can behold him?

Some expound thus; if God will not show his face, if he is not pleased to
reveal himself, no man can know, or see any thing of him; that is a truth. We
can know no more of God, then himself will reveal of himself to us; it is in
his light (Psalm: 36.9.) that is, in the light which he causes to shine from
himself, that we see light, or what and who himself is, who is light, and in
whom there is no darkness at all. If God will hide his power, or his wisdom, or
his truth, or his mercy from us, who can see any thing of them? though all
these perfections be always more glorious in him then the beams of the Sun,
yet unless God show them us, we cannot perceive them. We see the light of God
in Gods light; if God has a mind to conceal himself, or draws (as it
were) a curtain between the creature and himself, who can behold him? we
cannot by any study, or skill, or art, or endeavor of ours come to any sight
or knowledge of God, further then himself makes himself known. This
exposition is both true and useful; yet I conceive, when Elihu says, Who then
can behold him? his meaning rather points at these two things.

First, Who can have any comfortable enjoyment of him; to behold a man whose
displeasure we suspected, and find acceptance and freedom with him, is
compared to our beholding the face of God. I have seen thy face as though I
had seen the face of God and thou wast pleased with me, said Jacob to Esau
(Gen: 33.10.) when his brother treated him so lovingly contrary to his
expectation, he looked upon it as an evidence of the favor of God to him. Or
Jacob being much affected with the countenance and kindness of Esau, compared
his face to the face of God, because in his reconciled face he saw (as it were)
the face of God smiling upon him. This was David's argument, that God favored
him ( Psalm: 41.11.) because his enemies did not triumph over him; much more is
it an argument of Gods favor, when they speak and act friendly toward us, or
when we behold their face and are accepted. Joseph threatened his brethren, ye
shall not see my face (or behold me) except your brother be with you (Gen:
43.3.) if you come without him, either I will not admit you at all into my
presence, or I will look sowerly upon you. Thus to behold God, is to see his
face (as it is said ( Chap: 33.26.) the repenting sick man should) with joy.

Secondly, Who can have any confidence in him, or boldness with him; David
speaking of godly and upright men, says ( Ps: 34.5.) They looked (or, shall
look) unto him, and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed; that is,
they beheld God or came to him, with much assurance of his favor. Some dare
not so much as look another in the face, for shame or fear; but when we look a
man in the face, it shows we have either confidence in him, and freedom with
him, or courage enough against him. Now, if God hide his pleased face, or
withdraw his favor, who can behold him confidently, or come to him with hopes
to speed. Fierce Abner said to Asael (2 Samuel: 2.22.) Turn thee aside from
following me, wherefore should I smite thee to the ground (I could easily do
it, and he did it presently) how then should I hold up my face to Joab thy
brother. As if he had said, I can have no confidence to come to Joab, thy
General, if I should kill thee. Guilt of evil done to others, draws a
jealousy that others will do evil to us, especially they who are nearly
concerned in the evil which we have done; we cannot hold up our face to or
behold them with expectation of acceptance and favor, to whose near relations
we have been unkind or injurious. Thus, if God hide his face who can behold
him? either with confidence or with comfort.

Some refer the relative him (who can behold him?) to man, not to God; as if
the meaning of Elihu were this; if God hide his face from any man, all men will
hide their faces from him too; no man will look kindly upon such a deserted
person, Quis favorem ei exhibebit, a quo deus vultum averterit. Drus:
or give him a good look; he shall have but frowns from men, from whom God
withdraws his favor; that is a truth; He that is out with God cannot keep in
long with men. Usually all sorts disowne him that is forlorn and forsaken of
God, As when a man's ways please God (because then God is pleased with him) his
enemies shall be at peace with him (Pro: 16.7.) so when God is displeased with
a man, his very best friends shall turn enemies to him. Yet I conceive the
text carries it rather the other way, referring to God himself; If God hide
his face, who can behold him? that is, who can confidently behold God, or draw
near to him with comfort? And so it generally comes to pass, or thus it is,
Whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only.

As if Elihu had said; What I have affirmed, that, when God gives quietness,
no man can make trouble, or when he hides his face no man can behold him, is
appliable to whole nations, as well as to particular persons. This is an
extensive truth, a truth of large concernment, and therefore a truth of
necessary and important consideration. That which may be any man's or all men's
case, should be studied by every man.

Whether it be done against a nation, etc. (...)
The particle which we render against, signifies also for. We find it so
translated Psalm: 32.6. and at the 36th verse of this Chapter. Now, to do a
thing for a nation or for a person, notes the doing of it with respect to or in
favor of either. Thus we commonly speak in our language, pray do such or
such a thing for me. To this sense some render here, whether it be done for a
nation, or for a man only. So, Mr Broughton, whether it be done for a nation,
or for an earthly man alone. But, whether we read for, or against, the general
truth is the same. The word and power of God in sending good or evil upon
nations or persons, in acting for or against them, is uncontrouleable and
irresistible.

Further, to clear the text, that word in the close of the verse, (...) trio
significat simul, pariter, solum.
rendered only, signifies, sometimes together (Ezra. 4.3.) sometimes alike
(Psalm: 34.15.) and sometimes as we understand it alone, or only, whether it be
done against a nation or a man together, or against a man only or alone, the
matter is alike or the same to God. Many or one make a great difference among
men in any matter, but they make no difference with God, he can deal with
whole nations (in ways of Judgment or mercy) as well as with single persons;
yet because of the opposition which the text makes between one man and a
nation, it is most suitable to translate it either only or alike not together.

Thus we see, how the Spirit of God by Elihu has made a double application of
the fo mer part of the text ( when he gives quietness, who can make trouble,
etc.) in this latter, first, to a nation; secondly, to a person. If the text
were not thus expressed, it might be thus expounded and improved without any
streine at all to it. But forasmuch as the Spirit of God has told us
distinctly, that this great truth concerns nations as well as persons, This
Lecture was preached upon the Fifth of November 1658.
therefore we have a clear ground (besides the great usefullness of it) to
speak to the words in both their references. And this present memorable day
(as also their native order) leads me specially to speak of them, first,
under a National consideration.

When he gives quietness to a nation, who can make trouble or disturb the
peace of it. And the text may well respect that national blessing, peace,
because the word translated gives quietness, signifies such quietness
primarily, as is opposite unto war, sedition, and tumult in a nation ( Josh:
11.23.) And the land rested from war, it is this word, so ( Judge: 3.11.) The
land had rest forty years. (Judge: 3.30.) And the land had rest fourscore
years. (2 Chronicles: 14.1.) In his days the land was quiet ten years. (Zech:
1.11.) And behold all the earth sits still, and is at rest; in all these
places we have the word here rendered quietness, in opposition to war; who
knows not how great an unquietness war makes wheresoever it comes? and by a
like analogy, the word is sometimes rendered to be silent. War is full of
clamor ( Isa: 9.5.) Every battle of the warrier is with confused noise. Not
only is it so in some battles, but (says that Scripture) it is so in all
battles, Every battle of the warrier is with confused noise. What a noise is
there in an Army, especially when joining battle with another Army? what
beating of drums? what sounding of trumpets? what neighing of horses? what
clashing of armor? what groanings of the wounded? When God gives quietness or
peace, there is none of this noise, none of this confused noise of the warrier.
Hannah says in her song (1. Sam: 2.9.) The wicked shall be silent in darkness;
that is, either they shall be destroyed and thrust into their graves, where
there is nothing but rottenness and stench; darkness and silence; or they shall
be so affrighted and confounded with the horror and darkness of those miseries
which shall come upon them while they live, that they shall not have a word to
say, the mouth of iniquity shall be stopped. In this manner the wicked are silent
in darkness; but the Lord can make his people silent in light, that is, he can
give such quietness as shall at once silence the noise of war and all their
own complaints. When he gives quietness (this blessed silence to nations) who
then can make trouble?

Hence observe.

First, The quietness or peace of nations is the peculiar gift of God.
Whosoever has or enjoys quietness, it is Gods work, but most eminently when
nations enjoy it. Of national quietness the Lord spoke by his Prophet ( Isa:
45.7.) I form the light, etc. I make peace, I the Lord do all these things.
As natural so civil light is of Gods forming; as spiritual; so temporal
peace is of Gods making. And the Church was confident he would be their
peacemaker (Isa: 26.12.) Lord thou will ordain peace for us. Some read it as
a prayer, Lord do thou ordain (or command) peace for us; we as a profession
of their faith and hopeful if not full assurance that the Lord would ordain
peace for them. The Lord gives out an order, or makes an ordinance in heaven,
when he pleases for the peace both of Churches and nations here on earth. And
the Church there had this good ground of their assurance, that he would do it,
even their former experiences of his great power and goodness in doing much for
them, as it follows, for thou have wrought all our works for us; As if they
had said, Lord those gracious preservations which thou have heretofore given us
in trouble, and deliverances out of trouble, strengthen our faith both in
praying that thou would, and in believing that thou will, now at this pinch
ordain peace for us. To do so is a mighty and a merciful work of God, and
we may consider it two ways.

First, As the giving of quietness to a nation is the restoring of peace, or
the settling of them in a quiet state, after they have been torn and troubled
with wars and tossed with continual tempests of trouble (possibly) for many
years together. To bring peace out of war, and quietness out of
unsetledness, is a work worthy of God. ( Psalm: 46.9.) He makes wars to
cease to the ends of the earth; that is, all the world over. The end or ceasing
of war is quietness. And to assure us that the Lord can make an end of
wars, the Psalmist in that place shows us the Lord spoiling all the
implements, or instruments of war, He breaks the bow, and cuts the spear
asunder, he burns the chariots in the fire; Here are three great instruments
of war, the bow, the spear, the chariot, all which are sometimes
comprehended under that one word the sword, which is the most known and
universal instrument of war. Now, when neither sword, nor bow, nor spear,
nor chariot, are to be had, we need not fear war. And therefore that great
promise of peace runs in this tenor ( Mic: 4.2.) They shall beat their swords
into plow-shears, and their spears into pruning hooks (then presently
follows) nation shall not lift up a sword, against nation, neither shall they
learn war any more; There must needs be peace when the art of war is laid
by as useless, and shall be learned no more. That will be a blessed time
indeed when the art military shall be out of date, and (being it self the
greatest interrupter of learning) shall be learned no more. When Soldiers
shall turn Husbandmen and Vine-dressers, beating their swords into
plow-shears, and their spears into pruning hooks, then we shall have peace,
and put away the remotest fears of war. When a man casts away his sword,
we may very well conclude he intends to be quiet. Thus the Lord gives
quietness, to nations, which have been engaged in war, by causing wars to
cease.

Secondly, He gives quietness to nations by continuing their peace, when
wars are ceased; for unless the Lord give a check to the lusts and passions,
to the wrath and rage of men, plow-shears are quickly turned into swords, and
pruning hooks into spears. To preserve peace is the Lords work, as much as
to give peace. It requires the same or as great a power to keep our peace as
to make it; Non minor est virtus quam quaerere, parta ^ueri.
to keep it out of the hand of the sword, as to get it out of the hand of the
sword. When the king of Assyria threatened Jerusalem with a siege, the Lord
preserved their peace, and sent Hezekiah word ( Isa: 37.33.) He shall not come
into this City, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor
cast a bank against it, for I will defend this City to save it. The
continuance of peace, and quietness, is a continual giving of it. Wars
return after peace, as clouds return after rain, unless the Lord prevent
and forbid them.

And have not we of this nation reason to acknowledge this double mercy.

First, Was not the end of our late unnatural wars, the gift of God? was it
not he that made our troubles to cease from one end of the nation to the other,
yea throughout the three nations? If the Lord had not given the sword a check,
or counter-mand, if the Lord had not called in the commission which he once
gave the sword, it had been devouring flesh, and drinking blood to this very
day. We read (as it were) a dialogue between the Prophet and himself
concerning the sword ( Jer: 47.6, 7.) O thou sword of the Lord, (said the
Prophet being grieved for the slaughter and desolation which the sword had made
even in a strange land) how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy self
into thy scabbard; rest and be still; Himself answers himself; how can it be
quiet seeing the Lord has given it a charge against Ashkelon, and against the
Seashore? there has he appointed it. I spoke to the sword of quietness
(says the Prophet) But alas! how can it be quiet, how can that sheath it self
in its scabbard, and not in the bowels of men, seeing the Lord has given it a
charge against Ashkelon? As if he had said, I see no entreaties can persuade
the sword to rest and quietness, till it has fully executed the command of
God, and done his work, though it be very bloody work, even the making of it
self drunk with blood. The Lord can make the sword quiet; and it will hearken
to no voice but his; if the Lord give a charge for the sword to return into
the sheath then it will, and if not, it will not. The sword raged in these
nations till the Lords work and will was done, and then that had done. And as
we have reason to acknowledge, that the Lord has commanded the sword back into
its sheath, and given us peace out of war, so

Secondly, That he has continued our peace since the war, When he gives
quietness, who then can make trouble?

Note.

If God will give those nations quietness, where it was not, or continue it
where it is, there is no power on earth can stop, or interrupt it. Who can make
trouble; where he ordains peace? Balaam was forced to this confession (when
he would have troubled the people of Israel, and went from mountain to
mountain to seek divination) I cannot curse whom the Lord has blessed; why
not, said Balak, I will give thee a good fee if thou will, no, says Balaam
(Numb: 23.20.) The Lord has blessed and I cannot reverse it. We may put this
query, When he gives quietness, who can make trouble? especially to three
sorts of persons.

First, To politic men; some presume they can trouble nations and shake the
surest foundations of peace, with the engine of their brain, with their wit
and subtlety. Yet this engine proves useless and unserviceable to that end,
where the Lord gives quietness. Ahitophell was as an oracle of God for wisdom
in his times, and he stretched his brains upon the tenters to make trouble, but
God said there should be peace, and therefore (as David prayed) his wisdom was
turned into foolishness. There is no wisdom (says Solomon the wise, Pro:
21.30.) nor understanding nor counsel against the Lord.

Secondly, We may put the question (who can make trouble?) to mighty men; their
power (the strength of their Armies, and arm) cannot do it? Senacharib came
with a mighty host to disturb Israel, but he could not make trouble, he could
not so much as shoot an arrow against Jerusalem, when the Lord forbad it.

Thirdly, We may put the question (who can make trouble?) to magical men or
sorcerers; They cannot do it by their wicheryes and enchantments, by their
closest correspondencies with the devil himself. This was Balaams conclusion,
who (it seems) traded that way to do mischief ( Numb: 23.23.) Surely there
is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against
Israel: according to this time it shall be said of Jacob, and of Israel, what
has God wrought? When God is resolved to give a people quietness, though the
devil would, he cannot disturb them. We need not fear witches or magicians
(who correspond with hell to trouble the earth) if God say there shall be
peace; neither policy, nor power, nor witchery, can prevail against the
purpose of God.

Then happy are that people, who have the Lord for their God (Psalm: 144.15.)
what can a people desire more to make them happy, then to have the Lord for
their God, if we consider these two things?

First, God has a negative voice upon all the counsels of the wisest men in
the world; if he says it shall not be, it cannot be, whosoever says this or
that shall be ( Lam: 3.37.) Who is he that says and it comes to pass, when
the Lord commands it not? if he gives not his assent, nothing can pass into
a law. The Lords single negative stops the affirmative votes of all men joined
in one.

Secondly, The Lords power is paramount; He can effect what he wills, whether
men will or no. That Is plain in the text. If he give quietness, who can make
trouble?

To come a little nearer; This day, this fifth of November, which we solemnize
in a thankful remembrance of our deliverance from the Gunpowder treason, is a
very great confirmation of this truth.

Who is there that was alive at that day (as several here I know were) yea who
is there that has heard of that day, of the substance and circumstances, of
the matter and manner of the Gunpowder treason, but can tell us, that a Popish
party at home with their correspondents abroad, intended to make trouble in
this nation; surely there was a purpose to make trouble in the nation that day,
if ever there were a purpose to make trouble in any nation. What did they leave
unattempted, to promote the trouble of this nation? Counsels were joined for a
conjunction of forces to trouble this nation. The men engaged in that plot, may
properly be called Trouble-makers; It was their business or their design to
trouble the waters, that themselves might fish in those waters of trouble. We
may with respect to their purpose, (though God prevented it graciously) truly
say to them what Ahab said falsely to Elijah, These were the men that would have
troubled our Israel; they would have made trouble in every way, and in every
thing, wherein trouble could be made by men.

Would it not have made trouble to destroy the King the chief Governor of
these three nations, with his royal issue in one day?

Would it not have made trouble, to blow up the representative of the nation,
the Parliament, in one day?

Would it not have made trouble, to put the whole body of the people into a
confused heap, without a head, in one day?

Would it not have made trouble in the nation, to have seen Papal power, with
Popish Doctrine and worship brought in again upon us within a few days?

Would it not have made trouble, to have seen poor souls imprisoned,
persecuted, and consumed to ashes for their conscientious witness-bearing to
the truths of the Gospel?

Would it not have made trouble, to have lost our civil liberties, and to have
had a yoke of spiritual Bondage laid upon our necks by worse then Egyptian
taskmasters?

Would it not have made trouble, to spill the blood of thousands? Was it not an
attempt to make trouble, to attempt all these things which would probably, that
I say not certainly, have been the issue of that plot, if it had succeeded? Let
us therefore praise the Lord, who was pleased to prevent it, and said it shall
not be. They did every thing to make trouble, but make trouble; they did every
thing, but prosper in their design: They took secret counsel, they took
oaths, yea they took the Sacrament to assure the secrecy of those counsels and
oaths. All this they did toward the making of trouble, yet they could not; God
said at that time let England be in quietness; and therefore, only, those
Romish Emissaries and incendiaries could not make trouble.

Again, If we consider the present season wherein we live, it is a confirmation
of this truth, God has given us quietness for some years; and has he not
preserved this quietness hitherto, against all those both persons and things
that would have made trouble? if God had not confirmed our peace, we had been
in trouble long before this time, but yet our peace continues, yet it
continues; and is it not wonderful that it should continue, if we consider.

First, The sins of the nation which are the seed of trouble, especially those
two general sins, first, unthankfullnesse for our peace; Secondly, our ill
improvement of it. How have many abused their peace to nurse up their pride,
wantonness and vaniy! and being delivered from the fear of men, have even cast
off the fear of God! what just cause is there, that we should loose that peace
which we have used so ill, and have almost turned into a war with God
himself! yet hitherto the Lord has given England quietness, and none could
make trouble.

Secondly, If we look upon the divisions, both in opinion, and affection, that
are found among us, is it not a wonder that yet we have peace! if God had not
given quietness, doubtless these differences, of which we are so sadly full,
had filled us with trouble long before this time.

Thirdly, While we consider the different interests which have been abetted and
hotly pursued by too many in this nation, is it not marveilous in our eyes,
that our peace is continued! divided interests make greatest distances, and
open those breaches through which trouble usually enters upon a nation. When a
people are of one mind, of one heart and way, trouble can scarce find any way
to come in among them. But only God (who peremptorily gives quietness) can
give quietness to and prevent the trouble of a people who are divided in
opinions, affections, and Interests. As therefore it is the most desirable
mercy that a people may be all united as one man, in one mind, heart, and way,
according to the mind, heart, and way of God; so it is a most admirable mercy,
to see their peace continued while any considerable part among them are
dis-united in any of, especially if in all these.

Fourthly, Consider, that since the time of our peace, we have had many
changes, we have been emptied from vessel to vessel, from hand to hand, from
government to government, and from governor to governor; and is it not matter
of astonishment as well as of thanksgiving, that yet we have quietness! how
many have waited and hoped, yea desired and longed for our day of trouble, by
these changes, revolutions and vicissitudes, but yet we have peace. Must we not
then conclude, If God gives quietness, none can make trouble; neither our
sins, nor our divisions, nor our animosities, nor our changes shall put it into
any man's power (though they put an advantage into many men's hands) to make
trouble where the Lord our God is graciously and freely pleased to give us
quietness. Yet let us be in a holy fear, lest we at last provoke God, and sin
away our quietness, and make trouble for our selves. The condition of a people
who do so is very woeful; for surely (as it follows in the text) If he
hides his face, who then can behold him?

This latter part of the verse is applicable to a nation as well as the former,
and therefore before I come to speak of either with respect to a single
person, or a man only.

Observe.

God sometimes hides his face from whole nations, even from those nations that
have the outward profession of his name. As there are national mercies, so
national calamities, as his people in common may have the shinings of Gods face
upon them, so the hidings of his face from them. Did not God hide his face from
the people of Israel, his peculiar people, when they were though a professing
people, yet a very sinful and provoking people? ( Isa. 59.2.) Is it not said (
Jer: 7.12.14, 15.) Go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my
name at the first, and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people
Israel; God would not always own that place which he signally called his
own, and had set his name there, and that, at first (which was a great
endearement of it to him) but when they sinned much against him, he would not
so much as give them a look of favor, no nor of pity, till they turned from
their wickedness; yea he made his severe proceeding with them a president to
his people in another Generation, as it follows in the same place. Therefore
will I do unto this house which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, and
unto the place which I gave to you, and to your fathers, as I have done to
Shiloh. And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your
brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim. There Is a nation cast out of the
sight of God. To be cast out of Gods sight is more, if more can be, then Gods
hiding his face from a people. The Church complained bitterly of this latter (
Ps: 44.24.) Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction, and
our oppression. We use to say, Out of sight, out of mind; and when God leaves
a nation under affliction, as if he did not mind them nor cared what became of
them, then the Scripture says, he hides his face from them, or, casts them
out of his sight. I shall only add three things about this hiding of the face
of God from a nation.

First, This hiding of his face, is not a sudden act of God, he does not
presently nor easily hide his face from a people. He tells them often he will
do it, before he does it once. The Lord warned the old world long, before he
brought the flood ( Gen: 6.3.) And the Lord said, my spirit shall not always
strive with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days (wherein I will spare
him and wait for his repentance) shall be an hundred and twenty years. Of this
patience the Apostle spoke, telling us (1 Pet: 3.19, 20.) That Christ by the
Spirit which quickened him, went and preached to the sp^rits in prison (not in
prison when he preached to them, but in prison ever since for not obeying what
he preached, as the text says) which sometime were disobedient, when once the
long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the Arc was a
preparing: wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water; God did not
presently hide his face from that debauched Generation, who had corrupted all
their ways, but gave them long warning, even an hundred and twenty years. And
how often did God give warning before he withdrew or hid his face from the
people of Israel, his special people? He sent his Prophets rising early, and
sending them, saying, Oh do not this abominable thing that I hate, (Jer. 44.4.)
And in another place, O Jerusalem, be instructed, lest my soul depart (or be
disjoynted) from thee; (Jer. 6.8.) as if he had said, I am loath to depart, yea
I will not depart, if thou will but now at length hearken to my voice, and
receive instruction.

Secondly, As God is long before he begins to hide his face from a Nation, so
he does it not all at once, but gradually, or by several steps: we read ( Ezekiel.
9.3.) how the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the Cherub whereupon
he was, to the threshold of the house: Then ( chap. 10.18.) The glory of the
Lord departed from off the threshold of the house, and stood over the
Cherubims: And then ( chap. 11.23.) The glory of the Lord went up from the
midst of the City, and stood upon the Mountain, which is on the East side of
the City. When the Lord was departing from them, he did it by degrees; he
withdrew and hid himself by little and little, as in the Eclipse of the Sun,
whether partial or total, we observe the light gradually shut in and hidden
from us.

Thirdly, As God is long before he hides his face, and long in hiding it from
a Nation, so (which makes it dreadful) his face being once hid, continues long
hid from Nations. He does not return presently to them, as he often does to
particular persons. The Eclipses of Divine favor abide long upon Nations and
Churches. We commonly say, Great bodies move slowly; And God is usually slow in
his motions both from and toward great bodies; as he does not quickly remove
from them, so he does not quickly return to them. He stays long before he
hides his face, and he makes them stay long before he causes his face to
shine upon them again. When for the sin of Israel God gave up both them and the
Ark into the hands of the Philistines (though the Philistines vexed with the
hand of God upon them, sent it back shortly after, yet) it was long before it
was fully settled among them, (1 Samuel 7.2.) And it came to pass while the Ark
abode in Kirjath-jearim, that the time was long, for it was twenty years, and
all the house of Israel lamented after the Lord. The Ark (which was a sign of
Gods presence with them) being removed, was not soon restored to its proper
place; yea it was 20. years more after that, before it was set in its place by
David, (2 Samuel 6.17.) And whereas it is said, that in those first twenty years,
they lamented after the Lord, this signifies, that all those years God was
(comparatively to what he had sometimes been) but as a stranger in the land,
leaving them under the cruel oppressions of the Philistines: nor did they
recover his favorable presence, till they solemnly repented and reformed,
putting away their strange gods, and Ashteroth, preparing their hearts unto the
Lord to serve him only, as Samuel exhorted them to do at the third verse of
that chapter. The Jewish Nation in after ages had sad experience of this in the
Babylonish captivity; when God hid his face from them, it was seventy years
before he looked upon them again: and since that Nation provoked him (by their
rejection of the Gospel) to lay them aside, God has hid his face from them
above these sixteen hundred years, and they are to this day a scattered
unsettled people, and wanderers among the Nations, having their hearts hardened,
and their eyes shut against the light of the glorious Gospel. And as the Jews,
so many Christian Churches have for a long time felt the sad effects of these
Divine hidings and withdrawings. Those seven famous Churches in Asia, mentioned
in the second and third chapters of the Revelation, Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. have
been under this woeful Eclipse many hundred years; nor have those ancient
Churches in Africa, where Tertullian and Augustine once flourished, recovered
the presence of the Lord to this day. Let the Nations and Churches abroad
remember this, and tremble to provoke the Lord to such departures and
desertions. God has long hid his face from the Bohemian Churches, and
subjected them again to the Papal yoke; several parts of Germany are under the
same hidings: the light is departed from them, and they are left in much
darkness; their state is very deplorable, and their former purity, both as to
doctrines of faith, and practice of worship (as to humane help) irrecoverable.
And should not the dealings of God with them, awaken us in these Nations and
Churches, to remember and consider the wonderful patience of God in continuing
our peace, notwithstanding all our provocations, lest at last he hide his face
from us also, and then who can behold him? A throng of evils and mischiefs will
soon appear to us with open face, if once God hide his face. And it will not be
unuseful to instance a little in this place, what those evils and mischiefs are
which throng and crowd in upon Nations and Churches, when God hides his face
from them.

First, When God hides his face from a Nation, he lays down his former care
of them, and watchfulness over them, he takes little or no notice of their case
and condition, of their troubles and streights, (as was touched in opening the
Text) he regards not how it is with them, nor what becomes of them. Such
apprehensions the Prophet had in reference unto the people of Israel, ( Jer.
14.8.) where he humbly expostulated with the Lord, Why art thou as a stranger
in the land, and as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry for a night; a
stranger or a wayfaring man, intending to stay but a night in a place, thinks
not himself concerned with the state of that place; if he can but get a supper
and a lodging for his money that night, he troubles himself no further: whether
it be well or ill with the place, whether it be sickness or health, if he can
make shift for a night, he is satisfied. Thus the Prophet conceived the Lord
even as a stranger among his people, little minding what became of them,
whether they did sink or swim, whether it were peace or trouble, joy or sorrow
with them. And, further, he represents the Lord not only as a stranger, but as
a man astonished, not only as a man who cares not to help, but as a man who
cannot. An astonished man, how mighty soever he is, has no use of his might.
He that can do little with his reason (that is the case of an astonished
affrighted man) can do less with his hands. Now such a one is God to his people
(that is, he will do no more for them then such a one) when once he hides his
face from them.

Secondly, When the Lord hides his face from a Nation, he has no regard to
their prayers and supplications, no not to their fasts and humiliations; that
speaks sadly. Prayer is our best strength, it engages the strength of God; by
prayer we have our resort to God, and fetch all our help and succor in a day
of trouble from his All Sufficiency. If once God say to a people, I will not
hear nor answer your prayers, they are in a most forlorn condition. Thus God
resolved against the people of Israel, ( Jer. 14.12.) When they fast, I will
not hear their cry: And as he would not regard their own prayers, so he forbade
the Prophet to pray for them, ( verse. 12.) The Lord said unto me, pray not for
this people for their good; yea, he tells them, he would not regard the prayers
and intercessions of any others for them, ( Jer. 15.1.) Though Moses and Samuel
stood before me, (that is, should become Advocates in their behalf) yet my
heart could not be toward this people, (that is a sure and a dreadful
prognostic of ruin, as it follows) cast them out of my sight, and let them
go forth.

Thirdly, When the Lord hides his face from a Nation, he refuses to give them
counsel, or to direct their way. We need the counsel of God as much as his
strength; as we cannot do what we know unless he strengthen us, so we know not
what to do unless he counsel us. And when ever God hides his face from a
people, he hides counsel from a people. When God hid his face from Saul, who
was in a public capacity, and in a public case, his war with the Philistines,
O how he complained that he could get no counsel, (1 Samuel 28.6.15.) The Lord
answers me no more, neither by Vrim, nor by Thummim, nor by Prophet, nor by
Dreams; as if he had said, I cannot get a word of direction from God, what to
do in this calamitous and intricate condition, wherein my self and my Kingdom
are plunged, by reason of this Invasion; I know not what to do, and God will
not at all give me any intimation what to do, nor how to do, what is safest, or
most conducing to my own safety and preservation. The Prophet brings in the
Church lamenting this effect of Gods hiding his face, ( Psalm. 74.9.) We see not
our tokens, there is not any Prophet, nor any that can tell how long; as if
they had said, heretofore God was wont to give us signs and tokens, he would
even work miracles for us, or he would send a Prophet to instruct and advise us
what to do, we had those who could tell us how long, that is, how long our
troubles should last, and when we should have our expected end of them; but now
we are in trouble, and no man can tell us how long, now we are left to the wide
world, to shift for our selves as well as we can; the Lord will not advise us
what to do, nor give us his mind what is best to be done, or how to proceed;
thus deplorable was their condition upon the hiding of Gods face from them.

Fourthly, (which is yet worse) when the Lord hides his face from a people, he
does not only withold his counsels, but gives them up to their own counsels,
and that is, to their own hearts lusts, ( Ps. 81.12.) Israel would none of me
(says God) they would not harken to my voice: What then? So I gave them up to
their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels: and that was to
give them up to a spirit of division, to a spirit of discontent, to a spirit of
envy and jealousy, to a spirit of ambition, of self-seeking and emulation,
and so to a spirit of distraction and confusion, and so to ruin and
destruction: such and no better is the issue, when God gives a people up to
their own counsels; then they soon become a very Chaos, and run themselves into
a ruinous heap. As good have no counsel from man, as none but man's.

Fifthly, When God hides his face from a Nation, he is ready to declare his
displeasure, and the sorest testimonies of his fierce anger, formally, against
them; God looks upon a sinfully sinning people as a burden upon his heart; he
is pressed, and even oppressed with them, he loathes them, his stomach turns at the
thought of them, ( Isa. 1.24.) Ah! I will ease me (the Hebrew is, I will be
comforted, or I will comfort my self, that is, I will unburden my soul, and
satisfy my self by taking vengeance) of my adversaries, that is, of my people
who have rebelled against my command, and have been disobedient to my word.
These the Lord counts no more as his children and friends, but as his enemies,
and numbers them among his adversaries; Ah, says he, I will ease me of mine
adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies: I am grieved to do it, yet I must
do it, I am resolved to do it. As soon as the Lord had declared that he would
receive no intercession for Israel, he adds, ( Jer. 15.1.2.) Cast them out of
my sight, let them go forth, and it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee,
whither shall we go forth? then thou shall say unto them, thus says the Lord,
such as are for death, to death, and such as are for the sword, to the sword;
and such as are for the famine, to the famine; such as are for captivity, to
captivity; I will cause them to be removed into all Kingdoms of the earth,
(verse. 4.) and as I will not pity them, so none shall, (verse. 5.) All these
tokens of displeasure fall upon a people when once the Lord hides his face from
them. Yea then the Lord himself will go forth against them as a fierce Lion,
(Hos. 5.14, 15.) He was to Israel as a moth, and as rottenness, (verse. 12.)
that is, a secret consumption, he would also be an open destruction to them as
a Lion, yea as a Leopard by the way would he observe them, or lie in wait for
them, and meet them as a Bear that is, bereaved of her whelps, and rent the
very caul of their heart, (Hos. 13.7, 8.) The Lord God takes upon him the
actings of the most savage beasts in righteousness, to show how much he is
provoked, when he sees his people act like beasts in unrighteousness,
filthiness, cruelties, sensual pleasures; when men behave themselves unlike
men, God will not meet them (as he told Babylon he would not, Isa. 47.3.) as a
man, that is, either in the weakness of a man, or in the compassions of a man;
but he will meet them either as a beast of prey, who has no compassion, or as
God in the fullness of his power, not drawing forth, but quite restraining his
compassions. Yea, the spirit of God will strive no more in ways of mercy with
such a people, but turning their enemy (Isa. 63.10.) will fight against them.
He not only forbeareth to assist them against, and deliver them from their
enemies, but even assisteth their enemies against them, or delivers them up
into their enemies hand.

Sixthly, When God hides himself from a people, he removes their spiritual
enjoyments; he takes away his holy Ordinances, his Worship, the light and power
of his Gospel, or leaves them nothing but the shells and outside forms of
them; they shall be fed with husks, because they have not improved sweet
kernels and wholesome food; they shall have long shaddows, but little true light
or Sunshine. Vision shall cease; God will take away his Ministers and be gone,
and then they are presently overrun with error and superstition upon one
hand, or with ignorance and profaneness on the other.

Seventhly, He will spoil them also in their Civil enjoyments, he will take
away good Magistrates, who are as a staff and a stay, as a shield and a shelter
to a Nation; he will break the stay and staff of Government, as he threatened (
Isa. 3.1, 2.) and then (as it follows verse. 5.) The child shall behave
himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honorable; he
will leave them to the corruption of Justice, Judgment shall be turned away
backward, and justice shall stand afar off, and then truth falls in the
streets, and equity cannot enter, (Isa. 59.14.) and after all this, what will
he do with them? He will either leave them to the worst of National evils,
total Anarchy, or, he will give children to be their Princes, and babes shall
rule over them. When God hid his face from the Jewish Nation, he broke their
Government by taking away ten Tribes out of Rehoboams hand, and putting them
under Jeroboam; and out of his hand they fell into the hand of several other
wicked Princes, til at last they were carried into captivity by the common
enemy. These and the like are the woeful effects of Gods hiding his face from a
Nation; from all which we may well conclude with Elihu in the Text, who then
can behold him? who can bear his wrathful presence, when his face or favorable
presence is hidden from us? To shut up this point, I shall only add, that
because these hidings of Gods face are gradual, (as was showed before)
therefore they are little taken notice of; as the Prophet complained ( Hos.
7.9.) Gray hairs are here and there upon them, and they know it not; that is,
they are in a declining condition, (gray hairs are the signs of old age, Eorum
mihi videtur idoneus sensus and omnino Gormanus qui hanc libertatem dei, sive
pacem concedendi sive condemnandi (vel turbandi) ad tyrannos tantum coardat and
eos qui impie vivunt. Sanct.
which is the declension of man's life, he alludes from the body Natural, to the
body Civil or Politic, they are I say, in a declining, weakening, spending
condition) yet they lay it not to heart. And that is a sore, if not the chiefest
judgment of God upon a Nation, when hiding his face, he hides his judgments
from them, and gives them up to hardness of heart, to blindness of mind, and a
spirit of stupidity, that they see not nor take notice of their own danger, nor
the departure of God from them, which is the cause of it. And still the more
God hides his face from a Nation, the more miserable they are, and withal, the
more insensible of their misery. So much from that consideration of the Text,
as to a Nation, When he gives quietness, who can make trouble? and when he
hides his face, who then can behold him? Whether it be against a Nation, Or
against a man only.

As this verse respects a man only, or a single person, it is expounded two or
three ways.

First, Of Oppressors and wicked men; as if he had said, When God will give a
wicked man quietness or prosperity in his sinful way, who can make his estate
troublous, or trouble him in his estate? He shall be quiet while the will of
God is to suffer him to be so; and if God once hide his face from him, that is,
Si deus pacem tribuat impiis, quis illius providentiam and arcana iudicia co^d
mnare and bit. Gregor. Philip.
declares displeasure against him, who can behold him? that is, who among the
mightiest of wicked oppressors, can lift himself up against, or stand before
God?

Secondly, The words are expounded of the oppressed, or of godly men; as if he
had said, when God is minded or resolved to give peace and quietness to any of
his faithful servants, who can hinder him, or trouble them? and when he is
pleased for reason best known to himself, to leave any of his faithful servants
in darkness, and withdraw the light of his countenance from them, who among
them can behold him? that is, bear or endure his angry appearances.

Quum ipse tranquillat (sc. miseros afflictos) quis inquietabit? and cum
abscondit faciem (sc. ab improbis) quis contemplabitur eum. i. e. quis
improborum aversanti Deo ausit obsistere. Jun.
A third expounds the former part of the verse according to the second
Exposition of the whole verse concerning the oppressed or afflicted godly, if
God will give them quietness, who can give them trouble? And the latter part of
the verse, of Oppressors, if he hides his face from wicked and unjust men, who
can behold him?

Further, Some who take this sense, do not understand it as an act of God
hiding his own face, but as an act of God hiding the face of the wicked
Oppressor; as if it had been said, When God hides a wicked man's face, and
wraps him up as a condemned man, or when, by the command of the Magistrate,
after his legal trial his face is covered, being ready to seal the warrant for
his execution; ( Hamans face was covered as soon as the Kings word went out
against him) then who can behold him? Some insist much upon this
interpretation, in allusion to the custom of those times, when condemned
malefactors had their faces covered; and indeed, when God wraps up the
oppressors face as a condemned man, who can behold him, that is, who can hold
up his face against God, or resist him in this work of justice. But I intend
not to prosecute the personal consideration of the Text under these distinct
notions, but shall only take up the general sense; When he gives quietness to
a man, who can make trouble? and when he hides his face from a man, who can
behold him? I shall only add Master Broughton's gloss upon the whole verse;
when for the poor he kills the mighty, none can stay him; and when he hides
his favor, none can find it.

Hence Observe.

First, The quietness or peace of any man, of every man, is of the Lord. If God
will have a wicked man live in quietness, to it shall be, and God has given,
and does often give them quietness. I have seen the wicked in great power, and
spreading himself like a green Bay tree, (Psalm. 37.35.) David spoke this from a
good witness, the sight of his eye: I (says he) have seen the wicked in much
outward pomp and splendor, and as the outward peace and quietness, pomp and
splendor of the wicked is from God, so also is both the outward and inward
peace of any godly man.

First, The outward peace, or the peace of a godly man in his outward estate,
is of the Lord, ( Psalm. 4.8.) I will both lay me down in peace and sleep, for
thou only make me to dwell in safety: that is, thou O Lord wilt watch over me
in the night, and not suffer me to be surprised by any sudden danger, and
therefore I will quietly repose my self upon thy gracious promises, and throw
off those cares and fears, which as thorns in the pillow, would not suffer me
to rest, when I lie down in my bed: the Lord is my safety, even the rest of my
body. In the 5th chapter of this book ( ver. 23, 24.) Eliphaz tells us, how
the Lord secures the outward condition of a good man, and gives him such
quietness, that even the very beasts of the earth shall be in league, and the
stones of the field at peace with him, and he shall know (or be assured) that
his tabernacle shall be in peace.

Secondly, The inward peace, the soul peace, the spiritual peace of a godly man
is much more from the Lord, ( John 14.27.) Peace I leave with you, my peace I
give unto you, not as the world gives, so give I unto you; as if Christ had
said, I will not deal with you after the rate of the world, that is, either
deceitfully and falsely, or rigorously and unjustly; I will not give you such
measure as the world gives you, nor in such a manner; I give you my peace,
therefore let not your hearts be troubled, neither be you afraid: whatever
outward trouble the world can give you, be not afraid of it before it comes,
nor troubled at it when it is come, I will give you inward peace in the midst of
all your troubles. Christ invites the weary and the heavy laden to come to
him, with this promise, I will give you rest, (Matthew. 11.29.) soul-rest he
means; that Title or name of Christ, Shiloh, (Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall
not depart from Judah, until Shiloh come) signifies tranquillity, peace, and
rest; As Jesus Christ has bought our peace and rest with his blood, so he
bears it in his name. The fountain of our soul-peace is the heart of the
father, Grace and Peace from God the Father, etc. ( Col. 1.1, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1.)
The purchase or price of this peace, is the blood of the Son, ( Col. 1.22.) He
has made our peace through the blood of his Cross: Our peace cost dear, it
cost blood, and that the blood of the Son of God. The conveyance of this peace
is made by the holy Spirit; he is sent to bring the good tidings of peace unto
believers: the Spirit speaks peace from God, and witnesses with our spirits,
that we are at peace with God. And as this peace is at first from God the
Father as the fountain of it, and from God the Son as the Purchaser of it, and
from God the holy Ghost as the Speaker of it; so the continuing and renewing of
this peace is from the same God. He establishes and setleth the heart in that
peace which he has given, and he restores that peace when at any time we have
lost it, and the heart is unsettled. David's soul being unquiet, and his peace
ravell'd after his sin, he addressed to God for the renewing of it, ( Psalm.
51.12.) Restore to me the joy of thy salvation. David petitioned the restoring
of his peace, while he petitioned the restoring of his joy: it is possible to
have peace without joy, but there can be no joy in that soul, which has not
first attained to peace. We must wait upon God both for the restoring of our
peace when it is departed, and for the continuance of it when it is enjoyed.
When he gives quietness to a man, either as to soul, or body, or both, Who can
make trouble?

Note, Secondly.

The quietness or peace which God bestows upon any person is an invincible, an
insuperable peace and quietness, as to all that this world can do, or he suffer
in this world. If God will give a quiet outward estate, no man can disturb it;
when God gave Job outward quietness, what a mighty man was he? how did he
flourish? Nor could any break his outward peace; Satan confessed it in the first
chapter, Thou have made a hedge about him, and about his house, and about all
that he has, on every side; there is not the least gap open, no nor stake
loosned in his hedge, who can touch him? who can come at him? I cannot touch
him, Sabeans and Chaldeans cannot touch him. While the Lord gives and guardeth
our outward peace, it is inviolable. And as to our spiritual peace, if the Lord
speak it, who or what can trouble the soul?

First, The afflictions, tribulations, and vexations which we meet with in the
world, cannot trouble this inward peace; while storms are without, there will
be a calm within; the soul may be at peace, and the conscience quiet, in the
greatest visible confusions. Let the world turn about and overturn, let it
shake and break into a thousand pieces, this peace abides unshaken, unbroken:
let the world rage in the heat either of war or persecution, yet the heart is
serene, fixed, and quiet, like Mount Zion, that cannot be removed. Christ tells
his Disciples ( John 16.33.) These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye
might have peace; (and in the same verse he foretells them) In the world you
shall have tribulation: as if he had said, you shall have a peace concurrent
and contemporary with your tribulation; trouble from the world shall not hinder
the peace you have from me; yea, my peace shall conquer the troubles you have
in the world. Thus the Prophet tryumphed in believing, ( Hab. 3.17.) Though the
labor of the Olive should fail, and the Vine yield no fruit, though there be
no Calves in the stall, nor Sheep in the fold, etc. yet I will joy in the Lord,
and rejoice in the God of my salvation. To rejoice in the Lord, is more then to
be quiet, or to have peace in the Lord. Joy is the exaltation of peace, it is
the most delicious fruit of peace: The worst of worldly evils cannot despoil us
of the least purely spiritual good, much less of the greatest. Him will thou
keep in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, (Isa. 26.3.) That Is
perfectly perfect to which nothing can be added, and from which nothing can be
taken away; yet that is truly perfect, to which though something may be added,
yet it cannot be either totally or finally taken away. Such is the soul-peace
of true believers in this life, and therefore a perfect peace.

Secondly, As outward tribulation cannot hinder the soul-peace of a godly man,
so the policy, plots, and temptations of Satan our arch-enemy cannot, yea his
charges and most spiteful accusations shall not. The great design of the
devil, is, to destroy and devour souls, his own condition being most miserable,
he at once envies all those who are not in the same condition, and attempts to
make them so; and when he fails in that attempt, the destruction of souls, yet
he will not cease to attempt their molestation, and to trouble those whom he
cannot utterly devour. Now, as Satan cannot at all prevail in the former
attempt, the destroying of souls, so he cannot wholly prevail in the latter,
the troubling of souls. Hence that gallant challenge of the Apostle, ( Romans
8.33, 34.) Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that
justifies: who is he that condemns, it is Christ that dyed, yea rather, that
is risen again, etc. As if he had said, let all the enemies of our spiritual
peace rise up and combine together, they shall not be able to condemn, that is,
wholly to discourage or disquiet the heart of a believer, he having received
(his quietus est) rest and peace from God, in the justification of his person,
and the pardon of his sins. Satan can do much, and would do more (if his chain
were lengthned, and he not restrained) to the trouble and molestation of our
souls, there is not a godly man living should rest an hour in quiet for him, if
he might have his wish or his will; but because God gives quietness to some
believers, and will not have it so much as stirred, therefore Satan cannot make
any trouble at all in their souls, but they live in the constant light of God's
countenance, and in the joy of the holy Ghost. And because the quietness which
every believer has is the gift of God through Jesus Christ, who has made
their atonement, and established their peace, through the blood of his Cross,
therefore Satan cannot make any such trouble in any of their souls, as shall
for ever destroy their peace, or dissolve their quietness, though for many
reasons, all serving his glory, and their good, God suffers satan many times,
possibly for a long time to entangle and interrupt it. Temptations to the
committing of sin, and accusations or charges about sin committed, may
exceedingly hinder and shake the peace of a believer; but, as the sins to which
he is tempted cannot hurt his peace, when he resists and overcomes them, so the
sins into which he falls through temptation, cannot destroy his peace,
because those sins shall certainly be destroyed both by repentance and pardon.

Thirdly, The thunders of the Law cannot take away the peace of that soul, to
whom God gives quietness. Christ having in his own person fullfilled the Law
for believers, both doing the duty, and enduring the penalty of it, he has
delivered them from the terror and curse of the Law, himself having been made
a curse for them ( Gal: 3.13.) So then if neither tribulations nor temptations,
nor the terrors of the Law can make trouble, where God gives quietness; we may
conclude, nothing can.

There is a double Consideration upon both which, we may demonstrate, that if
God gives quietness, either outward or inward, none can make trouble.

First, Because, as God is sovereign and so may dispose peace and quietness,
to whom he pleases, or at his pleasure, when he will, or to whom he will; so
he has an all sufficiency to maintain and confirm, to preserve and protect
the outward peace of any man, against all the powers of this world; and the
inward peace of a godly man against all the powers of hell, against the terrors
of the Law, and the accusations whether of Satan or of his own Conscience.

Secondly, None can destroy the peace of a godly man, because it is a perfect
peace, as was showed before from that promise in the Prophet ( Isa: 26.3.) Him
will thou keep in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee. For, being a
perfect peace it will not decay of it self; and because it is perfect God will
neither destroy it himself, nor suffer any else to destroy it. Mark the
perfect man (says David, Psalm: 37.37.) and behold the upright, for the end of
that man is peace. He is a perfect man whose end is peace, and that is perfect
peace which holds to the end, or which shall never end. The peace which God
gives is perfect; First, because it is established upon perfect righteousness,
the righteousness of God. That righteousness which is the root of our peace
is called the righteousness of God, both because God has appointed it, and
because God has wrought it. Jesus Christ God-man is the Lord our
righteousness, and the Prince of our peace; or as the Apostle expresses it (
Heb: 7.1, 2.) He is Melchisedec, being by interpretation King of
righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is King of peace.
(Isa. 32.17.) The work of righteousness is peace, and the fruit of it is
quietness and assurance for ever. Righteousness is such a foundation of
peace, as cannot be shaken, and therefore that peace which is built upon it
cannot be utterly overthrown, how much soever it may be shaken.

Secondly, It Is a perfect peace, because it was obtained by an absolute victory
over all the enemies of it. That people must needs be in perfect peace who have
got a perfect conquest over all their enemies, and have got their opposers
under their feet. Now the spiritual peace which God gives his people, arises
from a perfect conquest over all their enemies. First, the world is perfectly
conquered by Christ ( John 16.33.) Be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world. Secondly, the Devil is perfectly conquered by Christ ( Heb: 2.14.) He
has destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil. He is more
then conquered who is destroyed; Christ has destroyed the Devil, who is the
destroyer, though not as to his being, though not as to his will to destroy,
yet as to his power to destroy those whom he has redeemed, and will eternally
save. Thirdly, Christ has also perfectly conquered the Law (not by destroying
but) by fullfilling it. Christ was above all that the Law, required or
commanded, and so he did at once freely submit to it, and fully (as to any
hindrance of a believers peace) subdue it, he holds it under him as well as
he was made under it. And he was contented for that very reason to be made
under the Law, that he might hold it under him, and that we might not be under
(the dread of) the Law (though we must walk and work by the rule of it) but
under grace.

It Is matter of strong consolation to poor souls, that when the Lord gives
quietness none can make trouble. And hence we also learn, that all the
breaches which are made upon the peace of the people of God, are from God
himself. As those breaches are meritoriously from themselves, so efficiently
from God himself; till he breaks their peace none can.

Thirdly, From the second branch, When he hides his face, who then can behold
him? This being applicable to a single person as well as the former.

Observe.

God sometimes clouds his face from his own servants, and children. These
words, When he hides his face, suppose that God sometimes does so, and the
Scripture elsewhere testifies that God has often done so; God has love
always in his heart toward his children, but he has not always favor in
his face toward them; his appearances are not always the appearances of a
friend, he may appear angry, and turn away his face as if he would not be
spoken with. Of this we find frequent complaints in Scripture; and I might
speak much to this point, but I have already met with it ( Chap: 13.24.) and
therefore I pass from it.

Only from the connection of these words, When he hides his face, who can
behold him?

Note.

The hiding of Gods face, or the vayling of his favor is exceeding grievous
unto any person. When he does it, who can behold him? This manner of speaking
does not only hold out, that if God will hide his face no man can see him, or
know him; for God is a secret to all men until he is pleased to reveal
himself; yea all the truths of the Gospel are secrets, and mysteries, till God
is pleased to reveal them and make them known ( Math: 11.25.) Father I thank
thee (says Christ) that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto babes; that is, thou have not opened them to the
wisest, etc. (there needs no other hiding of them from the wisest of men, than
a forbearance to open them) but to the babes, who are (though weak, yet)
humble and teachable, thou have opened them, and opened their eyes and hearts
to see and receive them. This speech holds out not only this truth, that when
God does not reveal himself, no man can know him or any thing of his mind,
or that neither his nature, or his will are known but by some way of
revelation; but this form of speaking (Who can behold him?) plainly tells us,
that if God hides his favor, he is so terrible, that none can have the
boldness or courage to behold him. For the hiding of his face, implies an
appearance of anger and displeasure; and when he is angry, who can behold him?
If the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the
glory of his countenance, as the Apostle speaks (2 Cor: 3.7.) surely then no
man can steadfastly behold the face of God when his countenance is filled with
wrath. Some said to Christ ( John 14.8.) Show us the Father and it suffices;
that is, reveal to us the love and good will of the Father, and that will
satisfy us, that will fill up all the desires and longings of our souls; we
shall have nothing more to wish for, nothing more to look after, if thou will
but show us the father. Now, on the other side, if the Father will not show
himself, if the Father will hide himself from the soul, what then can
suffice? what can comfort? where is our refuge or rest? Tranquillus deus
tranquillat omnia.
As when God is quiet and favorable to us, he can make all things favorable
and quiet to us; So, if God be displeased, nothing can be pleasing to a soul
that is sensible of his displeasure. A believer looses not only the joy and
triumph of his faith, but his very peace, he is not only in a dark, but in a
disturbed condition, not knowing where to repose himself, or rest his head,
when God hides his face.

Take this inference from it.

If the hiding of Gods face be so terrible, then take heed of provoking him to
hide his face. For though we are not tenants at will for our peace in reference
unto the world, in reference to men, in reference to devils; yet we are only
tenants at will for our peace in reference unto God. He can take away our
peace; and he does usually continue our peace, only so long as we behave our
selves well. As some have Letters Patents for great offices which run in that
tenor; They shall enjoy them (quam diu se been gesserint) as long as they
carry themselves well; but upon default or maladministration they may be
turned out of all; so I say, though we are not at the will of the world, nor of
any creature, for the holding of our peace, yet we are at the will of God for
it. And as he sometimes merely out of prerogative hides his face (as was
showed Job 13.24.) that he may try what a soul will do in a dark condition,
and that he may declare what the strength of his invisible grace can do when
nothing is visible, no not any the least ray or shine of favor from himself
to support and comfort the soul, I say, though God does thus in a prerogative
way sometimes hide his face) yet usually he does it not, but upon some default
in us, especially our neglect of him; when we regard not the face of God, and
grow slight as to our valuations of his presence, then he withdraws his
presence and vayles his face toward us; and when we fall into any gross sin
(such was the case of David, Psalm: 51.) God takes us upon default, and leaves
us in a sad condition, as he did David, who complained that even his bones were
broken, and that he had lost the joy of his salvation, which upon the renewing
of his faith and repentance, he begged earnestly might be restored to him, and
it was. Therefore if you would keep the light of Gods Countenance, keep close
to the light of Gods Commandment. No marvel if we be under the hidings of
the face of God, when we are turning our backs upon God! Sin is a turning from
God, a turning our backs (...) G^d; and is it any wonder if God turn his face
from sinners? To turn our back upon God is the worst of a sinful condition,
and to find God turning his back upon us, or hiding his face from us, is the
worst of a miserable condition. What can comfort us, when the God of all
consolation will not look upon us, unless in displeasure? What pleasure (but
the pleasure of sin for a season, which ends, without repentance, in endless
torment, what pleasure, I say) can that soul take in whom God takes no
pleasure, or with whom he is not pleased? It is very sad with the soul, when
we loose the sight of our own graces (sometimes a gracious heart cannot see
any work of grace, nor perceive any workings of grace in him, but thinks he
has no faith in God, no love to God, no sorrow for sin, this is sad) but it is
much more sad to loose the sight of the face of God, to have the favor of God
withdrawn from us. This made Jonah complain ( Chap: 2.4.) I am cast out of
the sight of thine eyes; he looked upon himself as an outcast, and then Jonah
thought himself as cast into the belly of hell ( v. 2.) When God hides his
face from us, or will not vouchsafe us a sight of his pleased face, we are as
in the belly of hell, as Jonah bemoaned himself. What is the glory and
happiness of heaven? Is it not the sight of the face of God? is it not the
clear vision and manifestation of God? Glory is that estate wherein God will
never once hide his face, nor look off from his glorified Saints, no not one
moment to all eternity. Now the happiness which we have here, the heaven which
we have upon earth consists in this also; when we live near God by believing,
and behold his face by faith; when God lifts up the light of his countenance
upon us, we are (as it were) lifted up from earth to heaven. As vision in
heaven will make us happy for ever, so hidings on earth make us miserable for
the time. And that which is the very hell of a godly man upon earth, the worst
hell, he can or shall have, is this, when God hides his face from him;
Therefore take heed you do not put the Lord upon withdrawing from you through
your default; This favor, the shine or light of Gods face is continued or
denied to us, usually upon these terms, as we behave our selves well or ill
toward him.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 30. That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be
ensnared.


THese words are the conclusion of Elihu's discourse, about the executions of
divine Justice, upon the sons of men; And in them we have two things; First,
the power; Secondly, the impartiality of divine Justice. God is so powerful,
that he can pull down the Mighty, and he is so impartial that if there be
cause, he will not spare to do it.

Or in the words we have to consider these three things.

First, The character of the person upon whom the Justice of God is executed,
The hypocrite.

Secondly, The Judgment it self, it is a stop to his greatness, that he
reign not.

Thirdly, We have the grounds of this Judgment, which are twofold.

First, His wicked purpose, against the people; He, if suffered, would lay
snares for the people.

Secondly, Gods gracious protection of the people; He will not have the people
ensnared.

That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared.
(...) significat sceleratum, profanu^, plerumque autem vertitur hypocrita.
What a hypocrite is, and what the importance of the original word is, here
translated hypocrite, has been opened from some other passages in this book.
I shall only say thus much further, that the word imports, First, a filthy
thing disguised or covered; For a hypocrite is a filthy profane person, under
the cover or disguise of holiness. Our English word knave is near in sound to
this Hebrew word chanaph, and some conceive it is derived or taken from it. And
to be sure, every hypocrite is a profane person, though all profane persons
are not hypocrites; Some wicked and profane ones care not who knows they are
so; yet very many who are indeed profane and wicked cover it, what they can,
and show that only whereof they have only a show, somewhat of godliness or of
goodness.

Again, There are hypocrites of two makes or strains; First, Religious, or
Church hypocrites. Secondly, State, or Civil hypocrites, and sometimes these two
are combined in one. It Is possible for a man who pretends not to Religion, yet
to be a hypocrite; A Magistrate, whether supreme or subordinate, may offer very
fair for the profit and liberty of the people whom he governs, when he minds
no such thing; yea, he may not only offer fair for the good of a people, as to
their outward profits and liberties, but as to the good of Religion, and the
benefit of their souls, and yet mind no such thing; we may take the hypocrite
in this Text, as twisted up, or compounded of both these; The State hypocrite
and the Religious are sometimes bound up together. That the Hypocrite Reign not.

To reign is the privilege of Supreme Powers; By me Kings reign, says
Wisdom, that is Christ, ( Prove. 8.15.) and when Paul saw how high the
Corinthians carried it in spirituals, he by way of allusion tells them (1 Cor.
4.8.) ye have reigned like Kings without us; ye are got (as ye suppose) to the
top, and into the very throne of Religion, and you think your selves able to
manage all difficulties, and can do well enough there without our help; But to
the Text.

This not reigning of the hypocrite may be taken two ways.

First, As a stop given him by the providence of God, In (...) ne regnat Mem
Negationem includit juxta linguae morem, and in (...) ab offendiculis similiter
ut dei magis extolletur justitia simul and potentia, qui reges de throno suo
dejicit ut populum ejus laqueis irretitum liberet ab illius tyrannide. Merc.
from getting up into the throne, or from getting the power of a Nation into
his hands; thus sometimes God says to the hypocrite, Thou shall not reign,
that is, thou shall not exalt thy self, though thou attempt it.

Secondly, This not reigning may be taken for a stop to the progress of his
power, when he has both attempted and attained it; and that two ways, either
first by taking him away from his power; or secondly, by taking away his power
from him; as Daniel told Belshazzar, while he minded him of the greatness of
his father Nebuchadnezzar (who had all the world (upon the matter) at his
command) as also of his fall from that greatness, ( Dan. 5.19, 20.) Whom he
would, he set up; and whom he would, he put down; but when his heart was lifted
up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his Kingly Throne, and
they took his glory from him: He was deposed, or as the Chaldee has it, (so we
put in the margin) He was made to come down from his Princely throne; either of
these ways does God (who is the King of kings, and Lord of lords) when he
pleases, put a stop to, or check the progress of false hearted Princes, that
have either got their power by flatteries and pretensions to that good which
they intended not, or who exercise their power so. That the hypocrite reign
not, Lest the people be ensnared.

The root of the word here rendered to ensnare, signifies the spreading of a
Net, or the setting of a Grin, such as Fowlers and Hunters make use of, to take
Beasts or Birds with; and thus God himself spoke concerning his dealing with
Babylon, ( Jer. 50.24.) I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken,
O Babylon, and thou wast not aware; litteral Babylon was a snare to the people
of God of old, and so is mystical Babylon at this day. The great Hypocrite, or
Snare-setter, reigns in or over Babylon; therefore says God, thou who have set
snares for my people, shall be ensnared, thou shall be taken unawares, I have
set a snare to catch and hold thee fast. When Elihu says, lest the people be
ensnared, it seems to intimate, that God will prevent the ensnaring of a people
by the hypocrite; He shall not reign, lest the people be ensnared, or lest
they should come into snares. There is another reading, which gives the reason
from the snares which the people have already been entangled with, because of
the snare, or because the people have been ensnared, (therefore says the Lord)
let not the hypocrite reign; thus God revengeth the peoples wrong, and does
justice upon those that had set snares for them. So much for the general sense
of these words, and the opening of them.

There is a second reading of the whole verse, which carries the sense somewhat
another way, and yet may be of use, and yield us some profitable
considerations, but I shall not meddle with that, till I have prosecuted those
observations which arise clearly from our own reading.

The words in general hold forth the heart of God toward false hearted men, he
cannot abide them, nor will he suffer them long to abide, especially not to
abide in power and greatness; That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people
be ensnared.

Hence Note. First, A hypocrite is a person hated of God, and hurtful to men.

He is therefore hated of God, because hurtful to men. And therefore God is not
pleased he should reign, either as to reign is taken strictly, for the
exercising of Sovereign power; or, as to reign may be taken largely, for the
exercising of any power, and living in the height of prosperity. For the
clearing of this truth, that a hypocrite is hated of God, I shall show, first
the nature of an hypocrite; secondly, give the distinctions of hypocrites;
thirdly, make some discoveries who is an hypocrite. To the

First, An hypocrite in his general state or nature, is (as I may say) a wicked
man in a godly man's clothes; he has an appearance of holiness, when there is
nothing but wickedness at the bottom. There are two great parts of the
hypocrites work, first, to show himself good, which he is not; this is properly
the work of simulation or feigning: secondly, to cover that real evil which he
is or does: this is properly the work of dissimulation or cloaking. The
hypocrite strives as much to appear what he is not, as not to appear what he
is; he makes a semblance of that purity which he loves not, and he dissembleth
that impurity which he loves and lives in.

Secondly, We may consider hypocrites under this distinction. First, there is a
simple hypocrite, who has not the good which he thinks and believes he has;
thus every one that professes or names the name of Christ, and is not really
converted, is an hypocrite; because he has not that which he seems to have,
yea, which possibly he verily believes he has; I may call such a one (though
it may seem a very strange expression) a sincere hypocrite; he does not intend
to deceive others, but is deceived himself, because he has not the root of the
matter in him, nor the power of godliness, though he brings forth some seeming
fruits of godliness, and is much in the form of it. Such we may conceive
shaddowed out to us by the foolish Virgins; they made a profession, they had
their lamps, yea, they had oil in their lamps, they did somewhat which was
considerable in the outward duties of Christian Religion, and they hoped to be
accepted with Christ, but they had no oil in their vessels with their lamps, as
the wise Virgins had, (Matthew. 25.4.) that is, they had no grace in their
hearts, nor did they mind the getting of that till it was too late, ( v. 10.)
but satisfied themselves with that little oil in their lamps to make the blaze
of an external profession. Such as these are simple hypocrites, being pleased
with a shell instead of a kernel, and with a shadow, neglecting the substance.
These hypocrites are in a very deplorable condition; yet these are not the
hypocrites which I intend in this point, or have here to do with.

There are a second sort of hypocrites, commonly called gross hypocrites, such
as hold that out which they know they have not, such as know they have nothing
in or of Religion, but the show of it; such as work by art, or with a kind of
force upon themselves in all the good they do, and duties they perform toward
God, and about the things of God. They do nothing as the Apostle says Timothy
did ( Phil. 2.20.) naturally, I have no man like-minded, who will naturally
care for your state. The word naturally is not there opposed to spiritually,
but to artificially, or to forcedly. What a sincere heart does in the things of
God, he does it naturally, that is, it flows from an inward principle, it is
not forced from him, but the hypocrite does all as it were by a kind of art or
force upon himself. The Lord charge the Jews with this kind of hypocrisy, (
Isa. 58.2.) They seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that
did righteousness; that is, they acted with an appearing forwardness, like
those who truly delight to know my ways; yet all this was but as a piece of
art, for as the Lord upbraided them ( verse. 3, 4.) they really kept their sins,
and walked in their own ways of oppression, strife, and debate; yea they made
all that noise abo^t humbling themselves, that they might the more
undiscernedly smite others with the fist of wickedness: and therefore says the
Lord ( v. 5.) Is it such a fast that I have chosen, a day for a man to afflict
his soul, etc. and then for many days to afflict both the souls and bodies of
his brethren? or to abstain a day from meat, and glut himself with sin? That Is
the strain of the hypocrite, he (as I may say) maintains and drives two trades,
he has a trade for God, and the ways of God, and he has a trade for sin, and
the ways of wickedness; this is his course, ( Jer. 12.2.) Thou art near in
their mouth, but far from their reins; they speak of thee, but they have no
desires to thee, no affections for thee, thou art far enough from their reins;
they act a part in Religion, but they neither partake of Religion, nor with it.

Thirdly, There are others, who besides that they are gross hypocrites, may
also be called designing or plotting hypocrites; for they that serve God with a
reserve, as to any sin or by-way, usually serve him with a design, or for an
end of their own. Christ ( Matthew. 23.14) speaking of gross hypocrites, such as
the Pharisees were, says, they devour widows houses, and in a pretense make
long prayers; they pray long in a pretense, or under a pretense; that is, they
have a plot or a design in prayer, they pray, not purely to enjoy communion
with God, nor purely to honor God; but they make use of prayer, and under
pretense of that, do other work. Christ does not there speak against, nor
disparage long prayers, as some do, to the great reproach of the Spirit and
grace of God, but he charge them with praying long in a pretense: pray
heartily, and then pray as long as you will; other due circumstances being
observed, the more you pray, the more is God pleased. But whether prayers are
long or short, if done in a pretense, or with a design to do mischief to
others, or only to get some worldly profit and advantage to our selves (as
those Pharisees prayed) they are an abomination to the Lord. It Is not the
length of prayer, but the end of prayer which discovers hypocrisy. The prophet
Isaiah (chap. 32.6.) gives us a description of this gross designing hypocrite,
The vile person will speak villainy, and his heart will work iniquity, to
practice hypocrisy, and to utter error before the Lord: while the hypocrites
heart works iniquity, his tongue speaks villainy; not that all his words are
villainous words, for then he were not an hypocrite, but a professed profane
person; but he is said to speak villainy, because how pious, and specious, and
godly soever his discourse is, yet he has a villainous intent in speaking, and
his heart at the same time is working iniquity, to practice hypocrisy.

Now that I may a little more unmask this plotting hypocrite, I will show you a
fourfold plot or design, which such hypocrites have in their most zealous
professions of, and pretendings to Religion.

First, They design their own praise or estimation among men; Christ makes
this discovery in his Sermon upon the Mount, ( Matthew. 6.2.5.) Do not as the
hypocrites, for all they do, (whether they give alms, or pray, or fast,) is
not for the glory of God, but that they may have glory of men, and be pointed
at for charitable and holy persons; Praise or glory with men is the food of
hypocrisy. If the hypocrite have but an applause from, and acceptance with
men, he does not look after acceptance with God, which above all things a
sincere heart looks after, and labors for; In this we labor (says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.9.) that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of
him; that is the highest ambition of a sincere heart: but the hypocrites
ambition is to be accepted of, and to have praise among men; and therefore
hypocrites are more troubled, if at any time they fail in expressing themselves
to men, then because (which they do at all times) they fail and faulter in
their affections to God; whereas he that is sincere and honest with God, can
bear it well enough though he has not such plausible expressions toward men,
because he knows his affections stand right with God. That great Macedonian
Alexander having run many hazards in war, turned himself to his soldiers, and
said, What pains have I taken, what dangers have I under gone, only to be
praised and cried up by you? As many in their worldly actings aim only at
their own praise, so do this sort of hypocrites in their spiritual and holy
actings; they pray, and hear, and deal about their alms for applause with men.
What the Histosian writes of the Camelion, is most true of them, they live by
the air, and are fed with the vapors of an earthly praise.

Secondly, Others (most of all the mighty, of whom Elihu is discoursing) act
for God in the outside of Religion, to get an opportunity of revenge upon men;
they put on a fair show of godliness, that they may have a fairer advantage to
let out their malice, and vent their spleen. When either a real or supposed
injury, falls upon an impotent and impatient spirit; malice will provoke to
give that back which charity teaches to forgive. The tyranny of this passion
gives no rest to the discontented soul; all methods shall be studied, and
stratagems devised to content hatred by the compassing of revenge; and when
common projects fail, the habit of zeal and religion shall be put on, that the
conceived malice may be let out: Such a man will cloth himself with the
garments of piety, that he may cover the instruments of cruelty, and do a
mischief unsuspected. Saul was a hypocrite, and false with God, yet how did he
encourage David to follow the War, and fight the Lord's battles against the
uncircumcised Philistines; (1 Samuel 18.17.) whereas Saul sought not the honor
of God at all, nor the overthrow of the Philistines, so much, as the overthrow
of David; his intent was to take his own revenge upon David, rather then Gods
revenge on them: for he hoped David would one time or other over-act his valor
against the Philistines, and lose his life, to win honor and reputation. How
religiously did Abner (who was a great Prince as David called him) urge the
promise of God to make David King, (2 Samuel 3.18.) and yet it is plain in the
Text, that his design was to revenge himself upon Ishbosheth, who had put (as
he thought) an affront upon him, rather then to be instrumental for the
fulfilling of the promise of God to David. Jezebel a great Queen proclaimed a
Fast (which is one of the highest acts of Religion) while her purpose was only
to get an opportunity to feast her self upon the destruction of Naboth, and to
drink his innocent blood. Herod a King ( Matthew. 2.8.) desired to have the young
child Christ, that he might come and worship him, but his design was to
murder him; and because he could not have his will to kill him alone, he
resolved to kill him in the multitude, commanding all the infants of such an
age to be slain, lest he should escape. We have a sad instance of this in two
of the Patriarcks, ( Genesis 34.) I do not say they were hypocrites, but, I say,
they acted a high strain of hypocrisy, and put on a religious pretense for the
compassing of revenge. Dinah, Jacobs daughter being deflowred by Shechem, he
sued to have her for his wife, and would wipe off the stain of his lust by a
legal marriage; old Hamor pleaded for his son, and Jacob was willing enough
('it is like) to salve the credit of his daughter; but the sons of Jacob answered
Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully ( v. 13.) and they said, we cannot
match with you, except you be circumcised, and so become Proselytes to our
Religion. If Shechem will be of their family, he must be of their faith; they
stood not upon their sisters jointure, the matter stuck only upon a scruple of
conscience. What argument of greater zeal for God could they have given then
this? Yet while these religious words were in their mouths, they had bloody
swords in their hearts: And all this pretense for circumcision, was only that
they might have an advantage, to come upon them in their soreness and destroy
them; which (as the holy story tells us) they soon after effected.

Thirdly, Hypocrites often design worldly gain, and aim at the purse more
then at God in all their holy services. Many take up a profession of Religion,
as all men take up a Trade, that they may get a Living by it; the Apostle
speaks of such (1 Timothy 6.5.) who ^urpose that gain is godliness; whereas he
says ( verse. 6.) Godliness with contentment is great gain, they say, Gain is
godliness; And all they look at by their profession of godliness, is worldly
gain. Religion is often made (as the Apostles word is, 1 Thessalonians. 2.5.) a cloak
of covetousness; and he professes in the same place, that in the dispensation
of the Gospel, he had not used his Ministry as such a cloak, God was his
witness; but there are many against whom (though men cannot) yet their own
consciences do, and God will witness, that their appearance in Religion is but
the hiding of, or a cloak for their covetousness. Hamor and Shechem used no
other argument to persuade their Citizens to take upon them the seal of the
Covenant, but only this, Shall not their cattle, and their substance, and every
beast of theirs, be ours? (Genesis 34.27.) And it seems the very mention of their
own emolument overcame them; they thought it a bargain well made, to sell a
little of their blood at so high a rate, and to exchange their foreskins for so
many head of Cattle. And hence it is, that among those seven sorts of Pharisees
collected out of the Talmud, the first are called Pharisaei Shechemitae,
receiving (it seems) both their Order and Denomination from these Shechemites,
because as they turned Hebrews, so these became Pharisees upon the hopes of
worldly benefit. And such were those Pharisees in truth, whatsoever their Title
was, who (as was touched before) devoured widows houses, and in a pretense
made long prayers. As it is a very great point of ungodliness (profaneness
indeed) to say, What profit is there in serving the Lord? So it is gross
hypocrisy to take up Religion merely for profit; there is profit, even worldly
profit in Religion; Godliness is profitable for all things, (1 Timothy 4.8.) and
has the promise of this life as well as of that to come; but woe to those that
take it up designing profit, and the filling either of their purses, or their
bellies. Our Saviors Divine Spirit quickly discovered this carnal spirit in
his followers, ( John 6.26.) Ye seek me not because ye saw the miracles, but
because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled: Judas followed Christ, but
the motive of it, was in the bag, ( John 12.6.) The zeal of Demetrius to his
Idol Diana, was kindled by as pure a fire as the zeal of these hypocrites to
Jesus Christ, ( Acts 19.24.) By this we get our living. They know nothing of
the life of Religion, who are religious only that they may live: If profit be
the Loadstone of our profession, our profession will never profit us; for what
shall it profit a man to gain the whole world by a profession of the name of
Christ, if he lose his own soul? Satan charged Job with this gross hypocrisy,
( chap. 1.9.) Does Job fear God for naught? as if he had said, Job finds it is
no lean business to be religious, and therefore no wonder if he be found so
religious. Who would not do and be as much as he in Religion, to have his
fields full of Cattle, and his folds full of Sheep, and his house full of
Riches? He knows well enough which side his bread is buttered on, what makes
for his profit; all the account he makes of Religion is, that he perceives by
his books, and the inventory of his goods, that it turns every year to a good
account: Jobs slander is the just charge of many, they use Religion but as a
stalking horse, to catch worldly riches.

Fourthly, The gross hypocrite often designs, that which is higher in the
esteem, and more taking upon the spirits of many then worldly riches, even
worldly power, or to get very high, if not uppermost in the world. It Is no new
thing for men to make religion a stayre to ascend the highest rooms among men,
or a stirrup to get into the saddle of honor, and when they have got high
enough, then down with the stayres, or it is no matter for the stirrup by which
they ascended. Jehu was very zealous in the cause of God, and for reformation,
but his design was for a kingdom, or his own exaltation (2 Kings 10.16.) he
made a noise of much piety, Come see my zeal for the Lord, yet all was but a
piece of State-hypocrisie. His care in destroying Ahabs house and Baals Priests
(according to the command of God) was but to pave the way to the throne. The
same way Absalom was taking to his fathers Crown; he told the people he was
troubled that they were no better governed, that they had no quicker dispatch
in their suites and businesses; he told his father he had made a vow, and
desired the liberty of his absence from Court, that he might go and perform
it; all he pretended was righteousness and religion, yet he intended only to
get an advan^^ge to make his party strong, that so he might thrust his fa her
out of the throne, and get up himself. He seemed a Saint while he meant to be
a Traitor. The History of the Church reports of Julia^ the Apostate, Socrates
Hist: Ecclesiast: lib: 3. c. 1.
that when his predecessor (being a Christian) held the Empire, he highly
pretended the profession of Christ, and read a Gospel-Lecture in the Church of
Nichomedia; yet while he was in show a Christian, and in hope an Emperor, he
was in heart a pagan. He saw the times served him not to act the pagan openly,
and therefore he subtlely betook himself to his disguise, and personated the
Christian, even in the mortified way of a monasticke life, (...). Tandem
simulationem professionis christianae penitus deposuit. Socrat: ubi supra.
that he might smooth his way to the Empire. To which having once attained, he
presently put off his disguise, and, to his utmost, disgraced and opposed the
name and faith of Christ, which he had formerly owned and professed.

Thus I have touched upon the four grand designs of the Gross hypocrite:
First, praise among all men; Secondly, revenge upon some men; Thirdly, the
gain of worldly riches; Fourthly, the attainment of power, dominion, and
Greatness in the world. These are as the four wheels of Satan's chariot,
wherein he hurrieth thousands to the land of darkness, while they would be
esteemed children of the light. Or some one of these is as the (primum mobile)
first mover (of which Philosophers speak in their doctrine of the heavens)
carrying many with a rapt and violent motion in the sphere of religion, while
they have in the Interim a secret undiscerned natural motion of their own
directly opposite to this, by which they hope at last to steal on fair and
softly to their wished periods.

Having thus far showed the close purposes of the designing hypocrite, who is
so hateful to God and hurtful to man, I shall a little discover and unmaske
his hypocrisy, by showing how we may know him, how we may look through these
vayles and see his ugly face.

Designing hypocrites are usually discovered these four ways.

First, By their affectation to be seen and taken notice of; they that will
have praise and glory with men, must needs affect to be seen of men; for no
glory comes to man, from men, but by what falls under the eye and observation
of man. Job says of murderers (Chap: 24.13.) They are of those that rebel
against the light, they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths
thereof. The murderer cannot endure the light either natural or moral, because
that tells who he is, or what he has been about. The contrary, in one sense,
is true of the hypocrite, he loves the light, and will do nothing willingly,
but as he may be taken notice of, and seen of men; as for those acts or
exercises of religion, which are private retirements between God and his own
soul, he is a great stranger to them, he cannot delight in them, but any thing
that may fall under public observation, he can be forward enough in. Christ (
Math. 6.5.) gives us this plain discovery of the hypocricall Pharisees; They
love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen of men. This was so much in Jehu's heart, that he could
not but blab it out with his tongue (2 Kings 10.) Come see my zeal; A false
fire kindled his zeal, else he had not made such a blaze. It was, insincere
rotten-hearted Saul that said (1 Samuel: 15.13.) Come thou blessed of the Lord, I
have performed the commandment of the Lord; he was his own trumpeter, and
would needs tell the story of his doings himself, though he had done his
business to halves; Come thou blessed of the Lord, I have performed the
commandment of the Lord; as if it would not serve him to do his duty, unless
Samuel had seen and taken notice of him. Abraham gave proof of the highest
act of faith that ever was in the world, yet did Abraham say, Come see my
faith? Moses led the people of Israel forty years in the wilderness through a
series of wonderful trials and temptations, to the very borders of Canaan
(which was one of the highest services that ever man undertook) and was
faithful in all his house (Heb: 4.2.) yet did he say, Come see my fidelity?
Joshua victoriously expelled the Cananites, and divided their land by lot among
the tribes of Israel, yet did he say, Come see my fortitude? We hear not a
word of any of their doings from those who were sincere. When we see men
forward to invite the approbation of others by making reports of their good
deeds, it gives a strong argument of suspicion, that they have done what they
have done with a bad heart, or, that (as it is said of Jehu) they have not
sought God with all their hearts.

But some may object, Did not Samuel proclaim his own integrity before all the
people (1 Samuel: 12.3.) Whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or
whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received
any bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith?

I answer; Samuel spoke this to upbraid their ingratitude and discontent, not
to extol his own justice; yea some conceive that he made this challenge, to
give Saul a pattern how he ought to govern, rather then to commend his own
government. I find the Apostle Paul making large reports of his own both
doings and sufferings (2 Cor: 11.) But if we peruse that Chapter, we shall find
him hovering in a suspense of doubts and fears, whether or no it were
convenient or comely for him to do so. How many preambles and Apologyes did he
make before he fell directly upon that unpleasing subject? Would to God ye
could bear with me in my folly (says he) and indeed bear with me. And
again, I speak (as it were) foolishly in this confidence of boasting. And yet
all that he spoke was not to make a boast of himself, but to vindicate his
Apostleship from unjust and envious calumniations.

It Is most certain, He that is sincere desires not to be open, but silently
satisfies his soul with the conscience of doing his duty, and takes more
content, in knowing his own integrity, then in knowing that others know it.
Virtue loses nothing of her value, in his esteem, no nor of her luster in
his eye, because she is hidden from the eyes of men. Like the earth (in this
point) he keeps his richest mineralls, and most precious gems of grace and
goodness below in his bowels, or at the center of his heart, and will not let
them be seen, till a kind of necessity diggs them out. When Moses after his
forty days near access to and communion with God in the Mount, perceived
that his face did shine ( Exodus: 34.33.) he put a veil upon it; every true
Moses whose acquaintance and fiduciall familiarity with God, has stamped upon
him the impressions of divine light, is so far from affecting to dazzle the
eyes of others with it, that he rather puts a veil of gracious modesty upon
it; and will not let so much as the light of his good works be seen, but as
thereby (in which case Christ commands it ( Math: 5.16.) He may glorify his
father which is in heaven. And herein a Christian follows the example of
Christ, in whom though the Godhead dwelt bodily, yet he rarely showed his
divine power. And when once by a miracle, he had made the blind see, he also by
command made them dumb concerning that miracle ( Math: 9.30.) See that no man
know it. It was our Saviors counsel to all his followers ( Mat: 6.5.) Let not
thy left hand know what thy right hand does, and it was his consolation to them
in the next words; Your father which sees in secret, himself shall reward you
openly; yea (which is a higher consolation then that) Himself will be your
reward.

Secondly, As the designing hypocrite desires to be seen in doing good, or to
have the good which he has done seen; so he is exceeding censorious and rigid
toward those whom he sees falling into evil. Christ gives this discovery also
( Math: 7.3.) Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye; concluding at the 5th
verse; Thou hypocrite (why does Christ call him hypocrite? surely because he
was so quick-sighted to see a mote, that is, a smaller fault in his brothers
eye, but took no notice of the beam that was in his own eye; a spot upon his
brothers coat, was censured more by him, then his own wallowing in the mire.
I do not say that the Patriarch Judah was an hypocrite, but, as those two
other Patriacks, so he acted one very gross part of hypocrisy ( Genesis 38.24.)
For he no sooner heard that Tamor was with child, but he censured, yea
condemned her presently to death; Bring her forth (said he) and let her be
burnt; and yet himself was more faulty then she. How hard a Judge was he of
that crime in another, which was principally his own? Saul had sinned greatly
(1 Samuel: 13.9.) in offering sacrifice before Samuel came, which was an
usurpation of the Priests office, and so great a sin that Samuel told him
presently, God would therefore rend the Kingdom from him; yet he thought to
put it off with a slight excuse. But in the 14th Chapter when Jonathan only
offended against a rash command of his (putting a Curse upon that people if any
did eat before the going down of the Sun) he sentenced him to death for it.
In the 8th of John, How severe were the Pharisees to the woman taken in
Adultery, they haled her before Christ, and pressed the Law that she should be
stoned to death; yet, when Christ said ( v. 7.) He that is without sin among
you, let him first cast a stone at her, they being convicted by their own
conscience, went out one by one. We ought to reprove and not flatter sin in
others; yet they who are extremely severe against a sin in others, usually
favor either the same or a worse in themselves. He that is sincere, pi^tieth
others, as much as reproves them, and he reproves them, though wi^h sharpness,
yet with meekness, at once considering himself, lest he also be tempted (Gal:
6.1.) and blessing God who has kept him in or from these temptations.

Thirdly, The designing hypocrite discovers himself by laying down or
departing from the profession of religion, when his worldly ends are attained.
Feined zeal cooles or abates, is less and less toward the things of God, as
such zelots grow warmer and warmer in their nests, and find their carnal
interests more and more served or secured. It Is reported by a Popish Author,
that a Friar or Monk was observed very precise, and circumspect in all his
ways, hanging down his head to the earth, very humbly and devoutly, as if he
meditated continually upon his mortality, or return to the earth; who
afterward being chosen Abbot or Governor of the Covent, grew very proud, high
and insolent. Some, wondering at this change of behavior, took the boldness to
ask him the reason of it; O, said he, I was but seeking the keys of the
Abbey, and now I have found them. Having gotten what he sought for, he laid
aside his strictness in religion, and threw off his veil. When Jehu that
hypocrite was in his way to the Kingdom, how zealous was he? yet no sooner
settled in it, but he was unsettled in religion, and turned Idolater, worshipping
the Calves that were in Dan and Bethel. When Julian had obtained the Empire, he
had done with Christ, and gave all the world a full argument against himself,
that he was but a hypocrite in his former profession of Christianity. David was
as zealous for God and as holy when he was upon the throne, as when he kept
sheep upon the Mountains, as good when a princely train followed him, as
when he followed the Ewes great with young. Moses was as faithful when he was
the ruler of Israel, as when he was an exile in Midian. Joseph was as gracious
when he wore a chain of Gold, and had the power of all Egypt put into his
hand, as when himself was a prisoner in Potiphers house, and the iron
(chains) entered into his soul. I fear God (said he, Gen: 42.18.) when he had
no man to fear. And when after his fathers death, his brethren feared he would
reckon with them for their old faults, or at least be careless of and unkind
to them, who had been so unkind and cruel to him, yet he would do them nothing
but kindnesses and courtesies, and thereof bid them be confident, ( Gen: 50.21.)

Fourthly, As success discovers some hypocrites, so the cross discovers
many more. The hypocrite will run from his colors when he comes to the battle,
or sees he must either quit the truths of God, or his own peace. If once he
finds that he cannot thrive by religion, he will meddle no more with it.
There is a generation who will appear no further for truth, then serves their
own turn; and when they see they cannot serve that, by holding the truth,
they will neither hold nor profess it any longer. They will venture no further
in such matters, then they may make a fair retreat, if they see themselves in
danger, or cannot carry onne their own interests. Thus the second ground is
described ( Math: 13.20, 21.) He that hears the word, and anon with joy
receives it; yet has he not root in himself, but dureth for a while, for
when tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is
offended. He has enough of the word, when he sees he cannot have that, and
enough of the world too. Many will get aboard the ship of the true Church in a
calm, who if they see the clouds gather, the air darken, the winds rising,
the storm coming, they dare not ride it out in an angry Sea, but will be
calling for the boat, and row to the next shore. These never purposed to
endure all winds and weathers, with the Church of God, but hoped to be
transported to the cape of their worldly good hope, and wished for earthly
haven. Their slight interprets their intents, and lists them among designing
hypocrites. The house founded on the sand, shows as fair in a fair day, as
that founded on a rock; But when the rain descends, and the floods come, and
the winds blow, you may distinguish it, by the downfall. He was never more nor
better then a mere outside professor, who does not hold fast his profession
in a day of trouble as well as in a day of peace; in the greatest distress, as
well as in the highest success and triumph of the people of God in this world.

To shut up this point and observation, I shall only give three or four
considerations, which may move all to take heed of hypocrisy. Christ says (
Luke 12.1.) Beware of the Leven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy. As Leven
sowres the whole lump of bread, so does hypocrisy both the persons and
conversations of those who are infected with it.

First, Beware of hypocrisy, or of hiding what you are, for what you are, does
always appear to God, though not to men; All things are naked and manifest
unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do (Heb: 4.13.) though we are
painted over, though we are cloaked, and hooded, and vizarded with pretenses,
yet we are naked before the eye of God. And that was the argument with which
God pressed Abraham to beware of hypocrisy ( Gen: 17.1.) Walk before me and
be thou perfect; that is, remember thou art always in my eye and sight,
therefore take heed of falsenesse and insincerity. We use to say, There is no
halting before a Criple; Criples know whether yours be a fained or real
lamenesse. O take heed of halting before God, he knows how it is with you, he
knows the temper of your souls, as well as the body of your conversations; he
does not only know what you do, but with what aims, with what heart and
purpose you do it. Paul said (1 These. 2.5.) We have not used a cloak of
covetousness, God is witness. As if he had said, God will quickly see through
us, and find out our covetousness, though we cover it with never so thick or
fair a cloak of devotional professions.

Secondly, Consider, as the Lord sees through you, so he will make you
thoroughly seen, he will make you known or unmaske you before men one time or
other. As he will bring forth the righteousness of a godly man as the light
(after it has been long hid under the darkness of uncharitable suspicions or
false accusations) and his just dealing as the noone day, Psalm: 37.6.) so he
will bring forth the unrighteousness of a hypocrite as the light, and his
false-dealing as the noonday, though it have layne hid a while under the
cloak and fair colors of the most pious semblances and protestations. God
loves to uncase hypocrites, because he is a God of truth; and because it
magnifieth his truth, justice, and omniscience to do so. And he does it many
times, by letting them fall into foul sins; they make fair shows in
religion, through restraining grace, and as soon as that bridle of restraining
grace is let loose, that very show is gone, and they show plainly what they
are. The closest designing hypocrites, often prove open Apostates; and though
some may abide long, (possibly as long as they live) in this vain show or
form of Godliness, without discovering their rottenness, yet at last their
rottenness shall be discovered: for as Solomon assures us ( Eccles: 12.14.)
God will bring every work to Judgment, and every secret thing, whether it be
good or whether it be evil. Or as the Apostle has it, (1 Cor: 4.5.) He will
discover the secrets of the heart, and bring to light the hidden things of
darkness; which, what are they, but the hypocritical designings of men? We
say, murder will out, and it is as true, Hypocrisy will out. The Lord many
times brings it out to the shame of hypocrites in this life, and he will bring
it out to the confusion of all their faces, in that great day, when the secrets
of all hearts shall be revealed.

Thirdly, Take heed of this designing hypocrisy; for as all who continue in it
shall be discovered, so usually they continue in it; your plotting cunning
hypocrites, are very rarely converted. Simple hypocrites (in the notion touched
before) are often converted; all unconverted persons that make any profession
in religion are hypocrites, and many of them are simple ones, they hope all is
well with them, and that they have grace, though they have it not, these are
often converted, but gross designing hypocrites, of what rank or degree soever,
are rarely converted. This is it which Christ said to the Pharisees, ( Matthew.
21.31.) Publicans and Harlots enter into the Kingdom of heaven before you;
Publicans were the worst sort of men, and harlots were the worst sort of women,
yet these repented and received the Gospel sooner then the hypocritical
Pharisees. The Evangelist made a like report of them ( Luke 7.29, 30.) All the
people (that is, the common sort of people) that heard him, and the Publicans,
justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John, but the Pharisees and
Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of
him; yea, as Christ speaks in the next words, they were piped to, but they
would not dance; they were wept to, but they would not mourn. All those various
dispensations of the Gospel were fruitless to them; neither a more pleasing nor
a more severe Ministry won any thing upon that generation of designing
hypocrites.

Fourthly, consider, As hypocrites are hateful to God, so God will deal with
them accordingly; he will for ever separate them from his presence, and cast
them out of his sight. A hypocrite has a double mind, a divided heart; he is
not half enough for God, (indeed he is nothing at all for God) and he is too
much, yea altogether for himself, and therefore he shall have no hing at all of
God, not so much as a sight of him. It is said in the 1^th of Job, The
hypocrite shall not come before him: Such as we hate, we cannot endure they
should come in our sight: It Is a suitable judgment, that they who have so often
come before God with false hearts, and mocked him with a seeming desire of
being in his presence, should at last be thrust for ever out of his presence.
It Is the portion of an hypocrite to have no portion in God, of whom he has
made such a boasting profession. When the worst of punishments is spoken of, it
is called the hypocrites portion ( Math: 24.51.) Give them their portion with
hypocrites in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Hypocrites are
spoken of as if they were the freeholders of hell, or as if all other sinners
that shall go to hell were but as inmates, and they the grand tenants of hell.
Consider how miserable a thing it is to be an hypocrite, if this be the portion
of hypocrites, to have no portion in God. And as they shall not reign at all
in the glory of the next world, so they are sometimes checked (says the text)
from reigning in the glory of this world.

That the hypocrite reign not. Reigning, as was showed before, being strictly
taken, is the exercise of supreme power, and in a large sense may signify the
exercise of any power, or a state of great prosperity.

Hence note, Secondly.

Hypocrites are high minded, and look after great things. David was a king, he
reigned over Israel, but it was not his own ambition, but the election of God,
and his anointing, which brought him to the throne. He could say of himself (
Psalm: 131.1.) Lord my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I
exercise my self in great matters, or in things too high for me. Though David
was high in his person and state, yet his spirit was not high; nor was his
spirit for high things, only God placed him on high. But here we see the
hypocrite is climbing and getting to the top of the stairs, he is ascending
even to the throne. Hypocrites are proud of that nothing which they have and
are in spiritualls, and they would have all, they would get high, they would be
highest in temporalls. There are two lusts which usually reign in hypocrites,
and both of them respect the world.

First, The lust of covetousness, which is an inordinate desire of getting and
keeping the riches of this world. The Pharisees all the Gospel over are taxed
for hypocrites; and when Christ had preached that parable of the unjust
Steward, concluding with this sentence, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon; The
Evangelist tells us ( Luke 16.14.) The Pharisees also who were covetous,
heard all these things, and they derided him. Covetousness and hypocrisy go
together; They who have no true hungrings and thirstings after the things of
heaven, are most hungry and thirsty after earthly things. We find Job in the
27th Chapter of this Book ( v. 8.) speaking of the hypocrites gain; What is
the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his
soul; which implies that the hypocrite is a great aimer at worldly gain.

The second predominant lust of the hypocrite is, ambition, or desire of
getting to the upper end of the world. Christ charge the hypocritical
Pharisees with this lust also ( Math: 23.6. Mark 12.39.) They love the
uppermost rooms at feasts, and the highest seats in the Synagogues. They are
all to be uppermost, they must have the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the
highest seats in the Synagogue, both in Civil and Church-meetings; hypocrites
affected superiority, or, Diotrephes-like, to have the pre-eminence, and (which
was another symptom of ambition) they (says Christ) love greetings in the
market place, and to be called Rabbi, Rabbi, which is a title of greatness and
mastership. Yea many hypocrites would not only have the uppermost seats at
feasts, and in the Synagogues, but the very uppermost seats in Nations and
Commonwealths; They sometimes affect to be the head, who are worse then the
tail of all the people. There are hypocrites of all ranks, and among all
degrees of men, some of low degree are in a very high degree of hypocrisy;
There are hypocrites in rags and in russet, there are hypocrites also in
scarlet and in purple; hypocrisy may reign in and among those that reign. It
is a maxim which some Princes have held out to all the world, as the rule of
their reigning; He that knows not how to dissemble, Qui nescit dissimulare
nescit regnore.
knows not how to reign. Dissimulation is a great part of hypocrisy, there is
dissimulation both as to the things of God, and the things of men; Some if they
knew not how to dissemble in both (at least) with men, would not believe that
they knew how to rule over, or govern men. Now as many who are great, and in
power, make little conscience to dissemble, or make use of hypocrisy, to carry
on their government, and secure themselves; so most hypocrites have a mind, and
will use all means (not forbearing those which are bad enough) to get into
power, and make themselves great. The spirit of hypocrisy is an aspiring
spirit.

Again, Elihu says, That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be
ensnared; here is not one word of the good government or protection of the
people, which should be the maine business of those that reign; The text
speaks only of snares; That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be
ensnared.

Hence observe; Thirdly.

Hypocrites getting into power, do either secretly or openly wrong and
oppress the people. They lay snares for them in stead of being shields to
them. Hypocrites in power, ensnare chiefly two ways.

First, By their ill example, there is a great snare in that; Inferiors are
very apt to be formed up according to their mould and manners who are above
them; R^gis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
the example of Kings and Princes are seldom unconformed to by their Subjects.
There is a great power in example, what is done persuades, as well as what is
spoken. And the errors of those that rule, become rules of error; men sin with
a kind of authority, through the sins of those who are in authority. Jeroboam
made Israel to sin, not only by commanding them to worship the Calves at Dan
and Bethel, but by commending that Idolatous worship to them in his own
practice and example.

Secondly, They ensnare the people by sinful and bad Laws; The Prophet
denounces a woe distinctly unto men of several ranks and places ( Hos: 5.1.)
Hear ye this, O Priests, and hearken ye house of Israel, and give ye ear, O
house of the King; he directs his speech, in that threefold division; First,
to the Priests; Secondly, to the body of the people; Thirdly, and chiefly to
the house of the King, why to the house of the King? Because ye have been a
snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor. That Scripture may be
interpreted; First, as an allusion to such as were wont to hunt upon those
mountains; Mizpah and Tabor were famous places for hunting, there they were
wont to set netts, and lay snares to catch their game; now, says the Prophet,
ye have been even like hunters spreading netts and laying snares. Nimrod is
called a mighty hunter before God; He was a hunter of men more then of wild
beasts. Now, look what nets and snares are to wild beasts, the same are sinful
laws to the consciences of honest and upright-hearted men. And it is well
conceived that the Prophet there referrs to those ensnaring Laws made by
Jeroboam and the succeeding Princes in the Kingdom of Israel, whereby they
endeavored to draw off the people of God from his true worship, and vexed
those who kept close to it. Secondly, some expound those words, Ye have been a
snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor, to signify their setting spies
upon those mountains to watch and so to give information, who went to the
solemn feasts, that so they might be proceeded against according to those
ensnaring Laws. Which way soever we take it, it is clear, that Scripture
reproves and threatens Judgment against the Priests and Apostatizing people of
Israel, complying with if not provoking the the ruling powers to trouble those
who could not digest the Idolatrous worship set up by Jeroboam at Dan and
Bethel, upon a politic consideration, lest the people going to Jerusalem,
should fall off from him, and weaken the kingdom of Israel in his hand.
Another Prophet complained ( Mic: 6.16.) The Statutes of Omri are kept. Omri
was a king of Israel, a successor of Jeroboam both in his power and hypocrisy,
he also pretended a zeal for the worship of God after his own devising, and
therefore made ensnaring Statutes to entangle those that were sincere, and
persevered in the true worship which the Statutes of God appointed. The Prophet
speaks of a strange kind of bridle, or of a bridle used for an unusual
purpose ( Isa. 30.28.) There shall be a bridle in the jaws of the people
causing them to err. A bridle is put upon the head of a horse or mule, as
David speaks ( Psalm: 32.9.) not to cause either to err or go out of the way,
but to keep them in the way. It Is evident by the context of this Chapter, as
also by the express text of the 37th Chapter ( v. 29.) that this bridle was
the Lords power against Senacharib and his host, whereby as with a bridle in
their jaws he diverted them from their purpose of besiedging Jerusalem. It Is a
truth also (to which we may warrantably enough apply those words of the Prophet
in a way of allusion) that good laws are like a bridle in the jaws of a
people, the multitude or the most would else be like headstrong horses, if
authority did not keep them in. It Is a great mercy when Laws are as a bridle to
keep us from erring, but it is sad when any Laws are a bridle in the jaws of a
people causing them to err, or go out of the way of the Laws of God; such Laws
are not (which all Laws should be) rules, but snares. Such were the Laws of
Jeroboam, and the Statutes of Omri in Israel of old; and what Nation is there
that has not had experience in one age, or other, of such Laws as have been a
bridle in their jaws causing them to err, or a snare to their souls and
consciences?

Fourthly, When Elihu says, That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be
ensnared, he intends an act of divine wrath, upon hypocrites, abusing their
power to the hurt of the people.

Hence Note.

God is highly displeased with Princes and Magistrates when they ensnare the
people. We read ( Isa. 3.12.) how the people of Israel were ensnared, and how
the Lord was highly displeased with those who did ensnare them. O my people,
they which lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. Thy
Leaders mislead thee. There are two sorts of Leaders, First, Spiritual Leaders;
the Ministers and Preachers of the Word now, as of old the Priests, Levites,
and Prophets, were Leaders of the people (and sometimes proved their misleaders,
Jer. 23.1.3.) in Spirituals. Secondly, There are Leaders of the people in Civil
things; such are all Princes and Magistrates. We may understand that Text in
the Prophet Isaiah, of both these Leaders; as if he had said, Thy Prophets and
thy Princes mislead thee, and cause thee to err; And therefore at ver. 14. of
the same chapter, God declares his displeasure against them, professing that
he would enter into judgment with the Ancients of his people, and the Princes
thereof. The same Prophet Isaiah (chap. 9.16.) complains of the same thing
again; The Leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are lead of
them are destroyed. The Hebrew is, they that bless this people, (so we put it
in the margin,) The Leaders of the people were so called, either because it was
a part of their office, to pronounce the blessing upon the people; or because
the false Prophets used to sooth up the people in their sins; and (as another
Prophet has it) to sow pillows under their elbows, as if they were in a very
blessed condition, and should do well enough, notwithstanding all the clamours
of the true Prophets against them. And so the latter words, they that are led
of them, are suitable to the former in the Hebrew, being thus read in the
margin, they that are called blessed of them; that is, declared or assured by
them to be in the right way, and so such as should come to a blessed end,
though indeed their end proved destruction. And if they who are misled (or
called blessed) fall into destruction, surely their misleaders (who call them
blessed) shall not escape. If the blind lead the blind, both fall into the
ditch, (Matthew. 15.14.) only the blind leader, or misleader, shall fall deepest
into it.

Fifthly, Observe.

As God is displeased with the hypocrite when he uses his power to ensnare the
people, so the Lord sometimes puts him besides his power, or takes his power
from him, that he may no longer ensnare the people. The ultimate scope of the
place, is not only to show the Lord displeased with the hypocrite, but
displacing him. When the Prophet had summoned all sorts, Priests, and people,
and the house of the King, he adds, Judgment is toward you, because ye have
been a snare upon Mizpah, (Hos. 5.1.) Thus as God pulls down hypocrites,
because they are hateful to himself, so because they are hurtful to others;
hurtful to their Civil Liberties, and worldly Interests, over which God is
tender; hurtful also to their spiritual Liberties, and soul Interests, over
which God is more tender. The Kings of Israel (who were very wicked, and did
much ensnare the people) went of their Governments, most of them, very
speedily, God did not let them reign long; yea, the whole Kingdom of Israel
(which had not one good King) was dissolved long before the Kingdom of Judah,
which had many good Kings. God did not suffer the hypocritical Kings of Israel
to hold their power, but gave them into the hand of the King of Assyria, (2
Kings 17.6.) because ( verse. 8.) they walked in the statutes of the heathen,
and of the Kings of Israel, which they had made.

From the whole verse I would give one Note by way of Corrolary.

A hypocrite is of all persons most unfit for public service. How unfit is he
to have power in his hand, who can use it no better, then for the ensnaring of
the people? A hypocrite is of a private spirit, he is all for himself, and
therefore most unfit for public trust. We may say of the hypocrite, as the
Prophet ( Ezekiel. 15.3.) of the Vine, Shall wood be taken thereof to do any work?
or, will men take a pin of it, to hang a vessel thereon? No, it is not fit for
that mean purpose or service, much less would a man take a Vine to hew a beam
or a pillar for a house out of it. Magistrates are as pillars of the house, or
like great beams, to hold up and fasten all; the hypocrite is so far from being
fit Timber to make a pillar of the house, that he is not fit to make a pin to
hang a vessel on upon the wall. Power is never so improperly employed as in
making snares, and yet that is the usual employment or improvement which
hypocrites, high or low, put it to.

Qui regnare facit hominem hypocritam propter offendicula populi. Vulg.
Constituens regem hominem delatorem propter scandala quae in populo. Chald. Non
sunt ita repugnantes hae interpretationes, quin una ex altera consequatur. Nam
si non sinit Deus diutius regnare hypocritam, certe aliquandiu smit; dat enim
reges in iram. Merl.
I have thus far opened the Text, and given these Notes from it, according to
our reading; yet before I pass from it, I shall mind you of another reading or
version of this whole verse, which carries the sense quite into another
channel. Thus

Who (meaning God) makes (or suffers at least) the hypocrite to reign,
because of the offenses or sins of the people. The Chaldee Paraphrase, the
Septuagint, and Vulgar Latin agree in this, and the dependence (for clearing
of it) may be made out thus.

Elihu having showed in the 29th verse, that if God gives quietness, none can
make trouble; and that if he hides his face, none can behold him, whether it
be done against a Nation, or against a man only, proceeds in this verse to show
the justice of God in punishing the people, by putting power into the
hypocrites hand.

The learned Mercer, I grant, is not satisfied with this rendering, as not being
so suitable to the Grammatical construction of the Hebrew Text; yet, holding the
first, he makes this as a consequent of it; confessing that it may be taken in
this sense; That the hypocrite reign not who did once reign, because of the
sins of the people; and so it intimates the sins both of the Prince and people.
Thus both readings correspond, and are not repugnant but subservient to each
other. For if God suffer not the hypocrite to reign any longer, it is an
argument that for a time he suffered him to reign for the sins of the people,
that is, to be an instrument of his wrath and vengeance upon them for their
sins. The same word signifies both a snare, and sin; a snare set by others, and
an offense or sin committed by our selves; and well it may, seeing nothing does
more ensnare us then our own sins. And as some are led into sin by the snares
which others lay for them; (...). Forte interpretes pro (...) cum puncta olim
voealia deessent legerunt (...) regnare faciens. Drus. (...) Ne sint
offendicula, quidam, propter offendicula populi. Nam (...) etiam propter
signifi^at. Drus. Possit and ita accipi, ne regnet homo hypocrita, qui quidem
regnabat ob offendicula populi, ut utriusque and Regis and populi delictum
notetur. Merc.
so very many by sinning bring themselves into snares: and usually when a
people have entangled themselves in the snares of sin, God sets evil men at
once to rule over them and entangle them with the snares of those sufferings
which are most proper to their sins.

And thus it is conceived Elihu answers those expostulating demands which Job
puts ( chap. 21.7.) Wherefore do the wicked live? become old? yea, are mighty
in power? Here are three questions, First, Why do they live? they are not
worthy to breathe. Secondly, Why become they old? they deserve to be cut off in
their youth, and not to live out half their days. Thirdly, Why are they
mighty? Why do they command all, who use their might only to do mischief? Elihu
answers these questions in a word, God gives power into the hands of evil men,
because of the sins of the people. As if he had said, if at any time you see
the wicked in great power and prosperity, it is a sign the people are very
wicked, and God will punish and scourge them by the hands of such for their
wickedness.

This is a truth, and much is said by some Interpreters for the making of it
out from the Text; but taking it as it is given, I shall only give you two Notes
from it.

First, Bad Princes are set up by the permission, yea disposition of God. He
makes evil men to reign. The same power which brings wicked men into the
world, sets wicked men high in the wo^ld. It is of God that any wicked man has
a place in the woe ld, and it is of God that any wicked man gets into the high
places of the world. All the Kings of Israel from first to last were stark
naught, Cujus jussu homines nascuntur hujus jussu and reges constituuntur, apti
his qui in illo tempore ab ipsis regnantur. Irene. l. 5. c. 24.
and very wicked, yet they were all of God's setting up, though their own
ambition, or the satisfying of some lust, put most of them upon aspiring to get
up. In the first book of the Kings ( chap. 11.29, 30, 31.) Ahijah the Prophet
finding Jeroboam (the first and worst of them) in the way, caught the new
Garment that was on him, and rent it into twelve pieces, and he said unto
Jeroboam, take thee ten p^eces; for thus says the Lord, the God of Israel;
behold, I will rend the Kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten
Tribes to thee. This Jeroboam was so bad a man, that he was not content to sin
alone, but made Israel to sin; yet even him did God set up, and sent a Prophet
to him to tell him so. How unholy soever men are in their place, and how unjust
soever in the exercise of their power, yet the holy and just God (for reasons
known to himself) places them in power.

Secondly, Observe.

God permits wicked Princes to reign, as a punishment of the reigning sins and
wickednesses of the people. The power of wicked Princes is the punishment of a
wicked people. Quidam reges ad utilitatem subjectorum dantur and conservationem
justitiae quidam autem ad poenam Dei justo judicio in omnibus aequaliter
superveniente. Irene. l. 5. c. 25.
Some Princes and Magistrates are given as a blessing, for the protection,
peace, and profit of a Nation, and for the exaltation of righteousness in it.
Others are given as a curse, for the vexation, trouble, and impoverishing of a
Nation. The Lord takes this fully upon himself, ( Hos. 13.11.) I gave them a
King in mine anger, etc. Angry providence are the fruit of sin. God gave Saul
in anger, he gave Jeroboam and the rest of the Israelitish Kings in anger; and
as he gave them in anger, so he took them away in wrath. The sins both of
Princes and people, produce mutual ill effects toward one another.

First, The sins of the people are the cause sometimes why good Princes are
immaturely or suddenly taken away from them. Josiah that good King was removed
very early for the sin of Judah; Pharaoh Necho had never slain him, had not the
people been unworthy of him. Hence that of Solomon, (Prove. 28.2.) for the
transgression of a land, many are the Princes thereof: He means not (as I
conceive) many together, but many successively, that is, good Princes go
quickly off the stage one after another for the transgression of the people of
the land; But (as it follows in the same verse) by a man of understanding and
knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged. Our Translaters render these
latter words in the plural number (as the margin has it) by men of
understanding and wisdom shall they likewise be prolonged; that is, when there
are many godly, wise, and understanding men in a Nation, God blesses them with
long-lived and aged good Kings or Governors.

Secondly, Whole Nations or a people are sometimes punished for the sins of
their Princes, ( Jer. 15.4.) the Lord tells the Jewish state he would bring all
that evil upon them for the sin of Manasseh. Regum lapsus poena populoru^ est;
sicut enim eorum virtate servamur; ita eorum errore periclitamur. Quid enim
possit habere corpus reipublicae capite languido.
The sins of Princes prove oftentimes the sufferings of the people. As both by
and for their goodness and virtues a people are blessed, so by and for their
evils, errors, and vices, a people are endangered, yea sometimes ruined: When
the Head of a Kingdom or Commonwealth is sick, the Body is seldom well.

Thirdly, The sins of a people bring destruction both upon their Princes and
themselves together, and wrap all up in one ruinous heap, as Samuel threatened
the people of Israel (1 Samuel: 12.25.) If ye still do wickedly, ye shall be
destroyed both you and your King. He speaks not a word of any sin in their
King, but tells them that their wickedness may bring destruction not only upon
themselves, but upon him also.

Fourthly, (which is the point in hand) the sins of a people cause the Lord to
set evil Princes over them. When once a people refuse the sweet and easy yoke
of Christ, or say, we will not have this man to rule over us, he in Judgment
sends such to rule over them, as shall lay heavy yokes upon them indeed. God
uses some Princes as his staff to support a people, and as his shield to
defend a people, yea as his Sun to cherish and influence them with abundance
of mercies. He uses others only as his sword to wound them, or as his scourge
to correct them for their sin. Vterum fert civitas haec, timeo autem ne pariat,
virum Correctore^ malae insolentiae. vestrae. Theogn: Cur Domino Phocam
imperatorem constituisti? responsum datum, qui^ non inveni pejorem. Cur
superbis? non es creatus Episcopus, quod dignus sacerdetio sis, sed quod
civitas tali digna erat Episcopo. Anast: Deus quibusda^ malis tanquam,
carnificibus usus est, ad sumendum de aliis paenas; quod verum esse de
plerisque tyrannis arbitror; Tale medicamentum fuit Argentinu Phalaru, Marius
Romany. Plutarch: de sera Number: Vindicta. Etiam talibus (Neroni scilicet)
dominandi petestas non datur nisi summi dei provide^tia, quando res humanas
judicat talibus dominis dignas. Aug: lib: 5. de Civ: dei. cap. 19.
Some are a blessing, others are an affliction to the people. An ancient Poet
observing the City wherein he lived, swollen with vanity, and bringing forth
daily many monstrous births of pride, luxury, and oppression, he could not
forbear to give his apprehension of the issue in this elegant fancy; This City
(said he) is with child, and I am afraid it will bring forth shortly (and what
will it bring forth?) some severe corrector of your evil insolences. When
Phocas (a cruel tyrant) had got the Empire, and reigned, there was a good man,
who prayed much, about him, and did even expostulate with God, why he would set
such a wretch as he was over the Empire; the story says, he received this
answer from God; I therefore set him to govern, because I could not find a
worse. And I find a like report of another, though in a lower degree of power,
yet in great power, wherein carrying himself very insolently, one said to him;
Why are you thus haughty and high-minded, why so proud of your power, God did
not put you into the government of this place, because you were worthy of it,
but because we were worthy to have a man of your worthlesness set over us. The
learned Moralist treating of the righteous, though late vengeance of God upon
men, has this passage; God (says he) uses some men as tormentors to afflict
and punish others. Which is verified in most tyrants. Such a bitter medicine
was Phalaris in his time to the Argentines, and Marius to the Romans. St
Augustine speaking of Nero, makes this conclusion; The power of Government is
not given, no not to such, but by the providence of the most high God, when he
judges the affairs or manners of mankind justly deserve and call for such
Lords and Masters.

O let nations take heed; The sins of a people, are the worst snares of a
people; sin provokes God to set up Princes for a snare. As therefore the
Psalmist admonishes Princes, Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, and learned ye
Judges of the earth; so I may say, Be wise, O ye people, and obedient all you
that are inhabitants of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice
before him with trembling, kiss the Son (submit to Jesus Christ) lest he be
angry, and give you such Princes and Powers, or put you into such hands as
shall break and vex you to purpose, and make you know what it is to serve men
in rigor, having refused to serve God in love. Many in all nations are apt to
complain much, when they have any burdens upon them by Governors, but few
complain of their own sins, which cause God to burden nations with such
Governors; let all leave off complaining of evil Governors, and complain
more of their own evil government, both of their hearts and lives.

Thus we see how this text according to these distinct translations, First,
gives warning to Princes, That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be
ensnared; and, Secondly, gives warning to people, that they provoke not God by
their scandalous offenses, to set wicked Princes and Powers over them.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have
borne chastisement, I will not offend any more.

That which I see not, teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more.


ELihu having convinced Job, both of the power of God, to do what he pleases,
and also of his righteousness, that he is just in whatsoever he pleases to
do, proceeds to give him counsel, how to carry himself better toward God,
then by his former speeches and expostulations (hinted at the 5th verse of this
Chapter) he seemed to have done. In these two verses he gives him (according to
our translation) counsel consisting of three branches.

First, He counsels him to a due submission, to the hand of God. In the former
part of the 31th verse; Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne
chastisement.

Secondly, He counsels him to reformation, or to a gracious resolution of
laying down every sinful thing, or what ever was a provocation to God. This
he does once and again, twice in these two verses; First, in the close of the
31th verse; It is meet to be said unto God, I will not offend any more;
Secondly, in the close of the 32d verse; If I have done iniquity, I will do no
more.

Thirdly, Elihu counsels Job, to pray for further discoveries, both of his
sins, and sinfullnesse, as also of his duty, at the beginning of the 32d verse;
That which I see not teach thou me. Thus you have the distinct points of that
counsel which Elihu gives Job, according to our reading of these words. There
is another reading, which I shall touch, when I have first opened and
prosecuted the words as they stand in ours.

Verse. 31. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement; I
will not offend any more.
These are child-like words, such words as a faulty, yet a submitting repenting
child, speaks to a displeased father, when he is under his rod, (yet such as
become the most aged and grown men in grace) I have borne chastisement, I have
been under thy correcting hand, forgive me O my father, I will do so no more.
Thus Elihu advises Job, to bespeak God his father while he was afflicting him.

Some render the former part of this verse, by way of interrogation, or
question, Has he said unto God, I have borne chastisement, I will offend no
more? has Job spoken thus to God? As if Elihu (making his appeal to the
bystanders) had said, Ye all are witnesses that Job has not yet humbled
himself under the correcting hand of God, but rather charged God with
severity, in dealing with him, and over-boldly enquired into the reason of his
dealings. Our affirmative translation carries the same sense with this
interrogative, and questioning translation; for when Elihu says to Job, It is
meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement; he supposes, that Job
had not said so.

Surely it is meet to be said unto God. (...)
The Hebrew particle which we render surely, commonly signifies, for, as giving
an account or reason, of somewhat that went before; yet we render it well both
here, and elsewhere, surely, according to the scope of the place; especially
seeing Elihu speaking thus, is not giving a reason of what was said before, but
inferring a duty from it.

Again, The word meet, is not expressly in the Hebrew text, yet it is clearly
employed in it, and therefore added by our translators to fill up, and clear
the sense; the original is, It is to be said unto God, we say, It is meet to
be said unto God, I have borne chastisement.

The word chastisement also is not expressly in the original, there it is only,
I have borne, but because bearing must needs import, that somewhat is borne as
a burden, and seeing according unto the subject matter that Elihu is upon with
Job, it must refer to some affliction or chastisement laid upon him,
therefore we fitly supply this word chastisement, It is to be said unto God, I
have borne; what? (it cannot be meant of any outward corporal burden, or
visible load laid upon his back; but, I have borne) chastisement, affliction,
or correction; It is meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement; that
is, I both have and will bear, whatsoever thou have, or shall be pleased to
lay upon me; I will not dispute thy burdens, but take them up. So then, this
first part of the verse is a direction ministered to Job, showing him how to
behave himself in the bearing of affliction; He must not strive or struggle
with them, nor with God about them, but sustain them. And this direction is
not peculiar to Job's person, or to his case alone, but it belongs to all that
are in affliction, let their case be what it will; all such ought to bear
quietly or patiently to abide under the burden which God lays upon them. I
shall not stay upon the opening of the special signification of that word
chastisement, because it is not in the Hebrew text, only thus, chastisements
are usually taken for those afflictions, or afflicting providence, which God
lays upon his own children; he lays judgments upon the wicked, and
punishments upon the ungodly, but properly, and strictly, that which falls upon
his own people is called chastisement. For though in Scripture, there are
dispensations of God toward his own people, spoken of under the notion of
judgment, yet they have not a proper sense of judgment, as proceeding from
wrath, and intended for revenge. Wrath is the spring from whence judgments
flow, and as to their issue, they tend to the satisfaction of Justice. This God
does not expect, at the hands of his own children, and therefore their
afflictions are most properly called chastisements, Surely it is meet to be
said unto God, I have borne chastisement.

Hence note.

It is our duty when the hand of God is upon us, or when we are under
chastisements, to speak humbly, meekly, and submissively to God. We ought
always to be humble, and carry it humbly toward God, but then especially when
God by any afflicting providence is humbling us. The Prophet ( Hos: 14.2.)
calling that people to return unto the Lord, advises thus; Take with you
words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, take away all iniquity, and receive
us graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips. As Elihu here makes a
kind of directory, what a person in affliction should say unto God, It is
meet to say unto God, that is, for a man in thy case, to say thus unto God; so
that Prophet, by the Spirit, says, Take unto you words, and turn to the Lord,
and say or speak thus unto him; though not strictly, syllabically, in so many
words, yet to this sense, and purpose, or according to this tenor, speak thus,
Take away iniquity, and receive us graciously. And when the Prophet says, Take
unto you words, his meaning is not that they should affectedly study a form of
words for God, much less that they should artificially counterfeit words which
their hearts had not conceived, or were not correspondent to their hearts,
(many speak words, even to God, which never come near but are mere strangers
to the intents of their hearts) but sincere words, humble words, words of
supplication, not expostulating words, not quarrelling words, not murmuring
words, not mere complaining words, but take to you words of confession, and
submission, and so present your selves and your condition before the Lord. The
Preacher ( Eccles: 12.10.) sought to find out acceptable words, and so should
we when we speak unto men; Preachers of the word should seek to find out
acceptable words; not fine words, not swelling words of vanity, not slattering
soothing words, but acceptable words, that is, such as may find easy passage
into the heart; or such words as may make their passage into the heart, through
the power of the Spirit of God. Now if the Preacher sought to find out
acceptable words, when he spoke to the people, much more should we when we
speak to God. O how should we labor then to find out acceptable words. All
words are not fit to be spoken unto God; the words that are (in such cases as
the text speaks of) may be reduced to these two heads.

First, They must be God justifying words, that is, words by which we acquit
the Justice of God, how sore, and how heavy soever his hand is upon us. When
Daniel (Chap: 9.7, 14.) was laying before the Lord the calamitous state of that
people (they were under as sore judgments as ever nation was, For under the
whole heavens (says he there) has not been done, as God has done unto
Jerusalem) yet all the words he spoke unto God, tended unto the justification
of God; O Lord (said he) righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us
confusion of faces, as at this day, to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, etc. We have not had one stroke more, then we have deserved,
there has not been a grain of weight more in our burden, then we have brought
upon our selves, there has not been a drop in our cup more then we have given
just cause for, Therefore has the Lord watched upon the evil, and brought it
upon us, for the Lord our God is righteous in all his works, which he does, for
we obeyed not his voice; these are words fit to be spoken unto God.

Secondly, We are to take to our selves self-condemning, self-abasing,
self-emptying words. Such we find in that chapter, ( v. 5, 6, 7.) To us belong
shame, and confusion of face, etc. these are the words we should take to our
selves, and thus it is meet to be said unto God, whenever his chastisements
are upon us.

Secondly Observe.

It is our duty to acknowledge it to God, that he has chastened us, when he
has. We must own his hand in afflicting us, as much as in prospering us, in
casting us down, as much as in lifting us up, in wounding us, as much as in
healing us; It is meet to be said unto God, we have born chastisement, thy hand
has been upon us. The neglect of, or rather obstinacy against this, is charged
as a great sin ( Isa. 26.17.) Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not
see; that is, they will not acknowledge thy most eminent appearances in anger
against them. It Is so with many at this day, though there be a hand of God (as
it were) visibly afflicting their bodies, and estates, their children and
families; yet they will not see, that it is a hand of God; but say as the
Philistines, it is a chance, or, it is our ill fortune; it is from the
negligence of this man, or from the malice of that other man. All this while
there is no acknowledgement of the hand of God. They say not with Eli, (1 Samuel
3.18.) It is the Lord; nor with David, (Psalm. 39.9, 10.) I was dumb, I opened
not my mouth, because thou did it; Remove thy stroke away from me, I am
consumed by the blow of thine hand. It is as much our duty, and for the glory
of God, to confess that our afflictions are of God, as our mercies and favors.

Thirdly Observe.

The chastenings of God must be born, they must be endured. Many are chastised
who cannot say they have born chastisements; It Is an ordinary thing to be under
chastisement, but its a great thing and requires much holy skill and
spiritualness to bear a chastisement; the duty of a Christian lies most in two
points.

First in doing, or in active obedience.

Secondly in suffering, or in passive obedience, and there is as much of God,
as much of grace, as much of holiness, yea I may say much more held out in
bearing and in suffering, then there is in acting or in doing.

But you will say, what is it to bear, that you make it so difficult a matter
to bear chastisements? How must chastisements be born? or what is it to bear
them?

I will answer the question under two heads. First, Negatively, To bear
chastisement is not

First, merely to find or feel it upon our shoulders as a burden which
pincheth or presses us; so a beast may bear.

Secondly, it is not a bearing merely because we cannot help it, or be rid of
our burden, for so the worst of men may bear; they bear the greatest burdens
that God lays upon them, because they cannot avoid them, nor ease themselves
of them.

Thirdly, It is not a bearing stoutly, or slightingly, to make nothing of it;
so proud men bear, men of unsubdued spirits unto God, and his word, regard not
what they bear, nor what God does to them.

Fourthly, It is not a bearing them sowrly or sullenly; for so discontented
persons bear; yea, so the devil bears the burden which the hand of God has
laid upon him.

Fifthly, Nor is it a bearing chastisement faintly or dispondingly; so weak
believers bear. To bear and faint, is not the bearing of faith. Neither of
these are the bearing of chastisement which Elihu intends in this counsel, when
he says, It is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisment. Thus ye see
the Negative, what the bearing of it is not?

Secondly, I answer affirmatively, To bear a chastisement as an act or work of
grace, is

First to bear it sensibly; that is, feeling the weight of the hand of God, and
tasting the bitterness of that cup of sorrow which he gives us to drink.

Secondly, It Is a bearing of it submittingly, humbly, patiently, laying our
selves down at the foot of God, and saying, as Eli did, Let him do what seems
him good; or as David, (2 Samuel 15.26.) Behold, here I am, let him do to me as
seems good unto him. We never bear any evil of affliction well, till we can
say (with a sweet resignation of our selves) to God, do with us what seems to
thee good. And (for our encouragement I may say) nothing can hurt a godly man
which seems good to God.

Thirdly, It Is a contentful bearing, or a bearing contentedly; Thus Christ
spoke ( Psalm. 40. and it is cited by the Apostle Heb. 10.) Lo, I come to do thy
will, I am content to do it; what was that? It was to bear or suffer; the
greatest part of what Christ was to do, was to bear or suffer the chastisement
of our peace, (Isa. 53.5.) and in suffering to be made a sacrifice for us; his
contentment to do the will of God, was a contentment to suffer. Of such a
spirit should the people of God be; bearing chastisement not only patiently,
but contentedly; this is hard, but this cannot be left out in the full exercise
of that grace.

Fourthly, It Is to bear it (more then contentedly) willingly; how free was
Christ to bear, when he said ( John 18.11.) The cup which my father has given
me, shall I not drink it? Surely I will, I am willing to drink it, though it be
a bitter cup. We are not to will our sufferings, but to suffer them willingly;
there is a vast difference between these two; I do not say we are to will our
sufferings, but we are to suffer them willingly; we must suffer what, and how,
and when, and how long God will; and when God wills our sufferings, we must
suffer with our wills, or be willing to suffer.

Fifthly, To bear chastisement in the sense here intended, is not only to bear
it with our will, but with our affections, not only willingly, but acceptably,
and embracingly; it is to say welcome cross, because it is the will of God.
There is no chastisement that we can rejoice in, or have any affection to,
considered in it self, but to bear chastisement in contemplation of the will of
God, should work our hearts to an accepting, to an embracing, to a welcoming of
it; we should say to all our sufferings, welcome, by the will of God.

Sixthly, It Is to bear it prayerfully; we must bear silently in opposition to
complaining; but we must not bear silently in opposition to praying. While
chastisement is upon our backs, supplications must be in our mouths; and we
must pray, first, That we may see the reason why or for what cause God
chasteneth us: Secondly, We must pray, that we may answer the ends which God
aims at in chastening us. Thirdly, That we may have fresh power to bear his
chastenings. Fourthly, That God would be pleased to remove our chastenings.
While we bear chastenings, we may pray, and pray hard that God would take them
away. David had no sooner said, I opened not my mouth, (that is, complainingly)
because thou did it (Psalm. 39.9.) but presently he opened his mouth in prayer
( verse. 10.) Remove thy stroke away from me. While we bear our cross patiently
and willingly, it would be our sin not to pray for deliverance from it. To say
I am under a chastisement, and let the Lord keep it upon me as long as he will,
I will never ask him to take it off, were a most unbecoming frame of spirit.
They that bear affliction most cheerfully, should pray most earnestly to be
eased of it; we must be willing to bear them always, yet we must pray that we
may not bear them long. If a child under the rod of a parent, should not say,
pray father stay your hand, it is enough, but let him go on striking, and never
intimate a desire of his forbearance, this were a sign of stubbornness, not of
patience and submission. It Is as bad not to ask release from our troubles, as
to murmr at them, or to be unquiet under them. Remember then, you must be as
much in the exercise of prayer as of patience under the cross, and that in
these four respects. Thus you have the answer to that question; by which it
appears, that it is no easy matter to say what Elihu says, It is meet to be
said unto God, I have born chastisement?

There is yet another question, (for some may demand) why should chastisements
be thus born? I answer,

First, We must bear them according to all the rules before given, because they
come from God. Our afflictions are Gods allotment, we must bear what he
appoints: therefore old Eli, though he had failed, and sinned greatly, and so
brought a cloud of calamity upon himself and his family (the very report
whereof, as Samuel told him, would make both ears of every one that heard it,
to tingle) yet he composed his spirit to a submissive hearing of it, upon this
single consideration, It is the Lord, and there is enough in that consideration
to make all men submit. For first, The Lord is supreme, and therefore what he
does must be born. Secondly, He is a Father, a child must bear what a Father
lays upon him; and as the Lord is a father, so he is not a hasty, imprudent,
or passionate father, but a most wise and judicious father; therefore it is our
interest as well as our duty to bear his chastisements. Yea, he is a gracious,
tender, and compassionate father, and when we know he that lays a hand of
affliction upon us, has also a heart full of compassion toward us, we should
willingly bear his hand.

Secondly, Chastisements are to be born in the manner directed, because they
are for our good, and shall we not bear what is good for us? It is good for me
(said David, Psalm. 119.71.) that I have been afflicted; and so the Apostle (
Heb. 12.10.) For they verily for a few days, chastened us after their own
pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
Chastisements are for our profit, and shall not we bear that which is for our
profit? If God should lay chastisements on us for our hurt, merely to vex us,
and to put us to pain, or merely because he delights in our sufferings, who
could bear them? But it is meet to bear what God lays upon us, because he does
it for our good and profit.

Thirdly, We must bear chastisements in the manner showed, because unless we
bear them so, they will do us no good, or we shall have no profit by them, and
that is a misery indeed. To bear smart, and find no advantage coming in by it;
to drink gall, and to have no sweetness come out of it; to endure loss, and to
have no kind of profit by it is very grievous. Now what ever chastisement is
laid upon any, it does them no good, and they can have no profit by it, unless
they bear it as was before described; it is not the bare being afflicted, that
does us good, but it is the wise management, or the skilful bearing of it that
does us good; and therefore we find, that the Apostle ( Heb. 12.11.) when he
had said, There is no affliction joyous for the present, but grievous, adds,
Nevertheless afterward it yeildeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness, (but
to whom? What to every one that is afflicted, have they these sweet fruits? No,
but) to them that are exercised thereby. Afflictions bring no sweet fruits to
them that have them, unless they be exercised by them: how exercised?
Afflictions exercise every one that has them; they are to all a passive
exercise, but to be exercised, notes here an active exercise; they who
graciously exercise themselves in affliction, shall without doubt find benefit
and fruit by affliction.

But some may say, what is it to be thus exercised by affliction? I answer (for
the opening of that Scripture) to be exercised, is,

First, To be much in searching our own hearts, and ways, or how it is with us,
and what has been done by us, ( Eccles. 7.14.) In the day of adversity
consider, that is, bethink your selves, First, What God is doing. Secondly,
What you have been doing. Thirdly, What becomes you to do in such a day. The
prophet points us to the two latter Duties of such a day in one verse, ( Lam.
3.40.) Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. To search
our ways, is to consider what we have been doing; to turn to the Lord, is the
great thing to be done, in a day of adversity.

Secondly, As this exercise of the soul consists in searching our own hearts;
so in searching the heart of God (if I may so speak) that is, in an humble
enquiry to the utmost, what God means by any affliction, what has moved him
to afflict us; and we have as much cause to search Gods heart, as our own in
this case. Thus in that National affliction (2 Samuel 21.1.) when the famine
continued three years, year after year, it is said, David enquired of the Lord,
why is it thus? he searched Gods heart by desiring an answer from the Lord,
what sin it was which provoked him to that sad dispensation. And thus we should
be enquiring of God by prayer what sin he strikes at, or what grace he
specially calls us to act by any affliction which he sends either upon our
families or persons.

Thirdly, There is an exercising of our selves in searching the affliction it
self; first, into the nature of it. Secondly, into the circumstances of it, how
timed, and measured, by what hand, and in what way the Lord deals with us; this
is a great exercise, and unless we are thus exercised under affliction, we get
smart, and loss, and bitterness, but no good at all by it. So much for the
first counsel given Job by Elihu, It is meet to be said unto God, I have born
chastisement.

His second counsel as it lies here in the order of the Text, is about the
reformation, or the amendment of what is amiss.

I will not offend any more. (...) a radice (...) significat magna nocendi
cupiditate ardere sicut mulieres ardent desiderio concipiendi foetum;
transfertur in secunda conjugations, vel ad parturientium dolores, vel ad
concupiscendi libidinem. Moller in Psalm. 7.14.
It is fit the afflicted should say unto God, I will not offend. The root of the
word here used, signifies sometimes the pains of travel in childe-bearing, (
Cant. 8.5.) I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, there thy mother brought
thee forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee. And again ( Psalm.
7.14.) Behold he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and
brought forth falsehood: It signifies also in Scripture to corrupt, or to
pollute, ( Neh. 1.7.) We have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not
kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments which thou
command thy servant Moses. To deal corruptly, or to do corruptly, what is it
but to sin against or offend God? Every offense or sin, springs from the
corruption of our own hearts, and is a corruption of our ways and manners.
Both these readings, I will not offend, or, I will not corrupt, meet in the
same sense; for to corrupt our ways is to offend, and to offend is to corrupt
our ways; to do any evil is to corrupt our selves, or others. So then, Non
tantum in Piel, sed and in Kall videtur usurpari pro corrumpere, Zech. 11.7.14.
Job 34, 31. De Dieu in loc.
the meaning plainly is this, I will corrupt my way no more; the man in
affliction must say to God in a deep sense of, and sorrow for his former sins,
offenses, and corruptions, I will offend, I will corrupt no more. Now,
comparing the former counsel with this; Observe, First.

Chastisement is for amendment. The evil of affliction is brought upon us, that
we may take heed of, and turn from the evil of sin, (that is intimated by the
connection) therefore to go on offending, while God is chastening, is to add
rebellion to our sin. It was the brand of Ahaz (2 Chronicles. 28.22.) in the time of
his distress, he trespassed yet more against the Lord; whereas being in
distress, he should have said to the Lord, I will trespass no more.

Note secondly.

When God chastens us, we should promise amendment. We should tell God, we will
him offend no more, we will grieve him no more, we will provoke him no more, we
will dishonor him no more; the least sin once committed is too much, therefore
we should engage to sin no more.

But it may be questioned, can any man make such a p^omise, or take such an
engagement upon himself, when under chastisement, that he will offend no more?
Is that degree of perfection attainable in this life, to offend no more? How
then is this meet to be said unto God, I will offend no more? Must we promise
things that we cannot perform? Is there any man chastened that offends not
again? says not the Apostle James, in many things we offend all? Is it then
meet to say this unto God, I will offend no more? Is it not sinful to make a
promise not to sin? I answer,

First, by way of concession. No man may promise, what ever his chastisements
are, that he never will sin at all any more, no man can make any such promise,
neither is that the meaning here; but he that is under the chastening hand of
God, may and must, promise that he will not commit such, or such a sin any
more; especially not such a sin as he most suspects to have brought the
chastisement upon his back; we may make promises against particular sins,
though we cannot promise we will never sin.

Secondly, We may promise, when we are under the chastening hand of God, that
we will offend no more, in such a manner as we have offended formerly, so
foolishly, so vainly, so negligently; we may and must promise to be more
watchful, that we sin not the same sin again either for matter or manner.

Thirdly, When chastened, we may say unto God absolutely, we will offend no
more, with respect to the purpose of our souls; that is, we must lay aside all
purposes of committing any sin; yea we may, we must tell the Lord, it is the
desire and purpose of our souls, it is our aim, and shall be our endeavor to
offend no more. The aim of every true believer is not to sin, though (in this
world) it be not the attainment of any (1 John 2.1.) My little children, these
things write I unto you, that ye sin not: As if the Apostle had said, I would
fain wind up your hearts to such a pitch, that you may not sin at all; But if
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father; I know you cannot but sin,
yet let it be your care not to sin, and your prayer to offend no more. And how
should we bless the Lord, if we could live without sin, and be for ever rid of
it! we should wish a thousand times more to be quit of sin, then affliction;
thus we must say unto God, we will offend no more.

Fourthly, though we cannot promise, or take up such a resolution absolutely,
nor in our own strength, yet we may and ought in the strength of Christ, or to
the utmost of that strength and grace, which he gives out, and bestows upon
us.

I shall have occasion to speak further to this poin^, from those words of the
32d or next verse, (which are of near alliance both as to matter and form with
these here) If I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

Only before I pass from this rendering of the Text in hand, take two Notes
more; In that Elihu tells the penitent person, he ought to say unto God, I
will not offend any more.

Note, First.

A truly humbled and repenting soul, is as careful to avoid the act of sin for
the time to come, as to be freed from the guilt of sin past. This holy care is
a sure argument of a good conscience. A wicked wretch may be desirous to have
former offenses pardoned, but he has not any unfeigned purpose not to offend
any more; and usually he has no sooner cast up his sin by a seeming penitent
confession, but he returns with the dog to his vomit by a fresh commission of
his sin. Sorrow for sin yields no comfort, if not accompanied with a care not
to sin. Christ was not so rigid to the woman taken in Adultery as her accusers
were, yet he says to her, ( John 8.11.) Go and sin no more; as if he had said,
thy case will be sad, though now thou have escaped or got rid of thy accusers,
it thou tradest on in this wicked way. And when David prayed for purging the
sin past, he also prayed for establishing by the free Spirit of God, against
suchlike temptations in time to come, ( Psalm. 51.) as if he had said, Lord, I
do not ask pardon that I might take liberty to offend again, but I desire thy
confirming and preventing grace, that I may offend no more.

Secondly, From the extensiveness of this engagement, to which Elihu directs
the penitent person, I will not offend any more, neither in one kind nor other.

Note.

He that is truly humbled for any one sin, will to his utmost avoid every sin.
He says, I will not offend any more. He that loves God, cannot live in the
doing of any one thing which God hates; but as he expects good out of all the
promises, so he has respect to all the commandments; whosoever has so, would
not offend in any thing any more.

Further, as this latter clause is translated, I will corrupt no more.

Note.

First, Sin is a corruption. We shall do well to look upon sin in all its
notions, to make it loathsome to us; this is one notion of it, sin corrupts
every thing and person it has to do with.

First, Sin is the corruption of our nature, the whole mass of mankind, and
the whole of every man is leavened by it.

Secondly, Sin is the corruption of our conversation, and of our way, ( Genesis
6.11, 12.) God looked upon the earth, and behold it was corrupt, for all flesh
had corrupted his way upon the earth. Moses warns the people of Israel against
sin upon this ground, ( Deuteronomy. 4.16.) Lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you
a graven image, read Psalm. 53.1. Hos. 9.9. Zeph. 3.7. Zech. 3.7.

Thirdly, Sinning is the corrupting of the Commandments of God, a sinner as
much as in him lies makes void the Law.

Fourthly, Sinning is a corrupting of the Covenant of God; yea some kind of
sinning is a corrupting the blood of the Covenant, or a counting the blood of
the Covenant as an unholy thing ( Heb. 10.29.) though the blood of the Covenant
be in it self infinitely above all corruption, yet sin does what it can to
corrupt it.

Lastly, Some render, it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement,
I will not break; which we may understand two ways. First, Ideo ad Deum dici
debet perfero, non disrumpam. Bez.
I will not again break the Commandment; so it falls in with our Translation, I
will not offend. Secondly, I will not break; that is, those rods, or bonds of
chastisement that thou have laid upon me; as if he should say, Lord, thou have
bound me in these fetters of affliction, and I will abide thy pleasure under
them, I will not strive, but submit, I will not break prison, but wait thy time
for my deliverance.

Hence Note.

We must bear, not break the bonds of our affliction. Some (like stubborn
children under the chastening hand of a Parent) would even break away from God;
or like malefactors, when under the hand of Justice, they would break prison,
knock off their irons, and get away. As the wicked do, and speak concerning the
bands and cords of Gods Commandments, ( Psalm. 2.3.) Let us break their bands
asunder, and cast away their cords from us; so some speak and do about the
bands and cords of divine chastisements, they will break from them, or break
them, if possibly they can. Let such remember, it is best when they are in Gods
bands, to let him untie them, and when they are in his prison, it is good to
abide there, till he is pleased to discharge and let them out. The Apostles
being in prison, the Magistrates sent the Sergeants, saying, Let these men go,
but Paul said unto them, they have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Romans,
and have cast us into prison, and now do they thrust us out privily, nay
verily, but let them come themselves and fetch us out. A godly man when under
restraint by the illegal or rigorous dealings of the Magistrate, will not
accept his liberty, upon unworthy terms; surely then he will not make an
escape out of the hand of God unwarrantably. He is ready to accept his liberty
with much thankfulness, but he will not force it with violence. A godly man
would free himself from sin, and get heaven by a kind of force (as Christ
speaks in the Gospel) but he would not free himself from suffering by force,
nor get his ease by violence. When God binds him, he says (according to this
reading) I will not break.

But you will say, who may be said to break or get by force out of the
chastning hand of God?

I answer; First, they do it, by way of interpretation, who are impatient and
unquiet in their afflictions. A child that strives and struggles under his
fathers rod, breaks away from him as much as he can.

Secondly, They actually break from under the hand of God, who by any sinful
way help themselves out of their afflictions. Such, when God has bound them
with the cords of affliction, go to the Devil to loose and let them out. It Is
sad when God imprisons a man, But O how sad is it to go to the Devil for a
release; yet so do all they who being under affliction, endeavor to free
themselves by any sinful way; especially when they who are persecuted for the
says and truth of Christ, break their faith with Christ, and quit the truth
before professed, that they may quit themselves from persecution. O take heed
of such deliverances, rather dye under the afflicting hand of God, or the
persecuring hand of man, then free your selves from either by putting your hand
or suffering your mouth to sin. Better be utterly broken by affliction, then so
to break the bands of affliction; better dye in affliction, then sin your
selves out of affliction. Let God who ha^h laid the burden upon you, take it
off, or el^e lie under it still. Thus much for these two coun else given Job by
Elihu; Sed ad deum fortem, qui dicit condono, non destruam, dicendum est
praeterquam quod video tu doce me, si ini quitatem operit^^ sum non pe^gam.
Merl.
It is meet to be said unto God, I have b^rne chastisement, and, it is meet
to be said unto God, I will offend no more; there is yet a third thing to be
said unto God, which Elihu gives al^o in counsel, that which I see not teach
thou me; But, before I proceed to that, I shall a while consider another
translation of the verse already opened, very Consistent with the Original
text, and much Insisted upon by some learned Interpreters, as being full of
Gospel sense, and very spiri^ual matter. According to this second reading the
words run thus: Verse. 31. But to the Almighty God who says, I forgive, I will
not destroy; It ought to be said, beside what I see teach thou me, if I have
done Iniquity, I will not proceed to do it.

The difference of the translation is very evident and eminent; we read thus;
Surely it is meet to be said to God, I have borne chast^sement, I will not
offend any more. This translation says, But to God who says I forgive, etc.
It ought to be said, etc. Mr Broughton, is express for this translation,
rendering the text in these words; Now unto the omnipotent which says, I
pardon, I will not destroy, this shall be said, what I see not teach thou me,
etc.

As the words according to our translation contain an humble and a very
gracious acknowledgement of the Chastening hand of God, and man's promise of
reformation; so according to this they contain a most precious description of
the most gracious disposition of God, speaking two things of himself to man.

First, As pardoning.

Secondly, As not destroying. From this double discovery of God, a double duty
is inferred, incumbent upon man. For God having thus declared himself ready to
forgive sin, and loath to destroy sinners, every sinner should be induced to say
thus to God; I see many of my sins, and I believe I have many sins more which I
see not; therefore, first, I beg of thee, O God, that thou would show me
what I see not, and, secondly, that thou would keep me for ever from doing
or committing again that evil which thou shall show me or cause me to see.
Thus the 32d verse is an Inference of a twofold duty in man, upon that
twofold manifestation of the goodness of God, as a God that willingly
pardons sin, and as a God that is unwilling to destroy sinners.

Or we may give the sum of these two verses (according unto this second
translation) thus; 1 Condono, in quo est remissio culpae. 2 Non destruam in quo
est remissio paenae.

We have first an Exhortation to repentance from the most merciful nature of
God, both as ready to forgive, and as loath to destroy his creatures. The former
act importing the taking away of the guilt of sin; the latter the remittal and
removal of the punishment.

Secondly, We have here a direction about repentance, or to the penitent,
showing, how an humbled soul should behave himself toward God; He ought to
say thus; What I see not teach thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I will do
no more. Where we see the humbled soul in the exercise of a fourefold duty;
First, He confesses what sins he knows; Secondly, He confesses or
supposes, that he has many sins which he does not know. Thirdly, He
entreats the Lord to show him every sin, whether of heart or life, which he
knows not of. Fourthly, He engages that he will not continue in any sin
which the Lord shall discover to him, or give him the knowledge of. You have
thus the general scope of these two verses according to this second reading.

I shall now a little open the words, and give Notes from them according to
this translation.

But unto God who says, I forgive. It may here be justly questioned, how the
Original can be rendered into such variety; one translation says, It is meet
to be said to God, I have borne chastisemen; this other says, ^o God who
says, I forgive, I will not destroy; It ought to be said, etc. The first
reading makes the words to be spoken by man; this second reading gives the
words as spoken both by God and man, Verbum (...) latissime patet si quid aliud
Hebraicum, inter alios tolerandi, parcendi, condonandi remittendi signifi^atum
habet etiam solitary positum ut hic.
or they are a direction given by the Spirit of God to man, what to say to God,
Who says, I forgive, I will not destroy?

I answer, for the clearing of that doubt, the difference of the readings
arises from the copious significa^ion of one Hebrew word, which is rendered
many ways in Scripture, especially two.

First, To bear, in which sense we translate, I have born chastisement. The
word chastisement, as was showed before, is not expressly in the text, but
supplied, to make out the sense, by our translaters: I have born, what? thy
hand, thy chastisement.

Secondly, It signifies also to pardon, or to forgive; I shall refer you to
one Scripture, in which that word is used in both these senses ( Gen: 4.13.)
And Cain said unto the Lord, my punishment is greater then I can bear; that is
the text, but if you read the margin of our larger Bibles, that says, My
iniquity is greater then that it may be forgiven, or pardoned; the text says,
my punishment; the margin says, my iniquity; the same word signifies both sin
the cause, and punishment the fruit. Again, there the text says, My
punishment is greater then I can bear; and the margin says, my iniquity is
greater then that it can be forgiven: So that according to the text, the words
are Cains complaint against the justice of God; that he dealt over-rigorously
with him, My punishment is greater then I can bear. And according to the
margin, they are a description of his despair of the mercy of God, my sin is
greater then that it may be forgiven. And as we find the word used in that
place, both for bearing, and for pardoning; So in several other places it is
translated by pardoning; take but one Instance in the Psalms, where we find it
translated twice in the space of a few verses to forgive or pardon ( Psalm:
32.1.) Blessed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven. And again, v. 5th, I
said I will confess my iniquity, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin; So
that, though there be a different version and translation of the word in this
text of Scripture, yet it is such as is consonant to the use of the word in
other Scriptures, and also to the truth of the whole Scripture.

Yea, we know that in our English tongue, to bear with a man, signifies to
forgive him his present fault, or not to punish him and use extremity against
him for it. And therefore according to the exigence of any place, the word may
be translated either way, and here it may be safely taken in both.

But to God who says, I forgive, I will not destroy, it ought (or it is meet)
to be said, what I see not teach thou me. Elihu according to the reading now
before us, brings in God thus speaking, yea even boasting thus of himself, I
forgive, or I pardon.

Hence note.

First; It is Gods own profession of his own self, that he is a
sin-pardoning God. And God does so much say or profess this of himself, that
when he was entreated by Moses to show him his glory, this was the chief thing
which he said of himself ( Exodus: 34.6, 7.) And the Lord passed before him, and
proclaimed the Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, long-suffering and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin. Here Is my name (says God) if you would know
how I am called, or what I would call my self, this is it, I am a God
forgiving iniquity, etc.

And as God pardons sin, so there is none in heaven or in earth that
pardons like him, that has such a name for pardon as God has ( Mic: 7.18.)
Who is a God like unto thee, pardoning iniquity, etc. The gods of the Earth,
that is, Kings and Princes give pardons, and to do so is the sweetest and
choycest flower in the Crown of Princes, and they usually show their Greatness
by this act of grace when they come first to their Crown and exercise of their
sovereign power. The Princes or gods of the Earth can pardon, but ('it is no
disparagement to put that question) Can they pardon like God? no; their pardon
is no pardon in comparison of Gods pardon; yea their pardoning is a kind of
condemning compared with the pardoning grace of God. The pardons which Kings
give are but the shadow of his pardon, who is King of kings ( Isa: 43.25.) I,
even I am he that blotteth out thy transgression. As if he had said, I am he,
and there is none else; this glory is proper to me, and none can partake with
me in it, nor will I give this glory to another. All sins are committed against
God, and (in a sense) against him only, therefore only to be pardoned by him.
Who can remit the debt but the Creditor? ( Psalm: 51.1.) Against thee, thee only
have I sinned. What debt soever we run into by any sin committed against man,
God only is the Creditor. All that men can do, is but to forgive the trespass
against themselves; so far as man is wronged, he may, yea he ought to
forgive, as Christ teaches us to pray ( Math: 6.12.) Forgive us our debts, as
we forgive our debtors. All that we can forgive is only the trespass done to
our selves, and so forbear personal and private revenge. We cannot forgive the
offense against God. For when Christ says ( John 21.20.) Whosoever sins ye
remit, they are remitted; that remission is but the declaring of a pardon, it
is not the bestowing of a pardon, or it is only a ministerial forgiveness, not
an authoritative forgiveness; so to forgive is Gods Royalty; He says, I
forgive.

Secondly, To God who says, I forgive, etc. Forgive! what? forgive! whom?
Here Is neither what nor whom, neither things nor persons named, God barely
says, I forgive.

Hence observe.

The pardoning mercy of God is boundless and unlimited. Here Is no sin named,
therefore all are included, no sinner specified, therefore all are intended. I
forgive, I pardon; the pardoning mercy of God knows no limits; it is not
limited; First, to any sort of sins or sinners; Secondly, it is not limited to
any degree of sins or sinners; let sins or sinners be of what sort they will,
let sins or sinners be of what degree they will, they are within the compass
of Gods pardoning mercy. And as this text intimates, that the pardoning mercy
of God is boundless, because it expresses no bounds; So other Scriptures tell
us expressly that it is boundless, extending it self to all sorts and degrees
of sins and sinners ( Math: 12.31.) Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven.
That a sin is great, that it is extremely aggravated, is no bar at all to the
pardoning mercy of God; he can as easily pardon great sins as little sins; even
sins that are as Crimson and scarlet, as well as those of the lightest
tincture. The die or color of some clothes or stuffs, is so fading, that (as
we say) the next wind will blow it off, or cause it to dye away, but scarlet
and crimson in grain never change their color; yet the pardoning grace of God
causes crimson and scarlet sin; to change color, and makes them as white as
the natural wool or snow, that is, takes them quite and clean away. Yea the
greatness of sin is so far from being a stop to pardon, that it is used asan
argument to move God to pardon. David prays ( Psalm: 25.11.) For thy names
sake O Lord, pardon mine iniquity; why? does he say? because it is little, or
only a small sin, a sin committed rashly, unadvisedly, or but once; no; he
uses none of these excusatory pleas for pardon, but says, pardon my sin for
it is great. Moses was not afraid to speak for pardon upon this ground also (
Exodus: 32.31.) Lord (says he) this people have committed a great sin, and have
made them gods of gold, yet now if thou will forgive their sin, etc. There Is a
great deal of divine Rhetorique in that speech; Moses was not doubtful,
whether God would forgive them their sin, because it was great, but he urged
the Lord to forgive their sin because it was great. Where sin abounds, Grace
does much more abound (Rom: 5.20.) and therefore God is said to pardon
abundantly, or to multiply to pardon ( Isa: 55.7.) and whom does he promise to
pardon there? even the man of iniquity, so that Scripture has it; Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man (or the man of iniquity) his
thoughts, etc. If you who have sinned abundantly, repent, I will pardon
abundantly. The heart of God in pardoning sin is infinitely larger then the
heart of man can be in committing sin: and as the least sin needs pardon, so
the greatest may have it; nothing hinders the pardon of sin, but the sinners
not coming for it, or his not asking it. The sin against the holy Ghost cannot
be forgiven; but the reason is, because such as commit that sin utterly reject
the grace of God, and tread the blood of the Covenant under their feet, as an
unholy thing.

Thirdly, The text speaks in the present tense; God says not, I will pardon,
or, possibly, I may pardon, but shows what he both actually does, and what he
always does, To God who says I pardon.

Hence note.

God pardons presently, he pardons continually. I pardon, is a present, it
is a continued act. To pardon is Gods work to day, and Gods work to morrow. As
every soul may say of himself, Lord I sin; not only I have sinned, or I shall
sin hereafter, but I sin: so says God, I pardon; as men stand always in need
of pardon, so God stands always prepared to pardon. He is ( Psalm: 86.5.)
plenteous in mercy, ready to forgive; The heart of God is never out of frame
for that wo^ke, never indisposed to it. David found him so ( Psalm: 32.5.) I
said I will confess mine iniquity; he did not say, I have confessed mine
iniquity; he was not come to a formal Confession; only he had it upon his
heart to humble himself before God, and confess his sin; yet it follows; and
thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. While there was but a holy resolve upon
his heart to confess his sin, the pardon of it was given him. The holy history
of his sin and of Gods mercy assures us, that the word was no sooner out of
his mouth (2 Samuel: 12.13.) I have sinned, but instantly Nathan said, The Lord
has put away thy sin. Though God does not pardon of course, yet he is in a
continual course of pardon; therefore Moses prayed ( Numb: 14.19.) That God
would pardon the people according to the greatness of his mercy, and as he had
forgiven them from Egypt until then. As if he had said, Lord, thou have been
pardoning all along from the very first step we took out of Egypt to this day,
thou have exercised abundance of patience, long-suffering and mercy in
pardoning this people, now Lord pardon us, as thou have done from Egypt to this
day; do not stop thy acts of Grace. The very first act of pardon stands for
ever, he that is once pardoned, is always pardoned: yet there are daily
renewings of pardon, and fresh acts of it every day.

Fourthly, The word rendered to pardon, signifies to take away; as to bear a
burden upon our selves (according to the former translation) so to bear, or
lift it off from another.

Hence Note.

Pardon is the taking away, or the bearing of sin off from us. An unpardoned
soul has a burden of sin upon him ready to break his back, yea enough to break
his heart, were he sensible of it; the Lord by pardon takes this burden off
from him. David speaks of his sins under this notion of a burden, ( Psalm.
38.4.) My sins are gone over my head, they are a burden too heavy for me to
bear. Yea sin is a burden too heavy for the strongest Angel in heaven to bear.
But pardon eases the soul of that burden, or it is the unburdening of the soul:
Hence also pardon is called the removing of sin, (Psalm. 103.12.) Thou removest
our sins from us, as far as the East is from the West. Pardon removes sin even
to the utmost distance, such is that of the East from the West. Pardon is
called in another Scripture, the casting of sin behind Gods back ( Isa.
38.17.) Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. Ye when God by pardon
takes sin from off our backs, he does not only cast it behind his own back,
but he lays it upon the back of his Son. Sin must lie somwhere till it is
satisfied for; therefore pardon takes sin off from us, and lays it upon
Christ, ( Isa. 53. 6.) He has laid on him the iniquities of us all. While sin
is unpardoned, we bear it; and that it might be pardoned, Christ has born it,
(1 Pet. 2.24.) He bare our sins in his body on the tree. Pardoned sin is taken
off from the sinner, and laid upon Christ; and he can do well enough with it,
he can bear it, and discharge it fully, none else can: Indeed heaps of sin lie
on the souls of some sinners, and they feel them no more then a fly: what is the
reason of it? Because they are dead in their sins, and nothing is a burden to a
dead man, throw a thousand Milstones upon him, he feels none of them: but a
soul that is awakened, that has but so much life put into it, as to feel a
conviction of sin, O how is that soul pressed and burdened with the weight of
sin! Yet till pardon take sin off from the soul, there it must lie, there it
must abide; therefore Christ says, ( John 9.41.) Because ye say ye see, your
sin remains; What Is that? You are unpardoned, your sin is upon you still; you
think your selves very wise and understanding, you think you can do well enough
without me, therefore your sin remains; that is, it stands in full power and
force against you.

Fifthly, Here are no conditions; God says not, I pardon upon such and such
terms, but I pardon.

Hence Note.

God pardons freely, he does not clog pardon with hard terms. It Is the glory of
God that he pardons freely. The pardon of sin may be considered, First, In the
Decree of God from everlasting. Secondly, In the Execution of his Decree; which
is, when any are effectually called and converted. Thirdly, As to the
manifestation and Declaration of it to the person pardoned. A poor sinner may
be unpardoned in his own sense, or in the Court of Conscience, when he is
pardoned in the Court of Heaven. Now as pardon is free in the Decree of it, so
in the Execution of it, as also in the Declaration of it to the soul; for
though something, yea much must be done in the soul before pardon is declared,
yet nothing is deserved, all is of free grace. God does not manifest pardon
till man repents and believes; yet he does not pardon him because he repents
and believes.

It may be objected, Surely there is something in us which moves God to pardon,
for says not Christ of Mary (Luke 7.47.) Many sins are forgiven her, for she
loved much. Hence Papists argue, that, pardon of sin is from something in us,
she repented much, believed much, loved much, therefore much was forgiven her?

I answer, That Scripture declares her great love to be the effect of great
pardoning mercy, not the cause of it. Christ says to Peter, much is forgiven
her; this woman was a noted sinner, and it appears plainly, that much has been
forgiven her, for she loved much. That her many sins are forgiven her, this is
the testimony, she loved much: The love of God to us, not our love to him, is
the reason and original of pardon, ( Isa. 43.25.) I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for my own sake. God pardons sin for his own sake, and for
Christ's sake, not for ours. In one Scripture God says ( Exodus 34.6, 7.) I will
by no means clear the guilty: In another ( John 6.37.) Christ says, He that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Till the sinner comes to Christ, his
sins are upon his own account; that is, he stands guilty, and God says, I will
by no means clear the guilty; no man shall ever be cleared of the punishment
due to his sin, while the guilt of his sin is untaken off by the blood of Jesus
Christ: but besides respect to the blood of Christ (which is the ransom paid
for us) God respects nothing out of himself as the reason why he pardons us.
I forgive.

I will not destroy. Our Translation reads it, I will not offend. The word
signifies first to offend or sin; it signifies also to destroy; and because
destruction is a fruit or effect of sin, one word may well serve for both; (...)
so we render it ( Micah 2.10.) This is not your rest, because it is polluted,
it shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction. Canaan was the resting
place of God himself, ( Psalm. 132.14.) and it was the resting place of the
Jews after their travel through the wilderness, ( Jer. 31.2.) but when once
they had polluted the land by sin, the land gave them no rest, but destroyed
them; that is, they were destroyed out of the land. Here God declaring himself
gracious in pardoning penitent sinners, promises rest to them, and freedom
from destruction. I forgive, I will not destroy.

Hence observe first, God is able to destroy.

Thus God reported himself by Moses, (Deuteronomy. 32.39.) See now, that I, even I am
he, and there is no God with me; I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal;
neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand. God does not say I
cannot, but I will not destroy; (James 4.12.) There is one Lawgiver who is
able to save and to destroy: There is but one supreme Lawgiver, and that is
God: and this one Lawgiver is able to save and to destroy. There are many
Lawgivers that are neither able to save nor to destroy; or if they be able to
destroy, they are not able to save. Men in authority, or worldly Powers, have
not power always to act their authority, but there is one Lawgiver that is
able to save and to destroy; he can save those that obey his Laws, and destroy
all those that transgress them; he is too strong for the strongest sinner,
there is no making peace with him by opposing or overcoming his strength, but
by taking hold of his strength, that is, by submitting to it, ( Isa. 27.5.)

Secondly Note.

To forgive sin, or to show mercy to sinners, is an act to which God declares
himself more inclined, or better pleased with, then to destroy sinners. Every
one that sins deserves to be destroyed; yet says the Lord, I pardon, I will
not destroy; I could destroy, and any one sin committed by any man would
justify me against all the world in his destruction: Every mouth must be
stopped, and all the world become guilty before God upon that account, ( Romans
3.19.) yet God does not destroy. And that he has no content in destroying, he
binds it with an Oath ( Ezekiel. 33.11.) As I live says the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, etc. as if he had said, I am not bent upon
your destruction, I had rather be taken off, and save you, I pardon, I will not
destroy.

If any shall say, Has God no pleasure in destruction? Has he not a will to
destroy as well as to save?

I answer, God has pleasure in destroying, but it is in the destruction of
those who obstinately resist his Will, who refuse both his counsel and his
Covenant; to such indeed he says ( Prove. 1.26.) I will laugh at your calamity,
and mock when your fear (that is, the thing you feared) comes, as desolation,
etc. That, the men in whose calamity God laugheth are such, is evident by the
character given of them at the 25th verse, Ye have set at naught all my
counsel, and would none of my reproof. As if God had said, you have laughed at
my counsel, therefore I will laugh at your calamity. The Lord will declare
himself delighted in their destruction who have despised instruction; and he
will glorify himself in the actings of his Justice upon them, who have
slighted and put by the tenders and entreaties of his mercy. Yet still God
declares himself more pleased in acting and putting forth his saving power,
then his destroying power. The Prophet ( Hos. 11.8, 9.) most pathetically
represents, as it were, a debate in the breast of God himself between his
Justice and his Mercy; How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver
thee, Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim?
Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together; (v. 9.) I
will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy
Ephraim. We see after the debate, the Lord determines for sparing, not for
destroying. So then, though he can, and will not only destroy, but laugh at the
destruction of obstinate sinners, yet he loves to spare rather then to destroy.

Thirdly, From the connection of these two, pardoning and sparing mercy, God
says first, I pardon, and then secondly, I will not destroy; who are they whom
God will not destroy? they are are such as he pardons.

Hence Note.

Pardoned persons shall never be destroyed. As soon as Nathan had said to
David, the Lord has put away thy sin, the very next word is this, thou shall
not dye, (2 Samuel 12.13.) if David's sin had not been pardoned, Daved must have
dyed for it. It Is a Logical Maxim, When the Cause is taken away, Sublata causa
collitur effectus.
the Effect is taken away; Sin is the cause of destruction, therefore when God
takes away sin, which is the cause, destruction the effect must needs be taken
away too; pardon destroys sin, therefore how can they that are pardoned be
destroyed? Pardon swallows up sin. As the Apostle speaks of life, (2 Cor. 5.4.)
That mortality might be swallowed up of life; Here, mortality swallows up our
lives by degrees, but hereafter mortality shall be swallowed up at once of
life; Now, as life shall then swallow up mortality, so pardon at present
swalloweth up sin; for as in our glorified state there shall never any thing of
mortality appear, so in a pardoned estate, nothing of sin shall appear as to
hurt us. Sin pardoned cannot be found, ( Jer. 50.20.) In those days, and in
that time says the Lord, the iniquity of Jacob shall be sought for, and there
shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; why not? The
Lord answers, for I will pardon them whom I reserve: And if their sins shall
not be found, surely they shall not be found guilty, and therefore not
destroyed: God may chasten them whom he has pardoned, but he will not destroy
those whom he has pardoned; pardoned persons may smart, and smart greatly for
sin, but they shall not dye eternally for it, they shall not be destroyed for
it. David was pardoned, yet God told him, the sword shall never depart from thy
house; and the Lord told him particularly of a sore destruction upon a part of
his house presently; because by this deed thou have given great occasion to the
enemies of God to blaspheme, (thou being a Professor, have opened the mouths of
the wicked against profession) therefore (though thou shall not dye, yet) the
child also that is born unto thee shall surely dye.

There are two things which the pardon of sin takes away. First, the power or
reign of sin; wherever sin is pardoned, the strength of it is subdued. God
does not pardon sin as Princes do; they may pardon an evil doer, and yet he
still remain as evil and as ready to do evil as ever; they may pardon a thief,
and yet he continue to be a thief still; but if God pardons a drunkard, an
adulterer, or a thief, he does not remain a drunkard, or an adulterer, or a
thief still; God takes away the power of that sin which he pardons. Secondly,
The pardon of sin takes away the punishment of sin; it may leave some
chastisement, but it wholly takes away the punishment. The Popish doctrine
says, the fault is taken away by pardon, but there is a commutation of the
punishment, eternal punishment is changed into temporal, either in this life,
or that to come; hence their doctrines of Purgatory, and of Prayer for the
dead, etc. all which stuff comes in upon this account. They cast all men into
three sorts, some are Apostles and Martyrs, men very eminently godly, and they
go immediately to heaven: there are another sort, and these are Apostates from,
or persecuters of the faith, notorious sinners, these go immediately to hell:
there are a third or middle sort of ordinary sinners, and they go immediately
after death, neither to heaven nor hell, but to Purgatory, where they must bear
the punishment of their sins till they can be prayed out: Christ has only got
so much favor for them (say they) to change their eternal punishment into a
temporal. The grace of the Gospel knows nothing of this Doctrine; that tells us
when sin is pardoned, all is pardoned, both guilt and punishment, both temporal
and eternal, nothing remains but only chastisement; how sorely soever a
believer suffers in this life, yet strictly taken, it is but a chastisement,
and there remains nothing for him to suffer in the life which is to come. And
if so, then

Pardon of sin is a precious mercy. It Is so, First, Because it proceeds from
the precious mercies of God. Secondly, Because it comes through the precious
blood of Christ, ( Col. 1.14.) Thirdly, Because it opens a door to all precious
mercies; as sin unpardoned withholds all good things from us ( Jer. 5.25.) so
sin pardoned opens the door for all mercy to flow in upon us. Christ said to
the sick man ( Matthew. 9.2.) Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.
Fourthly, It is a precious mercy, because it stops and keeps off all evils and
judgments strictly so called, I forgive, I will not destroy. Our comforts
cannot stand before the guilt of sin, and our troubles cannot stand long before
the pardon of sin; ( Isa. 33.24.) The highest wtath of God appears in this,
when he will not pardon; and it argues the greatest displeasure of man against
man, when he prays that he may not be pardoned. That was a most dreadful
prayer of the Prophet, ( Isa. 2.9.) The mean man is bowed down, and the mighty
man humbles himself, therefore forgive them not; here was a prayer that they
might not be forgiven; and the ground why he prayed so, seems to be as strange,
as the matter of it was dreadful. Is it a sin to be excepted from pardon, to
see a mean man bow down, and a mighty man humble himself? The meaning is, they
bowed themselves not to God, but to idols; all bowing and humbling our selves
either to worship an idol, or in idol worship, is rebelling against God. We
have a like prayer ( Jer. 18.23.) the Prophet having spoken of the plots and
devisings of the people against him, turns himself thus to God, Thou know
all their counsel to slay me, forgive not their iniquity, neither blot their
sin from thy sight. Nothing can be wished worse to any man then this, that his
sin may never be pardoned. And here it may be questioned, how the Prophet could
make such a prayer, which seems to have the height of all uncharitableness in
it. I answer, first, The Prophet was led by an extraordinary Spirit to do this.
Secondly, We are not to conceive that the Prophet prayed for their eternal
condemnation, but that God would call them to a reckoning, and make them feel
the evil of their own doings. There is a sin unto death, for the pardon of
which we are not to pray, (1 John 5.16.) yet there is no sin about which we are
to pray that it may never be pardoned. The worst prayer that can be made
against any man, is, that he may not be pardoned; and there is nothing better
to be prayed for then pardon. It showed the height of Christ's love, when
hanging on the Cross, he prayed thus for his enemies, ( Luke 23.34.) Father,
forgive them, they know not what they do; And the Protomartyr Stephen breathed
out a like spirit of charity, while he was breathing out his life (in a shower
of stones powered upon him from more stony hearts, Acts 7.60.) with this prayer,
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.

Thus, I have finished this 31th verse, both according to our own Translation,
and that other insisted upon by many of the learned; only from the connection of
this verse with the next, according to the latter reading, (To God who says I
pardon, I will not destroy; it should be said, that which I see not teach thou
me, if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.)

Observe.

The very consideration that God is ready to pardon sin, should make us
resolved against the committing of sin. The sin-pardoning mercy of God, is one
of the highest and most spiritual arguments by which the soul is kept from sin.
There is forgiveness with thee (says David, Psalm. 130.4.) that thou may be
feared; that is, because thou art so merciful as to forgive sinners, therefore
they ought to fear thee, in doing what thy will is, and in avoiding whatsoever
is contrary to thy will. It Is prophesied, that frame of spirit shall dwell upon
the people of God in the latter days, ( Hos. 3.5.) They shall fear the Lord
and his goodness; that is, Si scirem homines ignoraturos and Deos ignoscituros,
tamen non facerem. Sen^.
they shall fear to offend the Lord because he is so good, and ready to pardon.
It was said by a Heathen (and it may shame many who profess themselves
Christians, that a heathen said so) if I did know that men should never know
the evil which I do, and that the gods (so he speaks in their language) would
pardon and forgive the evil which I do, yet I would not do it. Surely, the
spirit of a true believer must needs rise thus high, and higher, upon the clear
grounds of Gospel grace, and discoveries of the free love of God. Cannot a true
believer say, though I know that God will pardon my sin, though he has
declared that my sin is pardoned, and though I could be assured that men should
never know of this sin, if I commit it, yet I will not do it. To God who says
I pardon, it should be said, I will sin no more.

I shall now proceed to the 32d verse, which stands fair to either reading.

Verse. 32. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will
do no more.
Some carry the general sense of these words, as if spoken by God himself to
Job, and spoken by an irony, or in scorn, as if he had thus bespoken him; If I
have afflicted thee beyond thy desert, or have overthrown thy judgment (that
Job had (more then once) complained of, Si quid me fugit in te affligendo, vel
si quid errarem tu me doceas. Si te venando perperam egi vel injuste me habui,
non ultra, id fecero, (...), Merc.
) if I have not kept to the true rules of reason and righteousness in
chastening thee; if in my dealings with thee I have done amiss, or have not
done thee right? Show me wherein (O Job) and I will afflict thee so no more. I
shall not stay upon this, but take the words according to our Translation, as
the whole verse intends a further description of a person deeply humbled under,
and sensible of the hand, the chastening, the afflicting hand of God; who
having said (with respect to all known sins) in the former verse, I will offend
no more, says here in this verse concerning all unknown sins, That which I see
not, teach thou me; and if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

That which I see not. There is a two-sold sight; First, Corporal, the sight of
the bodily eye. Secondly, Intellectual, the sight of the eye of the mind, or
of the understanding; when Elihu represents the penitent afflicted person
speaking thus, What I see not, etc. he intends not a corporal sight but an
intellectual. Seeing is here (as often elsewhere in Scripture) put for knowing:
the understanding is the eye of the soul. How blind and dark are those men,
who have no understanding in the things of God! ( Ephesians. 4.18.) When Christ had
said, For judgment am I come into the world, that they which see not might
see, and that they which see might be made blind; some of the Pharisees said
unto him ( John 9.41.) are we blind also? (have we no eyes?) Jesus said unto
them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin, but now ye say we see,
therefore your sin remains; that is, your sin remains upon you in the power
and guilt of it. In that sense also Christ uses the word ( Math: 13.14.)
Hearing ye shall hear, and not understand, and seeing ye shall see, and not
perceive; ye shall have only such a knowledge of God, and of the things of God,
of his word, and of his works, as will be of no other use to you, then to leave
you without excuse. Seeing ye shall see but not perceive; ye shall have a
fruitless and an unprofitable sight.

That which I see not (or have no understanding of) teach thou me, is the
prayer of the humble soul. But what were those things, which he feared or
supposed he did not see? Those unseene things might be of three sorts.

First, Those sins which he did not see; and those in a double notion, either
corruptions dwelling in him, or evils acted by him. What corruptions, or what
transgressions I see not, acquaint me with, anoint mine eyes that I may see
them.

Secondly, Those favors and mercies which he did not see (we have many mercies
which are not known to us, or of which we take little, yea no notice at all)
those good turns, which I have received and have not been thankful, or have
not improved and made suitable returns for them, show thou me.

Thirdly, Among the things not seen we may number the purposes, aims, and
ends of God, in laying those chastisements upon him. As if he had said, If I
have not yet apprehended what thou drivest at in my affliction, show it me, I
beg and heartily desire a discovery of it. And if I have acted unduely with
respect to thy aims in chastising me, I will do so no more. The acts of God
are plain, but his aims lie close and are not perceived, but by an
enlightened, yea and a very attentive eye. That which I see not, etc.

Hence observe; First.

The choycest servants of God may be much in the dark about and short in the
knowledge of many things which it much concerns them to know. Though every
believer has an eye, and an eye open to see the things of God, the things
which concern his peace, yet the clearest-sighted among believers know but in
part (1 Cor. 13.9.) We all know, but we do not know all. Those words of the
Apostle may have a twosold understanding. First, we know, but a little of any
thing, that which we know we have but a part of it in our knowledge; in this
life we know nothing thoroughly, nothing to the bottom, no not common
principles. David says ( Psalm: 119.96.) I have seen an end of all perfection,
but thy commandment is exceeding broad; There is such a perfection in thy
commandment, that I cannot see, nor can any man come to the outside of it in
this world. And as the holiness of God in the Law is exceeding broad, so there
is a hight, a depth, a length, and a breadth in the love of God revealed in the
Gospel, which exceeds all our knowledge. ( Ephesians: 3.19.) That ye may know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge, etc. We know but a part of that love of
God, the fruits and effects whereof are all our portion. We are not able to
comprehend, though we labor to comprehend the breadth and length and depth and
height of it. Our measure of loving God is to love him out of measure; but it is
a very small measure of the love of God to us which we can know. Thus we know
but little of that we know. Secondly, We know in part, that is, there are many
things which we know not at all, we have no knowledge of some things, which may
be fully known. Though we know many of our sins and corruptions, yet we have
sins and corruptions which we know not of ( Psalm. 19.12.) Who can understand
his errors? Who can understand the errors of his understanding? who can
understand the errors of his will? who can understand the errors of his
affections? who can understand the errors of his actions? who can understand
them all? yet they are all understandable. There are many errors in all these,
which we know not to be errors, therefore we have need every one of us to pray
as David there did, Cleanse thou me from my secret faults. From secret faults in
my understanding, from secret faults in my will and affections, in my practice
and conversation. The secret faults which he asked pardon for were not those
faults which he had committed in secret, or which other men know not of; but
those faults which were secrets to himself, or which himself knew not of:
Further, we know not our faults; First, either in reference to the doing of
evil, or sins of commission; nor Secondly, in reference to the not doing of
good or sins of omission; nor Thirdly, do we know our faults in reference to
the manner of doing that which is good. Though we do not quite omit a duty,
yet we fail many times in the doing of it. We do little of the good which we
ought, and little of the good which we do is done as it ought. We have secret
sins not only of commission in doing that which is evil, and of omission in
not doing that which is good, but also in doing good. There are many flaws and
errors in our doing of that which is good, which, though we perceive not, yet
the pure eyes of God perceive. So then, as we see not all our errors in
omitting duties, so we see not all our errors in performing duties; to see them
requires a spiritual sight indeed. Many can see when they omit a duty
altogether, and charge themselves with a fault for it, but our faults in
performance of duty, in prayer, in hearing none take notice of them, but they
who have a spiritual eye, nor do they always take notice of all of them, nor
fully of any of them at any time. We are much in the dark about these errors
which accompany our holy duties. The iniquities of our holy things are many,
and they lie very close. We may quickly and easily fall into them, but we
cannot easily discern them.

For, First, though we perform an act of worship, of Church-worship, of
instituted worship, right for the substance, yet we may miss and err in
several circumstances, and not come up exactly to the outward performance of
it. Secondly, much more may we run into errors and faults in the performance of
duty, as to the internal part of it, or that frame of heart with which a duty
is to be performed. We seldom, I may safely say, we never come up to that
zeal, to that self-abasement, to that faith, to that love and delight which
should be in us when we approach to and appear before God in the duties of his
holy worship, whether public or private. The best of Saints come far short
of knowing all the evil and faylings of their evil and deceitful hearts,
while they are engaged about that which is good, how much more are they short
in the knowledge of God; and therefore what reason have we to say, as Elihu
here directs the penitent soul to say; That which I know not teach thou me.

Secondly, Note.

It is the duty of the most knowing servants of God to confess their
ignorance. When Elihu would have Job say, That which I see not teach thou me,
he would have him confess, that there was some goed or evil which he did not
see. He that desires God to teach him, what he does not see, does therein
acknowledge that he does not see all that he ought. Our understandings are
imperfect as well as our wills and affections; and our sins or imperfections
wheresoever they are must be confessed. The deficiency of our knowledge, or the
imperfection of our understanding must be confessed as well as the imperfection
of our will to do good, and of our doing good. David lays load upon himself
in confessing the faultiness of his understanding, or inability to judge
aright of what he saw before him ( Psalm: 73.22.) So ignorant was I and foolish,
even as a beast before thee. And the special point wherein he confessed his
ignorance, was about the outward dispensations of God, in suffering wicked men
to flourish. He had ignorant apprehensio^s, and was quite out in that matter;
and therefore befools himself and calls himself a beast, so far was he from
seeing the mind and design of God as became a Saint. Such an acknowledgement
Agur made ( Pro: 30.2.) I am more brutish then any man, I have not the
understanding of a man, I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of
the holy. This worthy man confessed his ignorance; and as the more we know, the
more we see our ignorance, so the more we know, the more we confess our
ignorance. They that have but little knowledge, are especially defective in
this point of knowledge to see their ignorance; and are therefore but little
troubled with their ignorance. Many think they know enough; some, possibly,
think they know all. They who have least knowledge, are least conscious of
their own ignorance. And as there are many sins of ignorance, so ignorance it
self is a sin, and therefore to be confessed and bewailed before God.

Thirdly, When El^hu brings in the penitent person confessing his ignorance,
and begging instruction,

It teaches us, Sins of ignorance need pardon.

As our ignorance needs pardon, so do our sins of ignorance. The law of Moses
teaches this ( Levit: 4.2.) If a soul shall sin through ignorance, etc. he
shall bring his sacrifice. He must make an atonement for his sin of ignorance.
And we have further directions about offerings for sins of ignorance, when they
are discovered and made known to the sinner himself. ( Lev: 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.)
Then (says the Law) he shall be guilty, that is, if when he knows his sin,
he do not perform what the Law requires in such cases, then he is not only
ceremonially but morally guilty, as a neglecter if not as a despiser of the
ordinance and appointment of God for his cleansing. That which I see not teach
thou me.

The words are a prayer for divine teaching. The teaching of God is twofold;
First, Immediate by his Spirit ( John 14.26.) The Spirit which is the comforter
shall come and teach you all things. And again (1 John 2.27.) The anointing
(that is, the Spirit) which ye have received of him, abides in you: and ye
need not that any man teach you; that is, ye need not rest in, or pin your
faith upon the teachings of man; as you must not despise, so ye need not depend
upon the instruction of man. Secondly, There is a mediate teaching, God
teaches by means, instruments, and ordinances. First, by the ministry of his
word; Secondly, by the works of his hands. He teaches, First, by his works of
creation; Secondly, by his works of providence, they are our masters, tutors
and instructers. Now when this penitent person prays, Teach thou me; we may
understand him of both these teachings. First, of immediate teaching by the
Spirit, who is the anointing. Secondly, of teaching by means, by the preaching
of the word of God, and by his providence; in what way soever God is pleased
to teach us, our hearts should stand open to receive instruction. And what way
soever we receive instruction, it is God that teaches us. Though men be the
instruments, yet the effect is of him.

Hence Note, First.

God only is able to teach or show us the things which we know not. Men alone
cannot. Christ said to his Disciples, when he commissioned them, ( Matthew.
28.19.) Go teach all Nations. And ( Ephesians. 4.11.) When he ascended up on high he
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers; yet no Teachers can bring home instruction without the teachings
of God. The tenor of the new Covenant runs thus, ( Isa. 54.13.) All thy
children shall be taught of the Lord. And again ( Jer. 31.34.) They shall teach
no more every one his neighbor, etc. that is, they shall not be left to the
teachings of man: or the teaching of God shall be so glorious, that all shall
acknowledge it; though there be instruments, yet the flowing forth of the
spirit shall be such, that instruments and means shall be little taken notice
of. For when he says, they shall not teach every one his neighbor, it is not
an absolute Negative, but shows that there shall be a more excellent teaching;
as when the Apostle says (2 Cor. 3.6.) Christ has made us able Ministers, not
of the letter, but of the Spirit; This Negative is not absolute, for the
Apostles did teach the Letter, and the Spirit is usually conveyed by the
Ministry of the letter, or of the external word; the word is (as it were) the
chariot wherein the Spirit rides, and comes by the ear to the heart. So that,
when Paul says, We are Ministers not of the letter, etc. his meaning is, we
are rather, or we are more the Ministers of the Spirit then of the letter. The
inward teaching accompanying our Ministry, carries the matter, both for
conviction and conversion, both for illumination and consolation, not the
outward teaching ( John 6.45.) Every man therefore that has heard and learned
of the Father, comes unto me. And how long soever we go to School to men, how
long soever we sit under the Ministry of the ablest Gospel Preachers in the
world, we come not to Christ till the Father teaches; till he join his inward
teaching to the outward teaching of the Minister, the light and life of grace
is not received. It is God who teaches effectually, men teach but
instrumentally. Thus it was prophesied of the Gospel times ( Isa. 2.3. and
Micah 4.2.) Many Nations shall come and say, Come and let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths, that is, he will accompany the
Ministers and messengers of his word with his Spirit, he will empower them from
on high, and so we shall learn his Statutes, and understand his ways. David
ascribes even his skill in Military affairs to Gods teaching, ( Psalm. 144.1.)
Blessed be the Lord, my strength, who teaches my hand^ to war, and my fingers
to fight. God only teaches a man powerfully to be a good Soldier. Surely
then, it is God only who teaches us to be good Christians, to be Believers, to
be holy. He has his seat in heaven, who teaches hearts on earth.

Secondly, As these words hold out to us the temper of an humble sinner;

Note.

A gracious humble soul is teachable, or is willing to be taught. As it is the
duty of the Ministers of the Gospel to be apt to teach, that is their special
gift, or characteristical property; so it is the peoples duty and grace to be
apt to be taught, to be willing to be led, and instructed; naturally we are
unteachable and untractable. As we know nothing of God savingly by nature, so
we are not willing to know; we would sit down in our ignorance, or at most in a
form of knowledge. To be willing to learn, is the first, or rather the second
step to learning. The first is a sight of our ignorance; and the second, a
readiness to be taught, and entertain the means of knowledge.

Thirdly, The words being the form of a Prayer;

Note.

It is our duty to entreat the Lord earnestly that he would teach us what we
know not. It is a great favor and a mercy, that God will teach us, that he
will be our master, our Tutor. Now, as we are to ask and pray for every mercy,
so for this, that God would vouchsafe to be our Teacher, ( Psalm. 25.4, 5.) Show
me thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy paths; Lead me in thy truth, and teach me;
David spoke it twice in prayer, Lead me, and Teach me: Lead me on in the truth
which I know, and teach me the truths which I know not. So he prays again, (
Psalm. 119.26.) Teach me thy Statutes, make me to understand the way of thy
precepts. David was convinced that he could not understand the Statutes of God,
unless God would be his Teacher; though he could read the Statutes of God, and
understand the language of them, yet he did not understand the Spirit of them
till he was taught (and taught) of God, and therefore he prayed so earnestly,
once and again, for his teaching. When Philip put that question to the Eunuch (
Acts 8.30.) Understand thou what thou read? He said, how can I except
some man should guide me? Or, unless I am taught. Though we read the Statutes
of God, and read them every day, yet we shall know little unless the Lord teach
us. Solomon made it his request for all Israel at the solemn Dedication of the
Temple, (1 Kings 8.37.) Teach them the good way wherein they should walk. God
who is our Commander is also our Counselor.

Fourthly, From the special matter wherein this penitent person would be
taught, which is plain from part of the latter verse, If I have done iniquity;

Note.

A gracious heart is willing to know and see the worst of himself. He would
have God teach him what iniquity he has done. David was often upon that
prayer, ( Psalm. 139.24.) Search me, O God, and know my heart, and see if there
be any wicked way in me. Lord, show me my sin; as I would not conceal my sin
from thee, so I would not have my sin concealed from my self. A carnal man who
lives in sin (though possibly he may pray for knowledge in some things, and
would be a knowing man, yet he) has no mind that either God or man should
show him his sin; He loves not to see the worst of himself, his dark part; he
as little loves to see his sin, as to have it seen. But a godly man never
thinks he sees his sin enough; how little soever he sins, he thinks he sins
too much, (that is the general bent of a gracious man's heart) and how much
soever he sees his sin, he thinks he sees it too little. And therefore as he
tells God what he knows of his sin, so he would have God tell him that of his
sin which he does not know. That which I know not, teach thou me.

If I have done iniquity, I will do no more. There are two special parts of
repentance. First, Confession of sin, whether known or unknown. This we have in
the former part of the verse, That which I see not, teach thou me. There is the
confession of sin, even of unknown sin. The second part of repentance is
reformation or amendment, a turning from sin, a forsaking of that iniquity
which we desire God would show us, we have this second part of repentance in
this latter part of the verse.

If I have done iniquity, I will do no more. But why does he say, If I have?
etc. Had he any any doubt whether he had done iniquity or no? every man must
confess, down right, that he has sinned, and done iniquity, without ifs or
an's. Solomon having made such a supposition in his prayer at the Dedication of
the Temple, (1 Kings 8.46.) If they sin against thee) presently puts it into
this position, for there is no man that sins not. The Apostle concludes, (1
John 1.8.) If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us. Therefore, this, If I have done iniquity is not to be understood as
if this or that man, as if he or any man might be without sin; but when the
penitent is brought in, saying, If I have done iniquity; h^ meaning is, First,
What ever iniquity I have done, I am willing to leave it, to abandon it, I will
do so no more. Secondly, Thus, If I have done iniquity, that is, if I have done
any great iniquity, (...) Perverse agere.
if I have acted perverseness, or perversely, as the word signifies, I will do
so no more; to do iniquity is more then barely to sin. As if he had said,
though I cannot promise that I will sin no more; yet, Lord, if thou do
discover to me any iniquity, any gross sin or perverseness, I will do that no
more, I will engage my self against that sin with all my might; and to the
utmost of my power, by grace received, I will keep my self pure from every sin.
If I have done iniquity.

Hence Note. First, A godly man has a gracious suspicion of himself that he
has done evil, yea some great evil, that he has done amiss, yea greatly
amiss, though he be not able to charge himself with this or that particular
iniquity.

He knows he has sinned and done evil, though he knows not every evil he
has done, nor how sinfully he may have sinned; he doubts it may be worse with
him then he sees. Possibly he has done iniquity. Job in reference to his
children ( chap. 1.5.) had an holy suspicion that in their feasting they might
sin against God; he knew no sin they had run into, nor could charge them with
any excess; but he was jealous they had sinned; nor did Job speak thus, as if
his meaning were, that possibly in their feasting some corruption might work in
them, (he knew there is no man in the best duties of his life wholly freed from
the workings of sin) but, he had this jealousy, that they might have fallen
into some great sin, and so provoked God greatly against them, therefore he did
(as it were) way-lay such guilt, and early sought reconciliation with God. As
Job was thus jealous of his children, so a gracious heart, though he cannot
charge himself with this or that evil, yet he is apt to suspect his own
heart, and fears it may be worse with him, then possibly, it is.

Secondly, When he says, If I have done iniquity; This humble man, though he
does suppose that he might have done iniquity, yet he does but suppose it.

Hence note.

A godly man may live free from the doing of any gross sin. He does not put an
if upon it whether he had sinned or no, but, whether he had done iniquity.
Zachariah and Elizabeth were not without sin, but they did no iniquity; for,
says the text ( Luke 1.6.) They were both righteous before God, walking in all
the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless. It cannot be imagined
but that the people of Israel sinned, yet ( Number: 23.21.) God saw no iniquity in
Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel. There may be such a time in the Church when
the people of God have no iniquity, no provocation to be seen or found among
them. Though a Godly man cannot deny but he has sinned, yet he can affirm
that he has not indulged himself in any sin. If I have done iniquity, I will
do no more.

The Hebrew is, I will not add. We render, I will do no more. As if he had
said; If upon trial, it be found that I have done iniquity, yet I will not
add iniquity to iniquity, I will not go on, I will not persist, nor proceed
in iniquity. I will not take a step more in any way which God shall discover to
me to be an evil way. If I am out of the way, I will not go on in my way.

Hence observe.

First, A godly penitent person is resolute against sin. His will is set
against it; I will do no more. I showed in opening the former verse (It is
mere to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement, I will offend no more) in
what sense a godly man may make such a promise, or say, I will sin no more;
here I say, A godly man is resolute against sin, especially against great sins.
As a carnal man has but very weak resolves for the doing of good, he has
(as some express it) but a velleity, somewhat like a will to do that which is
good; so a carnal man makes but weak resolves against evil, he has not a
settled will, but a kind of noleity against it. He makes some flourishes of
profession against it, but he is not resolvedly engaged against it; whereas a
godly man is resolute both as to the doing of good, and the not doing of evil.
If a godly man might have his will, he would never sin more; And as a Godly man
waits joyfully for that state of glory wherein he shall sin no more; so a
resolution to sin no more, has, as I may say, somewhat of glory in it. In
glory we shall sin no more, and where grace is in truth, that soul would
gladly be rid of sin, and sin no more. A godly man is resolved against all
ungodliness; and this is a kind of entrance into glory.

Again, Whereas the penitent man says, I will do no more.

Note.

Continuance in any known sin ( for, says he, what I know not teach thou me)
or in that which is made known to us to be sinful, is inconsistent with true
repentance. Repentance for and continuance in sin, cannot consist in the same
subject. This is the voice of every gracious soul, I would not sin any more,
or I would not continue any longer in sin. To sin is common to man, but to
continue in sin, is proper to a wicked man. To err and fail that is humane,
but to persevere in error is diabolical. Sin will continue in us while we
continue in this world; but they that are not of the world, do not, will not
continue in sin, how long so ever they are in the world. Sin may be considered
three ways. First, as remaining in us; Secondly, as reserved; Thirdly, as
preserved by us. There is sin remaining in the best of Saints on this side
heaven ( Rom: 7.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.) Sin is reserved only in carnal men, they
save their sins, and would be saved, not from but in their sins. Sin is
preserved or maintained and defended in the worst of wicked men. Sin is
heightened to the utmost, where it is not only retained, but maintained and
preserved. The Apostle having closed the fifth Chapter of his Epistle to the
Romans, in the triumph of Gospel grace. That as sin has reigned unto death,
so grace might reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ
our Lord, begins the next with a prevention of the abuse of this Grace; What
shall we say then, shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid.
How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? How can we continue
in sin, that are partakers of Gospel grace? Sin will continue in us, but we
cannot continue in it. The question implies a kind of impossibility. We were
once dead in sin, but now we are dead to sin, how then can we live or continue
in it? Perseverance is either our best or our worst. To persevere is best when
we persevere in good, and to persevere is worst when we persevere in evil. It
is bad to be or do evil, but it is worse to abide in evil. The first best is
not to sin, the next best is not to continue, nor lodge in sin, no not for an
hour. Paul said in another case ( Gal: 2.5.) To whom we gave place by
subjection, no not for an hour; We should not give place to sin, no not for a
minute, but resist it to the utmost, and totally displace it, if we can.

Lastly, From the Hebrew elegancy, which says, I will not add.

Note.

A godly man may commit sin after sin, but he does not add sin to sin. When he
has committed any one sin, he breaks it off and dedestroyeth it by repentance.
He does not add sin to sin, because the sin formerly committed is destroyed by
repentance. His former sin is taken off the file before he acts a second, who
heartily repents of the first, and as heartily resolves not to commit a
second. Such a man does not run a round of sinning and repenting, though he
sins after ^he has repented. Daniel gave that advice to Nebuchadnezzar
(Dan: 4.27.) Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor. If thou repentest indeed, the sin that comes after
will not be added to thy former, because that is done away through Grace. A
godly man (according to the former point) would not add or commit another act
of sin to his former; as it is said of Judah (Gen: 38.26.) who had committed
folly with Tamar, He knew her again no more. Though his sin was great, yet
doubtless his heart was humbled, and he returned not to his former sin. But
the wicked man continues in his wickedness, yea, he blesses himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mi^e
heart, to add drunkenness to thirst (Deuteronomy: 29.19.) Every new sin is an
addition to his former sins, because he always lives in sin. They who would
not have the captives brought into the City, gave this reason (2 Chronicles: 28.13.)
For whereas we have offended against the Lord already, ye intend to add more
to our sins, etc. O take heed of sinning so, as to join sins together. As in
Arithmeticke when we add sum to sum, what an huge sum may we quickly
make. Therefore break off sin by repentance, that if thou sinnest again, it
may not be an adding of sin to sin. That Is a dreadful prophecy and threatening
( Psalm: 69.27.) Add iniquity to their iniquity, and let them not come into thy
righteousness. How does the Lord add iniquity to iniquity? will he cause any
to sin more? or will he do any iniquity? No; the meaning is (as our margin
intimates) the Lord will add the punishment of their iniquity to their
iniquity; or he will give them up to the power of their own lusts and vile
affections, so that they cannot but renew the acts of sin, and add one
iniquity to another. It is a blessed work when we are much in the additions of
grace to grace, and of good works to good. It Is the design and business of a
gracious heart to add grace to grace, that is, the exercise of one grace to
another, till every grace be exercised (2 Pet: 1.5.) Give diligence to add to
your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to
temperance patience. Here is a blessed addition. When a good man has done well
once, he adds to do more, he adds more acts of the same kind, and he adds to
do good acts of any other kind; He adds patience to godliness, and to
godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity; thus he is
busied in a blessed way of addition. But the addition of sin to sin, is the
bitter fruit of rebellion against God ( Isa. 30.1.) Woe to the rebellious
children -- that cover, but not with a covering of my Spirit, that they may
add sin to sin. They that make excuses for sin committed, add sin to sin; yet
by these coverings, we may understand not only excuses and pretenses, for sin
acted, but our own good acts; for to cover sin with any thing of our own, is
to add sin to sin. Yet I conceive, the adding of one kind of sin to another,
is the addition there meant. The Israelites said to Samuel, when they were
brought to a sight of their sin (1 Samuel: 12.19.) We have added unto all our sins
this evil to ask us a King. They refused the Lords government, and asked a
king in the pride of their hearts, and so added sin to sin. Thus it is said of
Herod (Luke 3.20.) That to all his evil deeds, he added this, that he shut up
John in prison. And as there is an adding of several kinds of sin, so of
several acts of the same kind of sin, oath to oath, and adultery to adultery,
and wrong-dealing to wrong-dealing; this day some oppress their brethren, and
the next day they do the same. O let such remember what additions the Lord
will make to them, he will add punishment to punishment, he will add the same
kind of punishment several times, he will add sword to sword, and famine to
famine, and pestilence to pestilence, and he will add punishments of various
kinds. The Prophet reports what various or (if I may so speak) heterogeneal
kinds of sin men added and strung up together. ( Hos: 4.2.) By swearing, and
lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out and
blood touches blood. Surely, God will make blood touch blood in a way of
punishment, as men make blood touch blood in a way of sin. The adding of sins
makes an addition of plagues. When Jehoiakim the King heard the roll read, he
threw it into the fire and burnt it (Jer: 36.) but could he burn or make an
end of the threatenings? no ( v. 32.) And there were added besides unto them
many like words. It is said ( Rev: 22.18.) If any man shall add unto these
things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book. To
add any thing to the holy word of God, is as sinful as to take from the word,
or act against it. God can add plagues as fast as men add sins. When sin is
added to sin, then guilt is added to guilt, and punishment to punishment. Take
heed of this addition, resolve with the penitent soul in the text; If I have
done iniquity, I will add no more.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 33, 34, 35. Should it be according to thy mind? he will
recompense it whether thou refuse, or whether thou choose, and not I: therefore
speak what thou know.

Let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise man hearken unto me.

Job has spoken without knowledge, and his words were without wisdom.


IN the Context of these three verses Elihu does chiefly these two things.
First, he appeals to the Conscience of Job (v. 33.) Should it be according to
thy mind? ask thy self whether it should be so, yea or no. Secondly, he
appeals to the judgment of Jobs friends, yea of all wise and understanding
men, concerning what Job had spoken, or whether he had not spoken unwisely, in
the 33d and 34th verses; Let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise man
hearken unto me. Job has spoken without knowledge, and his words were without
wisdom.

The scope of Elihu in these words is yet further to humble Job, and to provoke
him to repentance for his inconsiderate speeches. Yet Elihu does not call Job
to repentance upon the same grounds or terms as his three friends had done.
They moved him to repentance upon the Consideration of his former wicked life,
as they supposed; but Elihu moves him to repentance upon the Consideration of
his imprudent and rash speeches under the afflicting hand of God.

Verse. 33. Should it be according to thy mind?
This verse is delivered in as much variety as any text thorowout the whole
Book; and as a learned writer upon it concludes; Si omnes lectiones versiones
interpretationes persequeremur, plus tenebrarum quam lucis afferemus. Pined:
If we should stay upon all the various readings, translations, and
interpretations of it, we should rather darken then enlighten, rather entangle
both hearers and readers, then unfold the text. There are at least six distinct
translations of this verse, which I shall pass only with the naming of them,
and then proceed to open the words as they stand in our own; which comprehends
the sum and substance of what is held out in most of them.

First, Some give it thus; Should he reward it according to thy mind, though
thou have despised the one, and chosen the other, yet will not I, therefore
speak what thou know. As if he had said, Why should God reward him, as thou
would have him do it? Though thou have refused to submit to Gods mercy, and
have called for justice, yet I dare not do so. If thou know better teach me.

Secondly, Another thus; Should it come from thee, how he should recompense is,
when thou have refused his correction? but thou shall choose and not I,
therefore speak what thou know. The sense of which translation may be thus
represented; Should thou who have sinned, and refusest to be corrected,
teach God how he should correct thee? Thou may think so, but I do not,
show me better if thou can.

Thirdly, Should that come from thee, which he will punish? I speak it, because
thou have refused Gods correction, because thou have chosen that which I would
not. Now speak what thou know. As if he had said; Why should thou speak
against Gods proceedings, to bring farther trouble upon thee? my desire of
easing thee is the cause, why I speak thus; I should never have accused God as
thou have done, if I had been so handled by him. But if thou have any thing to
except against what I say, speak freely.

Fourthly, Did such a speech come from thee? He will recompense it, that thou
have rejected him; But thou choosest this way and not I: now speak what thou
know. As if Elihu had thus expressed himself to Job; I never heard thee
speak so humbly, as I have taught thee (v. 31, 32.) Surely God will punish
thee, because thou have spoken proudly against his proceedings with thee. But
this is nothing to me, who like not of such courses. If thou can defend thy
self, so do.

An ergo (haec oration profecta est) a te? rependet illud si spreveris (si: hac
oratione tuti, etc. Jun:
Thus Junius connecting this verse with the former, wherein is showed what a
penitent person should say to God, translates and expounds the whole to this
sense; Now therefore consider, have thou spoken in such a manner, surely God
will recompense it to thee, if thou refusest to speak so, (thus he deterreth
him by the consideration of the event, or of what might follow upon his
refusal, and then he deterreth him by his own example) but if thou choosest to
do otherwise, truly I will not. (Thou shall go alone for me) Now then speak
what thou think.

Fifthly, An igitur en tua opinione rependet deus illud quod homo fecerit
dicendo, etc* Pisc:
Should therefore God recompense that which man has done according to thine
opinion, saying, because thou dislikest this, it is but equal, that thou
should choose another and not I. And what do thou know? speak man.

Sixthly, Mr Broughton renders thus; Should that come from thee which he will
punish; as thou do loath, as thou likest, where I would not? Now speak what
thou think.

All these rendrings may be reduced to this one common sense; O Job, whatsoever
thou suffer, or by what means soever thou art fallen into this misery, is
it fit that God should be ordered by thy opinion and Judgment? And surely, O
Job, I must tell thee plainly, nor can thou deny it, that thou have not
rested nor sat down quietly in the determination and decree of God concerning
thee; But thou would rather be choosing and prescribing to God, how and in
what way he should deal with thee, and dispense his providence to thee, then
satisfy thy self in his appoyntments and pleasure. Far be it from me, that
I should follow thy example, or tread in thy steps as to this matter; yet if
thou have any thing to reply to what I have urged, say onne, bring it forth,
let me and all in thy presence, hear and judge of it.

Thus Elihu points Job to his grand error, that he did not readily approve, nor
quietly submit to the Judgment of God in his own case. And so had not spoken
reverently enough of God, nor humbly enough of himself.

The reason of these various readings and rendrings mentioned, is the
conciseness of the Hebrew text, which leaves some words to be understood and
supplied for the completing of the sense. And because the most skillful
Interpreters are not perfectly acquainted with the dialect or manner of speech
used in those more remote and ancient times, therefore they must needs differ
both in their translations and expositions, yet (which may free the reader from
all prejudices against the holy Scriptures, either as obscure or dubious) they
all center and agree in that which is true in it self, as also in the
principal scope and drift of Elihu in this discourse with Job.

Having thus given some account of the various translations of this verse, I
shall now close with the explication of our own.

Should it be according to thy mind? Thus Elihu bespeaks Job; Should it be? he
does not say what, but leaves us to the whole matter, should this, or that, or
to other thing, (...)
or any thing be according to thy mind? the Hebrew text is but one word, which
we translate, according to thy mind, or, as thou would have it? Number ex tuo
consilio et arbitratu rependet illud sc: bonum vel malum, sed de malo proprie
accipio. Merc:
should it be from thee? that is, should God take counsel or direction from
thee? or go to thee as an Oracle to be taught which way to deal with thee, or
with any man else; should it be from thee? The matter which Elihu insists upon,
respects the dispensations of God; So his meaning is, should God cut out the
works of his providence according to thy order? should God reward, or should
God punish? should God set up, or should God pull down? should God bring
trouble, or should God cause peace according to thy mind? must he needs ask
counsel of thee, before he proceed to any of these resolutions? no!

He will recompense it whether thou refuse, or whether thou choose. The former
part of the verse, is a question or Interrogation, Should it be according to
thy mind? He will recompense, etc. That Is the answer; and it contains both a
negative and an affirmative, he will not do according to thy mind, but he will
do according to his own; (...) a radice (...)
He will recompense it.

The verb signifies to pay, or appease, and make quiet, and the reason why the
same word signifies paying, or recompencing, and peace, is because where
payment is made, peace is obtained, where recompense is given, there quietness
is settled; He will recompense, or he will pay, that is, give our and distribute
in his providence as he pleases.

Whether thou choose, or whether thou refuse. There are two special acts of the
will, choosing and refusing; and these two are Intrinsecall and Essential to
the will; as the proper act of the understanding is to apprehend, and then to
assent; (...) denotat rejicere cum fastidio tanquam vile et co^temptum quid.
so upon those representations which the understanding makes to the will, the
will does either refuse or choose. Further, the word which we here translate to
refuse, signifies more then that simple act of the will, it signifies to refuse
with a kind of disdain and great disgust; to refuse a thing as altogether
unworthy to be received; or to refuse a thing as being much displeased and
burdened with it. Eliphaz uses this word ( Chap: 5.17.) Despise thou not the
chastening of the Lord; that is, do not refuse it with a dislike, or as a
thing that is grievous and nauseous to thee. That which is contrary to our
appetite, the stomach refuses and vomits it up again; such a force there is
in this word, he will recompense it, whether and how much soever thou refuse or
whether thou choose.

He puts that in, to show that it is neither the refusal of man that stops
God, nor is it the choice of man that brings God onne to his work, he will
proceed purely from himself; he will recompense whether thou refusest, or
whether thou choose, and not I.

As if he had said, it is God that will do it, it is God that will bring this
upon thee, and not I; that is the sense of our reading; But according to other
readings, and not I, referrs, to thou; do thou refuse or choose whether thou will obey the dispensation or no, for my part I will not stand upon those
terms with God, but refer my self wholly to his dispose.

From the words thus opened ( Should it be according to thy mind? etc.

Observe; First.

Man would have every thing go according to his mind. He would have his mind
the measure both of all that he is to do for God; and of all that God does to
him. We love to do all things according to our own minds, and we love to have
all things done according to our own minds. Man naturally would do nothing
according to Gods mind; nor would he have any thing done to him according to
Gods mind, unless it accord with his own too. The Apostle ( Rom: 8.7.)
proclaims that Innate Enmity that is in the heart of all men naturally against
the mind and will of God; The wisdom of the flesh is Enmity against God: It is
not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; that is, while a man
remains flesh, or in an unregenerate state, he is altogether at enmity against
the Law of God; both against what God appoynts him to do, and against what he
appoynts him to suffer. Man equally rises up in his thoughts, and rebels
against both. And as this enmity does remain whole and unbroken in all men by
nature, till they are renewed by grace and borne again; so there are
remainders of it, even in those who are renewed by grace; there is somewhat of
this opposition against God in every godly man; he would fain have things go
according to his mind; and he has much of this mind in him; I do not say, a
godly man would do nothing according to Gods mind, that is the natural man's
frame; but a godly man would very fain have God do things according to his
mind, as may appear, especially in four things.

First, He would have God reward, or do good both to himself and others,
according to his mind; He would have God lift up those whom he would have
lifted up, and prefer those whom he would have preferred; he would feign have
God show favor to or bestow favors upon those whom he favors.

Secondly, As to punishment and Judgment, he would have God punish according
to his mind; such a man is proud; he is an oppressor, he is an opposer of
goodness and good men, therefore he would have the hand of God heavy upon him,
to cast him down out of hand, or without delay.

Thirdly, He would have God go according to his mind in chastning and
afflicting himself; though he would not be totally uncorrected, yet he would
have God correct him only in such a kind, in such a manner and measure as he
would choose; he does not refuse chastening, but he would be chastened in what
himself pleases, or in his own way. He says in his heart, if God would
correct me in this or that, I could bear it, but I do not like to be corrected
in such a thing, or in such a way; one says, if God would smite me in my
Estate I could bear it, but not in my body; Another says, if God should smite
me with sickness, I could bear it, but not in my Children; or let the
affliction be what God pleases, if God would afflict me but thus much, or thus
far, in such a degree, I could submit, but my heart can hardly yield to this
measure of affliction. Thus we would have it according to our minds, as to the
measure, as also for the continuance of our afflictions. We would be corrected
for so long, for so many days, but to have months of vanity, and years of
trouble, this is not according to our mind.

Fourthly, He would have God govern (not only himself but) the whole world
according to his mind: Man has much of this in him, he would have God order
nations as himself and other men like himself desire. Some one man would
prescribe and direct what God should do, and how he should do to all men.
Luther writ to Melanchton when he was so exceedingly troubled at the
providence of God in the world; Admonendus est Philippus ut desmat mundum
regere.
Our Brother Philip is to be admonisht, that he would forbear governing the
world; we can hardly let God alone to rule that world which himself alone has
made; Should it be according to thy mind? to this man's mind, or that man's mind?
it must not be as it is; if every man might have his mind, he would govern and
rule the world in another way then God does. There is scarce any Good man that
is satisfied in the government of particular nations, if he might have his
mind, he would cast things into another mould and method then the providence of
God has cast them in at this day. Yea, it is seldom, that it either raines or
shines according to our mind; The weather which God is pleased to send, whether
wet or dry, fair or foul, rarely pleases us.

Secondly, When Elihu says, Should it be according to thy mind? This question
implies a strong Negation; certainly, it should not.

Hence note.

It Is beside the duty and above the line of man to desire that things should be
according to his mind, either with himself or with others. There Is nothing
more against the mind of God, nor against our own good, then that all things
should be according to our mind; we may quickly undo our selves and dishonor
God by having our own desires. And that it is sinful, very sinful to desire
to have our own desires, may appear, by considering the spring or root of
such desires, I shall show a threefold very evil root from whence those
desires spring.

First, They spring from pride and an overweening conceit of our selves; and
that upon a double account; First, from pride as to our deserts; for if God do
such men good, they are apt to think they have deserved more good, then God
has done them; and if God afflict them, they are ready to say, surely they
have not deserved so much affliction. We think we have deserved greater
kindness then God exhibits; and that we have not deserved to great a cross as
he inflicts. Is not this a great piece of pride?

Again, These desires spring from pride in our own wisdom and understanding;
as if we knew how to order matters more equally then God. Is it not a huge
piece of pride, of luciferian pride, to think that there might be a better
measure of things then the mind of God is? does not such a man make himself
wiser then God? and more prudent then God? does not he suppose, that he sees
further into things then God? when as alas we cannot see an hour before us,
but God has the prospect of all things, He sees the end from the beginning,
and has all in his eye from all Eternity. When we thus make our selves wiser
then God, is not this a high point of pride? Here Is the first evil root of
desiring to have things according to our mind, pride, or an opinion that we
deserve better, or could order things better.

Secondly, These desires proceed as from pride, so from discontent with the
dealings of God, and it is pride that fills us with discontent; he that would
have things according to his mind, must needs be dissatisfied when they are
not.

Thirdly, when they spring not from direct discontent, yet they do from some
degree of impatience. There is not such a quietness of spirit or acquiescence
as should be in the heart of man, otherwise he would let things be according
unto Gods mind, and never be troubled, when they are not according to his own.
Now consider what can spring from these three roots, Pride, Discontent, and
Impatience, but very evil and bitter fruit; therefore, to desire to have things
according to our mind is very sinful, exceeding sinful.

Thirdly, This question, Should it be according to thy mind? implies a sharp
rebuke and a reproof upon Job, as desiring a thing which was altogether against
rule and reason.

Hence Note.

It is most unreasonable and absurd, to desire that things should be ordered as
we would have them, and not as God would have them. Is it not unreasonable in a
family that things should be as the children would have them, and not as the
Father would have them? Or, that things should be done according to the mind
of the servants, and not according to the mind of the Master? Do not the
Magistrates and Governors of the world think it an unreasonable thing that
Nations should be governed according to the mind of Subjects, and not
according to the mind of the Prince, regulated according to the known Laws of
the Nation? Who does not think it an unreasonable thing, that a journey should
be disposed according to the mind of the Horse, and not according to the mind
of the Rider? Should the horse guide the Rider, or the Rider his horse? Is it
not an unreasonable thing that a man's sense should guide his understanding,
when his understanding is given on purpose to guide his sense? Is it not an
unreasonable thing that passion should order reason, when as reason should be
the bridle of our passion? Is it not an unreasonable thing that unlearned
ignorant men should teach the knowing, when the learned and knowing are set up
to teach the ignorant? and is it not much more absurd and unreasonable for us,
to desire that things should be according to our mind, either with our selves
or others, families, or Nations, and not according to the mind of God? Should
things be as the best, as the wisest, as the holiest men in the world would
have them, and not as God would have them; it were more absurd and unreasonable
then that things should go in a family according to the mind of the servants
and children, rather then according to the mind of the Master and Father; yea
it were more absurd then any of those forementioned absurdities. Should it be
according to thy mind, O Job? how unreasonable a thing were that!

Fourthly, From those words, He will recompense it, whether thou refuse, or
whether thou choose.

Note.

God will not yield to men, nor be subject to their pleasure. God will do what
he pleases, as I may say, in spite of any man's teeth. Things must pass in
such a way as God has appointed, and sees meet to dispose of them; and not as
we would have them. He will recompense: God is resolute for the doing of his
own will, and men are usually over-resolute for the doing of theirs; and indeed
some are as it were wholly changed into will, or rather wilfulness; they will
do this, and they will do that; they will have this, and they will have that.
Men may quickly, but God can never act too highly, too strongly, too
confidently upon his own will; the reason is, because his will is an holy will,
and the rule of righteousness. Only Consider from the whole.

Man is never displeased with what God does, till he forgets what himself
is. Man forgets that he is a worm, and no man, he forgets that he is a
creature, he forgets himself to be dust and ashes, else his spirit would not be
wrought up to such a height, to have things go according to his mind, and not
according to the mind and will of God.

And seeing God will have every thing go according to his mind and will, know
there is no striving nor struggling with God; if man will not bow to the will of
God, he shall be broken by the will of God: if he will not submit to it, he
must fall by it. There Is no avoiding one of these two, for he will recompense.
Therefore let us yield up our selves freely to God, to be ruled by him, and not
set him the rule, no nor so much as give him advice; let us receive the Law,
and take advice from him. God is our Commander, but we must not be so much as
his Counselors. The Apostle speaking of the eternal purposes and decrees of
God, says ( Romans 11.34.) Who has been his Councellor? As God had none to
counsel him concerning his eternal purposes, so we must not adventure to
counsel him as to his daily providence or dispensations, either toward our
selves, or others; the true rule of our life is, to yield our selves to be
ruled by God. He will recompense it, whether we choose, or whether we refuse.

And not I. As if he had said, If thou will struggle with the will of God, thou
may, but I will not. God will go his own way, and do as he sees good, say
thou what thou can, or howsoever it please or displease thee. And for mine
own part, I dare not entertain or give way to a thought of prescribing to him
in any of these things, what he should do; no nor be unsatisfied with, much
less censure, what he has done. Therefore, if thou can acquit thy self of
this crime and accusation which I have laid to thy charge, as thou did theirs
who spoke before, do it, say what thou can for thy self.

Hence Note.

He that sees another do amiss, ought to take heed of doing the like himself.
Again, As these words, and not I, refer to the word recompense, He will
recompense, whether thou choose, or whether thou refuse; the meaning of them may
be conceived, as if Elihu had thus bespoken Job, If thou do smart for thy
pride, and the height of thy spirit, if God pay thee home for it, do not lay
the fault upon me; I have given thee counsel to direct thee better, I desire
not thou should come under such a handling, but certainly God will do it.
When we have declared the mind and will of God, in the severity of his
judgments upon sinners, it is good for us to say, God will do it, and not we.
The Prophet Jeremiah (chap. 17.16.) having warned them of an evil day, adds,
Nor have I desired the woeful day, Lord thou know it: Jeremy had spoken woeful
things against that people, but (says he) I have not desired that woeful day,
though I have prophesied of it. So Elihu seems to speak, he will recompense,
and not I; though it be not in my mind, yet I assure thee it is the mind of God.

Yet further, Some read these words with the former as an Interrogation or
rebuking question made by God himself; What? Should you choose, and not I?
Election or choice is my privilege, not thine, thou must not think to
prescribe to me. Verba Dei per Mimesmesse puto. Merc.
I will chasten and afflict, as I think fit, or according to my own will, not
according to thine. Thus he brings in God speaking to Job; thou find thy
self much aggrieved, and complainest that thou art afflicted more then is
meet; It should seem then, that I must do what thou think fit, not what I
think fit my self. Surely thou must give me the rule, how much, how long, and
in what manner I must correct both thy self and others. Should you choose, and
not I: How uncomely!

Therefore speak what thou know. Here Elihu gives Job time to reply, as he
had done (at the 33d chap. verse. 5.) as if he had said, If thou know any
thing against what I have spoken, or art able to make any objection against it,
speak; if thou think I have not spoken right, show me my error, and spare
not.

Hence Note, First; When we have declared what we judge to be the mind of God
in any case, we should give others liberty of speaking their minds also.

This is my opinion, speak what thou can against it; we should speak (2 Cor.
1.24.) Not as having Dominion over the faith of others, but as helpers of their
joy; The Ministers of Christ must speak as Servants to, not as Lords of the
faith of others. Elihu did not carry it as a Lord over the faith of Job; but
left him to make good his own opinion and practice if he could.

Secondly Note.

Knowledge is the fountain of Speech. We need no other light to speak by then
that of reason, the understanding should feed the Tongue; we must not speak at
a venture, but keep to Rule and take our aim. The Apostle Paul tells us of
some who make a great noise, but know not what they say, nor whereof they
affirm (1 Timothy: 1.7.) they speak they understand not what, and vent what they
can give no account of; Speak what thou know.

Thirdly Note.

We should speak (when called) what we know. Knowledge is a Talent, and must
not be hid in a Napkin; if thou know better then I speak, pray speak, do not
hide thy knowledge. As Elihu would have Job speak in his own case, so he
inviteth others to speak about his case, as it follows in the next verse.

Verse. 34. Let men of Understanding tell me, etc.
In this 34th verse Elihu turns his speech to Job's friends again, presuming
of, or not questioning their consent to what he had said, being confident that
himself was in the right, and that they were wise enough to apprehend it. He
was persuaded that all wise men either were, or (upon hearing the matter) would
be of his mind, and that therefore what Job had spoken, was very defective of
wisdom, as he concludes in the thirty-fifth verse.

Let men of understanding tell me, etc. He appeals to Jobs friends, or any
other men of understanding: let them (says he) Consider what I and he have
spoken, Viri cordis. i. e. cord^ti; cor notat fapientiam et carere cor dicitur
qui descipit. Cum Jobo non putat amplius producendum esse colloquium. Quare
viros vocat intelligentes. Sanct. Et vir sapiens audit. i. e. audiet me, et
mihi acquiescet in hoc. Merc:
and give their judgment impartially concerning the whole matter in debate
between him and Job. Let men of understanding tell me, etc.

The Hebrew is, men of heart: the heart is the seat of understanding, according
to Scripture language, there we read of a wise heart, and of an understanding
heart; and it says of a foolish or indiscreete person, he has no heart; he is
a man without a heart. Ephraim is a silly dove without a heart (Hos: 7.11.)
that is, he does not understand. Mr Broughton translates; Sad men of heart will
speak as I, and the wise person that hears me. As in the former part of the
verse Elihu called for speakers; so in the latter he calls for hearers; Let
men of understanding tell me, And let a wise man hearken to me; or as some
render, a wise man will hearken to me.

The word rendered hearken, signifies more then to hear, even to submit, to
obey, a wise man will hearken to me; that is, he will assent to, and consent
with me, he will vote with me, and declare himself to be of my mind. In that
Elihu appealed to wise and understanding men.

Note, First.

It is not good to stand to our own Judgments altogether, in dealing with the
Consciences of others. Let wise men, let men of understanding, hear and
consider the matter, let them speak their minds; we should not lean to nor
rely upon our own understanding in the things which concern our selves only,
much less in those, wherein others are concerned more then our selves. Eyes
see more then an eye. And though it be an argument of too much weakness to see
with other men's eyes; yet it is an argument of much goodness and humility, to
call in the help of other men's eyes.

Secondly, Note.

The more wise men agree in any matter, the greater is the Conviction. One man
may speak to Conviction, but if many speak the same, it is a very strong
Conviction. Many (I confess) may center and agree in a wrong Judgment; yet we
ought to have a reverend esteem of, and not easily differ from that Judgment
wherein many wise and understanding men agree. Christ speaking of
Church-proceedings and censures, says ( Math: 18.19.) If two of you (who
constitute the least number, much more if a greater number of godly wise men)
shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be
done for them, etc. So still the more wise, holy, and learned men agree in any
point, the greater is our conviction, and the stronger our obligation to submit
to it. He that does not hear a single brother, his fault is great; much more
if he hear not two or three; most of all when he does not hear the Church
speaking to him, and testifying against him in the name of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, Elihu having made a long discourse, appeal's to wise men.

Hence note.

He that believes he has spoken truth, is not afraid to have it considered by
those who are best able to judge what is true. Truth fears not any test, or
trial. He that offers pure gold and silver, cares not who touches it, or
takes the Assay. Wisdom is (sure enough to be) justified of her children. They
who understand truth, and love it, can do nothing against the truth, but for
it.

Fourthly, Elihu having discoursed long, is willing to refer it to men, and
to let them judge of it.

Hence note.

He that has spoken truth in his uprightness, has reason to believe that he
shall have the Consent of the upright with him. There is a samenesse of spirit
in all wise and godly men for the maine, and for the most part it is so in
particulars. If a godly man conscienciously judge such an opinion to be truth,
he may be much assured, that other wise and godly men will be of his opinion
too. He dares say, as Elihu, Let wise men hearken unto me.

Fifthly, and lastly, In that Elihu makes his appeal to wise men; to men of
heart.

Note.

All men are not fit to give their Judgment in a case. All are not Competent
Judges, nor prepared to give an opinion; and if they do it is not much to be
regarded; wise men, specially godly wise men, men of a holy understanding, are
the men whose judgment and opinion is to be regarded. Elihu having bespoken
the thoughts and opinion of wise men, seems to give his own in the next words.

Verse. 35. Job has spoken without knowledge, and his words were without
wisdom.
When Elihu had offered it to the Consideration of wise and understanding men,
whether Job had spoken right about that great point, Submission to the absolute
Sovereignty of God, he forbear not first, and plainly to declare his own
understanding of it.

Job has spoken without knowledge. The Hebrew is, not in knowledge, or, not
knowingly; that is, ignorantly, foolishly; a very high charge; Job has spoken
without knowledge; yet we are not to understand it as if Elihu thought Job an
Ignorant, or an unknowing man, he could not but know otherwise; but as to this
particular case, he reports him as a man that had spoken without knowledge, and
declared himself both beside his duty, and the rule.

Hence note.

They who are very wise and knowing in many things, yet may be out in some. The
best of men are not perfect, either in grace, or knowledge. We may know much,
and yet come short in what we ought to know; A man may speak some things very
understandingly, and yet speak other things very erroneously; A Job may be out
sometimes. Job has spoken without knowledge.

And his words were without wisdom. When the Lord comes to decide this great
Controversy in the last Chapter of this Book, he tells Job's three friends,
that their words had not been right, as the words of Job; and yet here Elihu
says, Job's words were without wisdom, or, not in wisdom. When God said, the
words of Job were right; we may understand it, that they were so according to
their general tenor, or they were so comparatively to what his friends,
Eliphaz, Zophar, and Bildad had said in his case, or at least his last woe ds
(after God had thoroughly convinced and humbled him) were so, though in many
things he had failed in speech, or spoken those things which were not right
before. Yet here Elihu spoke truth, while he said, his words were without
wisdom in the special point he had to do with him about; and so much Job
himself acknowledged, I have spoken once, yea twice, but I will speak no more;
I will no more set my wisdom against the wisdom of God, nor presume to have
things go according to my mind, let God do what he will with me hereafter.

Consider, how well this good man took the plain-dealing of Elihu; It might be
expected that Job would quickly have risen up in passion, especially when he
heard himself thus urged; But being convinced, with what Elihu spoke, he gave
him not a word, much less an angry word.

Hence note.

A good man where he is faulty, will hear reproof with patience. A gracious
heart, will soon be angry with himself for speaking or doing amiss, but he
can take it well to hear himself reproved, when he has indeed either spoken
or done amiss. Nor are there many greater and clearer arguments of a gracious
heart then this. To bear a reproof well is a high point of commendation. Grace
may be showed as eminently by our patience when we are rebuked for doing that
which is evil, as by our forwardness and zeal in doing that which is good.
When Nathan the Prophet applied the parable home to David after he had not only
committed but continued long impenitently in his grievous sins of adultery and
murder, telling him to his face, Thou art the man (2 Samuel: 12.7.) and not only
telling him so, but at once upbrayding him with all the former benefits and
kindnesses of God to him, and threatening him with many dreadful future
judgments ( v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.) when (I say) he was thus sharply dealt with,
it might have been feared, that this Great king would have risen up in passion,
and roared like a fierce Lion upon the Prophet; yet we hear nothing from him
but words of sorrowful confession, and humble submission ( v. 13.) I have
sinned against the Lord. The boldness of Paul was great in blaming Peter
openly, and Peter's meekness was as great in bearing that blame ( Gal: 2.14.)
Nor do I know whether the patience of Job were greater in bearing the great
afflictions that God laid upon him, or in bearing the great reproofs which this
man laid upon him. I grant, he complained often of those bitter reproaches
which his three friends cast upon him, charging him for a wicked man or a
hypocrite, and then he replied and replied home: but here Elihu reproved him
sharply for his rash speeches and intemperate carriage under his affliction,
and he took it both meekly and silently. A good man will not storm, nor rage,
nor revile, nor threaten, when he is justly reprehended, but lies down under
it, and takes it quietly, yea thankfully, and goes home and blesses God that
he has met with a knock; These are very hard words, Thou have spoken words
without wisdom; But Job seems to confess and patiently bear them: It is
best for us not to do or speak any thing that deserves a reproof: and it is
the next best, to receive a reproof well for what we have either done or
spoken ill.

JOB. Chap. 34. Verse. 36, 37. My desire is that Job may be tried unto the end,
because of his answers for wicked men.

For he adds rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth his hands amongst us, and
multiplyeth his words against God.


IN these two verses Elihu winds up his second speech to Job, and in them we
have two things considerable; First, his motion made in reference to Job at the
beginning of the 36th verse; My desire is (or this is the thing that I move
for) that Job may be tried unto the end. Secondly, we have the reason of this
motion, which some make threefold, others fourfold, taking the latter part
of the 36th verse for one of the four; My desire is that Job may be tried to
the end, why?

First, Because of his answers for wicked men.

Secondly, I desire he may be tried unto the end, why? for he adds rebellion
unto his sin.

Thirdly, I desire he may be tried unto the end? why? he clappeth his hands
amongst us, and

Fourthly, I desire he may be tried to the end, why? he multiplyeth his words
against God. Others take the latter words of the 36th verse, only as the
subject matter about which Elihu desires Job may be tried, that is, concerning
his answers for wicked men. And so the 37th verse contains three reasons why
he desires he may be brought to that trial.

Verse. 36. My desire is that Job may be tried.
So we translate, and we put in the margin, O my father, most or many
translaters put that into the text, (...) voluit cupiit, undo (...) pater,
quasi benevolus dictus. Pater mi probetur Job usque ad victoriam. Iun:
O my father, Let Job be tried unto the end. The first word of the text has a
twofold signification; some taking it as an application to God by the name or
title father. The reason of this difference is, because the root of that
Hebrew word which signifies a father, signifies to desire, to will or wish. Mr
Broughton renders, O my father (and he adds, O my father which art in heaven)
Let Job be tried unto victory. As if Elihu (says he) looking up to heaven, by
O father, meant what follows, O father which art in heaven. And he quotes
Abraham Peritzol (a learned Rabbin) expounding the words so translated, at larg.

Father is one of the sweetest and most honorable compellations of God. ( Isa:
63.16.) the whole Church of the Jews is brought in bespeaking God in that
Relation; Thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, etc. And God
speaking of himself, says ( Mal: 1.6.) A son honors his father, if I be a
father, where is my honor. Apud Gentiles pater commune nomen erat Deorum; undo
Diespiter, Merspiter, Jupiter.
It was usual even among the heathens to add the name father to their Idol
gods, thereby to express their reverence, or veneration of them.

O my father. They who embrace this translation take special notice of that
pronoune My, O my father. He does not say only or barely, O father, but O my
father. Those appropriating possessive pronouns, mine, thine, have a kind of
deliciousness in them, and breath abundance of affection. Luther said the
sweetness of the Gospel lies in pronounes; when a believer can say (with
believing Thomas) My Lord, and my God. Those things or persons which we love
most we call ours; we say of a single special friend, he is mine; and to say,
such a one is mine, is as much as to say, he is much beloved, much prized or
esteemed by me, he, as it were, lies next my heart; property rayseth the price
of all good things. We rejoice in God most, when we can call him ours; and so
does God in us, when he takes us for his own. (...). Ex quo omnis paternitas.
Vulg: Paternitatis nomen ex seem ipso largitur omnibus; sicut enim solus bonus
dicitur quia bonitatem alijs communicate, etc. Hieron: in Epist: ad Ephesians: cap:
3.
We have a meeting or union of several possessive pronouns in one verse (
Cant: 8.12.) My vineyard which is mine is before me: My, mine, before me;
implying how much Jesus Christ did appropriate the Church unto himself, or how
much he thought himself concerned in the prosperity of the Church. And as the
Title Father is sweet and comfortable, so glorious and honorable; God is the
father of all, and all fatherhood is derived from God. That of the Apostle (
Ephesians: 3.15.) which we translate, of whom the whole family, etc. Others render,
the whole fatherhood, in heaven and earth is named. For as God only is good,
and other things are good only by communication from him, so God only is a
father, and all other fatherhood is by derivation and communication from him. O
my father, let Job be tried unto the end. We say, My desire is.

The Hebrew text is as clear for that; and whether we say, O my father, let
Job be tried, or, my desire is that Job may be tried to the end, the general
sense is the same. We render the word by desire (Chap: 9.26.) where Job tells
us, that his life or the life of man is like the swift ships; we put in the
margin, ships of desire (it is this word) that is, like those ships which being
most desirable (as being laden with the richest and most precious commodities)
make most have home to their harbor, or proper Port. Thus here, My desire, or
the thing that I strongly wish is, etc. The Chaldee paraphrase renders, My will
is, or I will Volo ego ut probe^ur Job, etc. Targ:
That Job may be tried.

But had not Job been tried already? was there any need to call him to a
farther trial? had he not been in the furnace a long time? why then does Elihu
so earnestly importune that Job might be brought to trial?

I answer; The word signifies a twofold trial; First, a trial by way of
examination, or argumentation; we try a man when we examine him, and argue with
him, when we scann and search out what he has spoken, or what he has done. In
this sense the word is used ( Chap: 12.11.) and at the 3d verse of this
Chapter, the care tries words; that is, the ear examineth the sense and
meaning of those things which are spoken; and by the ear, he means not only
the sensitive faculty taken abstractly, but the sensitive faculty joined with
the intellectual. A beast has an ear and can hear, but a beast cannot try
or examine that which is spoken and heard; only they that have rational
faculties joined with the sensitive are able to try words, and matter delivered
by them. I desire Job may be tried to the utmost, that the words and speeches
which have past from him, may be fully considered, or considered to the end,
that it may, at last, appear what he has asserted and maintained.

Sunt qui intel-iligunt probari pro exagitari disputatione, sed praestat ut ad
tentationem referatur per afflictiones. Merc:
Secondly, It signifies a trial by affliction ( Zech: 13.9.) One third shall be
brought through the fire and tried. As metal gold or silver is tried and
refined in the fire, so shall they in the fire of affliction. Jesus Christ is
called a tried stone (Isa: 28.16.) and he was so in both these accounts; he was
examined and argued with to the end, and he was afflicted, and grieved to the
end, he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs all his days; Behold
I lay in Zion a tried stone, a sure Corner stone; that which is tried is sure;
we may trust that which has been tried. We say, try me and trust me; we may
understand Elihu in both, or in either of these senses. My desire is that Job
may be tried, that what he has said may be further examined, Optatu^ ut
tantisper flagelletur Job donec deo vincenti cedat et responsis vanis
renunciet. Jun: (...) verbum (...) significat instare et urgere opus donec ad
finem perductum fuerit.
or that his affliction may be continued, till he be brought to a sight of his
errors and mistakes. I would have him corrected till he submits to God as a
conqueror, and recanteth his rash and inconsiderate answers. My desire is that
Job may be tried Unto the end.

He does not say barely, tried, but, tried unto the end; that is, fully and
thoroughly tried, not by halves, overley and slightly; If he be indeed just and
sincere, the fire of this trial, how long soever he continues in it, will do
him no hurt, it will only purge and refine him from his remaining dross; but
if he be unsound and naught, he will evaporate and fume away into vain
complaints and murmurings; Therefore let him be tried to the end.

Some of the Latins translate, I would have him tried to death, which is the
end or period of man in this world. The word signifies sempeternity, as also
victory, because that which continues ever, must needs be victorious (1 Samuel:
15.29. Plerisque latini, ad mortem usque reddunt quod in Originali habetur,
usque in saeculum vel in sempiternum. Vatablus longo Tempore; Gregorius, Ad
huc. Philippus Jugiter.
) The strength of Israel will not lie; we put in the Margin, The eternity or
victory of Israel (that is, the eternal God, who is victor over all) will not
lie. Thus some render here, I desire Job may be tried unto victory, that is,
that God would never give over trying him, till he has overcome him and
brought down his spirit, for still the man is too high, too stout, his spirit
is still too big, too unbroken; my desire therefore is that God would try him
to victory, till he has brought him upon his knees, and made him eat his
words, or till he give glory to God by humbling himself and confessing his
sin; I would have him fully convinced by argument and thoroughly humbled by
chastisement, till he at last resigneth up himself to the will of God. The
Italion gloss puts it in the form of a prayer; Withdraw not thy vis^tation
from Job, until thou have brought him to the duty of a child; Further, this
word, unto the end, does not imply a desire of the everlastingness of his
trial, but of the profitableness of it. He would not have him always kept
upon the rack, or under the rod, but he would have him effectually dealt with,
that the matter might issue well with him.

From the words thus opened, note first.

Affliction is a trial. It makes us appear what we are; most have but an
appearance till they are tried; and being tried, what they are does really
appear. Afflictions try our graces what they are; and afflictions try our
corruptions what they are. Afflictions draw forth the spirit of a man, they
turn his inside outward, and set him (as it were) in the open light. Take
trial in the second sense by way of examination, and it yields us the same
truth. He that is thoroughly sifted will appear in his own likeness. Let a man
be fully dealt and argued with, let his speeches and his actions be brought to
the rule of the word, what he is, and what they are, will soon be seen.
That Is the trial which the Apostle means (1 These: 5.2.) Prove all things;
prove what men say and hold, prove their assertions and opinions, and you shall
come to a clear understanding of them. Rectum est index sui et obliqui.
The rule of the word is a straight or right rule, and that which is right will
show you both it self, and that which is crooked, or any way swerving and
departing from it.

Secondly, As trial is taken in the former notion for affliction, My desire is
that Job may be tried unto the end.

Note.

It is lawful to pray or wish for afflictions upon others in some cases. We
may pray for and wish afflictions upon others for their good, or for the glory
of God. It is not good to wish evil as evil upon any man, no not upon the
worst of men. Job professed against that ( Chap: 31.29, 30.) If I have rejoiced
at the destruction of him that hated me, or have suffered my mouth to sin by
wishing a curse to his soul, then etc. As if he had said, If I have prayed or
wished that any evil might befall mine enemy as evil, I should have done very
ill, and deserved to suffer ill. For that had been an evil wish. Yet, as we
our selves ought to choose affliction rather then sin; so we may pray for
affliction upon others, rather then that they should go on in sin. As in that
case of the Churches proceeding to the sentence of excommunication; which is
the delivering of a person up to Satan, or a putting him into the very power of
the devil for a time (1 Cor: 5.4, 5.) it is the end or design which makes
this lawful: our business in the ministry and in all Church-administrations,
is to put souls out of the power of Satan, to rescue them out of the hand of
the devil, to recover those that are led Captive by him at his will; yet says
the Apostle, Deliver such a one unto Satan, put him into the devils hands, for
what end? For the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus. This makes the prayer or act of the Church lawful,
because the intendment is the destroying of that which ought to be destroyed,
or to destroy that in man which will be the destruction of man, his flesh, his
lust, his pride, his covetousness, his wantonness; For the destruction of this
flesh deliver him to Satan, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus. Thus we may pray and wish for affliction upon others; but it is a prayer
which must be managed with a great deal of caution, lest our prayers to God in
that kind, be found ill wishes to men. That which Elihu had in his thoughts,
when he desired Job might be tried to the very end, was, that he might be
prevented from going on in the way wherein he was to the end. Yea, I conceive a
man may pray for afflictions upon himself, rather then he should go on in a
course of sin, or, when he finds that other ways and means which God has
used with him, have not been effectual to subdue his corrupt heart, to
mortify his lusts, and to bring him off from a course of sin, but that (as it
is said in the next verse) he is in danger of adding rebellion to his sin. A
godly man had much rather that God should make him poor, sick, weak, and
nothing in this world, then let his corruptions have dominion over him; He
desires rather God should take the world quite out of his hand, the^ that the
world should get into his heart, or be as fuel to feed and inflame his lusts.

Thus Elihu desired that Job might be tried, Bono ipsius optat hoc, non odio
aut malevolentia. Drusi.
because trials by affliction are for our purging, refining, and bettering.
Love was the root of this wish, nor hatred or ill will. Let Job be tried to
the end. Why? we may take the latter part of the verse for a reason why, as well
as for the matter about which he would have him tried.

Because of his answers for wicked men. Propter responsiones (communes) cum
hominibus improbis. Bez: Tanquam unus e numero virorum vanorum. Pisc:
Let him be tried concerning those words which he has spoken in common with or
after the manner of vain men. He has spoken words wherein he seems to comply
with wicked men, to say as they say, to consent with them, and to be of their
opinion, this was charged upon him directly by Elihu at the 8th verse of this
Chapter; What man is like Job, who drinks up scorning like water, which goes
in company with the workers of iniquity, and walks with wicked men; that is,
though Job in his conversation or carriage of his life has not, yet in this
discourse, he has strengthened the hands of wicked men, or confirmed them in
their opinion, speaking so much of the heavy pressures of God upon him, and
desiring to often to come to a hearing, as if he had some wrong done him. We
are not to understand these words of Elihu, Because of his answers for wicked
men; As if he charged Job to do so directly, or as if he had formally taken
upon him to plead or advocate the cause of wicked men; we are not (I say) to
understand him so grossly, nor had it been true to say, that Job opened his
mouth, or spoke thus for wicked men; but his meaning is, he has spoken such
things as in common apprehension seem to comply with the opinions of wicked
men; or with the speeches which they use when they are (like him) in a troubled
condition.

Or again, Because of his answers for wicked men; that is, that he may
acknowledge the answers he has given, are not such as do become a godly man,
but rather savor of such a spirit as unbroken proud persons hold forth in the
time of their affliction; who are never pleased with, but always complaining
at divine dispensations.

Lastly, These words, Because of his answers for wicked men, may, possibly,
have this sense; Because he has spoken such things as may serve the turn of
wicked men for answers, or, as if he would instruct them what to answer, when
at any time they are under the hand of God. He may be said to answer for
another man, who any way prompts him how or what to answer. And while a good
man speaks amiss, in any case, he teaches, yea and encourages bad men to
speak so too. Yet I rather incline to the first interpretation, that Elihu
would have Job tried, because his answers were such as it might be judged he
had taken wicked men for his pattern in giving them, and not as if in them he
had given a pattern to wicked men.

Hence note.

First, A good man may sometimes act the part of a wicked man, or he may speak
like wicked men, as if he were one of them. Though his state be as different
from the state of wicked men, as light is from darkness, or as sweet from
sour, or white from black, yet as to some actions or speeches, he may bear a
resemblance to them. Good men and bad men do, as I may say, enter-common in
many things; a wicked man whose heart is naught, who is yet in an unregenerate
estate (for I mean not by a wicked man, him only that is flagitious, a
murderer, a whoremonger, a drunkard, but a wicked man is any one that is
unregenerate, whose heart is not yet changed; Now I say, a wicked man) may
speak and do many things like a godly man; he may hear the word, and pray,
and perform outward duties, which are like and are (take them materially) the
same which godly men perform. Thus he enter-commons with godly men; and this
is the case of all hypocrites, who make a pretense of religion, when they have
no acquaintance with the power of it. And thus through temptation, and in some
very burdensome afflictions a godly man may speak as a wicked man; such hasty
rash provoking speeches may pass from him as proceed from the ungodly, only
here is the difference, those evil speeches or actions proceed from the state
of the one, and only from the temptation of the other.

Secondly; From the phrase or form of speech, in which the original
expresses wicked men; The words are, Men of wickedness, or iniquity; As if it
had been said, the worst of wicked men. This shows us what man naturally is; he
is a man of wickedness; nothing but wickedness, altogether wicked. The Lord
looking down from heaven upon all the children of men (in a state of nature^)
said, There is not one that does good, no not one. Take any wicked man he has
no good in him, no not one good thought in him; he is a man of Iniquity, he is
mere wickedness, till he be changed, till his heart be broken by Godly sorrow,
till he be united unto Christ by faith, and through the Spirit. I know this
expression is used several times in Scripture, to note those men who are
sinners of the first form, being not only sinners in their state, but in the
highest degree of activity. Thus Antichrist is called, The man of sin (2 These:
2.) And when the Prophet says ( Isa: 55.7.) Let the man of iniquity turn from
his evil way; he means the worst of men. Yet this is a truth, every man in an
unconverted estate is a man of iniquity; he has no goodness, nothing of God in
him, he bears only the Image and impresse of the devil upon him. Christ told
the Pharisees, who were high in reputation with the world for good men ( John
8.44.) Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will
do. The natural man is so sinful, that he is merely sin. And sometimes a
godly man speaks and does as if he were so too. Job spoke like men of Iniquity.

Elihu proceeds more fully to declare both the reason why he would have Job
further tried, and likewise what he meant by his answers for wicked men.

Verse. 37. For he adds rebellion (or trespass) to his sin.
Nomine (...) intelligitur peccatum ex errore commissum; Nomine vero (...)
scelus proprie rebellio.
Here are two words, sin and rebellion; the first which we render sin, signifies
sin in common; the least transgression of the Law it is sin; the least vain
thought of the heart, the least idle word of the tongue is sin; but every sin
is not rebellion; that has many special marks or brands rather upon it. To
rebel is to sin with a high hand, to rebel is to sin with a stiff neck, to
rebel is to sin with obstinacy and resolvedness of will; he adds rebellion
to his sin. But did Job rebel indeed? I conceive the rebellion which Elihu
charge Job with, is not rebellion in a strict but in a qualified and
comparative sense; As if he had said; Job sinned before, but now his sin is
heightened, we see him now (in words) rising up against God, complaining of his
justice, or as if he had dealt unjustly with him. What he did in the time of
his prosperity, those slips and falls which he had then, weighed nothing as
laid in the balance with the intemperate speeches which he has uttered in the
day of his trouble. He adds rebellion unto his sin. So we render as
respecting what he was and had done before. Others render it potentially not
indicatively; Let Job be tried unto the end, because of his answers for wicked
men, for otherwise he may add rebellion to his sin; we know not whether his
corruptions may carry him if suffered to go onne. This is a more favorable
reading of the text, not as a charge of natural but feared rebellion against
God; As if he had said, I see the man's spirit is so entangled, that if he be
not well and wisely dealt with, possibly he may come to add even rebellion
unto his sin; and whereas he sinned before out of ignorance or imprudence, he
may shortly sin out of contumacy and perverseness.

Hence Note.

First, There are sins of several degrees. Every man sins, he that says he
has no sin, or does not sin, there is no truth in him (1 John 1.8.) But every
man's sin is not rebellion, every man does not rise up to that height and degree
of sinning. If any shall enquire, when is a man's sin rebellion? I answer.

First, That man's sin grows to be rebellion, whose will is much in it. He that
will sin rebels. The Apostle Paul says ( Rom: 7.19.) The evil which I would
not, that I do. This is the case of every godly man at his best, he does those
evils which he would not; this is not rebellion, because the will of a godly
man is changed and turned off from sin; he can say, the evil which I would not
do, that do I. Rebellion is the doing of that evil which we would.

Secondly, In rebellion, or in rebellious acts of sin, there is much of the
understanding as well as of the will; that is, a man sees clearly what he
does is sin, or that the rule is against him; to rebel is to sin against the
light. It is said in the 24th Chapter of this book, The wicked are of them
that rebel against the light; that is, they cannot abide the light; he means
it there of the natural light; the adulterer and the thief cannot endure Sun
or daylight: it is much more true of mystical light, if he has any light of
knowledge, he resists and rebels against it. Its great rebellion to resist the
receiving of light offered, but it is greater rebellion to resist light
received; sins against knowledge are rebellious sins.

Thirdly, A rebellious sin is a sin against reproof, admonition and warning;
when we have been often told of such a sin, and admonished of such an evil
course, and yet we will go on in it, here is rebellion; such a man has not
only light in his understanding, that what he does is sinful, but this light
has been brought home to him and wrought upon him by reproof, counsel, and
admonition; here is still greater rebellion. Therefore in the proceeding of the
Church, spoken of ( Math: 18.) when an offending brother has been reproved and
told of his fault, first in p^ivate by a particular brother, then by two or
three, then by the whole Church; if after all these admonitions and reproves,
he does not repent, he is to be cast out as a rebel, and accounted as a heathen
or a publican.

Lastly, As it is rebellion when we sin as against the reproves of man, so
against the providence of God; and those of two sorts.

First, When we sin against the favorable providence of God, I mean those
which are outward; when God bestows many mercies and comforts upon us, when he
gives us health and riches in the world, and fulness of all things, then to
sin against him is rebellion. ( Deuteronomy: 32.15.) Jesurun waxed fat and kicked, and
rebelled against the Lord, and lightly regarded the rock of his salvation. When
we have received many and great mercies, then to grow vain and wanton, and
nourish our selves as in the day of slaughter, this is rebellion against God.

Secondly, When the providence of God have broken us by this evil or that
evil, when we are broken in our estates, broken in our names, broken in our
relations, broken with sickness after sickness, and yet persist in a sinful
way, this is rebellion, this is sin in the very height of it. This was the
rebellion of Ahaz (2 Chronicles: 28.22.) Who in the time of his distress,
trespassed yet more against the Lord. And this was the rebellion of Judah (Isa:
1.5.) Why should ye be strieken any more? ye will revolt more and more. Take
heed of this; it is too much that we sin at all, let us not be found adding
rebellion to our sin. I may say these two things concerning the habit or any
act of sin.

First, It is a burden to a Godly man; O wretched man that I am (said Paul)
who shall deliver me from this body of death?

Secondly, As it is a Godly man's burden when he sins, so it is his care and
study not to sin; he would not sin at all; he watches himself that he may not
sin in the least degree. That was the Apostle John's desire and care for all the
Churches (1 John. 2.1.) My little children, these things I write unto you, that
ye sin not. I would have you watch over your hearts and ways so narrowly, that
no sin might slip you; that ye might not have a wrong thought, nor speak an
idle word; how much more should we take heed, that we add not rebellion to our
sin. There is somewhat of rebellion in every sin, even in the sins of good men;
but it is sad when they add rebellion to their sin. Samuel gives a dreadful
description of that sin which is rebellion (1 Samuel: 15.23.) Rebellion is as the
sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as Iniquity and Idolatry. Witchcraft
is that sin wherein men have much converse and compliance with the devil; The
devil and the witch, or the devil and the Diviner (as our Margin has it) act
as loving companions; they have mutual converse, yea commerse, they trade
together. Rebellion is that sin, or we sin rebelliously, when we declare our
selves most averse to God. The witch declares himself a friend to the devil;
the rebellious soul defieth and despises God; now those sins that have most
compliance with the devil, and most defiance against God, are put together; if
a man does much set himself to oppose God, by sinning against light, against
reproves, and against providence, whether the gracious or afflicting
providence of God (If a man (I say) rebel thus against God) it is like the
sin of witchcraft, which is compliance and converse with the devil. Here is
an extreme on the one side, and an extreme on the other side, yet both meet,
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as Iniquity and
Idolatry. These latter words are exegaticall; stubbornness (that is, when a man
is stout and will go on his way) is as Iniquity and Idolatry. We may consider
a great elegancy in those words; Stubbornness is as Idolatry. What is Idolatry?
it is worshipping or giving honor to a false god, which is indeed worshipping
the devil; all Idolatry is devill-worship; the witch worshippeth the devil
intentionally, and so does the Idolater, though he intend it not (1 Cor:
10.20.) The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils and
not to God. I do not say, every error or failing in worship is devill-worship,
but that which is Idolatry indeed, or the setting up of a worship of our own
devising is Idolatry, and devill-worship. Thus stubbornness is as Idolatry, and
rebellion is as witchcraft. What is witchcraft? compliance with the devil.
What is Idolatry? devill-worship, a falling down to the devil. Let the wicked
consider what they do when they rebel; and let the people of God take heed of
any sin, or way of sinning, which may be accounted rebellion. To sin with much
will against much light, against many reproofs from men, and against the
reproving, or against the inviting providence of God, has rebellion in it; He
adds rebellion to his sin.

Secondly, Taking the words in the mildest sense,

Note.

Sometimes a good man may go backward, he may be worse and worse, and do
worse and worse. We should be always growing in grace, that is the condition of
believers and their duty, yet under some dispensations they may decline for a
time and grow worse and worse, adding that which is like rebellion to their sin.

Thirdly, If we consider these words in connection with the former; Elihu
having prayed for further trial upon Job, as fearing, that else he might add
rebellion to his sin.

Note.

He that is not thoroughly convinced and chastned, may quickly grow worse and
worse. He may, or he will add rebellion to his sin. I do not know where a
man's sin will end, if the Lord should let him alone. It Is a mercy that any man,
especially that God has a continual inspection over us; if some men's ways
were not tried and questioned, they might add rebellion to their sin; who
knows where they would stop? it is a mercy to have both words and actions
examined by brethren and Churches, how sadly else would many wander, yea it is
a mercy to be tried by affliction. When God keeps us from a foul way by
building a wall against us, it is a mercy, else we might add rebellion to sin.
No man knows the measure of his own evil heart, or what it would do; for
though believers have a general promise to be kept by the power of God to
salvation; yet how lamentably have good men ^^llen, though kept from falling
away? Elihu aggravates this yet further by the example of Job in the latter and
last part of the verse.

He clappeth his hands amongst us, and multiplieth his words against God. He
clappeth his hands, or, makes a noise amongst us, as Mr Broughton reads it;
clapping of the hands in Scripture has a threefold signification.

First, It implies passion or sorrow. A man under affliction claps or wrings
his hands for grief. Both those gestures are of the same significancy.

Secondly, There is a clapping of the hands with indignation; when we are very
angry, then we clap our hands.

Thirdly, There is a clapping of the hands for joy, or in a way of triumph;
when a man thinks he has conquered and got the day, he claps his hands, and so
do they who are on his side. ( Psalm: 47.1.) O clap your hands (all ye people)
shout unto God with the voice of triumph. Explosurus esset nos, ut qui vicisset
nos disputando. Pisc:
I conceive Elihu intends Job clapping his hands in this third sense; he
clappeth his hands amongst us, or insults over us, as if he had conquered and
won the Garland; and therefore Elihu prayed that he might be further tried.
This is another aggravation of that ill frame which Elihu conceived Job to be
in. And indeed to clap our hands when we have done or spoken evil, is worse
then the evil, which we have either done or spoken; He clappeth his hands; And
multiplieth his words ( or, may multiply words) against God.

Solomon says ( Pro: 10.19.) in the multitude of words there does not want
sin; that is, there is store of sin in the multitude of words. They that will
be speaking much, slip much. Job (says he) multiplyeth words against God.
There is a multiplying of words against God two ways; First, directly;
Secondly, by way of reflection or rebound; Elihu could not say, Job had spoken,
nor could he presume he would speak one word, much less multiply words against
God directly. He knew Job was a godly man, but he asserts he had, or feared he
might multiply words against God reflectively, that is, speak such words as
might cast dishonor upon God, such words as God might take very ill at his
hands, and interpret as spoken against himself.

Hence note.

They who speak unduely of the ways and proceedings of God with them in this
world, speak against God himself. The business of Elihu in all this
discourse, was to hold forth the evil frame of Jobs heart, signified by the
intemperance of his language under the dealings of God. God had afflicted and
chastned Job, he had multiplied wounds upon him, and Job in the heat of his
spirit and bitterness of his soul, making many complaints about the workings
of God with him, is charged with multiplying words against God. We may speak
against God before we are aware; yea we may speak many words against God when
we think we have not spoke one word against him. While we speak impatiently
of the proceedings of God in the world, and murmur at his dispensations to our
families or persons, what do we but multiply words against God? we speak much
for our selves to God, yea (I may say) we highly commend our selves to God when
we submit to his doings, and say nothing, but in a silent admiration adore his
dealings, and wait for a good issue of them. Aaron proclaimed both his
humility and his faith in holding his peace, when the Lord slew his two sons
Nadab and Abihu, strangely with fire, for offering strange fire before the
Lord, which he commanded them not ( Lev: 10.1, 2, 3.) But how many are there
who proclaim their pride and unbelief, by not being able to hold their peace
under the afflicting hand of God, when his hand scarce touches them, or when
he does but lay the weight of his little finger upon them, in comparison of
that heavy stroke which fell upon Aaron. We are in much danger of sinning,
when at any time we speak many words, or (as Elihu speaks) multiply words,
he is a rare man that speaks many words, and but some amiss, Now, if to
multiply words at any time (even when we are most composed) exposes us to
error in our words, how much more when our tongues utter many words in the
bitterness and discomposure of our spirits? And as to speak amiss in any
matter is to s^n against God, so to speak much amiss of our sufferings, or of
the severest providence of God toward us, is to speak much, or to multiply
words (though nor intentionally) yet really and indeed against God. O then
forbear this multiplication of words, lest you multiply sins. Speak but
little, unless in the praise of God; take heed how you speak of what God is
doing to others, or doing to your selves. Let your words be few, and let them
be weighed, for God will weigh your words; and you may hear from him in
blows, what he hears from you in words. It Is a dangerous thing to be found
speaking words against God; yet this may be the case of a good man, whose heart
is with God, and whose heart is for God: even while he has a general bent of
heart to lay himself out in speaking and doing for God, he through passion and
temptation may be found speaking against God. What we speak discontentedly of
the ways or works of God, is a multiplying of words against God himself.

Thus I have given out and finished my thoughts upon the Preface which Elihu
made to lead in his discourse with Job, as also upon two stages of his
discourse with him. Job sits silent and answers him not a word, which Elihu
perceiving takes liberty to urge him further with two distinct discourses more,
contained in the three Chapters following; which, if the Lord give life and
leave, may be opened and offered to the readers use and acceptance in
convenient season.

A TABLE Directing to some special Points noted in the precedent EXPOSITIONS.
A
ABraham, a threefold gradation in his name. 13 Acceptance with God is our
highest privilege. 429 Accepting of persons, wherein the sinfullness of it is.
119, 120. To accept persons in prejudice to the truth is a high offense. 121.
Some special ways wherein we run into this sin. 124, 125. 630. God is no
accepter of persons. 631 Account, God gives no account to man. 253. All men
must give an account to God. 254. 322. God will call all men to account. 664
Accusations not to be taken up hastily, or merely by hearsay. 195, 196
Addition of sin to sin proper to the wicked. 828. It is very dangerous to make
such additions. 830 Adversity, a night. 688 Affliction must not be added to the
afflicted. 90. The afflictions of some men more eminently from the hand of God.
91. These afflictions which are most eminently from God, seem to bear the
greatest witness of the sinfullness of man. 91. Four grounds of it. 92. Yet it
is no concluding argument. 93. Godly men most afflicted, seven ends God has in
afflicting them. 93, 94. What use we should make of it when we see godly men
much afflicted. 94. In affliction it is better be found bewayling our sin, then
reporting our innocence. 208. We hardly keep good thoughts of God, when we are
afflicted and suffer hard things. 223. Afflictions put a double restraint upon
us. 224. How affliction carries in it matter of disgrace. 225. God speaks to
us by affliction. 340. Nine designs of God in afflicting man. 343, 344. Times
of affliction must be times of confession. 450. Afflictions designed for the
good of man. 472. No pleading of our innocence or righteousness for our
freedom from affliction. 515, 516. The Lord takes liberty to afflict them
greatly, whose sins are not great, 529. We must not complain of the greatness
of our affliction, how little soever our sins are. 529. In affliction, we
should speak humbly and meekely to God. 789. The hand of God must be
acknowledged in our afflictions. 791. Affliction or chastning must be born,
791. What it is to bear affliction, showed many ways. 792, 793. We must pray
for the taking away of an affliction, while we are willing to bear it. 794.
What it is to be exercised under affliction. 796. The sin and danger of
breaking out of an affliction. 801. Who may be said to break from or out of an
affliction. 801. Affliction tries us. 852. How it may be lawful to pray or
wish for affliction to fall upon others. 852 Alexander the Great, his speech to
a Soldier of his own name. 12 Amazement, what. 103 Anarchy, the worst of
national judgments. 746 Angels, good or bad sent to destroy. 362. How the
Angels come to know the mystery of the Gospel. 408 Anger, full of heat. 10,
11. Anger in the cause of God is good. 15. Anger prevails most in those who
have least reason. 27. They who give counsel must bridle anger. 28. We should
see good reason to be angry before we are. 40 Answer, unless we answer home,
we give no answer. 82. A fourefold way of answering. 232, 233. Apostates, who
are so. 620. Apostasy or turning back from God. 700. Apostates grow worse and
worse every day. 705 Archimedes much transported with joy and why. 85 Arrow put
for a wound. 525. Two sorts of arrows. 525 Attention, the best men may need to
have their attentions quickened. 551.
B
Barachel, what that name signifies. 11. Behold, a fourefold use of it in the
Scripture. 460, 461. Behold, to behold taken two ways in Scripture. 658
Belial, what it signifies, and who may be called Belial. 622, 623 Bernard, his
description of an Opinionist in his time. 115 Best, not barely good, but the
best things to be looked after and chosen. 508, 510 Binding, the great use of
it for healing. 608 Bladders, wicked men how like them. 691 Blindness
spiritual, or of the understanding, to be smitten with it, how sore a
judgment. 699 Boasting, man is very apt to boast of himself. 83, 84 Man is
apt to boast in the evil he does, much more of the good he does. 84. His
boasting of wisdom. 85 Bones, what they are to the body. 337. Pain in the
bones grievous. 337, 338 Breath, and spirit their difference. 590
C
Call of God, it is dangerous to refuse or not hearken to his first call. 268
Cato, his answer to a voluptuous person. 505 Change or turning of a man into
another man twofold. 55 Changes, God can quickly make the greatest changes both
in natural and civil things. 418 Charities done rightly produce a great
increase. 566 Chastisements are documents. 340. What properly a chastisement
is. 789. Chastisement is for amendment. 797. When God chastneth us, we should
promise amendment. 797. In what sense we may promise (being chastned) to offend
no more. 798 Surgeon, three things required in him, answerably those three
in those who would cure the soul. 101 Christ, remembrance of his humbling
himself, a great means to humble us. 325. Christ the Angel of the Covenant.
371. We must have union with Christ, else we can have no benefit by him. 429.
Christ the only hiding place for sinners. 672. Sinners under a fourefold
consideration, may hide themselves in Christ. 672 Churches of the Gentiles to
be warned by the severe dealings of God with the Church of the Jews. 697
Choosing, or choosing of Instruments, how it differs from Gods. 61. Choosing or
election, what it is. 506. The choosing of judgment what. 506. It is not enough
to know or do good, unless we choose it. 509 Clay, that all men are clay, how
it should work. 187 Comforts, the best in the creature vain. 347 Company, to
choose ill company the sign of an evil man. 538, 543. To be much in the
company of good men, a sign of goodness. 540. In what sense a good man may be
said to go in company with evil men. 541, 542 Condemnation supposes a man to
be wicked. 29. To condemn and make wicked the same in Scripture. 29, 30, 31.
Condemnation out of our own mouth, must needs stop the mouth. 196 Condemn, to
condemn those whom we cannot answer, how sinful. 29, 30, 31. To condemn God
the great wickedness of it, and in what sense many do it. 618, 619 Conditional
acts of grace. 398 Confession threefold. 445. Sin must be confessed. 449.
Whether a general confession be enough. 449 Confidence or trust in man, a
strong argument against it from man's weakness. 600 Conviction, what, or when a
person may be said to be convinced. 78, 79. Three great convincers showed. 80,
81 Conversion, the work of God not of man. 89 Consideration, what it is. 707,
711. Not to consider the ways and word of God very sinful. 713, 714. The duty
of consideration pressed. 717 Corruption, does not prevail upon the dead body of
man till the fourth day. 328. Corruption, why sin is so called. 797, 800
Courtesies; They watch for a discourtesie, who ask courtesies of us beyond our
power. 210 Croesus, the answer which the Oracle gave him ambiguous. 160 Cry of
the oppressed will go up to God. 718. Their affliction has a cry, though they
cry not 719. They are the worst of wicked men, who cause the poor to cry. 720.
God graciously hears the cry of humble oppressed ones. 722. Vide oppressed.
D.
Darkness, twofold. 666 Death is a going down to the pit. 402. Sickness has a
tendency to death. 402. When man dies he is gathered to God. 593. Death is
called a gathering in a threefold sense. 594. No man has privilege against
death. 597. Death of two sorts. 639. Death of any sort may befall all sorts of
men. 640. Death comes suddenly upon many men, and may upon all men. 640.
Violent death sweepes away many in a moment. 641 Declining, how a good man may
decline and grow worse. 860 Defer, God sometimes deferrs to do his servants
right. 520. Deferrings are very afflictive. 520 Deficiencies of the best men
two ways to be considered for their humbling. 323 Delaying dangerous, though
God be patient. 467. Delays in business may be no stop of it. 483 Delighting
in God, what. 545, 546 Deliverances of five sorts. 399. Deliverance is from God
only. 403. God conveighs deliverance by man or means usually. 403. Our
deliverance from sin is costly. 410. Deliverances are obtained three ways.
410, 411. Temporal deliverance by Christ also. 412. Great deliverances give us
a new life. 470 Despair of the end, puts an end to endeavor. 6. Despair in
creatures, yet hope in God. 528 Destruction, in whose destruction God has
pleasure. 811 Devils sin and condemnation, what. 86 Diadumenus, his
resolution. 12 Differences, what hinders the healing of them. 483, 484, 486,
487, 488 Diligence how it makes rich. 635 Discontent the Devils sin. 59
Diseases and death not far asunder. 360. Diseases are destroyers. 365.
Diseases at the command of God. 400 Displeasure of God renders all outward
comforts nothing to us. 348 Disputing, tough and hard work. 3 Disputation the
true law of it. 193 Drawing and withdrawing, two gracious acts of God toward
man. 299 Dream what it is. 280. Natural dreams caused four ways. 281
Diabolical dreams. 282. Divine dreams, five messages upon which they are
sent. 282, 283. It has been the use of God to reveal himself by dreams.
285. Five reasons why God revealed himself in dreams. 286. Dreams the way of
Gods revealing himself to the Church of old. 287. Luthers prayer about
dreams. 288. A profitable use may be made of dreams at this day. 289
Drinking, what it signifies in Scripture. 533. A threefold measure of
drinking. 534. To drink scorning like water, what it imports. 535 Dust, in
what sense all men are but dust. 598. Humbling considerations from it. 599, 600
E
Eagle, how she renews her strength. 419 Ear twofold. 290. The ear
naturally stopped against the teachings of God. 291. Seven Eare-stoppers. 291 God
opens the ear by four means. 292. Ear how it tries words. 499. The use
of the ears. 501. How the word must be tried by the ear, before it is
submitted to. 502, 503. The reproof of those who use their mouths more then
their ears. 504. Ear its power. 850 Earth, what it signifies in Scripture.
576 Easiness to follow or be led by others very dangerous. 99 Eldership
twofold. 36 Election an act of absolute free grace. 397. Election as an act of
man vid: choosing. Elihu, what that name signifies. 11 Eloquence, how it may be
burdensome. 191 Error, an error cannot always be maintained. 105. Errors both
of understanding, will and ways, many times secret to us. 818 Evil, not to
know to do evil, or to be a bungler at it is best. 130, 131. The spirit of a
good man is set against it. 132. They that do evil have reason to expect
evil. 138. Example of superiors in doing evil very powerful. 778 Examples of
Gods Judgments are to be eyed and marked. 686. Exemplary punishment, all
beholding. 694, 695 Three reasons why some are punished so. 696 Excuse, they
who excuse a fault, show they have a mind to continue in it. 549 Exercise of
the soul under affliction, in what it does consist. 796 Eyes of God, what they
signify. 656 Eyes see more then an eye. 843
F
Face of a man, why put for his person. 119 Face of God what, and what it is to
see his face. 431. Face of God sometimes hid from his people and why. 433. It
is the sole privilege of the favorites of God to see his face. 434 It is our
greatest joy and happiness to see the face of God. 435. Face of God what it
signifies. 727. The hiding of Gods face notes three things. 727. How the face
of God may be seen. 729. Not to behold the face of God what it imports. 729,
730. Hiding of Gods face from nations; Vide Nations. The hiding of Gods face is
exceeding grievous to his people. 755, 577. Caution to beware of provoking God
to hide his face. 756 Faith, our faith not be pinned upon men, how great or
ancient soever. 67. Faith is our vision of God in this life. 432 Father, a
relation or title of great honor and comfort. 849 Father-hood, God the
fountain of it. 849 Favorites to God, who. 427. A godly man is used by God
like a favorite. 429, 430, 433 Fear twofold. 42. A good fear what, they
seldom do amiss who fear they may. 44 Flattery is iniquity. 127. A twofold
flattery opened. 127, 128. The other extreme to be avoided. 129 Flattery is a
wrath-provoking sin. 135. To suffer our selves to be flattered is very
dangerous. 136. To give flattery has a double danger. 136, 137. More sinful
to flatter those that do evil, then to do evil. 231 Flesh, what meant by it
in Scripture. 349, 350. Flesh a fading thing. 352. Flesh called grass in two
respects. 352. Six practical inferences from the fadingness of the flesh. 354,
355. Man not called flesh till after the fall. 595 Flight, or to flee for our
lives, is a grievous Judgment. 648 Folly, refusal of obedience to God the
folly of man. 64 Forgiveness of sin. Vide pardon. Fortune, the wickedness of
ascribing any thing to it. 583
G
Gain of worldly things a strong temptation. 454 Gifts of the mind, wisdom
and understanding come from God. 55, 56, 57 Gluttony kills more then the sword.
367 God is to be eyed in all our ways. 140. God who gives us life, fits us
also for all the services of this life. 172, 173. God so good that he never
seeks occasions or advantages against us, nor needs he, we give him too many.
215, 216. We are apt to have hard thoughts of God, when we suffer hard things.
222. We should maintain good thoughts of God when we suffer evil. 223. God is
great, the use of it. 234, 235. Vid: Greatness of God. His power and dominion
absolute, he gives no account and why. 253, 254. His word of command is
effectual. 419. God usually deals with men according to what they do. 438.
Unworthy thoughts of God should be rejected with indignation. 554. God neither
does nor can do any unrighteousness. 556, 557, 574, 578. Two inferences from
it. 572. Those four things which cause men to do wrong, are at furthest
distance from God. 573. All things and times as present to God. 574. Power of
God primitive and unlimited, showed in five particulars. 579, 580. A fourefold
universality of the power of God. 582, 583. Admonition to those that are in and
under power, from that consideration. 584, 585. God can easily do whatsoever
he has a mind to do. 591. Two inferences from it. 592. God is most just,
showed in three things. 616. That God is just in punishing, proved by seven
particulars. 617. God can do the greatest things alone. 653. Two inferences
from it. 654. God how he hides himself. 668 Justice of God, Vide Justice.
What God has a mind to do, he can and will do. 689. All should follow after
God. 702. God his teaching; Vide teaching. Good men, they that are truly good
and gracious, are willing to know and see the worst of themselves. 824 Good, in
the doing of it many sins are mingled, as well as it is sinful not to do
good. 819 Gospel known from the beginning. 412 Government, a spirit for it the
most proper gift bestowed upon Princes. 56 God takes care of the government of
the world, or to maintain government. 684 Good, what is properly our good.
510. Goodness and strength where they meet, how useful. 555 Grace, though it
abides always, yet it does not act always alike, where it is. 247. Two
eminent acts of grace in God toward man. 299 All our mercies flow from the
free grace of God. 393. That all comes from grace implies five things. 394.
God usually gives out acts of grace when we repent, etc. 395 Graciousness of
God opened, 391, 392 To be gracious notes two things ^n God. 393. Two sorts of
(...) acts. (...) Great men, wisdom (...) with them. 63, 64. Therefore no
taking things upon trust from them. 64, 65 Greatness of men, or their abilities
either to reward or hurt us, must not turn us from the right. 122, 123
Greatness of God opened. 234. Five inferences from it. 235, 236. We may both
say and believe that God is great, and yet not answer it in our practice. 239.
who they are that indeed acknowledge God in his greatness. 240. Our not laying
to heart the greatness of God, causes our unsubmission to him. 241 Guilt, a
godly man is as careful to avoid the act of sin, as to be freed from the guilt
of it. 799
H
Halting of two sorts. 213 Hand, striking the hands together in a twofold
signification. 692. Hands, clapping of them in a threefold sense. 861. Hand
taken two ways in Scripture. 191 To be taken away without hand, what, 638. To
do a thing without hand notes three things. 650 Have often does hurt. 483
Haters of all good, many such. 610 Health to be prayed and praised for. 366.
Health to be carefully preserved. 367. Health and strength of body, the gift of
God. 417 Hearers, several sorts of faulty hearers. 146. Six considerations
upon which the whole mind of God is to be heard. 147, 148. He that would be a
profitable hearer, must be an attentive hearer. 476. The most prudent speakers
are also patient hearers. 483. The sin of those who either hear and do not,
or do not hear. 505 Hearing, good men may be dull of hearing. 498. The sense
of hearing is a great mercy, and of great use to mankind. 501, 505 Harkening,
more then hearing. 144, 145. What it is to hearken. 146, 475 Heart and tongue
should go together. 154. Three ways in which men speak against their own
hearts. 155 Heart of man prone to and fixed in evil. 299. Setting of the heart
upon any thing, what it notes. 587. Heart, the several ways of it. 657
Heartless man, who. 552 Hearty man, or man of heart, what it signifies. 551
Holiness, two things argue much the holiness of any man's heart. 15. Holiness
consists in our keeping close to and imitation of God. 706 Holy things, the
iniquity of them not easily discerned. 819 Honor, how to be given all men. 128
Humble, God is highly pleased with the humble. 427 Humbled, a truly humbled
soul much in the exercise of a fourfold duty. 803 Humility, low thoughts of
our selves best. 45. Three degrees of humility. 129 Hypocrites, much
discovered, by sickness and affliction. 359. What the Hebrew word for a
hypocrite imports. 758. Two sorts of hypocrites. 759. A Hypocrite is hated of
God, and hurtful to man. 761 The nature of an hypocrite. 761 A threefold
distinction of hypocrites. 761, 762. A fourefold design of hypocrites opened
in their making profession of religion. 763, 764. Four things by which
hypocrites may be discovered. 768, 769. They love to be seen, and are very
censorious. 770, 771. Several considerations moving all to take heed of
hypocrisy. 773, 774. Hypocrites rarely converted. 775. Hypocrites are
high-minded and look after Great things. 776. Hypocrites under the power of
covetousness and ambition. 776, 777. Hypocrites getting power abuse it to the
wronging and ensnaring of the people. 778. They ensnare two ways. 778. A
hypocrite is most unfit for public service. 781
I
Idols, how and why called terrible things. 189 Jealousy, Vide suspicion.
Ignorance. It is the duty of the most knowing to confess their ignorance. 820.
Sins of ignorance need pardon. 820. They who have but little knowledge, are
little troubled at their ignorance. 820 Imitation, It is not good to imitate
any in what they do ill. 98, 99. Imitation of God is our holiness. 706
Incorruptibility twofold. 170 Indians, their modesty in not speaking before
their Elders. 38 Infirmities, it is uncharitableness to take much notice of
them in others, but holiness to take notice of them in our selves. 217. God is
not strict to take notice of our infirmities. 218 Iniquity, what strictly. 202
Interpreter, taken three ways. 375 A threefold interpreter, 375, 376 The
Ministers of Christ are the interpreters of the mind of God to sinners. 376.
Ministers are the peoples interpreters to God four ways. 377. Two inferences
from it. 377, 378. True interpreters very rare. 379. Interpreters or Ministers,
few in a twofold reference, with the reasons of it. 380, 381. Interpreters in
truth but few, compared with those who are so in title, showed five ways. 381,
382. Faithful interpreters to be much prized. 383. The great work of an
interpreter or minister, is to show man his uprightness, or how he may stand
upright with God. 386 The interpreter sh uld be very tender toward troubled
souls. 390 Innocence is our safety. 200 Instruments, God can furnish such as
he calls to his work, with gifts proper for their work. 112. Why God uses
instruments. 584. God can work without instruments. 653 Injustice, the
sinfullness of it. 553, 555 Inspiration of God what meant by it. 52 The
inspiration of God sufficient to qualify all men for all duties, and without
that nothing can. 56, 57 Seven useful inferences made from it. 57, 58, 59
Intercession of Christ sues out our deliverance. 411 John of Times, why so
called. 46 John, what it signifies, and why the Baptist was so called. 392
Job, his innocence had a threefold testimony. 205. Five things in favor of
him, while he spoke so much of his own innocence. 205, 206. His patience how
to be considered. 242 Judges, it is abominable for them to do unrighteous
things. 553, 559 Judging, before we judge we must hear diligently. 498. We
must take time to judge of things. 504, 508 Judgments of God must needs be all
right. 662. Visible Judgments make secret sins visible. 687 Judgment taken
two ways in Scripture. 65, 507. A threefold notion of Judgment in Scripture.
517. Judgment how it is taken from a man. 518 Julian, once a great pretender
to Christianity. 768 Just, some think they are just enough, if they give man
his right, though they deny God his right every day. 231, 232 Justice, nothing
should weigh with us but truth and right, and that in a fivefold opposition.
121. Justice perverted five ways. 555. Four things cause men to pervert
Justice. 573. Some men are haters of Justice. 610. To hate justice is a most
hateful thing. 611. Justice-haters are most unfit to be Governors. 613. The
Justice of God showed diverse ways. 616. God will not allow any man a liberty
to complain of his Justice. 674. God never wronged any man. 676. God does
Justice upon some sinners openly. 695. A threefold reason of it. 696
Justification, wherein it consists. 17. Justification of our selves two ways;
What lawful, what unlawful. 18 Justification an act of absolute free grace.
397 Justify, to justify our selves lays us open to the reproof of others.
17. To justify is taken four ways in Scripture. 17, 18. In two cases a man
may justify himself. 18, 19. Five ways showed wherein men justify
themselves sinfully. 21, 22. How God is said to justify the ungodly. 22. To
justify our selves rather then God, very blasphemous. 23. When or how we may
be said to justify our selves rather then God. 24. Two inferences about this
sin. 25, 26 Justified persons have confidence to look up to God. 436. Such are
righteous. 440. A justified person, when and how he may loose the sight of his
righteousness. 441. When that sight returns Joy returns. 442
K
Keeping a man back three ways. 326 Kings and Princes, It is most uncomely and
sinful to revile them in word. 626. It Is a degree of blasphemy. 627. With what
tenderness (though with plainness) and by what rules the faults of Princes are
to be reproved. 628, 629 Know, not to know, taken three ways. 130. The
choycest servants of God may be short of knowing many things, which it much
concerns them to know. 817. We know but little of that we know, and there is
much, which we know not. 818 Knowledge, much knowledge should be in those who
have enjoyed much means of knowledge. 48. Knowledge ought to be communicated.
49 Knowledge or what we know is to be communicated. 72. Two things hinder some
from communicating what they know. 72. What and whose knowledge puffs up. 85.
A man of knowledge who properly. 495. A twofold knowledge. 507 Sinning against
the light of knowledge very sinful. 699. Knowledge the fountain of speech.
842 Knowledge of God over all. 660 Vid: Omniscience.
L
Law, how it convinces. 80. Two ways of keeping the Law. 624. Law of God how
written in the heart by Grace. 709 Laws, bad Laws, great snares. 778 To lie,
what it signifies in Scripture. 522. To lie or bear false witness against our
selves is very sinful. 523 Life of man in this life, at longest, short. 42.
Several divisions of man's life. 42. Life is the gift of God; a threefold
inference from it. 171. The life of man is at the call of God. 592 Life and
soul how they differ. 329 Life a great blessing. 459 Light, to see light, what
it imports. 458 Love, and to love, not to love God and good things is to hate
them. 611, 612 Love of God to man, what and how great is little known. 818
Lusts in the understanding as strong as those in the sensual appetite. 44
Luther, Erasmus, Melancthon, their different character. 60. Luther, how he
thought himself rebuked by God. 99. Luther a man of great courage. 113. His
prayer about two things. 288. How he confessed himself an Apostate. 700 Ly, to
deceive with a ly the worst deceit. 203
M
Magistrates, how they should be to men like a Harbor to Ships. 200. Why
expressed by the same word in the Hebrew which signifies both binding and
healing. 609. God highly displeased when they mis-governe a people. 780 Maker,
God is the maker of all men in a threefold consideration. 132. It is good to
remember God as our maker. 133. God is the maker of our bodies. 162. Three
inferences from it. 164. That God is the maker of all men, should make all men
meek one toward another. 174 Malefactors, their faces covered. 748 Man and
man are of a measure. 182, 183. Two inferences from it. 183 Man a frail
creature. 187 Many or one make no difference with God. 731 Marius, what he was
to the Romans. 789 Meat, dainty meat, two cautions about our using it. 348
Meekness, both in hearing and speaking the word, how necessary. 101. It is good
to use meekness toward all, especially the afflicted. 143, 189, 192. 230
Maschil, the title of some Psalms, what it signifies. 707 Men, not made by
God all of a rank. 625. All men are the work of Gods hands in a twofold
respect. 633. All men divided into three sorts by the Papists in respect of
their soule-state. 813 Mercy, God declares himself more inclined to it, then
to wrath and Judgment. 811 Method in speaking how useful. 178 Midnight
trouble, what it signifies. 644 Mind of man, man would have his own mind, vide
will. Ministers should speak as in Gods stead. 184. And are so to be heard. 185
Their meekness in dealing with souls. 192, 193. Ministers are Messengers. 372.
How they should speak. 373. They ought to be heard, and how because Christ's
Messengers. 374 Vide Interpreter. Mighty men of three sorts. 649. The mightiest
men have no might against God. 652. God can easily overthrow the mightiest men
of the world. 681, 682 Ministry of man nothing without God. 822 Mis-judging
one another very common. 9 Moderator, or composer of differences between
others, four things required in him. 101, 102 Moment, what it signifies in
Scripture. 639 Mouth, the opening of the mouth imports four things in
Scripture. 149 Murderer, how hateful. 400 Murmuring, no cause to murmr at
any of the dealings of God, showed in four things. 678
N
Names, the giving of significant names to children, very useful. 11, 12
Nations, God sometimes hides his face from whole Nations. 739. Three things
noted concerning Gods hiding his face from a Nation. 740. What those mischiefs
and evils are which throng in usually upon a Nation, when God hides his face
from them. 743
O
Obedience to the Law, if not universal, is not obedience. 711, 712. Obedience
twofold, takes in the whole duty of man. 792 Obstinate persons not to be
further dealt with. 7. They must be left to God. 90 Occasion, God loves to see
occasion of doing good to men. 446 Occasions, to seek occasions against others
a great piece of uncharitableness. 210. How to do so is against the law of
love, showed by seven steps. 211, 212, 213. It is a sign that we look upon a
man as an enemy, when we seek occasions against him. 221 Old age does not make
men wise. 65, 66. Spirit of God not tied to any age. 66 Old men, a twofold
stamp of God upon them. 38. Old men elegantly called men of days. 45, 46. How
old men should speak. 46. Old men have reason to be wiser then the young. 48.
Old men should be apt to teach. 49. It Is a reproach to old men to be ignorant.
49 Omission-sins, or the neglect of doing a duty easier to be observed then
failings in doing a duty. 819 Omniscience of God, caution from it. 226. God
knows all our goings. 569. The exactness of Gods knowledge of all things.
660. The everlastingness and universality of Gods knowledge. 661, 662. Five
inferences from it. 662. to 665 Once, taken three ways in Scripture. 266, 267
Opinion, our opinion or what we hold is to be showed, and how. 72. Nine honest
ends in showing our opinion. 72 Oppression cries, though the oppressed do
not. 718, 719. Oppression will cause a cry. 720. Cry of the oppressed brings
vengeance upon oppressors. 723 Oracles of the devil doubtful. 160 Ordinances
of worship, why called the face of God. 431
P
Pardon, God pardons greatest sins. 236. Free grace extends to the pardon
of the worst sinners. 451. Pardon of sin, proper to God. 805. How man is said
to forgive or pardon him that has wronged or offended him. 805. The pardoning
grace of God is boundless. 806. God pardons presently, and continually. 807.
Pardon takes sin off from us. 808. Pardon is free, not clogged with hard
terms. 809. God will never destroy any, whom he has pardoned. 812 Pardon of
sin takes away two things. 813. Pardon of sin is a precious mercy, showed upon
four grounds. 814. The consideration of Gods readiness to pardon sin, should
make us resolved not to sin. 815 Passion, we must not answer nor reprove with
passion, but with reason. 100 Patience provoked turns to greater passion. 40.
Patience of God toward sinners. 466 Peace of nations, the special gift of
God. 733. That peace considered two ways. 733. If God will give peace to
nations none can stop it. 735 Three sorts of men most likely to do it cannot.
736. Two reasons why not. 736, 737. A wonder that the peace of our Nation is
continued, four considerations why. 738, 739. Peace of particular persons
twofold from God. 748. Peace personal of believers, how it comes from the
Father, Son, and Spirit. 749. The peace of believers how an insuparable peace.
750. Two demonstrations of it. 752. Peace of believers in what sense perfect.
753 How we are tenants at will for our peace with respect to God. 756. Peace,
holding our peace, or silence, what it may signify. 478. A twofold holding of
our peace. 479. In three cases especially we should hold our peace, 480. It is
a great point of prudence to know, when to hold our peace. 481 People troubled
and in a tumult described. 642, 643 Perfection, three reasons why God calls us
to it, though we cannot attain it in this life. 514 Perishing, twofold. 596
Perseverance is our best or our worst. 828 Fantasy, the power of it in
sleep. 281 Pit, and deliverance from it, what. 457 Princes, what they ought to
be. 624 Promises of God always performed. 676 Provocation, does not excuse,
yet somewhat abate a sin committed. 206 Pharisaei Shechemitae, why so called.
766 Phocas, the prayer of a good man about him, how answered. 785 Poor men of
two sorts. 631. Poor men are as much the work of God as the rich. 633. It is
the Lord who makes men poor or rich. 634 The fall of a poor man oppressed
makes a loud cry. 721. What cries of poor men are not heard by God. 722. It Is
dangerous meddling with Gods poor. 723 Pope, his great cheat put upon the
world. 67 Power, men in power cautioned. 584, 585 Princes and people, their
sins produce mutual ill effects toward one another. 784 Pronounes, how the
sweetness of the Gospel lies in them. 849 Prayer, good things must be asked of
God. 57. Endeavor must be joined with prayer. 58. There are but two
restrictions upon the grant of whatsoever we pray for. 148. Prayer, how a
battle fought in heaven. 178 Strong prayer. 422. Sickness is a special
season for prayer. 423. God only the object of prayer. 424. We must ask mercy
if we would have it. 424. The Lord is ready to hear and give when we pray.
425. Till the person is accepted, his prayer is not. 428. Length of prayer not
disapproved by Christ, if other things be right. 763. We must pray for the
removing of our affliction, while we bear it chearefully. 794 Pride, man
naturally proud. 83. God hides pride from man two ways. 304. Pride, why put
for all sin. 305 Man very prone to pride. 306 Pride shows it self three ways.
306 Eleven things named of which men are proud. 307, 308. Five conceits as so
many roots of pride discovered. 311, 312. Pride is a vile and odious sin,
showed upon six considerations. 313, 314. Great, wise, and rich men most
subject to pride. 316 Pride the greatest sin for four reasons. 316. God by
various means gives check to pride. 317. Four pride-subduing considerations.
318 Seven means to cure man of pride. 320, 321 Protection from sin the best
protection. 200 Proud men, scornful and contentious 537 Property, our property
to any thing makes us love it the more. 849 Providence a continued creation.
165 Not to consider the works of providence, is the mark of an ungodly man.
715 Punishment of sin in this life is not equal to sin. 452. Humbled sinners
confess their greatest punishments less then their sin. 453. The justice of
God in his punishments showed seven ways. 617. Wicked shall not be unpunished.
663. No man ever punished by God beyond desert. 676, 677, 678 Purposes of
evil, man is very forward to them. 298. Until God withdraw him, he will go
on in them. 300 Five ways by which God withdraws men from evil purposes.
301 It is a great mercy to be hindered in evil purposes. 302
Q
Questions, which are unprofitable. 44 Quietness of the dead and living, what.
725. Quietness opposed to war. Vide Peace. 732
R
Ransom, who and what our ransom is. 405, 406. The deliverance of sinners by
a ransom is the invention of God. 407. God is to be highly honored for this
invention. 409. That we are ransomed should mind us of five things. 413 Reason,
we ought to hear reason whosoever speaks it. 71 Rebellion, when a sin may be
called rebellion. 857 Redemption, the benefit of it set forth two ways. 459
Repentance, a truly penitent person is resolute against sin. 826. Continuance
in any known sin is inconsistent with true repentance. 827 Reproof, there
must be proof before there can be reproof. 79. Negative reproves more easy
then affirmative. 229. Reproof to be tempered with meekness. 230. Reproves
should be given with plainness. 230. Reproof to be taken with humble silence.
549. A good man will take reproof with patience. 846 Resurrection, shadows of
it. 420 Revenge, the highest acts of revenge from God are but the awards of
justice. 92 Rewarding, if the Lord should not reward those that serve him, he
were unrighteous. 556. Righteous shall not be unrewarded. 663 Rewards both good
and evil, such as men are, and according to what they do. 438. What God
renders to man according to his work is called a reward in a fourefold
respect. 560 Rich and poor men of two sorts. 631 What rich men are not, what
are regarded by God more then the poor. 632. How men make themselves, and how
God makes them rich. 634 Right, what it is. 448. What it is to pervert right.
448 Righteous, there are three sorts of righteous persons. 4. How a man in a
good sense may be righteous in his own eyes. 5. How being righteous in our
own eyes, is hateful both to God and good men. 8. A justified person is
righteous. 440 Righteousness, how it delivers from death. 403. Righteousness
twofold. 437. Why the same word in the Hebrew is used to signify Alms and
righteousness. 437. Righteousness how it cannot be lost. 439, 440. Several
sorts of righteousness. 514 Most dangerous to be proud of or trust to our own
righteousness. 516 Running with God, and in the ways of his commandments,
what it implies. 544
S
Scorners are the worst sort of men. 536 Scorning two ways taken. 534 Seals,
a threefold use of sealing. 294 Sealing of instruction what it is. 294 295
Senators, why so called. 37 Season to be observed for speaking. 106 Such speak
to most advantage. 108 Season, to hit a right season of speaking very
advantageous. 36. Season, the danger of neglecting it. 268, 269 Self-love, a
bad glass for any man to see himself in. 311 Service of God, to account it
unprofitable, how sinful. 546 Shadow of death, what it signifies in
Scripture. 667 Shewbread, why so called. 435 Sick persons should be wisely
minded of death. 361. They should pray and desire prayers. 423. A sick man
being recovered should report the goodness of God to him. 445 Sickness, three
expressions gradually setting it forth. 336. Sickness comes not by chance, nor
only from natural causes. 341. Sickness brings down the strongest men. 342.
Several ends for which God sends sickness. 343, 344. In sickness, all
creature comforts are vain and tastless to us. 347. Sickness brings great
decay upon the body. 351, 352. Sickness, in what sense called a spending time.
356. Sickness makes a wonderful change in man. 358. Sickne^s near the grave;
three inferences from it. 361, 362. Other cautions from the nature of sickness.
367, 368. Sight, twofold. 816 Silence, or holding our peace, Vid: peace.
Sincere persons do not affect to be seen. 770 Sin, to say we have no sin, how
extremely sinful it is, showed in four things. 202, 203. That showed further.
515. Sin, three things in it. 31. How man is sinned against, God only sinned
against properly. 167. All sin reducible to three heads. 198. Sin a defection
from God. 198. Sin is a defilement. 199. Sin a hurtful thing, three ways.
201. Every step in sin is a step to misery. 331. What sin is. 448, 450. Sin
pretends to bring in profit to the sinner. 454. No good can be gotten by sin.
455. Sin is exceeding dangerous and destructive. 455. Sinners shall confess at
last, there is no profit in sin. 456. The heart strongly set to sin. 472, 473.
The more easily any man sins, the greater is his sin. 537. Sins of others,
how they may become ours. 562 Sin unpardoned a great burden, yet by some
unfelt. 809. We have many unknown sins. 818. A godly man desires God would
show him his sins. 824. A godly man may live free from gross sins. 826. Sin,
considered three ways. 827. A godly man may commit sin after sin, but he does
not add sin to sin. 828. The addition of sin to sin a great and most dangerous
sio. 830. To sin rebelliously, what. 856. When a sin may be called rebellion,
showed in four things. 857, 858. It Is the burden of a godly man to sin, and
it is his care not to sin. 858, 859 Sinners would but cannot hide themselves
either from the eye or revenging hand of God. 669, 670. Sinners would hide
themselves upon a twofold account. 670. Four things upon which sinners think
themselves hid from God 672, 673 Sirnames or titles of two sorts. 126 Sleep,
what it is. 280. Three words in the Hebrew signifying sleep. 284 Sovereignty
of God showed. 255, 839 Man is never displeased with what God does, till he
forgets what himself is. 840. Sovereignty of God, in afflicting the most
innocent person. 515. The Sovereignty of God showed in five things. 580. Three
inferences from it. 581. God has an absolute power to pull down and set up
whom he pleases. 683 Soul of man why called the breath of the Almighty. 169.
The soul flows immediately from God. 169, 170, 594. Three inferences from
it. 170. Soul, put for the whole man. 359 Speaker, he that speaks is at the
mercy of his hearers. 530 Speaking, twofold. 46. It Is very painful not to
speak in some cases. 114 He that speaks his mind, eases his mind. 116. The
right end of speaking. 116. To neglect speaking where duty calls very
dangerous. 117 A fourfold consideration is to be had of what we speak. 149. We
should first try and taste what we are about to speak. 152. Three sorts who
speak amiss doctrinally. 156, 157 How or when God is said to speak. 264.
Several ways of Gods speaking to man. 265 Speech, they who have most ability
are usually most sparing of speech. 45 Spirit, often taken for the soul of
man. 51. Spirit of God free, not tied to age nor to any order of men. 66, 67
Spirit, an imposing Spirit how bad. 193. Spirit of God mightily overpowers some
men both to do and speak. 114. Why our making is attributed to the Spirit.
162. The Spirit of God is God. 165. Eight reasons from Scripture proving that
the holy Ghost is God. 165, 166, 167, 168. The Spirit supplies the absence of
Christ in the Church. 685 Spiritual things are not understood by a natural or
unregenerate man. 275 Two reasons of it. 276. They that are spiritual do not
always perceive spiritual things. 277. Three grounds of it. 277, 278
Striving, fourefold described. 243. Man is apt to strive with God. 248. Four
ways showed in which man striveth with God. 249. Striving with God very
uncomely and sinful. 250. Striving with God a presumptuous sin. 251. Striving
with God an irrational thing. 252. Striving with God of two sorts. 255, 256.
Seven considerations why we should not strive with God. 258. Seven
preservatives against striving with God. 259, 260 Three things to be striven
with, 261 Submission with silence to the will of God always a duty. 479
Sufferings, we may not will our sufferings, though we must suffer willingly.
793 Suspicion, a godly man suspects himself, that he is worse and has done
worse then he knows by himself. 825 Sword, put for all violent calamities. 330
T
Talent, not to be hid. 72, 108 Teachers, should be leaders. 489 Teaching of
God twofold. 821. God only can teach effectually. 821. We should pray and wait
for the teachings of God. 823 Teachableness, or a willingness to learn, shows
an humble and gracious spirit. 823 Threatenings, it is good to think of them.
139 Tongue, he has a great command over his spirit, that can command his
tongue. 208. Tongue an unruly member. 547 Troubles, both national and
personal at the command of God. 644 Troubles overtake many when they least
expect. 645 Truth must be held and held to in all cases. 121. Clear truth
should be spoken. 158. We should speak truth clearly. 159. Truth to be
maintained with all our might. 179. A good man seeks not victory but truth.
487. We should grow up into highest confidences about the truth. 569. Why some
truths are and ought to be often repeated. 571, 572 Trial, word preached to be
tried before it be received. 502. Trial of two sorts. 850. A person tried may
be trusted. 851. Trial by affliction. 852 Turning back from God, how sinners
do so. 700. Three sorts of them, who turn back from God. 700, 701 How some
good men, and how all unregenerate men turn back from God. 701. The whole life
of a person unregenerate is a turning from God. 703 Twice, considered three
ways. 270 Twice, thrice, what it implies. 464
V
Vanity of all earthly greatness. 685 Vision of God in this life, what it is.
432 Visitation or visiting a threefold sense or use of it. 575 Unbelief a
striving with God. 249 Unbelief is the root of Apostasy. 704 Understanding of
man taken two ways* 52. God can furnish the weakest man with much wisdom and
understanding. 61. In what sense every man has not an understanding. 602, 604.
Three attributes of the understanding. 603. Only a spiritual understanding can
receive spiritual things. 604, 605. What we hear we should labor to
understand. 605 Unity among the Saints, the great argument moving to it. 175
Vocation an act of absolute free grace. 397 Uprightness of heart in speaking,
standing in a threefold opposition. 153 Uprightness of man what it is, and how
showed him. 384, 385. Many good men see not their own uprightness. 385. What
the uprightness of our state is, and what the uprightness of our life showed.
386, 387. Caution to Ministers about showing man his uprightness. 389
W
Waiting on man, in three cases necessary. 35. Waiting imports three things. 74
Walking with God, what. 539, 706, 707. Walking as man, what. 539 Warnings, God
graciously gives them once and again. 270. We have no ground to expect
frequent warnings. 271. No man knows how often he shall be warned. 272.
Warnings by words being neglected, blows follow. 339. The punishments of
others should be our warnings. 697. 698 Water, to drink iniquity like water,
what it signifies. 536 Ways of a man twofold. 657. Ways of God twofold. 707.
Ways of God not regarded by wicked men. 713 Not to consider the ways of God a
great sin. 713 Wicked men, they who do like the wicked, shall be dealt with by
God as wicked men. 693. The same word signifies to be wicked, to condemn and
trouble, why. 726. A good man may in some things and at some times act and
speak like a wicked man. 855. Every man naturally is wicked, yea a man of
wickedness. 855 Will, man has not only a weakness, but a wound in his will.
278. The will of man is naturally bent against the ways of God. 709, 710. Will
more then the action alone. 544. The will of a natural man is weak against
the doing of evil, and for the doing of good. 827. Two proper acts of the
will. 834. Man would have all things go according to his will. 835 That man
would have his will, showed in four things. 836. The sinfullness of desiring
things to be after our mind or will, showed by a threefold evil spring of it.
837. The absurdity of desiring to have our will. 838. God will not give man his
will. 839 Wise, a man wise in his own eyes, hard to be reduced. 4. Greatness
of birth or place can make no man wise. 63. None are so wise but they may
learn more wisdom. 490, 497. Nothing is worth the learning but makes us
truly wise. 490. A wise man how distinguished from a man of knowledge. 495.
The wise will hear as well as speak. 496, 497 Wisdom twofold. 47. Wisdom
most probably to be found in old men. 47, 48. Wisdom or understanding is the
gift of God. 53. Man apt to be proud of that which he calls wisdom. 85. What
that wisdom was which our first parents sought. 86 Two reasons why there is
such a temptation in wisdom to pride. 86, 87 True wisdom consists chiefly in
two things. 489, 490. Spiritual wisdom is the best lesson. 491. Wisdom is
the savory knowledge of things. 500. The beginning of true wisdom. 607 Wish,
how we should be and do according to the wish of others. 181 Witness, to bear
false witness against our selves very sinful. 523 Word of God is fitted for
all sorts and sizes of men. 497. They who turn from the word of God, turn
from God himself. 704. The not minding of the word of God, is the cause of all
wickedness. 710, 711 Words, strayning of words, of two sorts. 16. Words well
meant may sometimes justly fall under an ill interpretation. 27. Words should
be well weighed before they be uttered. 76 Words acceptable to be sought, what
they are. 77. Our words should be well ordered, like an Army, etc. 95, 96. An
idle word, what. 145. Hard words as grievous as blows. 192 Not to offend in
word a great point of perfection. 208. Words of good men often worse then their
meanings. 529, 547. Inconsiderate words render us obnoxious to severest
censures. 548. Words multiplied seldom without sin. 862, 863 Work of a man
and his way, how they differ: 563 Works in what latitude to be taken, when it
is said, God will render them to us. 561. Every man shall have according to his
works. 563 Two objections against it answered. 564, 565. Several inferences
from it. 566, 567. Works of God, to speak unduely of them, is to speak
against God himself. 861, 862 Works of God to be deeply considered. 463.
Works of God perfect, or he will perfect his work. 466 Works of God called
his ways. 708. The plainest works of God have many wonders in them. 716
Workers of iniquity, who. 668 World, a twofold disposition of it. 577 Wound
without transgression, how to be understood. 526. The wounds which God makes,
cannot be healed by any medicines but his own. 527 Wrath of God makes quick
dispatch with sinners. 137. Wrath of God appears highly against man, when he
says, I will not pardon. 814
Y
Yoke, they that will not bear the yoke of Christ, shall never have any
benefit by his cross. 623 Young men should show respect to their elders. 37.
Young men apt to run into mistakes. 43. What young men say or hold is not to be
despised because of their youth. 68. Old men when and how to be preferred
before young. 69 Youthful lusts, which. 44
Z
Zeal should kindle for the defense of truth. 113
A TABLE OF Those Scriptures which are occasionally cleared, and briefly
illustrated in the foregoing EXPOSITIONS. The First Number directs to the
Chapter, The Second to the Verse, the Third to the Page of the BOOK.
Chap. Verse. Page. Genesis. 3. 17. 475. 4. 10. 721. 4. 13. 804. 6. 3. 468, 271.
6. 5. 658. 6. 8. 392. 6. 12, 13. 350, 328. 6. 17. 595. 18. 25. 571, 559, 554.
20. 5, 6. 298. 25. 21. 421. 33. 10. 729. 39. 22. 463. 42. 16. 88. 44. 17. 554.
Exodus. 4. 10, 11. 57. 7. 23. 588. 12. 23. 362. 16. 21. 181. 23. 20. 371. 25.
10, 17, 21. 406. 25. 30. 435. 32. 23. 299. 34. 6, 7. 810. Leviticus. 10. 1, 2,
3. 862. 19. 32. 37. Numbers. 14. 34. 215. 20. 12. 258. 20. 24. 594. 23. 21.
451, 218. 25. 4. 695. Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. 123. 21. 15, 16, 17. 612. 25. 1.
30. 29. 19. 829. 32. 4. 557. Judges. 2. 17. 707. I Samuel. 2. 3. 660. 2. 9.
732. 3. 1. 379. 7. 2. 741. 10. 6, 9, 11, 12. 55, 56. 12. 3. 769. 15. 23. 859.
15. 29. 851. 26. 8. 267. 28. 19. 160. II Samuel. 2. 22. 730. 3. 36. 251. 5. 20,
21. 135. 12. 13. 396. 12. 31. 330. 23. 3. 614. I Kings. 11. 9. 273. 17. 12.
270. 21. 13. 627. 622. II Kings. 6. 10. 271. 10. 16. 84. 16. 3. 330. II
Chronicles. 16. 8, 9. 661, 657. 16. 9. 664. 32. 25, 26. 309. 34. 28. 594.
Esther. 4. 14. 117. Job. 5. 6. 91. 7. 11. 327. 11. 12. 86. 37. 11. 395 38. 36
53. Psalms. 1. 1. 537 1. 2. 714. 2. 12. 134. 4. 6. 727. 4. 8. 749 5. 3. 178.
5. 5. 462. 7. 5. 329. 7. 8. 19. 8. 2. 61. 9. 18. 724. 9. 16. 696. 10. 4, 5.
706. 10. 11. 670. 10. 14. 717. 10. 3. 84. 10. 5. 601. 11. 4. 657. 13. 1. 728.
14. 4. 538. 16. 8. 140. 16. 10. 328. 16. 11. 727. 17. 14. 364. 18. 23. 300. 19.
11. 547. 19. 12. 818. 23. 4. 667. 25. 10. 708. 25. 11. 806. 25. 4, 5. 823. 26.
9. 593. 28. 3. 138. 30. 7. 727. 32. 5. 807. 33. 6. 165. 34. 16. 431. 37. 3, 6.
646. 38. 16, 17. 213. 39. 1, 2, 3. 114. 39. 11. 342, 335. 37. 37. 753. 34. 5.
730. 36. 9. 729. 40. 6. 293, 147. 46. 9, 10. 733, 256. 49. 20. 604. 50. 17.
711. 50. 18.19. 544. 51. 4. 805. 51. 12. 624. 51. 15. 314. 52. 1. 6 2. 58. 10,
11. 698. 62. 10. 588. 64. 9, 10. 698. 66. 11. 273. 68. 13. 426. 69. 27. 829.
72. 1. 613. 72. 13. 471. 73. 1. 223, 26. 73. 15. 223. 73. 22. 820. 74. 9. 744.
78. 5. 648. 78. 36. 127. 78. 49. 363. 81. 12. 744. 81. 11.700 303. 82. 7. 641.
89. 35. 266. 90. 3: 592, 365. 92. 15. 556. 97. 9. 582. 101. 4. 131. 103. 1, 2.
712. 103. 1.5. 418. 103. 10. 565. 103. 14. 600. 104. 30. 165. 105. 14. 621.
109. 7. 30. 110. 3. 624. 111. 4. 463. 116. 10. 154. 118. 17. 471. 119. 6. 711.
119. 18. 378. 119. 126. 451. 121. 4. 184. 130. 3. 589. 131. 1. 307. 136. 25.
595. 138. 6. 313. 141. 5. 231. 147. 6. 305. 147. 10, 11. 427. 147. 20. 245.
Proverbs. 1. 5. 497, 52. 1. 20, 21. 709. 1. 22. 537. 1. 24. 339. 1. 26. 811. 1.
29. 509. 3. 29. 476. 4. 17. 535. 10. 19. 861. 11. 4. 403. 12. 19. 639. 12. 23.
304. 13. 8. 413. 15. 3. 658. 16. 1. 54. 16. 26. 190. 17. 11. 363. 17. 15. 485,
30. 18. 1. 490. 18. 22. 297. 18. 23. 632. 20. 12. 501. 21. 24. 537. 21. 27.
567. 22. 2. 132. 22. 6. 182. 22. 18. 110. 23. 2. 367. 23. 10, 11. 723. 24. 7.
149. 24. 31. 461. 25. 27. 313. 27. 19. 182. 28. 2. 784. 28. 17. 399. 28. 21.
121. 29. 11. 110. 30. 12. 4. Ecclesiastes. 2. 26. 54. 5. 3. 281. 7. 9. 28. 7.
16. 524. 7 24. 378. 7. 29. 386. 12. 1. 507, 133. 12. 7. 593. 170. 12. 10. 790,
77. Canticles. 2. 14. 427. 8. 12. 849. Isaiah. 1. 3. 715. 1. 5. 6. 1. 10: 628.
1. 24. 745. 2. 21. 601. 2. 9. 814. 3. 5. 38. 3. 6, 7. 609. 3. 12. 780. 5. 18.
300. 6. 10. 276. 7. 13. 249. 8. 19. 112. 9. 5. 732. 9. 2. 667. 9. 16. 780. 10.
15. 584. 11. 2. 54. 11. 3. 32. 11. 4. 334. 26. 3. 753, 751. 26. 11. 716, 279.
26. 12. 733. 27. 5. 811. 27. 11. 163. 28. 16. 851. 30. 1. 829. 30. 13. 690. 30.
18. 447, 395. 30. 24. 158. 30. 28. 779. 32. 2. 671. 32. 3. 475. 32. 4. 62. 32.
5. 632. 32. 17. 560. 35. 5. 502. 40. 2. 144. 40. 6. 595, 553. 40. 27. 728. 41.
14. 364. 41. 23. 167. 44. 5. 126. 44. 24. 653. 45. 4. 126. 45. 9. 251. 45. 15.
668. 47. 3. 746. 48. 8. 293. 49. 15, 16. 711. 50. 4. 377, 293, 116. 52. 7. 383.
53. 1. 384. 53. 3. 352. 54. 13. 822. 57. 17. 657. 58. 2, 3, 4, 5. 762. 58. 11.
522, 355, 338. 64. 8, 9. 163. Jeremiah. 2. 2. 435. 2. 23, 24. 299. 4. 22. 131.
5. 4, 5. 552, 63. 6. 10. 551. 7. 12, 14, 15. 740. 13. 16. 667. 14. 8. 743. 17.
5. 600. 18. 18. 67. 18. 23. 814. 20. 10. 213. 25. 16. 64^. 31. 18, 19, 20. 396.
31. 18. 689. 31. 34. 822. 41. 6. 156. 47. 6, 7. 735. 49. 16. 585. 50. 24. 760.
50. 38. 188. Lamentations. 2. 14. 137. 3 4. 351. 3. 37. 736. 3. 28. 581. 4. 6.
641. Ezekiel. 5. 5, 6, 7, 8. 696. 7. 10. 306. 13. 18. 136. 29. 21. 150. 36. 37.
394. Daniel. 2. 27. 88. 2. 34. 651. 4. 17. 684. 4. 34, 35. 558. 4. 27. 828. 6.
4, 5. 210. 12. 4. 661. Hosea. 1. 7. 654. 2. 6. 224. 4. 4, 17. 7. 5. 1. 778. 5.
13. 528. 5. 14, 15. 745. 7. 9. 747, 418. 7. 11. 843, 552. 10. 13. 476. 13. 1.
45. 13. 7, 8. 745. 13. 14. 414. 14. 2. 789. Amos. 2. 4. 467. 2. 6. 121. 3. 3.
539. 5. 13. 150. 7. 2. 237. Obadiah. 00 21. 404. Jonah. 1. 7. 465. 4. 1, 8. 16.
Michah. 2. 10. 810. 4. 2. 822, 734. 6. 9. 265. 7. 17. 43. 7. 18. 805. Nahum. 1.
15. 622. Habakuk. 1. 14. 658. 2. 3. 35. 2. 4. 387. 3. 17. 751, 522. Zephaniah.
3. 9. 158. 3. 10. 422. Haggai. 1. 5. 714. Zachary. 2. 13. 257. 9. 11. 412. 13.
9. 850. Malachy. 1. 14. 237. 2. 15. 112. 3. 1. 372. Matthew. 3. 19. 308. 5. 3.
9. 5. 18. 646. 6. 27. 252. 7. 1. 509. 7. 3. 771. 9. 38. 106. 10. 14, 15. 374.
10. 17. 105 11. 19. 485. 11. 25. 755. 12. 31. 168. 13. 14. 817. 16. 17. 350.
16. 26. 455. 18. 15. 78. 18. 19. 844. 21. 16. 62. 21. 31. 775. 23. 14. 763. 24.
51. 776. 25. 4. 761. 25. 29. 442. Luke. 7. 29, 30. 485, 17. 7. 47. 809. 12. 10.
104. 12. 25. 649. 14. 26. 612. 18. 14. 9. 17. 10. 315. John. 1. 13. 350. 2. 25.
658. 5. 25. 292. 5. 40. 278. 6. 27. 597. 6. 44. 299. 7. 38. 110. 7. 48, 49. 64.
8. 9. 80. 9. 41. 809. 14. 8. 755. 14. 6. 706. 14. 27. 749. 15. 2. 467. 16. 7.
80. 16. 12. 606. 16. 13. 685, 166. 16. 33. 751. 20. 23. 401. Acts. 5. 36. 311.
8. 9. 311. 9. 11. 396. 12. 22, 23.6, 2. 136. 13. 8. 17. 17. 27, 28. 703. 18.
28. 79. 23. 5. 616. Romans. 1. 28. 709. 2. 17, 22. 310. 3. 5, 6. 554. 3. 19.
481. 4. 1. 350. 4. 5. 564, 22. 7. 8, 11. 211. 8. 7. 835. 8. 28. 472. 8. 33, 34.
751. 9. 14. 557. 9. 15, 19. 255. 12. 3. 312. 12. 10. 108. 13. 1. 360. 13. 3.
190. 13. 7. 128. 13. 14. 354. 14. 12. 322. 14. 13. 21^. 15. 18. 173. I
Corinthians. 1. 26. 6^. 1. 27. 61. 2. 10, 11. 166. 2. 12. 432. 2. 16. 377. 3.
2. 539. 3. 5. 89. 3. 18. 59. 4. 7. 58. 4. 9. 695. 4. 14. 487. 5. 4, 5. 853. 6.
19. 164. 8. 1. 85. 9. 2, 3. 296. 10. 11. 686. 10. 13. 675. 13. 6. 486. 13. 7.
211. 13. 9. 888. 14. 19. 116. 15. 44. 600. II Corinthians. 1. 23, 24. 192. 3.
6. 822. 3. 18. 705. 3. 17. 436. 3. 14. 292. 5. 1. 651. 5. 9. 429. 5. 7. 434. 5.
13. 20. 5. 14. 110. 5. 16. 1^4. 5. 20. 143. 6. 14. 542. 6. 14, 15. 622. 10. 12.
323. 11. 13, 14. 156. 11. 24. 677. 12. 14. 356. Galathians. 1. 10. 129. 6. 1.
144, 101. 6. 3. 312. 6. 12. 354. Ephesians. 2. 2. 539. 2. 1^. 133. 3. 10. 458.
3. 15. 849. 3. 19. 818. 4. 4, 5, 6. 175. 5. 27. 416. Philippians. 1. 16, 17,
18. 156. 2. 3. 129. 2. 20. 76^. 3. 3. 351. 3. 19. 84. 3. 21. 599. Colossians.
2. 3. 569. 2. 11. 6^1. 3. 3. 669. I Timothy. 1. 9. 623. 3. 6. 85. 4. 2. 157. 4.
12. 37. 5. 24, 25. 671. 6. 16. 171. II Timothy. 1. 6. 277. 2. 22. 44. 2. 26.
100. 3. 2. 311. 3. 9. 106. Hebrews. 1. 1. 265. 2. 14. 754, 363. 3. 7, 13. 268.
3. 12. 703. 5. 11. 498. 5. 1^, 12. 50. 5. 13. 376. 6. 10. 556. 6. 18, 19. 266.
9. 27. 593, 268, 266. 10. 10, 26. 268. 11. 1. 78. 11. 25, 26. 507. 12. 4. 262.
12. 5. 79. 12. 9, 10. 594, 92. 12. 14. 434. James. 1. 5. 57. 1. 17. 54. 1. 20,
21. 100. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 124. 2. 9. 80. 2. 10. 712. 2. 12. 147. 4. 12. 811.
5. 15. 398. I Peter. 1. 12. 408. 1. 18. 598. 3. 6. 220. 3. 19, 20. 740. 4. 11.
159. 4. 17. 94. II Peter. 1. 9. 441. 1. 18, 19. 266. 3. 16. 9. I John. 1. 9.
556. 2. 19. 155. 2. 27. 821. 3. 7. 4. 5. 16. 815. Jude. 0. 6. 317. 0. 15. 197,
81. Revelation. 2. 9. 155. 3. 0. 155. 10. 8. 3^8. 11. 3. 270. 14. 13. 560. 15.
4. 695. 21. 17. 183.

ERRATA.
PAge 14 line 27. for History, read Historian. p. 145. l. 22. for words, r.
word. p. 236. l. 11. for inseparable, r. insuperable. p. 238. l. 13. for has,
r. had. p. 328. l. 23. supple, Christ, p. 338. l. 8. for epethite, r. epithete.
p. 339. l. 24. dele, and. p. 239. l. 26. for, to, r. being. p. 355. l. 38. for
61. r. 11. p. 390. l. 9. for in, r. to. p. 392. l. 30. for, yet more, r. Thus.
p. 409. in the Margin, for Cato r. Calvin. p. 511 l. 14. dele, yea. p. 639. l.
9 for 2. r. 12. p. 652. l. 30. for 58. r. 52, p. 709. l. 23. for God, r. good.
p. 787. l. 39. for, yet a, r. but.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Sign of the three Crowns
over against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheap Side.
A Commentary upon the three first Chapters of Genesis, by Mr. John White, in
fol.

A learned Commentary, or Exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians, by Dr. Richard Sibbs, published for public good,
by Thomas Manton, Folio.

There is come forth Mr. William Fenner his Continuation of Christ's Alarm to
drowsy Saints, with a Treatise of effectual Calling: The Killing Power of the
Law: The Spiritual Watch: New Birth: A Christians ingrafting into Christ: A
Treatise on the Sabbath, which were never before printed, bound in one Volume,
Fol. and may be had alone of them that have his other Works, as well as bound
with all his former Works, which are newly printed in the same Volume.

The History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of Piemont: Containing
a most exact Geographical Description of the place, and a faithful account of
the doctrine, life and persecutions of the Ancient Inhabitants. Together with a
most naked and punctual relation of the late bloody Massacre, 1655. and a
Narrative of all the following transactions to 1658. Justified partly by diverse
ancient Manuscripts written many hundred years before Calvin or Luther. By
Samuel Morland Esquire; in fol.

Divine Characters in two parts, acutely distinguishing the more secret and
undiscerned differences between the Hypocrite in his best dress of seeming
virtues and formal duties, and the true Christian in his real graces and
sincere obedience, by Mr. Samuel Crook, in fol.

The humbled sinner resolved what he should do to be saved; or faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ the only way of salvation by Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick, in 40.

The Fountain o^ened, and the water of life flowing so th for the refreshing of
thirsty sinners, by the same Author, in 4.

Anatomy of secret sins, presumptuous sins, sins in dominion and up ightnesse,
on Psalm. 19.12, 13. together with a Treatise of the sin against the Holy Ghost,
by Obadiah Sedgewich.

The hypocritical Nation described, with an Epistle prefixed, by M^. Samuel
Jacomb, in 4.

A Sermon of the baptizing of Infants, by Mr. Stephen Marshal, in 4.

The unity of the Saints with Christ the Head by the same Author, in 4.

Truth brought to light, and discovered by time, or an Historical Narration of
the first fourteen years of King James, in 4.

The Trial of the Marquess of Argyle, wherein you have his Indictment, and
his Answer, together with his last speech and words upon the Scaffold, in 4.

(...), or the Great Mystery of Godliness, opened by way of Antidote against
the Great Mystery of Iniquity, now awork in the Romish Church, wherein 1. The
Incarnation of the Son of God is fully displayed. 2. Ceremonies in point of
Worship proved to be by Christ abrogated. 3. Christian liberty with its 8 Steps
and 5 Boundiaries, by Thomas Douglass, M. A. in 4.

Moses and Aaron, or the Privileges and Boundaries given by God both to
Magistrates and Ministers.

Mr. Robinsons Christians Armor in large 8o.

A Book of Emblems, with Latin and English verses made upon (Lights) by Robert
Farlie, small 8o.

The one thing necessary; By Mr. Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook,
8o.

The Riches of grace displayed, in the offer and tender of salvation to poor
sinners, by Obadiah Sedgewick, in 12.

Hidden Manna by Mr. Fenner, in 12.

Picturae Louventes, or Pictures drawn forth into Characters, in 12.

A most excellent Treatise containing the way to seek Heavens Glory, to fly
Earths Vanity, to fear Hells Horror, with godly Prayers, and the Bell-mans
Summons, 12.

The singular Actions of sanctified Christians, in several Sermons, on the 5.
of Math. 47.

An Exposition on the whole book of the Canticles, by R. R.

There is printed an Exhortation of the Churches of Bohemiah, to the Churches
of England, wherein is set forth the good of unity, order, discipline, and
obedience, in Churches rightly constituted; With an Exhortation premised of the
order and Discipline used in the Churches of the Brethren of Bohemia: Dedicated
to His Most Excellent Majesty, Charles the IId. in Holland, at His departure for
England, if possibly it may be for an accommodation among the Church of Christ;
By J. Amos Comenius, the only surviving Bishop of the remains of those Churches.

Grace to the humble, as a preparation to the Sacrament in five Sermons, by Dr.
John Preston.

Johnsons Essaies expressed in sundry Exquisite Fancies.

Sion in the House of Mourning, because of Sin and Suffering, being an
Exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations, by D. S. Pastor of
Vpingham, in the County of Rutland.

Groans of the Spirit, or the Trial of the Truth of Prayer.

A Handkercher for Parents Wet-eyes, upon the death of their children or
friends.

The Dead Saint speaking to Saints and Sinners living, in several Treatises,
viz, On 2 Samuel: 24.10. on Cant. 4.9. on John 8.15. on John 1.50. on Isa. 58.2.
on Exodus 15.11. Never Published before. By Samuel Bolton, D. D. late Mr. of
Christ's College in Cambridge.

Peoples Need of a Living Pastor, at the Funeral of Mr. John Frost, M. A. by
Mr. Zach. Crofton.

A Treatise against the Toleration of all Religions, By Mr. Thomas Edwards.

Catechizing Gods Ordinance; in sundry Sermons, by Mr. Zachary Crofton,
Minister of Buttolphs Algate, London, the second Edition, corrected and
augmented.

A Theater of Political Flying Insects. Wherein especially the Nature, the
Worth, the Work, the Wonder, and the manner of the Right-ordering of the Be is
discovered and described. By Samuel Purchase, M. A. and Pastor at Sutton in
Essex.

The second part of Man's wilful Impenitency, upon Ezekiel. 18.32. By Mr. William
Fenner, late of Rochford in Essex, With some other Pieces of his, preserved by
a special Providence.


