THE CASE Betwixt Mr. POOL, and Mr. CORNELIUS BE; Considered and Decided.
DEAR NEPHEW,
I Could do no less than gratify your desires in imparting my opinion to you,
touching the Difference betwixt Mr. Pool and Mr. Be, having diligently perused
and weighed the printed Papers on both sides; whereupon, I must needs tell you,
I am undeceived in my thoughts, which were, That Mr. Pool undertook his Design
with the full consent and good liking of Mr. Be: But now I apprehend it very
far otherwise, and that Mr. Pool has engaged himself (and others) in his
Undertaking, not only contrary to the mind of Mr. Be, but to his own Promise
to him, before Mr. Bee's going into Holland: And for the better securing of
himself in his Proceedings, has advised with two learned Lawyers, to know
whether he has not as just a Title to and Property in Mr. Bee's goods, (viz.
the Nine Volumns of the Critics printed for himself and others) as he himself
has. It is resolved by his Counsel, First, That the grant of the sole printing
the Critics does not prohibit the printing of a Synopsis made out of the
Critics, etc. any more than the grant of the sole printing of the Bible does
prohibit the printing of a Sermon or Concordance. Secondly, the Opinion of Mr.
Jones is, That Mr. Be has no injury done to him by Mr. Pool and by
consequence, can have no remedy either in Law or Equity.

I would humbly present this Reply to the Opinion of these Two Learned
Gentlemen, (it being that which mainly animates Mr. Pool to his vigorous
proceedings in this Work) That the Act of Parliament, mentioned in the Papers
(printed betwixt them) is intended to secure every man's propriety in that kind,
from any open or surreptitious intrenchment upon it, (the Proprietor observing
the requisite circumstances of the said Act as due Entry in the Register Book
of the Company of Stationers at their Hall, etc.) So that there is nothing
appears more evident than the Reason of that Act, (and the Reason of the Law is
properly the Law) which is destroyed, if another man lay hands upon my just and
proper goods, and so order and dispose of them at his pleasure, that my
interest is not only prejudiced, (which the said Act has provided against)
but overthrown and extinguished. It Is true, Mr. Pool pretends not to print Mr.
Bee's Critics either the whole, or any one of the Nine Volumns; but he would
have the World understand, That he will take care to collect (out of them) what
ever belongs to the Explication of Scripture, etc. which is the intent of the
Seven first Volumns of the Critics directly, of the Two last reductively: So
that, if we may believe Mr. Pool, he will leave Mr. Be the bare sceleton
only, and make use of the rest himself; which, how contrary it is to the
manifest reason and intent of the mentioned Act, any ingenuous Arbitrator will
easily judge. Mr. Pool cuts here and there a piece out of my gown, when be has
so done, he calls them his own, then bids me be quiet, and sends me word his
Counsel tells him, He does me no injury, and I have no remedy in Law or
Conscience. For my part, I cannot but apprehend Mr. Be to have as just a right
and propriety in the Critics, as Mr. Pool has to the jump upon his back, who
doubtless would count himself as much wronged, by having it mangled to pieces,
as to have it violently taken from him, though the Learned Lawyers in the
Land should tell him he is not injured, and has no remedy in Law or Equity.
For the printing a Sermon or Concordance, neither of them prejudice the Grant
of sole printing the Bible, it being no ways destructive to the Reason of that
Act for Printing; nor does that weaken, much less nullify the interest of him
or them to whom the Grant is indulged: for again I must affirm that if the
reason of the Law (every way essential to it) be abandoned, it is but called
what it is not, as the man is called a man when his soul and body are parted:
Had Mr. Pool printed twenty Sermons, and in them quoted Mr. Bee's Critics an
hundred times, or instead of a Concordance extracted an Index or Indices,
possibly Mr Be might have been so far from thinking his interest violated,
that he might have judged of it much otherwise. But in the absence of Mr. Be,
that Mr. Pool contrary to his promise (as if the word of a Priest were not
sacred, and the breach of it execrable) to project a way to draw the plank from
under him, which was principally, if not only, left him to get to shore after
that Fatal Fire had consumed the bottom (Sion Coledge) wherein he had embarked
so great a Treasure of Learned Authors, and among the rest, the far greater
part of that costly Edition of the Critics, is a thing, wherein no Counsel
does, or can excuse him. I cannot imagine what claim Mr. Pool presumes to Mr.
Bee's goods, unless it be for coming within the walls of Sion College; this I
am assured of, were there no Law to enforce it, yet Conscience and Honesty
would be, and do like it self.

Besides the forementioned Act, considered in the true reason of it, Mr. Be
thought himself (as he very well might) further, and more fully confirmed in an
undoubted property in his own goods, by his Majesty's Royal and gracious
privilege (a favor usually indulged by most Princes in Christendom to
Merchants for books, with a severe penalty to any that shall presume to do any
thing that shall violate their Mandates) prefixed to the first Volume of the
Critics: The learned Lawyer may reply in a Case of a different nature, (yet
the same in issue) and tell us, That the Kings Declaration it not a pardon in
point of Law, unless under the Broad Seal, yet God forbid but it should bind in
point of honor. His Majesty's gracious privilege vouchsafed to Mr. Be,
corresponding with an Act (the Kings Law) gives him as just an interest in the
Critics, and secures him from any damage, as much as any man can be secured in
goods of that nature.

This I have written to you (k^nd Nephew) to satisfy you as to ths Velitations
betwixt Mr. Pool and Mr. Be; and further, I assure you, it was not long after
that dismal fire in London, that Mr. Be desired my advice about raising his
Critics out of their ashes by a second Edition, (this was long before Mr. Pool
was heard of to have any such design in hand) and accordingly (having read over
the nine Volumns of the Critics) I directed him about the convenience of
laying aside some or those Authors in the former Edition, and the inserting
some not formerly taken in, as also the reducing and applying several of those
excellent tracts in the Appendices, to their proper places, besides many other
rare pieces, heard of, and found out since. This I signify to you, because Mr.
Pool was so difficult to give credit to Mr. Be when he assured him of his
resolution in that kind: And lately I hear Mr. Be has printed a Specimen of
his intended purpose, but have not yet seen it.

You desire to know my mind touching your Subscription for the Synopsis, (the
Specimen whereof you sent me) I should be loath to encourage you to that, which
I see so much reason not to do my self: Besides the apparent wrong which is
done and accrues to Mr. Be by this undertaking, Let me tell you, I have
bestowed a diligent perusal upon the printed Specimen sent abroad by Mr. Pool.
In one of them, (for I have seen two several ones) I suppose the first, I
discovered several mistakes; enough to allay my hopes in the following work,
when that which was sent into three Kingdoms (if no further) to invite their
hands to his assistance, was so grossly overseen. The next time the same sheet
came abroad mended in some of its former errors, yet still it wants not some,
and those considerable (which if you have not found, when I see you, which I
hope shortly, I shall convince you of) far from that accurateness pretended,
that I verily believe it will not make any Atheist cry, nor a jot divert him
from his Lucianick laughter: Now Sir, if this Specimen that is sent abroad,
which doubtless has had thousands of eyes upon it, labors of such defects (to
say no more) and so many as I have not found in half the nine Volumes of the
Critics (to the honor of those learned and worthy persons, who had the
oversight of that work, I speak it) what may we expect in the following
sheets, which are not to come to our sight, till we have the first of his three
promised Tomes?

I assure you, I am so sensible of the damage done to Mr. Be by Mr. Pool in
this business, (who would make the world believe he has Law and Conscience of
his side) that I cannot omit the acquainting of you with one passage I was a
present witness of in Oxford, where Mr. Be had contracted for a small number
of Critics (before Mr. Pool had proclaimed h^s project to the world) and it
was my hap to be in Oxford again, when Mr. Be had the said small number of
Critics delivered to him upon his former contract; where I heard him, freely
offer fifty pounds to be released of his bargain, Mr. Pools Specimen being
abroad before the delivery of the books, which was not heard of before he
contracted for them (such is the fortune of new things) so much damage Mr. Be
sustained by Mr. Pools means, in a small number; though there is no question,
but the ground and reason of the Act of Parliament, and his Majesty's Royal
Privilege, are intended to protect him from any damages in that kind: If you
duly consider it, you will easily understand, that as well the Printing of the
Critics, as of any other books whatsoever (be the books never so useful and
valuable,) if they be liable to the pleasure of every Epitomizer, as it is
enough to discourage any noble Undertaking, so to undo the Undertaker.

You perceive by the papers, that Mr. Be has showed his readiness to commend
his design to the Reverend Convocation now sitting, and to submit his work to
their advice and direction, either for Epitomizing his Critics, or the setting
forth another Edition: Mr. Pool is a person that I know not, but they that do,
and are very able to judge, deem him in several respects very unfitting for
such an undertaking, and many (nay most)of the learned Clergy in this Country
are of the same opinion, and plainly say, Have we no Files of our own, but must
go to the Philistines to whet our Coulters?

Kind Nephew,
I Received lately a sheet of paper, set forth by Mr. Pool, a great part
whereof is only a Repetition of his former Vindication (as he calls it)
Subscribed by two Lawyers, enlarged now to five in all: I gave you my thoughts
upon the former, you desire the like in this: I shall not loose so much time as
to reply any thing to the man's confident words, he has little to do that reads
them a second time.

What Mr. Pool has said in his last (should he make his Vindication as large
as he intends his Synopsis) it will be but slender satisfaction to any
impartial understanding, till he answer the reason of the Act 14. Car. 2. (as I
intimated to you in my last) the reason (I say) of that Act, for the most
learned Lawyers in their books tell me, that Reason is the Law of the Law: and
the design of the foresaid Act is to secure every man's propriety in the books
he Prints, justly and duly observing the conditions required in the Act, which
Mr. Be makes it appear he has done.

Mr. Pool assures us* he has as ample a privilege for the Printing of his
Synopsis, as Mr. Be for his Critics, and that none shall Print, or Sell h^s
Book, but whom Mr. Pool shall appoint: Grant it to be so, let me ask Mr. Pool
in his ear, if Mr. Bee's security by a Law confirmed to him, as also by his
Majesty's Royal Privilege, does not defend hi^ against Mr. Pool's intrusion
upon, and violation of his due right^ich interest, whether does it secure him
from having the like usage. All he confidently presumes he may legally practice
toward M^ Critics: Mr. Pool says, is this; he does not intend to Print Mr
olume, Mr. Well, mark it! when Mr. Pool has set forth his something from Be
possibly, or some other, may add to, or d^^^ alteration in h^s h^s Synopsis,
(for nothing is more easy) and ma^se^ pract^se, besides method forsooth, and
for so doing Mr. Poo^ (...) the the opinion of five learned in the Law, is
ready to witness against him, otherwise it will not appear as justifiable in
the one as in the other: And if Mr. Pool finds the like usage from Mr. Be when
his first Volume is produced, and Mr. Be cries it about the three Kingdoms as
Mr. Pool has done, I will not give him two pence for his vigorous proceedings
in his second and third Volume. Its true indeed, Mr. Pool makes not use of such
faint Politics, but will keep the warmer side of the Hedge, for he has got
enough into his Hands to bear Charges, and is resolved to wade no further than
he will be sure to come off alive: I must needs say Mr. Be has showed great
ingenuity all along, in those rare pieces he has Printed; for he was willing
to show him that bought his Books what he had for his Money, and left him to
himself whether he thought good to buy or not: Mr. Pool is upon far different
terms, and sells his Subscribers, A Pigg in a Poke, as we say in Yorkshire.

In the next place, I cannot understand where Mr. Pool finds the Absurdity of
Mr. Be in the stating of his Case, which, to any man that reads his Papers,
appears to be thus; viz. Whether the Critics were Mr. Bees? and consequently,
whether Mr. Pool, or any other, might assay any thing with, or about the
Critics, destructive to Mr. Bees interest and propriety. And where does Mr.
Pools perspicacity find Mr. Be mistaken, or absurd in the stating of his case?
Hereupon, I suppose (not without as good reason as Mr. Pool produces any) that
Sion College (where Mr. Bees treasury of books was) being burnt down, if Mr.
Pool builds upon the ground where it stood, and makes the buildings less than
before (Epitomizes them) and claps his Bills upon the Door, or upon the
Exchange, signifying that if any man has a mind to be his Tenant, (though the
rooms are not so big, yet they the price are as commodious, and) they shall
have them for a third part they were at formerly, that he does the owners of
that ground as little injury, as he does to Mr. Be in this Case; for he has
as much right to his Critics by the Law (though they are most of them burnt)
as any man has, or had, to his House or the Ground whereon up^ House stood:
Mr. Be has a mind to build his house again himself dist^^ is own ground and
foundation, what reason has any man to less (Ep^^? If he takes not in all his
ground, but builds his rooms he not have es his Critics himself, which I hope
be will not do) shall his own, and w^erty allowed by the Law to do what he
please with What if Mr Be breasonable to grant every man in those cases?
according to his Speci^ as large as before, Prints, I mean, the Critics
intends, it will (...) the (...) forth (which if he proceeds to do, as he (...)
eminent work, next the Sacred Bible that ever the Christian world enjoyed)
suppose it amounts to a round price, Mr. Pool will direct any man to an
expedient that has not 10 l, to purchase it, or time to read such large
Volumes, and will assure him where he shall have the most material Authors, if
not all of them, for a small matter, Mr. Be has sunk the prizes of them so
low, by hooking them (as it pleases Mr. Pool to call it) into his Critics: Mr.
Pool intends to take in the Bibl. Max and many other Authors (he names) into
his Synopsis, and to squeeze the virtue out of them, which if he does, we shall
hope to have those voluminous Authors for a Song, or as cheap as Marrow Bones
in the street, when Mr. Pool has sucked out the Marrow, as he confidently
would persuade his Subscribers, and all that are so credulous as to take his
word for it.

It is suggested in Mr. Pool's last paper, that his warrant is good for his
proceeding vigorously in his business, because, though he makes bold with Mr.
Bee's Critics, yet he extracts also out of several other Authors. This
justifies him not a jot, or no more than if any man should think he might
lawfully export prohibited commodities out of the Kingdom of England, if he
carries along with those prohibited goods several others that are allowed, to
bear them company; there is as little to be said against Mr. Pool should he
undertake the epitomizing of Mr Bee's Critics only, as if he takes in Bib.
Max. Cajetan. Ainsworth, etc. into his Synopsis to go along with them. I
believe the Law will not excuse him that practices the former, which if it does
not, it can never justify Mr. Pool for doing the latter, for it necessitates
the ruining Mr Bee's interest in reference to his just right in his Critics.

For Mr. Pool's two concluding cases, and his Queries upon them, he may take
these few concluding considerations. First, If his Doctor be so Reverend, very
Learned, and Worthy, as Mr. Pool represents him, he will do nothing unworthy of
all those titles: If he has epitomized Mr. Bee's Critics, and drawn in
collections out of diverse other Authors, much of Mr. Pool's labor is done to
his hand: when the Dr. pleases to set forth his Specimen, if it appears that he
has not undermined Mr. Bee's propriety, I shall wish him God speed. Further if
Mr. Pool's Doctor be such as he sets him forth, viz. Reverend, very Learned,
and Worthy, Mr. Be may possibly supersede and suspend his interest, in hopes
that the public may be served by a person of such eminencies, which he has
great reason to doubt are very hardly to be found in Mr. Pool. Again, those
excerptions of the Doctors, gathered out of the Authors which Mr. Be has
taken into his Critics before Mr. Bee's Critics came forth (which is about 8.
years since) were supposed by the Doctor either to be prejudicial to Mr. Bee's
interest, or very little beneficial to the public, otherwise he would not have
concealed them so long, and at last revealed the secret to Mr Pool to make a
query of: I believe Mr. Pool's Doctor has not epitomized the Critics, because
its rarely done for private use by Reverend and very Learned Doctors.

For Speeds Chronicle, Dictionaries, Reports, and others, if upon an extract
out of them all, those that have the privilege of sole Printing them are not
injured, or are not willing to think themselves injured, what concerns it Mr.
Be to become their Apologist? And for Mr. Pool to argue a facto ad jus is to
leave a Cipher for the consequence. Doubtless Mr. Be is wronged by Mr. Pool's
unrighteous attempt, apparently against that which must necessarily be
acknowledged to be the reason of the Law, by all that impartially weight it,
otherwise they must conclude it a very difficult matter to find any in it.

When you have signified what I have said to Mr. Pool, acquaint the Bookseller
and Printers, who used to publish books worth a Scholars reading, that
hereafter they secure themselves by Subscriptions ere they begin, or else
fortify themselves with a strong belief, that when they have bestowed some
thousands of pounds in Printing of an Author, the Epitomizing of it will do
them no injury, (unless by chance it undo them.) What would they think that
have the Copy of Sergeant Rolls his Commonplace book (lately set forth, and
sold for forty shillings;) should any man fall to Epitomizing (paring something
off, and inserting something into it out of other Law Books, changing the
method, all which are feasible) and tell the world that the Book is Large, the
Price Great, and some have not so much time as to read such a Volume; others
not money, to go to the price of it, I would not excuse the Undertakers for the
loss of many a pound: for suppose the Epitomizer tell his Subscribers be would
sell his Synopsis for the third part of the price, and they should have for
their money all that is Material in the large Volume, besides the Marrow of many
a rare book to boot, and its fitting all sorts of Lawyers should be
accommodated. I would rather be possessed of so much good white paper, then the
large Printed book. If men be uneasy to believe that all these things, may be
done, let them repair to Mr. Pool, and he shall with a great confidence assure
them (and that with authority) that they receive no injury by all this.

FINIS.

