The CASE concerning Wools, etc.
FOrasmuch as it is found by experience, that since the late Act against
transportation of Wools, Woolfells, Yarn made of Wool, Fullers earth, and other
scouring earths, etc. That notwithstanding the penalties thereby inflicted, the
same are exported as frequently as before: therefore for the better prevnetion
thereof for the future, these Proposals are humbly offered to Consideration,

1. That one or more Commissioners may be appointed by Act of Parliament, who
shall appoint a sufficient number of Subcommissioners and other Officers under
them in all parts where need requires; And no person shall carry any Wool, etc.
on Horse Carriage, to or from any place within (...) miles of the Sea, or from
(...) in the evening to (...) in the morning, from Michaelmas to our Lady day,
or from Sun setting to Sun rising from our Lady till Michaelmas.

And that no parcel or parcels of Wool after it is keemed exceeding one hundred
pound weight, may be carried out of Canterbury, Dover, or Sandwich, to be
elsewhere employed into Manufacture, without a Writing, or Tickett from one of
the Commissioners, or Subcommissioners, that such a person has authority to
carry so much keemed Wool, expressing the nember or quantity thereof and
whether the same is to be carried; and that the party shall if it be required,
subscribe, or enter into Bond to His Majesty's use, that the said Wool shall
not be carried elsewhere.

2. That such Commissioners or Subcommissioners, before they Act, sha^^ (...)
^n Oath for the due execution of their Offices.

3. That the Offenses of the Act, shall be heard and determined by one or more
Justices of the Peace near the place where any such forfeiture is made, or the
Offender apprehended, with appeal to the Quarter Sessions of the County.

4. That the said Commissioners for a reccompence of their pains, charge and
expenses, have a yearly Sallary from those persons only that have the benefit
of that Manufacture, to wit the Clothiers, Wool-Combers, Weavers, etc.

The Reasons for the Premises.
I^ Reason, For that the Law's formerly made have not prevented such
Exportation, as is commonly known to all there inhabit near the Sea side: For
these Causes, 1. The Exporters are many, and they come not nigh the Ports to
ship away their Wool, but send it from the Coast, in French or Dutch bottomes,
who make it their sole employment to attend upon (...) Account. 2. The Country
by Gain made by their Horses and Carriages, are ready to Assist those that use
that Trade. 3. For that no Forfeiture is really made before the Commodity is
water-born (Intention and purpose to do the same being hardly to be proved,)
And therefore before that ^^me no seizure dare to be made of it without danger
of suits and troubles. 4. Because such Transportation is commonly in ^^rk
nights, which none or very few can or will take the pains and run the hazard to
prevent it. 5. That the Boats and Shallops that attend those tansportations
come very strong, and the persons therein very resolute: All which will be
prevented by the Considerations aforesaid.
IId Reason, Because such Boats and Shallops doc commonly Import in a secret
manner, many rich foreign Commodities and land them in several places
according to Order, whereby the King is deceived of a great part of his
Customs. For that in all Foreign parts to prevent Exportation of Commodities,
such course is taken which is found by experience to be the best and surest
me^^^ to hinder it. Because when such care is taken as aforesaid, no Exporter
will venture or hazard his Goods when he cannot convey them near the Sea side
without danger of disocovery, traveling by night being forbidden upon a
penalty. The Subject will have more speedy case and less charge by such
prosecution aforesaid. Those persons that make most gain of those Manufactures
by this prevention, have most reason to bear the Charge of it to the
Commissioners; And are willing to do it, as appears by their subscriptions
concerning the same.


