A DISCOURSE SHOWING That KINGS have their Being and Authority from GOD, That
therefore Good KINGS when Dead are lamented, That all while Living are to be
Obeyed, AND That Treason and Rebellion are punishable both in this and the next
World.

Preached the Sunday following the news of the Death of our late King of
Blessed Memory, Charles the Second.

By JOHN CVRTOIS, Rector of Branston, near Lincoln.

LONDON, Printed for Jo. Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball, against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1685.

TO Sir HVMPHREY WINCH, BARONET.
Honored Sir,
I Present here a Discourse to you which I preached to my Parish the Sunday
after we had heard of the Death of our late Sovereign: By which you may see how
faithful I am to my Trust, in instructing them to give unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, as unto God the things that are God's. And I think it was
received by them with that respect and affection, that is due from all honest
and good men to a Discourse of this nature. A while after I had the opportunity
to Preach it in the Cathedral at Lincoln, where it was kindly resented by many
Loyal persons, of whom the number is very great in that City. But there were a
few Heterogeneous men crept in among them that were as much disgusted at it,
and no sooner out of the Church, but they fell to calumniate and belie me,
perverting my intentions and laying to my charge things that I never said: So
that to vindicate my self from the Aspersions of these men I have made the
Sermon public as you see it, after the same Copy by which I spoke it. It will,
I presume, endure such a public Test: For upon a strict review I find nothing
there but what is agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church, and the late General
acknowledgments of our Loyal Nobility, Gentry and Clergy in their Addresses to
His Sacred Majesty. And therefore I question not your Favorable acceptance of
it in particular. As it has, so it needs, nothing else to commend it to you,
but the Loyalty of it, which, it is Argument enough that you approve of, in all
its Appearances, because at the Critical time of Trial you abhorred and
withstood the Unnatural and Unchristian Bill of Exclusion; and the same Party,
which, in those days of iniquity, would have Excluded His Sacred Majesty from
his three Kingdoms, would have also excluded you from the Parliament.

That all future Parliaments may consist of such worthy Members as you, such as
will distinguish betwixt Religion and faction, legality and injustice, such as
will be as True to the Church and State as the King is pleased to be Gracious
to them, is the earnest prayer of,

Honored Sir, Your most obliged and most humble Servant, JOHN CURTOIS.

ROMANS XIII. 1. -- There is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained
of God.
HAVING received the sad tidings of the Death of our most Gracious Sovereign
Charles the Second, I think it requisite to say something, as early as I can,
that will be suitable to it: And therefore I pitch upon this Subject as proper
and seasonable to exercise your Devotions at this time.

In these words Saint Paul plainly teaches this Doctrine.

That all Kings or Supreme Governors of Nations are Constituted of Almighty
God, and Rule solely by his Divine pleasure and Authority.

I shall clear this unto you, and then draw an inference or two from it.

First, This was eminently true of the several Governors of the Jews. They had
all particular and apparent Signatures and Impresses of the Image and Authority
of God upon them. For when from all the Nations of the World God had set apart
the Jews to be the Object of his more immediate care, he is said to have sent
Moses to be a Ruler and Deliverer unto them by the hand of the Angel which
appeared to him in the Bush: By reason of which power so signally conferred by
God, he was entitled King in Jeshurun when the Heads of the People and the
Tribes of Israel were gathered together. And when God was pleased to remove his
servant Moses to a Crown of Glory in Heaven, he nominated Joshuah to succeed
him in the same Authority. And after the removal of Joshuah, he raised up
Judges to them, men of absolute and uncontrollable power for the time they
continued, inferior to Kings only in the title. And lastly, to oblige them
with variety of dispensations, at their own desire and according to a former
promise of making them every way as Glorious as the Nations round about them,
he gave them many Governors with the Title of Kings too, to go out before them
and fight their battles.

But although the Kingdom of Israel might seem here to have had a more signal
designation and her Governors a more particular commission from God than any
other, yet

Secondly, the Gentile Rulers were as truly the Ministers and Vicegerents of
God in their respective Dominions though not so remarkably. Thus Syracides
says, Eccl. 17.17.
in the division of the Nations of the whole Earth, God set a Ruler over every
people, but Israel is the Lord's portion. And the same is signified by the men
whom we are certain God inspired to reveal the truth.

The Prophet David, speaking of Rulers in General calls them Gods and the
children of the most High. Psalm. 82.6.


And that of Solomon is as General. Prove. 8.15, 16.
By me Kings Reign and Princes decree Justice, By me Princes Rule and Nobles
even all the Judges of the Earth.

And particularly, in the Prophecy of Isaiah, Isa. 44.28, 45, 1.
Cyrus the King of Persia is styled the Shepherd and the Anointed of the Lord.
And in the Prophecy of Jeremiah, Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 27.6.
King of Babylon is styled his Servant. And the Prophet Daniel tells that
King expressly, Dan. 2.37.
The God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, Power and Strength and Glory.

The Son of God himself said as much, John 19.11.
when he confessed that Power by which Pilate acted under the Roman Emperor to
be given him from above.

And so his Apostle in the Text in the Reign of a Heathen says, There is no
Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God.

Accordingly the first Christians taught. L. 5. Contr. Har.
Irenaeus says, that by whose appointment men are born by his appointment
Princes are constituted. Apol. c. 30.
Tertullian says, that they have their Power thence whence they have their
Spirit. So Optatus, lib. 3.
There is no person Superior to the Emperor but God only, who ordained the
Emperor.

Nay, the wiser Heathens that had any sense of Religion had the same sentiments
of the Divinity of Regal Power. This is the meaning of that Benediction of the
Queen of Sheba, when she was full of Admiration at the Wisdom of Solomon, 1
King. 10.9.
Blessed be the Lord thy God which delighted in thee to set thee on the Throne
of Israel: because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore made he thee King
to do Judgment and Justice.

The Romans in their Lex Julia adjudged the same punishment to Treason as to
Sacrilege, Vlpian l. 7. De Off. Procons. in l. 1. ff. ad Leg. Jul. maj.
as looking upon an injury done to their Prince, to be an injury also to Gods;
Hist. Hea. Gods. l. 3. p. 187.
whose place of power upon Earth the Prince supplied. The Kings of Egypt had
Asps usually represented upon their Crowns, to express the Holiness of their
persons, whom none ought to dishonor or injure without a signal punishment; as
being the most Sacred Images and Lieutenants of God upon Earth. So firmly did
the better sort of Heathens, who believed an invisible overruling Being,
believe likewise the power of Kings to be derived from it.

Now, it does not invalidate this Truth. 1. That some Princes exercise their
power Tyrannically and Rule wickedly, oppressing and murdering their Subjects.
For the power is nevertheless of God though it be abused and perverted by men.
As it is in the case of Episcopacy, the spiritual power, by which the Bishops
govern the Church, must be acknowledged to be received from Christ, though the
Bishop of Rome Tyrannize in the exercise of it: So it is in the case of
Kingship and Regality, God must be owned to have conveyed and consigned over
the Temporal Power to all Princes though the Grand Seigniour of the Turks, and
others, play the Tyrants within their Dominions. And yet we may not here
conceive God to be Author of the wickedness, as of the Power, for it is the
Power only not the abuse of it that is from God: The latter proceeds from the
Prince's evil heart alone. God makes him a Prince, and he, through the
corruption of his Nature and the malicious Temptation of the Devil, finds out
many inventions to do wickedly. The Kingly Power as other good and perfect
Gifts do, descends from God, although they may be all some time or other
abused by evil instruments and to evil ends and purposes. Our Savior intimated
this in granting Pilate's power to be from Heaven, by whom he knew he should be
sentenced to dye as a Malefactor. St. Paul did the same, speaking the Text in
the days of Claudius or Nero, two of the worst of men and the greatest Tyrants
that ever were. Neither 2. does it invalidate this Truth that some Princes come
to this Power by Conquest, some by Election, and others by Inheritance. For
these are but several ways and means of Conveyance and Investiture; they are
but as Conduit Pipes to carry the Water from the Fountain to separate places:
Still the Power is derived from God to the Prince, by which soever of these
means he be invested with it. 1. Although he fight for it, and by the Sword,
makes his way to the Throne, yet when he is placed there, he sits as God's
Vicegerent, having no Superintendent but God: The People are all subjected to
him by right of Conquest.

Or say it be 2. By Election, by the Votes and Consent of the People that he is
seated on the Throne, yet being once there, he becomes their Sovereign Lord,
Ruling by a Power Superior to theirs. For the Power is God's, not the Peoples:
They are only God's instruments in conferring the Regalia's; and when the
Ceremony is over, have no more to do, but to obey.

And if it hold true in Conquered and Elective Kingdoms then how much rather 3.
Deuteronomy. 21.15.
In all those Nations where the Crowns are Hereditary; the way which God
appointed in Israel before their settlement in Canaan, and after it, did so
signally bless in a numerous Succession of Heirs.

In all Hereditary Kingdoms the people have nothing to do but, upon the Death
of their King, immediately to obey the next Heir Apparent, and humbly to
recognize him for their Sovereign. Their Approbation or Consent here is of no
signification; for he is born to Reign over them, and whether they will or no,
does rightfully inherit that Power which God has entailed upon his Family.

And (to speak something here particularly of our own Nation) thus it is,
thanks be to God, in the Kingdom of England. (And we have reason to thank God
for it, because we are hereby free from many mischiefs which unavoidably attend
the change of Kings upon Conquests or Popular Elections.)

Here God has, for many Ages past, by wonderful Providence made known the
Family that is to Govern us, so certainly and so apparently, that none but he
that desires to be a Rebel to God and the King will ever dispute the Title.
Whence it is become a Maxim in our Law that the King never dies. And that
nothing is to be assented to in Parliament which tends to the disinherison of
the Crown. Hence also we find it ever subscribed to those Ensigns of Royalty,
which descend perpetually with the Crown, Dieu Et Mon Droit, God and my Right.
So in all public Edicts we find this inserted, Dei Gratia Rex, By the Grace of
God King of England: And upon Twelve several Festival days in the year, our
King offers upon the Altar a sum of Gold to God, in signum specialis Dominii,
as a public Acknowledgement That by his Grace alone he is King. And this every
man of us solemnly assenteth to, that takes the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy. "In the Oath of Allegiance, we promise to bear Faith and True
Allegiance to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors. In the Oath of Supremacy,
we first utterly testify and declare that the King's Highness is the only
Supreme Governor in this Realm; And do therefore promise that we will bear
Faith and True Allegiance to the King's Highness, his Heirs, and Lawful
Successors, and will to our power assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities granted or belonging to the King's
Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm.

So that by the way we may wonder at the great impiety of our late pretending
Patriots, who with so much heat and boidness Voted the Exclusion of the
Rightful Heir, in plam contradiction not only to their Natural Allegiance but
also to their Promises and Declarations solemnly made by these Oaths. They
ought, I think, to seek God and the King's Pardon, or a public Repentance: And
when they are so ingenuous, and not before, we may in Charity hope, that they
will be better Christians and better Subjects for the future.

But, to convince you more fully that our King, by the unalterable Right of
Inheritance Succeeding to the Crown, Reigns by God, and him only, let us a
little distinctly consider, that there is neither person or thing within his
Dominions but what are subject to him, as by the ordinance of God, and right
reason, so likewise by our own public concessions. The People are all so, and
so are the Laws. The People of this Nation whether singly or Representatively
considered are subject to the King.

If we look upon them in their single persons, which of them can pretend
equality with or superiority to his Prince? Who indeed but he that is as mad as
the man in Bedlam, that vainly imagins himself to be a King.

Or look upon them Representatively, in the Church or in the Parliament, in
both they are subject to him, first in the Church.

The Church as humbly and as expressly as she can acknowledges the King's
Supremacy and her own subjection, In her 37th Article she says. The King's
Majesty has the chief Power in his Realm of England and other his Dominions,
unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes does appertain, and is not nor ought to
be subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction. To which she adds, Whereas we
attribute to the King's Majesty the chief Government, by which Titles we find
the minds of some slanderous folks to be offended, we give not to our Princes
the ministering either of God's Word or of the Sacraments, but that only
Prerogative which we see to have been given always to all Godly Princes in holy
Scriptures by God himself, that is, that they should rule all Estates and
degrees committed to their charge by God whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil doers.

In the 3 part of her Homily of Obedience she says, This is God's Ordinance
God's Commandments and God's Holy Will that the whole Body of every Realm and
all the Members and parts of the same shall be subject to their Head their King.

The like is said by her in the 5th part of her Homily against Rebellion. The
holy Scriptures do teach most expressly that our Savior Christ himself and his
Apostles St. Paul, St. Peter with others were unto the Magistrates and Higher
Powers, which Ruled upon their being upon Earth both obedient themselves, and
did also diligently and earnestly exhort all other Christians to the like
obedience unto their Princes and Governors, whereby it is evident that men of
the Clergy and Ecclesiastical Ministers as their Successors, ought both
themselves specially and before others to be obedient unto their Princes and
also to exhort all others unto the same. Our Savior Christ likewise teaching
by his Doctrine that his Kingdom was not of this World did by his example in
fleeing from those that would have made him King confirm the same: Expressly
also forbidding his Apostles and by them the whole Clergy all Princely Dominion
over People and Nations; and he and his holy Apostles likewise, namely Peter
and Paul did forbid unto all Ecclesiastical Ministers Dominion over the Church
of Christ.

See Can. 36.
So in her 55th Canon she requires her Preachers before their Sermons to pray
for the King's Most Excellent Majesty as Defender of the Faith and Supreme
Governor within this Realm and all other his Dominions and Countries over all
persons in all Causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil.

And as this Supremacy is now acknowledged, See Fulwood's Roma Ruit. c. 9.
so it has been granted by the Church of England to her King ever since she was
a Church, except for those small spaces of time that the Pope usurped it after
the Norman Conquest. But in Henry VIII. Reign it was fully resumed and with the
concurrence of all the Estates in Parliament resettled in the King. And upon
this principle our Reformation from all the other Popish corruptions was
founded, viz. that the King had the Supreme Power in the Nation, and by that
might protest against and reform all the Papal Abuses which had corrupted the
Church and Kingdom. And therefore those Sects and Parties of men amongst us,
the Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, etc. are not to be
accounted of our Church because they deny the King's Supremacy. But are
Retainers still to the Church of Rome, being not yet reformed from this Romish
corruption, of subjecting the King to the Church. Next, as the Church is
subject to the King, so is the Parliament. The Parliament is called by the
King's Writ. And when they meet they own his Supremacy and promise Allegiance
to him upon Oath. During their Session, they can make no Laws by themselves,
but only advise, propound and petition what may be for the good of the Nation:
And therefore are called the Great Council of it, consisting of Three Estates,
The Lords Spiritual and Temporal and The Commons; the latter of which is said
not to have been before the Reign of Henry III. who required their presence to
Stem the Tide of his Barons Rebellion. And although since through a long Tract
of Time and the concessions of some Kings they have a claim to certain
privileges yet sure not to that of Supremacy or Coordination with their Prince.
For any or all of them to say they are above or equal with him is a
contradiction as well in Reason as Terms. For besides what is urged before,
they may be adjourned, removed prorogued, or dissolved as the King pleases.
They live and die, are and are not by one breath of his mouth. Whence he is
said to be Principium, Caput and Finis Parliamenti. And to put all out of doubt
of it, several Parliaments have in several Acts and Statutes acknowledged the
King's Supremacy and Sovereignty over them addressing to him under the Title of
our Gracious Sovereign, and our Dread Sovereign Lord the King, His Most
Excellent Majesty, etc. calling themselves his most dutiful and Loyal
subjects. None ever denied it but the Long Parliament under King Charles I.
which was therefore since by another declared to be a Rebel Parliament.

Lastly, the King is not subject to the Coercive Power of the Law. There is no
Law made but with His Royal Assent: And when the Law is in force it can have no
power over him, because the Authority it has, it receives from him both as to
the Being and Execution of it. He can in dubious cases interpret the meaning,
in severe cases remit the rigor, and at any time suspend the penalty of the
Law. All Suits, all Processes at Law, all judicial proceedings whatsoever are
from him. All other our Magistrates Act by Commission from him; and when he
thinks good to recall his Commissions, are no more than private persons,
without rule, without power. Hence was occasioned that Loyal Motto upon the
Rings of some of our Late created Sergeants at the Law A Deo Rex, a Rege Lex:
i. e. the Power the King has is from God, the Power the Law has is from the
King.

All this sure speaks him not subject to the Coercive Power of the Law. And
what? Although it be confessed that at his Coronation he takes an Oath before
the People to Govern by the Law: Yet is he not therefore Coordinate with or
inferior to the people or the Law, because it gives him no Right or Title to
the Government: The Right and Title he has are Antecedent. Both the Crowning
and Proclaming of him are only Public Declarations that he is by Birthright
in Lawful Possession of it.

And if he should not observe his Coronation Oath, who shall say to him thou
art wicked and ungodly? What Law is there that can reach his Sacred Person? Or
what particular man or company of men can exhibit a Commission from God to
judge and condemn him?

But I shall prosecute this Argument no farther. Enough is said to convince any
reasonable man.

Thus I have made it clear to you that all Kings or other Supreme Governors of
Nations are Ordained of God, and owe their Sovereignty to God and God only, by
what ways or methods soever they be invested with it, whether by Conquest,
Election or Inheritance. And that the King of England in particular, who
Reigns over us by the indisputable Right of Inheritance, is as truly God's
Minister and Vicegerent as any other Prince can be, knowing no Superior but
God.

Let us now draw an Inference or two from the premises.

First, Kings having their Being from God, when God takes away from a Nation a
Good and Gracious King, one that Rules as well after his Example and Will, as
by his Power, it becomes matter of public mourning and lamentation.

Cruelty and Oppression are things so odious in their Nature, and so
mischievous in their consequences, (being as prolifick of evils as Pandora's
Box, Murder, Depopulation, and a long, etc. attending) that a Tyrannical
Prince soon grows uneasy to his people; the men as wicked as himself are
weary of him, impatient for his death, curse and abhor him, wish and conspire
his ruin. And though the good man dares not do this, because his Religion
will not suffer it, yet upon his fall he lifts up his eyes to Heaven and
blesses God for the deliverance whilst he hates the Treason. Whereas on the
contrary, Love and Clemency, and all the other Qualities of a Godlike. Prince
are so amiable and attractive, so productive of public benefits, peace and
plenty and every thing that conduces to make a Nation happy, that when these
are manifested, the people rejoice in their Prince, while Living, as the Light
of their eyes and the Breath of their Nostrils; they love him as their Father,
and depend upon him as their Savior. The profane equally with the pious are
ready to rise up and call him blessed; to esteem his Life worth ten thousand of
their own and to offer up themselves and all they have in defense of his Royal
Person. But when God, who gave them this blessing from Heaven, is pleased to
call it thither again, than these Great Rejoycings are immediately converetd
into sorrows as excessive. They look upon their Prince indeed to be happy, but
upon themselves to be forlorn and miserable. And therefore as Rachel, when she
had lost the Darlings of her Affections, they grieve and will not be comforted,
till Nature has had her Fill of Grief, or the sorrow be in some good measure
proportionate to the loss.

This has been the general sense of the World from the beginning of it. The
ancient Jews and Christians and Heathens also give Testimony to it.

When Moses died the Children of Israel wept for him in the plains of Moab
thirty days. Deuteronomy. 34.
The visible assurance they had of the continuance of God's special care over
them, the Divine Accomplishments of Joshuah his Successor, their earnest
expectations of Canaan, could not divert that mighty sorrow which they had
conceived at the death of this excellent Prince, who had preserved and brought
them through the perils of the Wilderness to the confines of the promised Land.

So at the death of their King Josiah all Judah and Jerusalem mourned. 2 Chronicles.
35.2.
And Jerimiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing men and singing women
spoke of Josiah in their lamentations, and made them an ordinance in Israel,
and behold they are written in their lamentations. He had purged their Religion
from all Heathenish superstitions, he had repaired their Temple, and restored
the Worship of it to its primitive purity, and so had endeared them to God and
himself. And they thought in return, they could do nothing too much to
perpetuate the memory of his Goodness: And therefore, besides their mournful
Elegies at his Funeral, they transmitted their Griefs to posterity in a Book of
Lamentations.

Upon the death of Constantine the Great in Nicomedia, Zuing. Theatr. Vol. 1.
l. 1. p. 97.
the first Christian Emperor (who had not only embraced Christianity himself
but had industriously promoted it throughout the Empire) his Soldiers were so
overcome with sorrow, that they tore their Clothes, cast themselves prostrate
upon the ground, dashing their Heads against the wall, omitting no outward
expression of Grief that a sorrowful heart could dictate, crying out in
doleful Accents that they had lost a Protector, a Guardian and a Father. The
Citizens, at the same time, as men out of their wits, ran howling about the
streets, not able to suppress their Grief within: Others, as men amazed, walked
silently about with their Heads hanging down; all complaining that they were no
longer possessours of the comforts of this life. And answerable to this were
the sorrows of the Senate and People of Rome for his death. At the Relation of
it, their Baths were shut up, their Markets and Plays unfrequented, and their
public sports and pleasures and days of Festivity neglected. They could find
no Alleviation to their Grief, but by painting him above the Firmamental
Regions partaking with other blessed Souls of Heavenly Glory, and by
petitioning his Son Constantius that they might have the Honor of interring
his Remains at Rome.

And the like were the Resentments of the Roman Senate for Titus Vespasian, Id.
p. 98.
one of their Heathen Emperors (a Prince so universally famed for his Virtues,
that his Motto was Princeps bonus Orbis amor) upon the news of his death they
rushed into the Curia, and there bewailed their loss of him in Panegyrical
Orations, and could not be satisfied till they had decreed him the honor of an
Apotheosis, till they had Deisy'd, and placed him amongst the rest of their
Supernal Gods, whence they might hope for some sarther Experiments of his
favor and protection.

To name no more, this is a Truth that our own experience testifies. How
grievous has the Death of our Late Sovereign been to every one of us? How full
of surprise and sadness was the news of it? At its first Reception we looked as
half Dead our selves, and stood staring upon one another as men at our wits
end: Every eye was ready to drop a tear and every heart to breath a sigh. I
think I may truly say, never was King of England so generally and so heartily
lamented. And is was no more than was due to a Prince so extraordinary Good as
he was, a Prince that exceeded all others in a benign and gracious Government;
a Prince (to say all of him we can in a little) than whom we cannot expect, we
cannot wish, we cannot pray for a better. And I question not but his Memory
will be ever precious with us, and we shall never mention him now dead but with
that respect and honor that we served him when alive. Only, here, I would
advise that we reflect not on him as men without hope; but as we look with an
eye of sorrow back upon him, so that with an eye of joy we would look forward
upon his Successor, our present King, James II. by a true Lineal descent
seated upon the Throne of his Fathers; that we would hope from him all the
generous Actions of his Ancestors. We shall be very ungrateful and unworthy
if we do otherwise: For this most Serene Prince has more than once exposed
his Life to the mouth of the devouring Cannon, and the as merciless Sea, for
our preservation. And since the Death of his Royal Brother has been pleased to
give his Royal Word to preserve this Government both in Church and State as
it is now by Law Established. A distrust of that would be an odious suspicion of
his want of the sense of Conscience and Honor. It would be likewise an impious
distrust of God's Good Providence over us. For we are told by Solomon, Prove.
21.1.
The King's Heart is in the Hand of the Lord as the Rivers of Water: He turns
it whethersoever he will. So much to our first Inference.

Secondly, Kings having their Being and Authority from God, are to be obeyed.
So St. Paul argues in this first verse of his 13th Chap. to the Romans, Let
every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers; for there is not Power but of God,
the Powers that be are ordained of God. And the like at the 4th verse, etc. He
is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil;
wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
Conscience sake: For, for this cause pay ye Tribute also, for they are God's
Ministers attending continually on this very thing. Render therefore to all
their Dues; Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to
whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor.

So then, every subject is to pay Obedience to his Prince, as being the
Minister of God. No man, no order of men can plead exemption or dispensation
from it. For the words are general and indefinite, and being of a moral nature
comprehend all Potentates and all Subjects in all times and places. This is the
sense of the most ancient and learned Commentatours upon the place.

And according to them that of St. Peter in his 1 Epistle and 2 Chap. Has the
same extent and meaning, where he bids, Submit your selves to every ordinance
of man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers
and for the praise of them that do well. For so is the will of God that with
well-doeing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.

But these Apostolical precepts must be understood to extend no farther than to
things warrantable by a previous Law of God: For if a King command or enact any
thing that is contrary to what God has already declared to be his will,
therein the Subject is to not yield obedience to him. The reason of it is,
because God is Superior to the King, and all the Authority the King has, he
has received from God: And therefore no good Christian will nor ought to obey
his Prince any farther, than it may be consistent with his primary duty to God.
And the Apostolical practice herein is a good comment upon the Doctrine. When
some of the Apostles were commanded by the Sanhedrim of the Jews not to speak
at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus, Act. 4.19.
they gave this Answer, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto
you more than unto God, judge ye, for we cannot but speak the things we have
seen and heard. And afterward, when they charged them with neglect and
disregard of their commands, saying, did we not straightly command you that you
should not teach in this name, Act. 5.29.
and Behold you have filled Jerusalem with your Doctrine, they answered and
said, We ought to obey God rather than men.

The like to which had been done before by some holy men of God under the old
Testament. When King Nebuchandnezzar had set up a Golden Image and had made a
decree that every person under his Government should fall down and worship it,
Dan. 3.18.
and that he that denied it, should be cast into the midst of a burning fiery
furnace; Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego would not regard his Decree, and told
him they would not serve his Gods, nor worship the Golden Image which he had
set up.

And when King Darius had. Dan. 6.7, 10.
Established a Royal Statute that whosoever should ask a Perition of any God or
Man for thirty days save of himself, he should be cast into a den of Lions. The
Prophet Daniel when he knew the King had signed this writing went into his
house, and his window being open in his chamber he kneeled upon his knees three
times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks unto his God as he did aforetime.

From all which it is evident, that the Commands of a King are obligatory to
every Subject except where they cantradict the Commands of God; and then the
Subject may lawfully deny the performance of them. But then he ought to be well
satisfied by serious and deliberate examination of the matter, that what he so
refuses bears a real contrariety to the Commands of God: For a Conscience, not
thus rectified, cannot justify any such refusal. These Holy Men indeed now
mentioned denied obedience to the commands of their Governors, but, First,
they were truly satisfied that in performing of them they should directly
violate the Laws of God.

And after all, if a man cannot with any satisfaction to his soul to give an
Active Obedience to the Laws of his Prince, yet he must yield a Passive
Obedience: i.e. if he cannot with a good Conscience do the Law he must quietly
suffer the penalty of it; he must not refist his Prince with force or violence,
but patiently submit to the punishments he shall inflict upon him.

This is a Doctrine that is harsh to flesh and blood, and so indeed are most of
the Doctrines of the Gospel, but is as clearly the Christian's duty as any
other there revealed. St. Paul is as urgent for this Passive Obedience as for
the Active in the verse following the Text. Whosoever therefore, says he,
resists the power resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation.

And so is St. Peter in the words following those afore-cited from him,
Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward; for this is thankworthy if a man for
Conscience toward God endure Grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it
if when ye be buffeted for your faults ye shall take it patiently? But if when
ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with
God. And then he proposes Christ as the great pattern and exemplar for it, For
even hereunto were ye called because Christ also suffered for us leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps, who did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously.

And both St. Peter and St. Paul with all the other Apostles acted answerably
to this Doctrine and their Master's example. This we are ascertained from their
Acts recorded by St. Luke, and from other Histories of their Lives. The
Governors of the Church that followed the Apostles in the first Centuries, and
so had reason to understand their Doctrine best, exactly transcribed this Copy;
publicly teaching and practicing the same. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 36. p. 108. ed S.
Polycar. Ibid. l. 4. c. 15. p. 132. Cypr. ad Demetr. Ep. 83.. 2.
All the weapons they used themselves in desence against the severity of the
Pagan Emperors, and all they taught to be used by every Christian were their
Prayers, Fasting and Tears. And so it came to pass that when Christianity had
gained ground on Heathenism and was so far advanced in the Empire that the
Christians equaled if not exceeded the Heathens in number and courage, Tertul.
Apol. c. 37. p. 30. Naz. in vec. 1. in Jul. p. 94.
they generally valued their Faith and Allegiance more than their lives, and
chose rather to open their Breasts to the point of the Emperor's Sword, Just.
Mart. Apol. 2. Vsser. ep. Ign. p. 9. Lactan. de Just. l. 5. c. 13. p. 495.
Tertul. ad Scap. c. 1. p. 72.
than lift up their own against his. Their Persecutors in the heat of their
Cruelty saw this and confessed it. And the Apologists for Christanity rejoiced
and gloried in it, as one great cause of the propogation of their Religion.
Agreeably to these first and purest Ages of Christianity, the Church of England
teaches her Children not to resist or rebel against their Prince.

This she does very copiously and strenuously in her Homily against
Disobedience and Rebellion set forth in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth. Which,
because she does so largely there insist upon it, I shall rather choose to refer
you to, for your better satisfaction, than mention any particulars from it.

It was necessary this Doctrine should be vehemently pressed in the days of
that Queen, because there were then a company of men started up that began to
corrupt and ridicule it, Bell. de Romans Pontif. l. 3. c. 9. and l. 5. c. 7. Knox
to Eng. and Scot. p. 78. Hist. p. 343. Buch. de jure Regn. p. 61. Bp. Bancrost
danger. Positions.
such as Bellarmine the Romanist, the two Presbyterian Scots, Knox and
Buchanan, and our first Nonconforming Divines; men, who as the Apostle says of
some other enemies of the Truth, could not but be willingly ignorant. But they
had the Luceferian Ambition to be above all that are called Gods, to be Kings
themselves, and therefore had brazen'd their Foreheads and were resolved to say
any thing that would serve their designs in dethroning the Rightful Sovereign.
And indeed there is nothing in the World could do it more effectually than
this; for the Subject being once persuaded of the Lawfulness of Resisting his
Prince, any little humor or passion, any private grudge or animosity would be
soon heated into open Rebellion. And so it followed; the viperous progeny of
these men in after years improved and promoted their Fathers principles: They
sat brooding a while upon that Cocatrice's Egg; and then Rebellion and
Regicide sprang from it. The Malecontented people did actually rebel, and King
Charles I. was murdered. And, not satisfied with that, the same men have with
the same Trumpet of late sounded another Alarm to Battle. And therefore it is
but necessary that the Clergy of the Church of England should as loudly sound a
Retreat by proclaiming the duty of Nonresistence and Passive Obedience. And it
is their glory and their honor that they do so, because they are hereby true
to God, the King and the Church. Speech concerning Bill of Exclusion printed
for Baldwin.
Notwithstanding some of the Excluding Speech-makers cast it into their Teeth
as their shame and reproach. The shame be only theirs that contrary to Oaths
and protestations, throw dirt in the face of their Venerable Mother, and for no
other reason malign their Spiritual Guides, but because they tell them the
Truth. That of St. Paul is very Applicable to them, 2 Timothy 3.8.
As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the Truth: men
of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith, but they shall proceed no
farther; for their folly shall be manifested unto all men as theirs also was.

I will say no more than that the very Heathens will rise up in judgment
against the men of this leaven. Tac. Hist. l. 4. c. 8.
For, Marcellus told the Romans that Subjects might wish for good Princes but
ought to bear with any. And Pliny, That as mem are Reverent in their behavior
when they converse with God, Praef. ad Admiran. Romans
so ought they to be in their deportment to their King. And as the Supreme part
of the World is above the disturbance of the lower Regions so the Courts of
Princes are not to be profaned with the rude approaches of their people. L. 2.
exem. Po. c. 16.
So Sacred and revereable was the Person of a King among the Ancient Heathens,
by the mere light of natural Religion.

After all this some perhaps may Quaere in particular, What if Our King should
actually endeavor to destroy the Religion that is now by Law Established, or
punish us for the open profession of it, might we not then Lawfully take up
Arms, and list up our hands against him in defense of Religion? To this I
cannot answer better than in the words of the Learned Dean of Canterbury, viz.
Letter to late Lord Russel.
That the Christian Religion does plainly forbid the resistance of Authority;
That though our Religion be Established by Law, yet in the same Law that
Established our Religion, it is declared that it is not lawful upon any
pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the King. Besides that, there is a
particular Law declaring the power of the Militia to be soley in the King; and
that ties the hands of Subjects though the Law of Nature and the General Rules
of Scripture had left us at liberty, which I believe they do not, because the
Government and peace of Humane Society could not well subsist upon those Terms.

Thus the Question is resolved by that Reverned Person. But (blessed be God)
there is no reason to ask this Question, calculated only for the Meridian of a
bloody Antichristian Covenant, or Association. It is a Question as unseasonable
now, as it is at all times improper for a Disciple of the Son of God, who never
needs the Arm of flesh to defend his cause. But, because the evil of punishment
is usually the surest conviction of the evil of sin, to satisfy you fully of
the wickedness of Treason and Rebellion upon all Accounts whatsoever, I shall
here take leave to observe a while their direful and tremendous consequences,
or the signal punishments that have attended them, recorded both in sacred and
civil Story for our Admonition.

Many of the Instances of sacred Story are collected to our hands by Sir Edw.
Short View of late Troub. p. 650.
Coke. And I will give you them in that order as they are lately recited from
him by Sir William Dugdale.

It appears, says he, in the Holy Scriptures that Traitors never prospered,
what good soever they pretended, but were most severely and exemplarily
punished, as Corah, Dathan and Abiram, by miracle, The ground clave asunder
that was under them, Number. 16.31, 32.27.3.
and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses and
all the men that appertained unto Corah, and all their goods; they and all that
appertained to them went down alive into the Pit; and the earth closed upon
them and they perished from among the Congregation.

Athaliah the Daughter of Amri who Massacred all the seed Royal of Judah
except, 2 Kin. 11.16.
one Infant which was concealed from her, and so for seven years usurped the
Crown, was at length slain by the sword.

Bigthan and Terish, Esth. 2.23.
who sought to lay hands on King Ahasuerus, were both hanged on a Tree.

Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.9.14.
in Rebellion against his Father David, was hanged in an Oak, and Joab took
three darts in his hand and thrust them through the heart of Absalom while he
was yet alive in the midst of the Oak.

Achitophel the promoter of that Rebellion hanged himself and died. 2 Samuel
17.23.


Abiathar the High Priest, 1 King. 2.26, 27.
who had been Traitorous against King Solomon, was thrust out from being Priest
unto the Lord; though he had his life indeed granted him because he had bore
the Ark before David and had been afflicted in all wherein David was afflicted.

Shimei, who had cursed and cast stones at David, 1 King. 2.46.
was slain at last by the hands of Benaiah, at the command of Solomon.

Zimri, 1 King. 16.18.
that killed Elah his King and Master and all the House of Baasha, that he
might Reign securely, after seven days Reign, to save himself from the hands of
Omri was forced to burn the Palace over his own head and there perished in the
flames.

Theudas a Mutineer in Israel, Act. 5.36, 37.
boasting himself to be some body, to whom a number of men about four hundred
joined themselves, was slain, and all as many as obeyed him were scattered and
brought to naught.

And Judas of Galilee, who rose up after him in the days of Taxing, and drew
away much people after him, he also perished, and all even as many as obeyed
him were dispersed.

These examples we have in sacred Scripture of the disastrous events which have
attended Rebels and Regicides. Other History is as full of them. For as men of
such profligate spirits have never been wanting in the World, so God has never
been wanting to make examples of them.

The Plotters and Actours of the Assassination of Julius Caesar, Sueton. vit
Juli Caesar.
though they escaped the legal punishment which the Senate condemned them to,
yet, being pursued by Divine Nemesis, died all immature and unnatural deaths;
some of them stabbing themselves with the same Dagger they had stabbed Caesar.

Pope Gregory VII. Otho Frising. Chr. l. 6. c. 35.
(the first Pope that took the impudence to excommunicate and depose Kings)
having stirred up the Princes of Germany against the Emperor Henry IV. and by
them endeavoring his utter Ruin, was, during the Contest, by the consent of
his own people, turned out of the Papacy, and at length by a sense of his own
miseries, upon his deathbed forced to confess and lament his crime, Sigeb.
Ann. 1084.
imputing it to the instigation of the Devil. This we may believe from the
Relation which Sigebert gives of it, Ibid. Ann. 1085.
who lived at that time, though Bellarmin many years after charges him with a
lie, Bell. de Scrp. Eccl. p. 215.
for no other reason but because he was Loyal to the Emperor.

Radolph Duke of Suevia, Vespergens. Ann. 1080.
the great instrument of that Pope in the War against the Emperor, lost his
Right Hand, and received some other mortal wounds, of which being ready to die,
he bitterly bewailed his wickedness, and, sighing, observed to the bystanders,
that he had lost that Hand in the Rebellion against his Sovereign, with which
he had sworn Allegiance to him.

I might produce many other instances from Foreign Histories, but I choose here
to divert to a few Observations, which the aforesaid English Author makes upon
some Traitors of our own Country, because they probably will the most affect
you.

Montfort Earl of Leicester (says he) the principal Actour in the great
Rebellion against Henry III. Short View of late the Trou. p. 599.
with his Eldest Son Henry was slain at the Fight near Evesham; his head, hands
and feet were cut off by the fury of the Soldiers; and though his body through
the charity of others was buried in the Abbey, the common people, out of high
indignation toward him, who had been the chief instrument of misery to the
whole Realm, dig'd it up and carried it to a more remote place, esteeming it
unworthy of Christan Burial by reason it had been so much infected with the
Leprosy of Rebellion. Neither did the judgment for his iniquities terminate
here but pursued his two other Sons Guy and Simon, who being escaped out of
Prison got into France, and there, endeavoring to bring in Foreign Forces,
ended their days in misery. As for his Accomplices, most of them perished in that
Battle at Evesham; and the rest, excepting one, were taken prisoners and
disherited. But afterward through the King's special favor restored to their
Lands upon several Fines according to the measure of their offenses.

And that which he relates also of Oliver Cromwell, that Arch-Traitour against
Charles I. is as remarkably judicial.

Immediately upon Cromwell's Murdering the Reverend Dr. Huit, p. 456.
his Beloved Daughter Claypole was perplexed with such an excessive Grief of
mind that falling into a sharp fit of sickness, wherein crying out against her
Father for Dr. Huit's death, she died with the most bitter torments imaginable.
Which death of hers was the forerunner to that of this wicked Tyrants, for soon
after a deep melancholy seized closely upon him; in which the Guilt of so much
innocent Blood as he had spilt might perhaps somewhat touch him; but without
doubt, that which stuck nearest to him, was his real consideration that he
could never ascend to such a height of Sovereignty, as his ambitious desires
had long gaped after. And these sorrows and perplexities of his restless mind,
meeting with some natural infirmities of his Body, struck him into a sharp and
severish distemper, of which in a few days (notwithstanding his own and his
Chaplins Revelations to the contrary) he died in great discomposure, upon the
same day of the month whereon he had been twice wonderfully victorious.

After his death, his Carcass, though it was artificially embowelled and
embalmed with Aromatic Odours, wrapped also in six-fold Cerecloth, and put in a
sheet of Lead with a strong wooden Coffin over it, yet did it in a short time
so strangely ferment, that it burst all in pieces, and became so noisome, that
they were immediately necessitated to commit it to the Earth, and to celebrate
his Funeral with an empty Coffin.

And here I cannot but add that his memory will ever stink as did his Body,
both equally loathsome and abominable to all Good Men. (Wretch that he was,
who, to perfect the sum of all his Villainies, added this as the last Figure,
that when he had solemnly protested to take care for the safety and welfare of
his Prince, he brought him to the Block, and struck off his Head before his own
Royal Palace in the face of the Sun and the People, and even then wiped his
mouth and said he had done no wickedness.) But neither yet had the Divine
Vengeance left him: For although he had at his death usurped the Sepulcher, as
in his life the Throne of a King, yet he was not suffered to remain there in
peace, or to mix with Royal Dust, but not long after his Interrment, was dig'd
up and drawn thence on a hurdle to Tyburn, the place which he did best deserve
and become; where he hung stinking in his corruptions with as much Shame and
Infamy as before he had lain in State and Grandeur, a reproach to all
prosperous wickedness, and a scarecrow to Rebellion.

And this reminds us also of the inglorious ends of many of his
Fellow-Trytours, who died about that time by the hand of the Common Hangman;
and whose Head and Quarters are yet standing upon the Bridge or other places of
our Metropolis, as lasting monuments of their villainy.

And happy had it been for some of later date, if these or any other examples
could have given them warning, those late Rebels against King Charles II. many
of whom we all know have had the same Fate with their predecessors, to suffer
the legal punishment due to their crimes. And one of them to avoid the Hand of
public Justice, as Achitophel and Zimri, fell by his own, became his own
shameful Executioner.

Thus you have seen, from the beginning of the World to our own Age, the
Actours of Rebellion and Treason exemplarly punished. But I deny not that there
have been of old and yet are some Rebels and Traitors that go to their Graves
in peace like other men dying natural and easy deaths. Yet this ought not to
be any plea for or encouragement to their wickedness; because we see God has
given example enough to the contrary in terrorem to affright others from it:
And however it be as to this present World, we are ascertained he has awarded
everlasting punishment to it in the next. So we hear from St. See Dr. Hammond's
Ann. on that place.
Paul in the verse following the Text, They that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation.

Which in its utmost extent must necessarily mean that they who by force or
violence do oppose their Lawful Sovereign in this Life, shall after this Life
ended, be condemned eternally to suffer the Torments of Hell.

Verily there is a God that judges in the Earth: And though some of his Acts
of Providence are here unsearcheable and past finding out by the short Line of
Man's finite understanding, yet in the next Life he will abundantly convince
the World that he will do right, Psalm. 58.11.
that he will, as he has said, render to every man according to his deeds. To
them, who, by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory and Honor and
Immortality; Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9.
eternal Life. But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth
but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath; tribulation and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil.

Therefore (Sirs) if you have any regard to the Commands of God, if you have
any regard to your Temporal and Eternal Happiness, never resist the Lord's
Anointed, never privately plot, or publicly fight against your King.

It is to be feared that our present Sovereign will have the same enemies all
his Ancestors had since the Reformation, I mean the Fanatical part of the
Nation, who have been all along declared enemies to the Monarchy and the
Church. The Jesuits (those creatures of Ignatius Loyola that were created on
purpose to embroil and destroy every Reformed Regal and Ecclefiastical
Government, and are accordingly sworn to it) first instilled their
Antimonarchical and Schismatical principles into them; and still, under the
disguise of holy and sanctified Brethren, and fine pretenses of Gifts of Prayer
and Gifts of Preaching, and the like intoxicating whedles, they nourish and
maintain the same. And while they are willing to be deceived and run into
Conventicles, where these poisons are infused, notwithstanding the many
Warnings they have had from the faithful Ministers of our Church in printed
Sermons and other Treatises, what hope can we have of better things from them?

But be not you of them; partake not with them in their sins least you partake
with them in their punishments. Remember always and follow that pertinent
Advice of St. Paul, Romans 16.17.
Mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which
you have learned, and avoid them.

And that of Solomon, Prove. 24.24.
My Son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change.

Finally, be ever ready to aid and assist the King against all his enemies
whatsoever, to the utmost of your powers and capacities. And be ever praying
for him, that Almighty God would secure his Sacred Person from the secret
conspiracies and the violent outrages of seditious bloud-thirsty-men, that he
would strengthen his Arm and render him perpetually able to make good his most
gracious Promise to preserve the Government both in Church and State as it is
now by Law Established.

Grant this (O Lord) for the sake of thy Blessed Son, by the powerful
Operation of thy Holy Spirit. To whom be ascribed for ever all Power and
Dominion. Amen.

FINIS.

