THE ARTS OF GRANDEUR AND SUBMISSION.

OR A Discourse concerning the Behavior of Great Men toward their Inferiors:
and of Inferior Personages toward Men of greater quality.

Written in Latin by Joannes Casa Archbishop of Benevento, Author of the
famed Galateus concerning Manners: and rendered into English

By Henry Stubbe Oxon.

Quintilian. Instit. Orat. l. 1. c. 1. Operum fastigia spectantur, latent
fundamenta.
LONDON Printed by A.M. for William Lee, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Turks-Head in Fleet Street over against Fetter-Lane.

First Printed in English May Day 1665.

To my very worthy Friend Sr Charles Lyttelton, Knight, late Deputy Governor
of Iamaica, one of the Cupbearers to His Sacred MAJESTY, and Major in the
Sea-Regiment to his Royal Highness.
Sir;
ALthough this Treatise may seem impertinent to a Personage of your Endowments
and Worth; yet I could not but Dedicate to the preserver of my life the first
Essay of my recovery; and let you see that however I may be unfortunate,
necessitous, or weak, yet I cannot cease to be acknowledging. When I was in
Iamaica, I had the honor, of your favor; and I participated together with
others the happiness of that Government, which needed not the caprichios or
follyes of any insolent and unworthy successor, to endeare it to the
Inhabitants. When I was sick, you made me a part of your care: and when my own
resolutions, added to the violence of my disease, had inclined me to Dye, you
commanded me to live: and that I yet retain so much breath as to make this
profession, it is out of obedience to your Authority, as well as an effect of
your Tenderness. But I am not only to render you thanks for that being I
derive from your Goodness: Moral Philosophy teaches me, and that more
solemnly, to acknowledge the Author of my well-being: and it is with all the
have, as well as Submission imaginable, that I testify my obligations to you
for fixing me in the Family of the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Mordant,
and establishing my repose by the same Loyal, Noble, and generous hands, which
have contributed so much to the universal tranquillity of this Kingdom. I
have, at length, removed all the umbrages I ever lay under: I have joined my
self to the Church of England; not only upon the account of it is being
Publicly imposed, (which in things indifferent, is no small consideration: as
I learned from the Scottish-transactions at Perth) but because it is the least
defining, and consequently the most comprehensive, and fitting to be National:
wherein any unprejudiced person (not resolved to mistake particular men's
actions or opinions, for Church-Principles and errors) may observe all those
circumstances to continue in order to the promotion of Sober Piety, which the
Angels proclaimed at the Birth of the World's Savior; viz. GLORY TO GOD IN THE
HIGHEST, PEACE ON EARTH; AND GOOD WILL TOWARD MEN. In fine, it bears the
impress of what is Ancient, and Apostolic, as well as True. I always had a
reverence for those Primitive Christians; and it is with a sincerity not
unbecoming them, that I thus declare my self: and I believe you will admit this
deportment to be the best retribution I could make you; since it justifies your
esteem for me, and those pretensions wherewith I am perfectly

Sir, your most humble and your most obliged-humble Servant Henry Stubbe.
Parsons-green Apr. 25. 1665.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
READER,
IT was not with an intention to engage thy Judgment, that Muretus recommended
this ens^eing Piece as the best for it is Style and management, that had been
written since the time of Cicero. Our Author, Joannes Casa, Archbishop of
Benevento, preferred this before his Galateus: and having penned that in
Italian, he bestowed upon this Treatise his more attentive thoughts, and that
language wherein he surpassed Bembus, Sadoletus, Longolius, Manutius, and
indeed all others but Him whom he chose to imitate. He took for his example
Tully: and designs the work according to his manner where he treats de
Officiis. I shall leave the Discourse to recommend it self; and only inform
you that I have changed the Title my Author gave it into what it is, because
that however the word Duty may in some cases express the Latin word Officium,
yet it is not adequate in English; and might be scrupled at by some
Supercilious Reader. I observed that in this Treatise the Documents set down
are more then once called an Art and Artifice; whereupon I thought it no
incongruous Title, to express De Officiis inter potentiores and tennuiores
amicos Liber, by the Arts of Grandeur and Submission, respecting the sense of
the words, and Subject, rather then the genuine signification. Another thing I
am to take notice of, is, That I use promiscuously the words Superiors, Great
Men, and Patrons, as also those of poor Friends, Servants, Creatures, Vassals
and Dependances. In which I have partly followed my Author, and partly amended
him in the English; which you will observe to become more proper and
intelligible as I have worded it, then if I had emphatically restrained my self
to his Amici, Tenues and potentes amici, etc. If these be no Faults, I have
committed none, but what I durst justify to my Author, and therefore make not
a superfluous Apology.

Farewell.
THE ARTS OF GRANDEUR AND SUBMISSION, OR, A Discourse concerning the Behavior
of Great men toward their Inferiors: and of Inferior personages toward Men
of Greater quality.
I Have always thought that our Ancestors were freed from many of those
troubles which are to us both continual and vexatious; in that they did not,
as it is now our practice, retain in their Families, and in the number of their
domestiques, any but such as were absolute Slaves, to serve them in the
ordering of their Victuals, attending of their Persons, and other private
exigences. For whereas Man is naturally proud, haughty, and much more
quallified to command, th^n obey; it cannot choose but be a troublesome, and
odious affair to be a Master over such whose courage is yet entire, and their
Spirits no way enfeebl^d. And therefore I believe the ancients had no difficult
or unpleasant task, The inconvenience of our usual servants, if compared with
slaves.
to command over persons that were already subdued, and tamed by captivity,
exchange of fortune, and hard usage, or from their infancy inured to Slavery.
We have to do with men Sturdy, Strong, and as it were Savage, whom not only
Nature inspires with an hatred against all subjection, but even the freedom of
their condition impowers to resist their Masters. They have rights to pretend
to, and are capable of being injured: which occasions quarrels and contests
betwixt them and their Masters, and sometimes gives them the face of Justice.
Thus distractions multiply; and we become perpetually embroiled. Nor can it be
otherwise; since every man is a partial Judge in his own case, and puts too
great a value on his own performances. Thus it falls out as in auditing of
accompts^ they can never be balanced duly, whilst more is set down as
disbursed than has been received. Hence arise those bitter expostulations and
complaints; I have spent my self in your Family; I have rendered you these and
these considerable services; you are redevable to me for the achievement and
glory of such and such enterprises. And on the other side; I have been your
constant Patron and friend; you are obliged to me for your edu^ation and
subsistence all this while: I have showed you these and these particular
respects, and rewarded you thus and thus.

My own inclinations and common humanity made me esteem it no unworthy or
unagreeable design, to prevent, and allay these so usual and troublesome
quarrels. Wherefore having oftentimes entertained my self with those thoughts,
The Author's design in writing.
I at length happened to set down certain precepts, and as it were artificial
rules for the management of that mutual relation, and intercourse which is
betwixt Great, and Inferior persons: which from the resemblance it has with
that of old, is called by the harsh name of Service. And this I did, to the
end, that if I had not failed of my intention, both the one and the other sort
of men might receive such directions, as if they duly pursued, they might reap
all the advantages aimed at in those mutual relations, and avoid the
inconveniences which generally befall them therein.

Now, seeing that it is our business to deliver certain directions for our
conduct in a particular way of combining, and associating of men together: and
seeing there are several sorts of communities, and associations of men,
contracted upon sundry, and different grounds: It is necessary that first of
all we distinguish and separate from all others that kind of Society whereof we
intend to treat; Several sorts of relations and dependances amongst men.
to the end, that although there be some universal precepts which equally
concern all, and the explication whereof is too large a theme to be handled
at present, yet such rules as especially appertain to this subject, and mainly
conduce to those aims we now propose to our selves, may be distinctly and
plainly set down.

There is no action of man which is without design; Nothing done by men
without some design, or end.
and it is in vain to imagine there is any so good natured, as that their
visits and friendships are without particular ends, which though they are not
always in our thoughts, yet do they nevertheless insensibly rule us, and
influence us in all our enterprises. All Societies, applications, and addresses
are made either with an intention to delight us, or advantage our selves in the
acquiring of things necessary, The several sorts of relations or Societyes,
whereon grounded.
or of Power, or of Riches, and such like; or the improving our present
acquests, or else securing them unto us: or else we propose unto our selves
the considerations of Virtue, Justice, and Gallantry, and accordingly frame our
comportment. Under the first sort (that I may illustrate it by examples) all
lascivious actions, and amors, and such as are transcendently called
pleasures, are comprised. The sense of common Vtility and profit is very
comprehensive, and includes all the motives whereupon all Estates, and
Republiques, all Corporations, and Companyes are erected. For men embodie
together in Commonweales, Cities and Corporations, to the end that being thus
united they may live safe, and protected from foreign dangers, and domestic
inconveniences: those other Fraternities, and Societies of an inferior rank to
these, are instituted upon hopes of extraordinary advantage, and gains. Under
the third sort is contained that friendship and amity which is managed by
virtuous persons, not established upon particular advantages, but resentments
of integrity, praise and decency.

Inferior and ordinary persons when they apply themselves to the friendship of
Princes, and Great men, The reasons why mean persons apply themselves to great
ones: and why great men retain them.
and also Great personages, and such as are eminent for power, or wealth, when
they caresse or admit into their Cabnets and familiarity such as are obscure,
inconsiderable, and of little interest: neither the one or other intend by
those applications Honesty or a good mine: no, they scarce so much as make that
any part of their regards: but they principally, or only pursue therein either
profit, or pleasure. All which is evident, in that mean persons propose not to
themselves the service of the Just, the good, the valiant, or best temper^d
men, but (if they have opportunity to contrive and choose their relations) they
join themselves to the Rich, to the Powerful, and such as are favourite^ of
the Court, and populace: and having made their own fortunes, as if they had
never entertained further thoughts, they retire, or at least covet to disengage
themselves. Neither do the Great, Rich, or ambitious Potentates, employ, or
oblige such as are of a severe and inflexible virtue, but such as are diligent,
industrious, subtle, of a popular not rigid honesty. A morose integrity with
them is as odious, as Bigottery in Religion: it may make the practisers of it
admired at best, rather than employed, or confided in. Wherefore I shall omit
all those harangues which relate to True and ideated Friendship, when
agreeableness of manners and conversations does unite vertuou^ persons
together in a firm love, and friendship. These are as remote from our purpose,
as are the ends thereof from those pursued in that friendship which we now
treat of. Things of so different natures are not regulated by the same
precepts: nor can they be reduced under one head, which are so disjoined in
their designs, and management.

There is a further subdivision of humane Societies: for they are contracted
either betwixt equals, as betwxt Brother and Brother; or betwixt persons of a
disproportioned rank and esteem, as betwixt Parents and Children. It is of
great importance in the conduct of our affairs, It imports much to know the
grounds on which Socyeties are founded.
to understand the nature of that Society and Friendship we are engaged in:
for howsoever the world may give to all one common name, yet are the motives
which establish them, and the obligations to prosecute and continue them, very
different: and in the engaging therein, and interruption thereof, there is
oftentimes neither that ^eak^ess^ of judgment, nor inconstancy, nor
ingratitude, that men of small discretion, and insight into things, do imagine.

It is not to be questioned under which branch of the last subdivision the
Friendship we treat on, is comprised. Every one sees that it relates unto the
latter sort. But as evident as it is, that it intervenes only betwixt persons
of a different rank, The relation betwixt Master and servant, Lord and vassal,
is betwixt persons of unequal degree.
yet do most men either not regard that consideration, or not remember it
throughout the course of their life. It behooves us therefore to fix and
determine what that general aim and scope is, which we propose to our selves
in this society and confederacy, and according to which we ought to form and
conduct our actings: lest by mistakes and misapplications we fail in our
projects, and wrongfully condemn others, or render our selves liable to
censure. It is not in this as in other cases, wherein Learning, Power and
Riches make this inequality of degree.
Age, Nobility, or intrinsique worth and virtue is considered: no, these are
not the grand inducements unto, and Pillars of this Amity, but only Riches,
Dignity, and Power. And it were to be wished that all these should concur, to
the end that the friendship might be the more firm, wherein those ends mankind
proposes to it is self in these circumstances, may be all obtained, and no
pretense remain for the dissolving, and interruption thereof. But however, it
behooves us to consider, upon what grounds our mutual relation is contracted,
and not only what we design, but what they may expect; and accordingly ensure
our selves: since, not according to the greatness of our own hopes, but the
general answering of all theirs, this sort of friendship is established, and
continued. Let us therefore not indulge our selves in phansies, nor attribute
more to the resucries of speculative men, nor principles framed in Studies and
Hermitages by persons unacquainted with the practice of the world (which alone
is the rule of prudent and performing men; and which alone gives actons the
repute of being Honorable and Dishonorable abroad) than to the constant
course of humane affairs, in which we may daily observe, that upon any great
alteration of fortune, the whole nature and condition of this friendship is
changed; and it is not more true, that many are reduced to the same level
with, and even below their former equals and inferiors; then it is, that they
likewise are enforced (notwithstanding any previous friendship of the nature
aforementioned, and without any disparagement to such as admit of this
vicissitude) to revere, ^ourt and complement such as before were their
creatures, and at their devotion. In all which accidents there is nothing
strange, but the alteration of Fortune; with which such extravagances are
usual, in advanc^ing, equalling and debasing men: and they who understand
themselves comply with her disports, and accordingly demean themselves, Cases
altering, but not they. Wherefore in all Communities, and Leagues of
Friendship, let this be a general and infallible direction, A general rule to
be observed in contracting any dependence.
That every person engaging therein, thoroughly ^xamine the design and ends
upon which he and others enter thereon; and let him carefully inquire into his
own condition and abilities, and impartially judge how much he does contribute
to the upholding of that amity: and accordingly as he finds himself to be of
importance to the other contractors, and subservient to the ends they have in
ambitioning his friendship, so far let him value himself, and expect to be
valued.

But it is usual with men to cast up their reckonings otherwise, and they are
thereby precipitated into great errors and absurdities. Wherein I would
willingly undeceive them, that they might not give themselves and others the
troubles they perpetually do. Wherefore as often as they shall enter upon
those debates, they ought to remember, that it is not every thing which ought
to be put into the Scales, but only Riches and Power. Forasmuch as upon this
account only, and none else, is the relation to rich, and powerful men sought
after, and acquired; and we subject our selves to them in this manner, because
of their Riches, and Power. It is but fitting therefore that such as are
sensible of the calamities that attend poverty, who are weary of being
miserable; such, the meanness of whose condition is become insupportable to
them, and who cannot create themselves a better fortune without the helps of
others, and that power which another must those impertinences, and not place
too great a merit in their extraordinary wit, Nobility or Learning, (which yet
I despise not; and) wherein they themselves put no great confidence, as to
hope, or demand, that in regard of them, they should be equalled or preferred
before those others. But perhaps they will say, We are the better men: We
exceed them in point of behavior and virtuous deportment. Our Families are the
more ancient, and Noble: In Learning we surpass them. There is but one
advantage they have over us, and that they are obliged for to their Fortune,
not desert; had any thing but that blind Goddess, and chance (propitiou^ to
none but such as must absolutely depend thereon for their felicity) distributed
those favors, we had deprived them thereof, or at lest disputed them. It is
well for them, that prosperity is not always the attendant of virtue: and that
there is some way to felicify those who deserve nothing, and apprehend nothing.
I allow all this^ nor do I silence their objections, by telling them they are
partial to themselves; that they ought to give others leave to judge of their
good qualilites, and examine their particular defects: I grant them all they
pretend to; and being thus liberal in my concessions, I must yet tell them,
that in this kind of relation and friendship, all that they insist on is
frivolous, and not to the purpose. It was none of those considerations that
endeared them each to the other: It was Riches and Power: It is from hence that
those have the pre-eminence: and the want of them necessitates the others to
submission. Either these terms ought not at first to have been accepted of, or
not to be controverted afterward. There was formerly a Law amongst the
Aethiopians, that they should make him King amongst them, who was the tallest
person. I would feign know if this Law had not extended so far as to punish
any proud Pe^ant, or Philosopher, that should have ambitioned the Crown? Yet is
it true that wisdom is to be preferred before an extraordinary Stature: and it
imports more a Nation, that their Prince be endued with knowledge, than bulk of
Body: All this is true; yet since the Laws of the Aethiopians have a particular
regard to Tallness of Body; the Laws must take place; and Tallnesse must be
perferred. So it is with us: we must acquiesce in those conditions which usage
and custom has enacted, and which we our selves (as a part of that multitude
which gives Laws and Customs without comptroll) have ratifyed. For so far
ought we to be from adding ought to what has been appointed, and from giving a
value to any thing (howbeit otherwise very considerable,) where custom has
given it a disrepute, or contempt; that sometimes these kind of accessionals
become derogatory. This, that modesty which becomes a Virgin in a Cloister, is
criminal in a Curtesan: for since the esteem of a Curtesan depends upon her
spritely air, amorous gestures, aspect, discourse and dallyances: All that
carryage, all those graces, addresses, mine, and Language, which recommend a
beautiful Virgin or grave Matron to our admiration, are unbeseeming in a
Whore: and lasciviousness, how criminal and odious soever it be elsewhere,
makes up her praise and merit. Upon no other ground than this, was it decreed
in some Commonwealths, that those Citizens whose virtues were transcendent, and
not of a popular alloy, should be banished, though innocent: nor was this
procedure much condemned by the great Philosopher Aristotle; since, in those
Republiques all things were managed in a regular way, and all estates and
interests reduced to a temperament, it seemed just even to confine virtue it
self, and limit her within a mediocrity stricter than nature ever placed her
in. Let us then accustom our selves to yield that precedence and quality to
Riches and Power, which usage authenticates: let us be so wise in these
friendships, as not to place an undue value upon Nobility, Learning or Virtue.
Let us at length behold all such as refuse those terms (of which there is a
great number) as we would turbulent and unreasonable persons, who are as
troublesome in their friendships, as the seditious are in States.

Thus it is manifest, that in these kinds of associations, such only are
comprehended as are different in power and riches: and the bonds of them are
not a particular affection and love each have for others, but utility. From
whence also it is concluded (which was before asserted) that they are much
mistaken, who think that this sort of friendship has any affinity with, or
ought to be managed according to the principles of true and exact friendship.

Truly those men are very much deceived, and guilty of an intolerable
oversight, who exact in these associations, those ardours and deep concerns
which are only to be found in virtuous friendships. Those people ought to
distinguish amidst such a multiplicity of relations as encumber and associate
men one with another; and not expect to find every thing every where. For,
that any man should demand or imagine that another should quit his own
advantage, and abandon his particular profit, to serve him and procure his, and
this in such a friendship as is established upon mutual conveniences, is a
folly no considering person will fall into, or presume upon.

It is observable, that in this sort of friendship both parties propose not to
themselves the same advantages: but great personages expect from those that are
indigent and inferior to them, service, and an awefull regard: on the other
side, necessitous persons purpose to acquire Riches and Honor from Those that
are possessed of Wealth and Dignity. For they which are wealthy propose not to
themselves by this retinue any further increase of riches, but they understand
that the addresses and dependence of inferior persons upon them, not only
augments their splendor and glory, but is beneficial to them in their
domestique employments, and has other conveniences, besides the particular
satisfaction they find therein. Those that are inferiors, by reason of their
poverty and that contempt which attends it, seek not only their sustenance
and advancement, but protection in rich and potent families.

He that depends upon, or makes use of others, ought to understand their
humors and inclinations.
Since that things are in this posture; as in all other affairs, it concerns us
much to know the qualities and inclinations of those men we negotiate with, so
it will not be amiss, in these circumstances, to make a diligent inquiry into
the nature and inclinations of those persons with whom we live, that we may
either accommodate our selves to their humors, or refuse advantages that are
not to be procured but on such difficult terms as we cannot submit to. In this
inquiry it is not necessary that we should be very curious and exact, since a
general account, and such as is commonly if not universally true, will
satisfy: and indeed the humors of particular men are so infinite, that if it
were requisite to be acquainted therewith, the thing were not feasible.

To begin with a character o^ those which are Rich; The character of the
humors of Rich men.
they are generally inclined to pride, and contempt of others: for they live as
if they were masters of whatever the world calls good; and abounding with
money, according to which all things are valued, and which is the equivalent
price of all things, they imagine nothing to be above their reach, and indeed,
not already in their possession. The world is but a great market, in which
every thing is sold; the opulent^ suppose that whatever they can buy, is no
great tender, if given; that no present can be made, which if it were to be
purchased, would be too costly for their exchequ^r. And consequently, where no
expense is great, no accessional is so considerable as to oblige the receiver
to ^n extraordinary resentment. Thus they apprehend themselves already
possessed of happyness; and that they may communicate it to others, but not
derive any from them. Besides, they behold all men (especially that have the
reputation of prudence) to set themselves wholly upon increasing their estates:
they see it to be an indisputable point, that the rich man is never out of
esteem and repute; nor can lose his interest, but with his fortune: that
indigent virtue is rather admired, then followed; and that without riches it
seldom procures, and never can maintain its esteem. And as for Power, it
wholly subsists by large revenues; and vanishes without full coffers, or a
proportionable credit, which must be made good by an ample treasury at least.
Hence they conclude, they may justly bear themselves high, being already (...)
of what all covet, all men admire, and without which even they who vilify it
cannot subsist, or effect any great exploit. Nor does it a little add to their
arrogance and insolence, that many are unavoidably forced to apply themselves
to them, and petition for many things at their hands. Nor are they free from
the vanity of thinking that their riches entitles them to Empire, and that it
is ^or these treasures, wherewith they abound, that Soveraignety is ambition'd.
Thus great riches are attended with vainglory and insolence: nor are these the
only defects of the opulent, for it is so difficult for men not to be
transported with good fortune, that we may reckon petulancy, and a peculiar
kind of wantonness which is unexpressible to be another of their vices. They
are also addicted to luxury; and where delicacy is not the nature of the men,
it is their practice; because the ostentation of happiness, is a part of it.
In fine, great riches are never without, and o^tentimes create great follies:
but Civil happiness depends upon them; and good fortune is so inseparably
annexed to them, that even in common speech, by those great fortunes which
befall us, we understand nothing but great riches. All these Vices in rich men,
The hu^^urs of men newly made rich.
more notoriously affect such as have newly acquired their riches, then those
to whom they have descended by inheritance. For custom takes away the
admiration and value we frequently have for things; and the easiness of the
purchase lessens our esteem for them: besides, who are ignorant of the
miseries of an irrelieveable condition, and of the benefit that arises from
small supports therein, or universal deliverance from it, understand not the
happiness they enjoy themselves, and confer on others. But such as are
sensible with how much care (...) industry, or unexpected good fortune (which
happens but to some) they enriched themselves; who retain a perfect memory of
their wants, and the miseries it occasioned them, and the poor and necessitous
thoughts and actions it put them upon; they are surprised with the change of
their estate: and as men newly escaped from precipices and as yet filled with
horror and affright, magnify their passed dangers beyond reason; so do they
too much exalt their present enjoyments, and too overly behold the miserable
and the poor. Whereunto if we add this other circumstance, that those who
arrive to these sudden riches, are neither men of any education, nor insight
into the nature of things, nor acquainted with the humors of men whom they
retain or converse with; we will les^e wonder at those follyes, and that vanity
which their former, ignorance, mean spirit, and so vast and unthought of
change of fortune, (requiring a novell gar^, addresses and parts; which they
are not accustomed unto) produces in them. Examples whereby to verify and
illustrate this character, are obvious in the City of Rome, and elsewhere.

If any think they are injured by this character, and suppose themselves free
from the vices we impute to them; they apprehend not things aright, since the
universality laeves room for particular exceptions, and whilst the usual
defects of rich men are set down, occasion is given for them to glory that they
are not such.

As for the manners of such as are of great Power and Authority, The humors of
men in power.
they are partly agreeable with thos^ of the rich, already mentioned; partly
they are better they being commonly endued with a manly spirit, courage,
activity of mind, and a^ incessant desire of glory: And as in the atchieving of
high enterprises, the concurrence of other is necessary; So it is to the
celebrating (...) their praises, and completing of their honor which is
nothing but the opinion others have i^ their deserts; and supporting their
power an^ interest, which is insignificant without a mult^^tude of firm
dependences. Whereupon the comport themselves rather with gravity, the
insolence, toward their inferiors.

And thus much may uffice ^or the humou^ of such as are rich, and powerfull^
The poor and needy are sufficien^ described in their natures, The humors of
the poorer sort.
I add that they are directly ^^^posite to those others already charactered.

Wherefore those poor people which depend upon rich, Poor dependants, how they
are to deport themselves to wards their Superiors.
and Potent persons, ought to resolve with themselves to bear with all their
inconveniences, their contumelies, injuries, and follyes, and not only to
employ their patience in enduring them, but their prudence to conceal them:
and enforce their inclinations, if possible, to love them; which if they cannot
do, they must make it their care to pay them all those regards and services,
which the most affectionate would; for it is natural for them to desire every
one should love them: it being a certain acknowledgement of their worth, and a
testimony rendered of their agreeable carriage, when they are beloved: it being
impossible for a man to affect a person whom he approves not of. Thus rich men
arrogate all things to themselves, and are extraordinarily pleased with the
addresses, and respects of their friends, who are in this case as so many
d^ponents for the worth of the Grandee.

But it is a difficult matter to comply with the impertinencyes and follyes of
these men: They are to bear with their defects and follyes.
and to love a person whose foolery, and defects are so palpable, that he must
be stupid who sees them not, and worse who approves them. All this is true, bu^
since, as Tiresias in Horace says, Since you cannot your self supply,
But on another must rely:
You must submit to all this, and endure those conditions patiently, which you
cannot otherwise decline. Wherein you ought so much the less to scruple, since
this kind of friendship is not established upon real virtue, bu^ advancement
and profit. They are therefore to b^ condemned as troublesome and malapert
fellowe^ and ignorant of what becomes them: wh^ like ( Davus the servant in
Horace, durin^ the Saturnalia, or twelft-night-Kingdom) deport themselves
insolently, and reproa^^ their Patrons all the year long, as he did i^ those
Holy Days. 'Twas Fortune that preferred thee;
In one nature we agree.
Cursed chance! my virtue's my disaster!
I am all worth: but you're my Master.
This language is not to be admitted; an^ proves often fatal, where the Patron
is as po^erfull, as he is proud: Wherefore we ough^ not only to avoid such
words as these, but even to shun such thoughts. For if once ^ man indulge
himself in those cogitations, They ought not to think ill of them.
it is impossible but he will lessen his esteem, and consequently fail in his
respects, and the punctuality of his applications to his Patron, whereon depend
this whole friendship and relation. They are no les^e faulty, and incur the
same prejudice, who speak ill of their absent Patrons, and derogate from the
reputation of those they ought to revere, Much less to detract from them.
and from whom they draw great advantages. These men certainly are doubly
peccant, both because they perform not their duty, and because they act
repugnantly, to what they speak: for they live with, and are the followers of
one to whom they do not vouchsafe a good word.

Those also that are proud and haughty ought to decline carefully these
relations, Nor to demean themselves proudly.
and friendships, for there is not any thing so inconsistent with humble
addresses, deference, and obsequiousness, as a proud mind: for we respect, and
abase our selves before such as we allow to precede us in some eminent manner;
but such as are highly conceited of themselves, will not yield the preeminence
to another. There is a generation of men in the world who are not more
concerned for any thing, then not to acknowledge any man to be better then
they, and who are so highly opinionated of themselves, that they think it
unimaginable for any person to have acquired that excellence which they possess
not. It is intolerable, to say any one is a better man then they; he is only
richer, or more powerful: they have a lesser estate, but are not his
inferiors: it is death to them to think that worth^ and not Poverty should
discriminate them. These are morose, melancholique, and peevish persons, that
keep accounts of their services, and register punctually every bow, cringe,
and complement they make, and every good look, or acknowledgement, they are
appayed with. If they be at any time reproved, they produce their table-books,
and evince thence that the Congees are balanced, and that they are not behind
in any one respect. So much received; so much paid. Oh insupportable vanity! Oh
nicety not to be insisted on! These men ought to betake themselves speedily to
some other course of life, least they spend their days in continual trouble,
and anxiety, and after all sit down with nothing, and curse their sad f^rtune;
whereas they themselves only are to be bl^med. He that would thrive in this
employment, must be a mild, flexible and good man, who knows when to lower his
top-sayles, make his honor subservient to his interest, and to comply with
fortune in all her exigences: and all this with a cheerful soul, or at least
with that submission which discovers nothing of constraint and reluctance: for
no man unwillingly serves the person he respects. In this kind of Friendship,
since pride in a Patron is a quality generally to be supposed, and since
nothing gains so much upon it as complaisance and respect; all poor and mean
persons ought to compose themselves with the greatest humility and submissions
possible: which they must manifest partly in their words, and partly in their
actions. In all discourses and entertainments they must use not only a sweet
mildness, and complacentiall address, but also reverence: being neither rough,
nor servil, or flattering. Which consideration imports them much, since they
are certain to have frequent occasions of speaking with them, and there is not
any thing sooner engages the affections of a man then an handsome address, and
graceful language. The first caution therefore that they are to observe, But
to be humble in their addresses.
is, that their language be full of submission, humility, and such deference as
also tends to the debasing of our selves: for we are born in an age that is
extravagantly complementall; nor ought we to be ashamed of an error so
universally received. Custom authenticates our compliance, and to repine were
malepertnesse; to condemn it, an insufferable arrogance. It would be tedious
to enumerate particular advertisements; to have intimated them is sufficeent.

Moreover if at any time we are compelled to dissent from our Patron, Never to
dissent from their Patron's judgment, or ^ut modestly.
and oppose his judgment, it must be done warily, and very seldom, and never
but when it is not possible to avoid it: for it does not become the same
person to dispute, and to obey. It commonly happens at meetings and
entertainments, there are dubious and subtle questions proposed and
controverted: hereupon several persons of great ingenuity and parts expose
themselves thorough their imprudence: for they assume to themselves the whole
discourse, as if it were their due: they object, they reply sharply, they
propound, they confound all things, they debate obstinately, without end,
without moderation, (I had almost said) without sense: this is no sign of
respect, or deference. I know they are apt to reply, how they are not to be
blamed for refuting an opinion which an ignorant, and illiterate blockhead
proposed: he started it on purpose to engage them in talk; the question was
intricate and not be resolved in few words, and appertained to those studies in
which they were singular: and therefore the mentioning of it could not
otherwise be looked on, then as a challenge, or essay of their abilities; and
therefore they ought not to be blamed for closeing with a proffered opportunity
to manifest their great parts in ample discourses. All this I know: and I am
further sure, that where the debates are like to prove obscure or tedious, more
will start controversies than will hear them willingly stated: many will
object, that will not endure contradiction, and having presumed too much upon
their opinions and reasons, hate a confident and poynant refutation. These are
to be entreated like friends, not adversaries: every advantage is not to be
taken against them, nor every thrust put home, nor must your whole strength be
employed against them. There is policy sometimes in abandoning the Field, and
quitting a certain victory: It is not necessary that we always overcome, much
less triumph: Some Conquests have been fatal to the victors: or else the That
is, a victory attended with the ruin of the Conquerors: as a^ Thebes the
A^gives were overcome by the Cadmeans at Thebes: but they drew upon themselves
a War afterward with the Athenians, wherein they were over come. vid. Erasm.
adag.
Victory of Cadmus, had never given occasion to the Proverb. But they will
rejoyn, that it is a ^^fficult thing for a man whose reputation is ^^re in
question then the thing discussed, being warm with dispute about a thing he is
supposed or particularly pretends to be versed in^ to restrain himself and to
indulge or yield to an insolent puny; flesh and blood cannot endure this. All
this I question not, or, if they will have me to do so, I allow of. But I am
sure, and dare avow it, that this procedure is hurtful to them: and multiplies
adversaries, rather than converts. No generous soul will twice become the scorn
of a Pedant; but hate him as uncivil, whose Learning otherwise he would
commend. It behooves therefore these kind of men either to regulate their
passions, abate of their pride, and confidence, and accommadate themselves to
the humors of others: or confess that they are incapable of this kind of
friendship.

Let them also take heed how they railly, To be cautious in their rallying with
them.
and jest with, rich or powerful men, when they are not inclined, and in a
manner commanded by them to that familiarity: for in raillery there is a
freedom assumed, that agrees not, nay, which repugnes with Grandeur; and makes
those seem fellows who are superiors: Besides there goes along with it a kind
of security, and presumption upon the others facile nature, which a proud and
great spirit will not ordinarily endure. As for the Taunts and Sarcasmes of
great men, how sharp and biting soever they be, they are to be entertained with
a serenity of look and mind, or pleasantly retorted, and otherwise diverted:
there ought to be no resentment, how passionate soever one be; nor how highly
soever provoked: no emotion of the soul, or countenance, that may evince our
displeasure, or disgust: Great persons think themselves condemned of folly,
when their actions are disallowed: which as it is inconsistent with that
haughty spirit and arrogance their Greatness inspires them with; so it is as
unbefitting one that depends on their favor; who owes all his good fortune to
them; and who ought rather to reflect upon the unusual confidence they have in
him, by being so familiar; then be angry for their over-acting it. As for sharp
replies and answers upon such jests, they are to be eschewed: it is not for the
same person to avenge his wrongs, and to be concluded under obedience. This
advise is the more impracticable, by how much more pregnant and quick a man's
wit is: for ingenious answers so easily occur to them, and so unawares fall
from them, that without great discretion and command of their tongues, they are
to be reckoned amongst the unsociable; and men of dangerous and unagreeable
conversation^ It requires more then common patience, for a man of spirit, that
is always armed, and often assaulted, not to strike again: yet this must not
be done in these circumstances: No cause can be just for a man to oppose his
Superiors; who if they be overcome, hate; and esteem themselves foiled, if
opposed. Hence we see that being netled with any reply, they immediately change
the discourse, and avoid to intermeddle with those that handle them so
roughly. Now, as by pleasant converse, continual applications and g^ntilesses,
the proud are gained upon: so they are lost by crabbed looks, melancholique
silence and sullynesse of humor. Moreover, it is ridiculous for a man to
repine at their jests, whose injuries he must pocket up. It becomes therefore
poor and indigent relations, not only to take in good part the sallyes of wit
or even immoderate jesting in their Patrons; but also to express a great joy
and satisfaction in that familiarity they are admitted unto. And in the whole
remaining course of their life, let them comport themselves with that
moderation, that their discourse be agreeable, and so pleasant as the humo^r of
their Patron requires, or will endure: For this is the char^ they must sail
by: His will and nature is that rule, according to which they are to frame
their speech: And avoid ta^i^urnity and pensiveness, which (how melancholique
soever he be) in a dependant is odious, and displeasing, and commonly
suspicious: for it usually creates in Great persons an opinion, They are not to
be of a sullen humor, or aspect.
that such as are sad, dislike their own condition, or the behavior of their
Patrons: neither of which is acceptable. They ought not also to be talkative,
nor intrude into his privacyes, or debates: this is irreconcilable with that
reverence that is due from them. Nor ought they to seek, Nor forward in
discourse.
or minister occasion of discourse; but stay till it be given, or that they be
commanded to do it, thereby to pass away the time; as often it happens. For
it becomes those, as Great men, to choose what matter they will hear spoken of;
and he is justly blamed, who makes haste to begin a discourse before his
betters.

I formerly insinuated, Nor addicted to flattery.
that in this sort of friendship men ought to avoid flattery: I now come to
propose my reasons for that caution; since others are of a different judgment,
and think nothing to be more advantageous: They do particularly recommend the
practice thereof, endearing it by the examples of many Illustrious persons, who
have accumulated great riches, and obtained great honors solely by these
means. But how gainefull a course soever this may seem, I think a man ought
not totally to esloigne himself from the regards of honesty and justice. Though
I do not bind him up to the rules of that exact and imaginary virtue to be
found only in the Books of Philo^sophers, and barangues of malcontents; yet
there is a certain vulgar Morality (like Sterling coin, Nor debauched in
their morals.
with a legitimate alloy, current and passable) which I would not have them
relinquish: nor, for any profit, to render themselves base and unworthy. For,
if once they disengage themselves from the obligations of common honesty, even
such as employ them in unjust actions, or are privy to them, have no ways to
secure themselves from their attempts upon themselves, in robbing, or betraying
them. A man may have his particular failings, yet whilst he retains a due
esteem and reverence for those general maxims of Justice which support
humane commerce, and civil societyes; he may be looked on as a weak person,
but not rejected or dreaded as absolutely wicked. But whosoever makes light of
all those considerations which oblige man to man, and which represent him as
virtuous; how small soever his miscarriages be, yet is he not to be trusted
(however he may be made use of) nor admitted to bear a part in any society,
much less in this we speak of. Beware therefore least the desires you have of
benefiting your self, transport you beyond the rules of honesty. Now, what is
more remote from honesty, than flattery? what more general artifice is there
to introduce and propagate vitiousnesse in men, then that? wherefore take heed,
Seek not a parasite to be,
Having professed amity.
There is a very great affinity betwixt flattery and obsequiousness: and
indeed it is universally true, that virtue and vice have such a resemblance,
they sometimes approach so near each other, that it is hard to discern
betwixt them, or to distinguish one from the other: yet are there certain
precepts, which who so shall adhere unto, he shall preserve his integrity,
without disserveing himself.

There is a certain temperament of language, The nature of an agreeable
conversation.
and way of moderating our selves in our discourses, which virtue being
destitute of a proper and peculiar name, the Aristotelian Philosophers thought
fit to borrow an appellation for it from Friendship, and to call it (...):
because those who have that singular endowment, manage their conversation with
all that affability, courtesy, and oblieging deportment, which usually
intervenes betwixt Friends. And it consists in this, that we neither absolutely
resign our selves up to the will and sentiments of those we associate with,
nor abuse their civility with a petulant behavior: retaining a cheerfulness
and alacrity of spirit without sullenness; as grave, but not austere. To
conduct us in this mediocrity and temper, it imports us much to know both those
we have to do with, and our selves. And these, as all other things^ are best
understood, by comparing those in which the distance is remarkable, rather then
such where the distinction is more subtle and nice: as pa^ents and children,
private and public persons. For that address which is proper enough to a
private person, suits not with one whose capacity is more public: what in one
is civil, is saucy and malapert in the other. For a son, to reprove his
Parents, it is impiety^ to censure a Magistrate, it is rebellion: to condemn ones
equal, it is no unbeseeming action. This accommodation of language our client
must punctually observe. The case is nice; he walk^ betwixt two precipices; he
must neither servilely flatter, nor be clownishly morose. All thi^ he shall
attain unto, if I be not deceived, without much difficulty, if in convenient
place and time, he enlarge and somewhat expatiate himself in the praise of all
such qualities and actions as he finds really commendable in his Patron; and
never touch upon any thing that is to his prejudice or disparagement: To
admonish and reprehend, it is an act becoming equals, not inferiors. And to
magnify what is not praiseworthy, and which a man approves not, is the
quality of a base, treacherous, and deceitful person. All his discourse ought
to be attended with modesty and respect, not only because this is the most
becoming civil persons, but by reason that liberty of speech argu^s us to be
too secure and to presume upon the nature of those we discourse with. Let him
avoid obscenity and ribaldry: whatever is wanton, or unseemly, let it not be so
much as named; let every word, and every action signalise it self by its
particular deference, and mani^est that our client is no way indifferent what
opinion his Patron have of him. Let him also take heed that all his carryage,
every motion of his, whither he walk, stand, sit, or eat: that his hands, his
eyes, his voice, all have nothing that i^ pu^rile, affected, or distasteful:
And not only this (which is an advise pertaining to another part of morality)
but that all be managed with that grace and mine, as to evince how much he
reverenceth and almost adores his Superior. No profuse laughter, no outcryes
or pi^rcing exclamations, no rude or antic postures, no yawning, or frequent
spitting, nothing that carries with it either neglect, indecency, or excessive
freedom, is to be tolerated. All that liberty and negligence of garb, which
some use when they would be debonaire, and divert themselves from serious
cogitations, is to be confined to the privacyes of men of equal rank and
quality. Our client must never be so intimate: Not but that at some times, and
for some while, with some persons, a ple^sant^ familiarity and freedom may
happen to succeed well: but No man ever miscarried through excess of respect,
or was disgraced for retaining a constant and proportionate sense of hi^
Patrons Grandeur. That Great man either forgets, or abases himself, who seeks
his divertisement with his inferiors; and when he either recollects himself,
or resumes his former thoughts, he apprehends the absurdity and danger of these
condescensions: and his serious and deliberate judgment is, that a client who
complies with his Patron's weakness, takes too much notice thereof; and may
perhaps be induced thereby to pretend to a further interest in him at other
times, then he ever thinks ought to be allowed him: hereupon to secure himself
from the effects his indiscretion: has made him lyabl^ to, he esloignes
himself from his client, who ought always to remember his own comdition,
whatsoever his Master does. Our ^lient also ought particularly to see that he
be decently clothed, Of the garb and attire of such as are dependants.
with that nearness, and bravery, which suites with the dignity of his Patron.
There is no Great man but pride^ himself up in the ostentation of his riches
and quality; and delights in perpetual acknowledgements of his magnificence and
seeming felicity: Besides, it is a part of their splendour and luxury, to be
served by men of a good age, mine, and garb.

Although that it is certain that by their language and address, men render
very great testimonies of their respect: yet it is more amply expressed by
action. Wherefore it behooves inferior persons continually to attend upon their
superiors, Of their adresse and attendance on their superiors.
and readily to entertain, and dispatch their commands: Nor is it imprudently
done of them to use that conduct in rendering their services, as to endear them
to their Masters knowledge by such cerimoniousnesse, as may not retard their
affairs, yet evince that extraordinary concern^ and regard they have for their
Patron's quality, as well as person. It is not only necessary that business be
done; there is an artifice in making known that it is so: and many actions are
lost for not being sufficiently averred. Great men multiply their dependances
more out of state, then necessity: there is a grandeur in the pompous delivery
and receiving a message. An affectionate disrespect seldom prospers: it
obliges not so much by its sincerity, as it provokes by its ill example, and
that diminution it carries with it of the Patron's dignity. Wherefore let them
not slight these considerations: let them be constantly in his presence, and
always make up a part of his retinue: let them be assiduous, but not
troublesome. Let them not imagine that because he has meniall Servants and
particular Officers for common employments and attendance, that therefore they
are to be excused waiting. It is their appearance is requisite, not their aid.
And this circumstance has nothing singular in it, but extends to all inferior
personages. Those which delay and trifle, who dispute or transfer commands (as
more proper to others) who come late, or often absent themselves, introduce an
ill example in this kind of relation: and being spareing of their own regards
and applications, do as it were instruct their Patron how he ought to comport
himself toward them, and not to be prodigal in his favors, where their
returns are niggardly appaid. Who makes himself a stranger, ought not to
wonder if he be treated as such. In the managing of business, and dispatch of
commands, the first thing to be observed is a great fidelity and integrity: Of
their fidelity.
And that, not only because it is decent, and most fitting; but also because it
is most advantageous: for Great men where they find a faithful Servant, they
usually entrust themselves with him, and rely upon his care and honesty, and
are thereby induced to promote his peculiar interest. Besides this trustynesse
our client must have a subtlety of wit and ingenuity, Of their prudence, and
conduct in affairs.
to manage all things with that conduct, and quickness, as if it were his own
concernment: or more vigorously, if possible; because it is more difficile to
govern others affairs than a man's own. But these advertisements are general
to all men of business, and all societies: In our relation it is a particular
advise, not so much to regard what is really best to be done, They are to
manage affairs according to the judgment of their Patron, and not their own.
or what method is best to effect it, but what our Master will best approve: to
whom since Fortune has subjected our persons, we must resign our judgments.
I shall instance but in one case, which he that will may make further use of.
Great persons commonly retain in their service some Learned persons as
Secretaries, whom they exercise in the penning of Letters, and manifestos, upon
several subjects, to the end that they may be ready to indite them upon any
exigency, for them to sign. These men adhereing to these rules and precepts
which they have framed to themselves out of their own observation, reading, and
converse with learned and prudent persons, very frequently displease their
illiterate, humoursome and fantastical Patrons, who account the numerosity of
their periods, and Politeness of speech, pedantry; and all that is Rhetorical,
to be but Academique impertinences, and the dotages of such as never understood
the World, or business. Hereupon they blot out all that is good and proper;
alter the whole design and texture of the writing, and deprave it according to
the capriciousness of their particular phansy. What should a man do in this
case! what counsel must our unfortunate Scholar betake himself unto? I know
none better, than that of Euripides in his Phoenissae. Amongst Fools thy wit
disguise,
how hard a matter soever it prove, It Is criminal then to be wise.


I conclude therefore that as in their writings, so in their actions, the rule
they are to order them by, is their Patron's approbation, and allowance: This
is the standard, and measure they are to be tried by; it is from him they have
their value; as the Kings stamp and Image makes of any alloy current Silver.
They ought not to be solicitous what is truly the best, nor perplexe themselves
with scruples out of Divinity, Morallity, or Politics: Their Patrons will is
their Oracle: his pleasure makes every thing just, and reasonable, and
prudentiall: who understands this thoroughly, needs no other Casuist,
Counselor, or Confessor: Nor ought he to satisfy himself how well affairs
are managed; but how much to his Patrons satisfaction. Let our client therefore
learn his Masters humor and caprichioes, as well as interest: let him inform
himself of his particular inclinations, and passions, and the extent of his
reason: let him know the language of his frowns, and smiles; and the dialect
of his eyes, in all circumstances. Then shall he be accomplished for this
Ministry.

This is the whole part which an inferior is to act; these are his rules by
which he is to guide and move himself. They are set down in generals; but the
more full illustration of them, and accommodation to particular cases and
accidents, is a laborious work, and which each man must supply himself withal.

As for the rich Rich and great men how they are to comport themselves toward
their inferior dependants.
and factious they are much more to attend unto the subsequent rules and
directions: because that power, if not regulated by wisedom^, disposes them to
greater follyes and extravagancyes then others: And if they be for a while left
to their own wills, without any check or guidance, vices take deeper root in
them ( as weeds in rich ground) and afterward grow too prevalent to be
extirpated. For, what is it, that a man would not undergo rather then subject
himself to the barbarous pride and capriciousness of some persons, that I
could name, but shall not? who are of so odious and insupportable a nature,
that it is not to be wondered if even men of despicable fortunes and rank,
choose rather to suffer their present want and penury, then approach or submit
to them. But such as are poor and indigent, instead of a Tutour have the sense
of their own wants continually to check them; and that necessity which compels
them to seek their advancement in the service of another, daily makes them
apprehensive least they loose it: And, if they do offend, the miserable shall
never want such as will blame them. Let rich men therefore know, that they
themselves are obnoxious to Laws, and that neither Revennues, nor Dignity
exempts from certain rules: Nature has prefixed bounds to paternall
authority; and it is impiety for any to exceed them. They ought not to despise
and set at naught all such as they surpass in estate, They ought not to
despise and undervalue them too much.
and to think that because they are not rich, therefore they are not men. Nor
are they to exact all manner of services from every client; for though he be
not able to subsist of himself, he is not therefore immediately to be abased
and employed in the meanest and most abject offices. There are differences
betwixt man and man, where riches intervene not: and in the distribution of
their affairs, this disparity is to be regarded. Even all Great men are not
equal in dignity or estate, and as absolutely as the client is to resign
himself up to his Patrons will, and as requisit^ as it is for him to do so, yet
that discrepancy of Great persons makes a necessary distinction betwixt the
respects due to the one and other. Hence it is (that I may illustrate the thing
more by the most remote comparisons) we mortals pray to God and honor him with
a pious devotion^ but should a Great man demand of his vassals to rear Altars,
and Sacrifice to him, and change their respects into their Religion: He were
mad: And it is visible that we pay not to several illustrious Princes the same
homage, which the Persians do to their King. Wherefore, as it is the clients
part to serve his Patron without repining, cheerfully, and sometimes without
staying to be called upon: So it becomes the Patrons not to abuse their
facility and compliance, nor to oppress them with punctilios. He ought to
remember, that those he imployes, those that serve him, are not his Slaves, but
Friends of a lesser degree; and as mercenary as they seem to be, fortune and
their own wills only, not nature subjected them to him. They are free men; They
are freemen.
this they owe not only to the Laws in being (which is manifest) but to their
birthright. If there be any such thing as natural slavery and dominion, it is
where there is the like difference as betwixt men and beasts: or where the one
has abilityes to direct, and the other is either devoyd of reason, or has
only so much left as, joined with abilities of limbs, capacitates him to be
serviceably ruled. But these we speak of now under the notion of inferior
friends, they are not merely qualified for porters, and such drudgery-works,
requiring only strength of Body, but they are such as merit our commendation
for their industry, wit and experience. Thus it is clear that they are free:
and it is custom (as I said in the beginning) which gave this relation the
name of servitude: which term, as harsh as it is, use has somewhat
qualified: for even rich and Great men when they accost their inferior
acquaintances, in civility they profess themselves to be their Servants,
because it is the fashion so to say. So that the word is now rather an argument
of regard, Not Slaves, however they be called Servants.
then service or vassallage. But such as make enquiries into the true nature of
things, ought not to perplexe themselves about words. For as long as the
ancients furnished themselves with Slaves out of the captives taken in War,
and that there was no standing Laws prohibiting that usage, there was no great
reason why they should desire to make use of persons whose freedom rendered
them less obnoxious to their commands and power. Therefore it is no wonder if
they did not afford it a peculiar name in their language, which had scarce any
place in their Country. But after that Christianity had allayed the fierceness
of men's minds, and abated the severity of unfortunate wars: when it began to be
reputed an impious cruelty to enslave those who were servants to the same God,
and not so estranged in enmity as to disagree in Religion; about that time it
is probable that men of inferior rank and extraction being in want, began to
be retained by greater and richer persons in sallary, to discharge those
employments which slaves formerly underwent: and in process of time it become
so little disgraceful, that even men of better quality than ordinary, scorned
not to take wages in like manner. But this custom is not supposed to have
prevailed till the declination of the Roman Empire, when their authority was
extinct who had power alone to give it a Latin name. Hence it is destitute of
a convenient appellation; and it is not worth the while to invent a new name,
which it is uncertain how it will succced; and therefore I shall be content to
express the parties by the names of Clients and Patrons; servants and Masters,
superiors and inferiors: and the relation betwixt them by that of
conjunction, and friendship, not that any of these are proper, but that they
are significant enough to cause me to be understood; And so I end this
digression.

Wherefore such as depress their poor Clients even to Slavery (which, who is
there that endeavors not to do?) they do not only carry themselves inhumanely
and unmercifully; but act tyranny, and injustice. For how Lord-like, and
tyrannical, is it to walk abroad daily in the Garden or Grove, with a numerus
retinue of these friends standing on the right and left hand, with their hats
off, and yet never so much as to vouchsafe them a good look? Let us reserve
this deportment for Kings alone: And for those who are not possessed of Empires
and Monarchies, let them not pretend to royalty; lest their followers hate
them, and their enemies deride them. They are as faulty, who embrace every
little occasion to quarrel with their honest and well meaning creatures, in
public; to chide, to rail upon them when the error is so little, that their
folly becomes the only remarkable thing. What should this generation do with
servants? For, howsoever that it be not for them to question the demeanor of
their Patrons, or regret any thing; yet it becomes those others to consider
what pressures they lay upon them. As for those who are so furious, Ought not
to be beaten, or ill used.
and passionate, as to assault and beat such as by their Subjection have not
lost their liberty: I think them fitter for Bedlam, than a serious reproof.
Aristotle maintains, that betwixt the servant and Master there intervenes no
such relation, as to make the former capable of an injury: Every action (he
says) is just, nor will he allow any duty that he may challenge from his
Master. Yet since even those servants are men, he thinks it not amiss if the
Master regulate his power by the rules of common humanity. Nor is that saying
impertinent, which the crafty and roguish Sauria makes use of to a Freeman who
brawled with him.

I am a man, as well as you!
But Aristotle speaks of absolute Slaves; And, however, his discourse
abstracts from Christianity. But our Petty Tyrants, that have not to do with
slaves, treat all as if they were such, or indeed as if they were not men; yet
do they not extend to them that regard they have for their beasts. For those
Horses they use for their Saddle, or Coach, they take great care of them: they
neither over-worke them, nor harrasse them out with ordinary labor, they
afford them rest, and ease when they are weary; and cure them being sick, or
lame: but for these poor clients, who has any regard or care? who pities them
being tired, or looks after them being sick? Is there any condition more
deplorable, or vexatious, than that of such as are retainers to Great
personages in Rome? This deportment is not only repugnant to Christian-charity
and humility, but even that common notion of humanity which is imprinted in
every man: let not therefore excess of good fortune destroy in any man the
resentments of nature: nor let the apprehensions of their own riches and
greatness cause them to forget that their Clients though poor, are Freemen. Yet
must I confess that it is hard for a man to observe a just conduct, and to
comport himself with an unblameable evenness in all occasions: Or so much as,
upon mature consideration, to determine what that equability is according to
which actions are to be regulated. For there is a great difference in persons,
times, ages, the nature of things, men's manners, customs of Countries, and an
infinite number of other circumstances; all which various emergencies cause us
to vary our addresses and regards: and which require a vast comprehension that
they be quickly and duly understood. I do not pretend to a greater judgment
then other men; nor do I think it necessary to boast of my intellectuals: since
in this exigency there needs no more, then that men perfectly remember those
precepts I have already set down. And those precepts are only two in number.
Two great directions for Superiors, how to deport themselves toward their
Inferiors.
Viz. That men would not abuse the obsequiousness of their Clients; but employ
them with that tenderness and civility, and so adjust unto them their
negotiations, that they may apprehend themselves not to be indifferent to their
Patrons, nor them insensible. And, That they do not mistake morosity for
Grandeur; nor great passions for Greatness. Wherefore as often as men have
occasion to make use of the service of others in the mannagement of their
affairs, they are to consider the quality of the several persons about them,
and with a regard thereunto, to appoint mean and sordid employments to men of
as base a rank and extraction: They ought not (as some preposterously do, (to
their own disparagement more then that of others) employ Gentlemen in their
Kitchins, and scullery, or such like mean offices. There is not so much of
state in that ambitious humor of being served only by persons of worth; as
there is odium, in debasing them so low. Nor ought they to set weak and sickly
persons to hard labor: nor to cause the serious and grave to personate the
Antique or Buffo^n; nor the aged to act the parts of the young and sportive.
Homer does not represent his Achilles so as if he employed Phoenix, that
reverend old man, to be his Butler; but fixes this employment on Patrochus, a
man of more agreeable years and spirit^ They are also to take care that they
never impose an extraordinary trust, They ought not to be put upon unnecessary
troules.
or laborious command, on any, or engage them in any great quarrel, but upon a
great cause, or inevitable necessity: For common humanity obliges us not to
make a Sport of, or any way to misuse the good nature, care and vigilance of
another. For even such as are absolute servants love not jeastings of so much
trouble and importance to them and commonly express their resentments as
bitterly as he in the Comedian.

Slave that I am to a capricious Master! Is this a time of night to go to town
in? This errand might have been respited till daylight.

Daedalus, that brave Engineer, is is said to have had all manner of springs
and Machines of iron wherewith mechanically to represent the actions of
several living creatures: Nor be put upon unsuitable employments.
But, can any man imagine that he ever made those to fly, whose nature it was
to swim? or, that having no occasion to exercise his art, that he yet never
permitted them to rest, or stand still? Let them then generally follow his
example, and let them temper their commands with mildness and moderation. As
for those who are all imperiousness, who know no requests but what are express
commands, Nor two imperiously treated.
who enforce those services they might otherwise readily dispose of; with whom
every failour, is criminal; and two or three petty defects an unpardonable
miscarriage: certainly these persons are not only very injurious and
oppressive in their demeanor; but ought to apprehend their own condition, as
being environed rather with so many enemies, then accompanied with a large
retinue of Friends.

There is also in the ordinary discourse and conversation of great men, a
certain mildness and affability, or rather staidness, But with affability.
and severity of temper mixed with courtesy and jocundnesse, which whosoever
practices, their dependents respect them as if they were their parents, and are
so far from detesting them as tyrants, that they have a great affection for
them. It is incident to humane nature, to hate whom they stand in fear of. But
oftentimes it falls out, that many men studying to avoid excessive familiarity
(which they think inconsistent with that port and Grandeur which is requisite
to their quality) they become peevish and Surly. It will be no impertinent
digression from our present purpose, to relate the story of Deioces a Mede, who
was endowed with very great wisdom. Herodotus tells us, how by reason of the
great opinion hi^ Country had of his justice, he was chosen King, and amongst
several laudable customs he put in practice, this was one, whereby he
preserved the dignity and honor of that Throne he was newly advanced to.
Whatsoever business he had to dispatch, or employment to confer on any man,
he managed it by others, so as that he suffered never any Median either to
speak with him, or once to see him. This worthy personage did apprehend very
much least he should be envied by his Subjects: and that they who had lately
been his equals, and lived in as good fashion as he, would not patiently endure
he should possess that extrordinary splendour and honor they themselves had
conferred on him. This inconvenience he thought to remedy thus, if he not only
declined their converse, but presence; and accustoming them to the commands of
a King, he extinguished in them by degrees the remembrance of that private
condition in which they had been better acquainted, and which they could never
totally forget whilst the memory of it would be renewed by constant visits and
enterviewes. Nor indeed is it unusual for men to f^a^e, and highly esteem
those things that are removed from their sight, and with which they are
unacquainted: and that Opinion, like a multiplying Glass, should magnify
things at a distance. Yet would not I advise Great men so to demean themselves
toward their Inferiors and dependants, Yet not with too much kindness.
as if they were their Brothers^ and make them their confidents: no, this
complaisance is peculiar to real and sincere friendship. But as I would not
make this last my advice, so neither can I allow this austere and sullen
behavior. It is true Deioces did well, considering the unsetledness of his new
Government, and the Persons he ruled over, who were Barbarian sinured to
absolute Monarchy: Yet certainly his condition was attended with a great many
unpleasant circumstances; particularly, in that he deprived himself of all
society, and that delight which arises from the conversation of friends.
Wherefore let great men preserve their State and honors; yet by means
agreeable; and when their leisure permits, let them willingly lend an ear to
the applications of their domestiques, and reply courteously, and sometimes
begin discourses with them, and railly with them, and comport themselves with
mildness: to the end that they may not altogether resent their ill fortune, but
be satisfied that if their necessitousness reduce them to depend on another,
yet their quality is not absolutely servile. Let no man abuse himself; humane
nature delights not in being subject: All men affect liberty: and however many
ambitiously and vainly boast and make show of the Empire they have over others;
wise men are content to possess it, without unnecessary ostentation thereof.

There are some who maliciously dissemble an affection for their Clients, Their
Serviceablenes^ ought to be recompensed.
to the end that they may oblige them more effectually in their service; they
humor them with very good words and small favors, and having reaped from
their industry and unusual diligence all advantages imaginable: they
recompense the assiduity of their services with a little good language. This is
an unworthy deportment, and so far from becomeing a person of worth, that it
is not to be eudured in any body: it is a mere cousenage; and if it be not
handsome to defraud a man of his money and estate; it is criminal, to rob a
man of the fruits of his labors, and many years attendance; to defeat his
hopes, and that expectation which we our selves ^omented him in.

It is also a subtle but unjust artifice which some men use, who reckon it
amongst the obligations they have put upon their domestiques, that they have
not evilly entreated them: they register every good look, civil word, or
courteous action of theirs, and think they have thereby sufficiently rewarded
them for all the cares, troubles, and dangers they have undergone for their
sake. I must tell those persons, that it was no part of their agreement, or
expectation, when they first came together, to be so served: they never
proposed to themselves the requital of one courtesy, or civility, by another;
but that riches, and r^all profit should accrue to them by that dependence. And
it is no true payment, if having hired a Fiddler to play all day at a feast, we
should when he demands his money, invite him to sit down at the table, and to
hear us sing or play in the like manner, or perhaps more skillfully. No, he did
not (as I may say) lend his music, to be repayed in kind, but sell it.

Furthermore, as it behooves inferior relations to put up the wrongs and
injuries done them by their Patrons, and not only patiently to support their
contumelies, but with complaisance to behave themselves thereupon: so on the
other side, it becomes great persons not to take notice of every little failour
in their creatures, Every little default in them ought (...) to be resented.
nor rigorously to insist upon each punctilio with them nor to censure them
for every petty defect in their manners. For we may easily guess, how hard or
rather impossible a matter it is to find another man entirely complacentiall
and never to disoblige us in word gesture, or action: since we our selves, who
ought better to understand our minds and inclinations than any other can, can
never so conduct our affairs as to be always satisfied with the mannagement
thereof. Wherefore let them take heed lest they fall into too violent a
passion, or too severely resent the defaults of their poor servants, as often
as they mistake or err in the discharge of their ordinary employes, or
dispatch nota message so well, or fulfill not a command so punctually, or
readily, as might have been expected, or wished. There are many who are too
rigorous herein; not imagining that it is much more easy to contrive than to
put in execution a thing: and that how facil so ever it be at first appearance
in the designing, yet many accidents and difficulties intervene, which impede
and retard it is performance. Nor ought they only to connive at, and pardon
such faults as be purely involuntary, or as humane frailty precipitates them
into; but also diligently to examine their own breasts, and to consider whether
they themselves have well weighed all circumstances, and that they are not
either in part or altogether culpable for those defects, which are imputed to
their poor servants. For it commonly happens, that all the providence and
forecast of the most wise and careful servant becomes sucesseless, and
prejudicial, thorough the indiscretion, peevishness, inconstancy of mind, and
hastiness of humor in the Master. Which made him to cry out in that ancient
Comedy. Pardon, ye Gods! the d^stiny's too bad,
To be a Slave, and to a man that is mad.
Let them beware therefore how they censur condemn, or otherwise reprove their
servants, whenas they themselves only are in fault, and deserve to be blamed.

Moreover whereas this conjunction is effected, and that men enter on this
dependency upon no other aims and terms, as I have already evinced, then hopes
of advantag^^ (without extraordinary regard to particular inclinations, Great
men ought not to b^ unmindfull of the interests of their dependants.
or affection) Great personages ought to provide so for their dependants, that
such as serve them diligently and carefully, and signalize themselves by their
serviceableness to them, may not be defeated of their recompense, and and what
they may justly expect. And as it is the duty of such as are subordinate, and
inferiors, not to press too vehemently in their own behalf, nor to urge their
own concerns too much with their Superiors, but mildly to insinuate the
remembrance of them, Nor they too boldly to importu^^ their Pa^ron^.
or lightly to mention them upon occasion: rather suggesting them to their
memories, then importuning their justice: For he understands not the artifice
of obsequiousness, nor the address due to Great men, who treats them as a
Creditour would his Debtour; who does not solicit modestly, but boldly as it
were arrests them: What ever he may have of right in his demands; the way of
promoting his interests, is injurious. Thus parents are displeased, and all men
authenticate their resentments, when their Children implead them, though
justly: there is something of indignity in the procedure^ The difference
betwixt parent and child, and the disproportion betwixt their quality, all
vanishes when they appear under the names of plaintiff and defendant. As the
client ought not to be troublesome to his Patron, in recounting his merits, or
importuning his rewards; so it becomes not the Patron to forget his deserts,
nor to respite his acknowledgments too long. It is ungenerous in this case, not
to own the industry and faithfullness of your creatures; and who stays till he
be reminded of his duty, either must be reputed insensible, as not knowing: or
unworthy, for slighting it; and must blame himself, if he fall into disrespect
with his Clients, or be afterward disserved by them These kind of men should
apprehend, that they are under an obligation to promote their personal
advantages; the thing is a real debt, without the formality of covenant and
bond; and we are engaged to see them recompensed, who lay out themselves and
their lives, for our advantage. We ought not to overvalue our goodness, nor to
imagine our selves to be generous, in all our retributions: to enrich or
otherwise gratify our affectionate creatures, is not always a largess: To be
great, to be powerful, does not entitle us to the abilities of other men, nor
authorize us to challenge all their performances as our due: We are redevable
to them for what they have done for us, and do but in effect pay them wages for
their attendance and employments under us. We ought to be as ready to
acknowledge, as to make use of them: and to proportion our sentiments and
munificence to their zeal and diligence; and to imitate the earth in its
products, which the more it is cultivated, tended, and looked after, the more
plentiful crop does it yield the husband man. Hereby we shall not only act a
part befitting us, but acquire the reputation of gratitude and liberality:
wherein one may observe, that more is gained then an unprofitable and
insignificant applause; For our creatures are thereby more fixed to ourservice,
and more devoted to our persons; and others are inclined to embrace all
opportunities of obliging so sensible and good-natured Patrons.

Such as are dependants, ought not to be straightened in their diet or salaries^
Great men ought also (howbeit many think it a matter of small importance) to
take special care that their domstiques and inferior friends be well provided
for; that they be not straightened in their diet, nor poorly maintained, so as
to be reduced to mean Shifts whereby to victual and otherwise accommodate
themselves, for it is a part of the recompense due to their officiousness, and
no act of singular Grace, that every one of them be maintained according to his
quality. They which usually pinch them in their victuals, or totally discommon
them, like slaves, upon any misbehaviour, or neglect, are to be reprehended
upon two grounds; both because they disoblige, and incur the hatred and
reproaches of those self same persons by whom they affect to be respected and
commended: and, for that they give the world just cause to censure them for
parsimony, and niggardlyness toward such men as are only retained by them
(there being no other reason imaginable, why they should create themselves that
trouble and expense) and designed to augment their splendor, and possess the
people with an opinion of their generosity and magnificence. Besides, those
very persons finding their smallest miscarriages and peccadillos so severely
examined, and their deserts little regarded, they contract a disesteem for
their Patron, and his service; and at length absolutely despise him. Nor do
they study which way they may either recover his good grace, or preserve
themselves any way therein; but by degrees esloigne themselves from him: And,
to speak modestly in the case, It is not to be presumed, that any man cares to
be beloved, or to love another, but for interests sake. Hence it is that few or
none, but such as are of the meaner sort, will condescend to others, and become
their followers: No; it is profit which cements, and profit dissolves this
league. It behooves therefore great men to endeavor as much as they can to
enslame their dependants with all just hopes, to endeare them unto them as much
as it is possible, to the end that they may the more cheerfully serve them, and
embrace their interests with such confidence as becomes men who know their own
good fortune entirely to be joined therewith. And this they will effect, by
treating them rather civilly, then imperiously; and by expressing proportionate
resentments and favors for their merits. But as the world goes now, most great
men imitate those Laws which are none of the most prudent, though enacted by
several Cities, whereby men are affrightned from doing ill by terrors and
penalties: And they imagine it enough, if they make provision that no man
escape unpunished, or, at least, obtain advancement by his crimes. I should
think it much more agreeable for them to regulate themselves by those Edcts
which are by Xenophon termed Royal Laws: by which Laws it was ordained, not
only that offenders should be punished, but the virtuous recompensed, by
proposing rewards to the valiant, and the good. Let great men therefore study
to render their dependants absolutely their creatures, and to make it heir
inclination as well as interest, to adhere unto them. For, Command is then most
pleasant, and obedience least irksome, when it is established upon the clients
devotion, and not d^serence only. As for that Empire which is founded upon
constraint, and the necessitous condition of repining vassals; I believe it to
be a qualification God conferres upon such as he accounts worthy of that
punishment whereto Tantalus is said to have been condemned in Hell, where he
was continually to languish under the dread^ull apprehensions of a second death
continually hreatening him.

It is a cunning and subtle devise which some men have, Discord ought not to be
sowed and fomented amongst dependants
of sowing discord perpetually betwixt their dependants, and keeping them at
variance. These men fear nothing so much as tha^ their creatures should hold a
good correspondence one with the other and think the worse intelligence they
have one with the other, the better they shall have with them all themselves. I
shall only demand of these politicians, and Great wise men, if their
dependants be wicked and of a suspected fidelity, why do not they discard or
correct them, rather then jealously watch over them? If they are men of honesty
and integrity, why do they create themselves an unnecessary vexation? what
great exploits can they do by the service of such as so little understand one
another?

Wherefore let them learn the Art of ruling, and that conduct which is
necessary to the proper mannaging of power: This is no easy and common matter,
or such as may be acquired without extraordinary attention: It comes not by
instinct, nor is propagated by generation: to the obtaining thereof more is
requisite then a great fortune, and a sense of its necessity: in fine, it is so
transcendent a quality, that to speak the truth, it seems to be placed above
the designs and contrivance of mankind, and it is rather a peculiar gift of
God, then the acquest of humane prudence. But the directions leading thereunto
are not to be delivered occasionally by a digression in this discourse; but to
be deduced from another Art, wherein whosoever is thoroughly conversant and
knowing, the same will neither fail in the suitable Choice of his instruments
and Creatures, nor in his comport toward them; so as to effect, that they who
mutually love and correspond among themselves like Brethren; may also agree to
love, serve, and even adore him. Amongst the documents of that Art, it is one
great and wholesome Precept, That such as are in power ought to assure
themselves of the affections of those they rule over: hereby their Empire is
more secure and stable, and the voluntary services of their vassals are not
only more pleasant to them, because unconstrained; but infinitely more
advantageous to their Rulers, whose interests shall not be neglected any way,
as long as their persons are not indifferent, or odious to them. Whence it
appears, how much they mistake themselves who live at continual variance with
their families, who not only abandon their concerns, and forget or slight their
particular advantages, but depress, and oppose them, as if they were their
adversaries: whose sense of the unusual care, fidelity and dispatch of a good
servant, prompts them not to reward or prefer him, but to fix him to their
adherence, by making it impossible for him otherwise to subsist: They imagine
that he would be less their friend, if promoted above the condition of a
servant, that if once his Fortunes grow consid^rable, he will certainly either
totally prosecute those, or (if he be excessively generous and acknowledging)
only intermix their concernments with his own; and make that but a part of his
care which is now his whole employment. I should think it a much more wise
course, to imitate as far as possible (for the alteration of times, Religion,
and other circumstances hinder us from following the practice) the usage of the
Ancients who made Freed-men of such as had faithfully served them; thus we
should distinguish those who signalize themselves to us by their industry and
faithfullness from ordinary and servile Dependants, and admit them to a nearer
and more generous friendship or relation. Nor do I apprehend this course to be
more prudentiall only, but more profitable. For, what Farm, or Manor, yields
so great and certain an income to a rich and potent Grandee, as an entire
friend? what profits may compare with those which many Princes have received
from their affectionate creatures? How vast a difference is there in our
relying upon generous and obliged friends, for ye supporting or carrying on of
our affairs; and ^^usting our Persons, and estates, in the hands of such as
have scarce the appearance of friendsh^p to ascertain them to us; no reality at
all? For such who manage their parts and obsequiousness, as they would moneys,
which they do not lend gratis, but put out to use, are presumed always to
expect interest, and to regulate their addresses and applications solely by
their utility, and private gain. Whereupon they serve great men, as tenants do
their Landlords, who do not expend themselves and their riches to imbellish
their tenements, or to beautify their grounds with pleasant Gardens, Walks and
Groves, Grots and Aqueducts; but contrive which way they may improve the Land
to their advantage, and with least cost multiply their present profits: Thus,
they, being retained as it were by wages and salary in the service of Great Men
for a time, study not during that intervall, how they may most benefit them,
nor how they may best advance or secure their power, riches, or dependances;
but how they may make the best of that opportunity for themselves. But, when
they are removed from the sense of gain and particular emolument, and fixed to
us by those more general and noble ties of affection and handsome friendship;
they no longer act like self-minded Tenants, but embrace all our concernments
with ye same zeal and integrity as if they were their own, studying rather to
aggrandise themselves by the greatness of their Patrons, than regarding their
annual incomes, and the profits that from year to year accrue to them. Thus,
having devoted themselves to our families, and as it were cordially espoused
our interest once, they account nothing troublesome, great, or hazardous, which
is beneficial to us; having possessed our selves once of their hearts, our
interests are no longer different; they have but one important concernment, and
that is, for us.

Since it is thus; if we purpose not to resign our selves wholly up to pride
and ambitious arrogance; The commendation of this exact deportment of great
Persons toward their dependants.
if we will not divest our selves of all humanity, and relinquish that nature
and reason which distinguishes as much man from man, as from other Beasts; if
we intend not to degenerate into bruitishness, and grow perfect salvages; let
us foment and nourish in our selves these friendly inclinations; let us put on
an amicable temper of Spirit, and make it as much our nature as it is possible.
Let us embrace an opinion which brings with it all ye inducements that the
greatest profits or delights can suggest. Man is a Sociable creature, and it is
not only our wisdom, but a compliance with humanity, and those uncontrived,
unbiassed sentiments which we assume not, but are born with, to prosecute those
means which erect and establish an agreeable friendship and amity. This one
circumstance is so considerable, that they who harangue upon this subject,
profess no wise man can be entirely happy in a Wilderness: that it is not in
the power of virtue, Knowledge, or Grace, to felicifie the solitary; and that
even Heaven, would cease to be Heaven, and the joys thereof be disgusted, were
it not for the company there, and that innocent agreeableness of the Saints and
Angels assembled together. Nor is there any thing more facile, or whereto we
are more prone, than vehemently to love and affect those who delight us.
Besides, there is a great tie and obligation put upon, the Spirits of men by
daily cohabitation and converse, whereby they become united and leagued one
with another: as we observe in Beasts, which being bred up or used to feed
together; the Bruitishness of their Nature hinders them not from resenting the
absence, and missing their former acquaintance. In so much that I cannot
persuade my self, but those persons do violence to nature, and injure humanity
it self, who do not sincerely love, and communicate their good Fortunes with
such whose fidelity and carefullness they have experienced, whose manners and
humors they allow, and of whose affection they are infallibly assured.

FINIS
Errata.
THe principal Errata, are those two following. Page 6. lin. 10 instead of a
good mine, read a disinteressed goodness of nature. p. 11. l. 13. after that
power which another must, insert which an other must supply: it is but fitting
that these men should omit those impertinences. The others of lesser note are
p. 6. l. 6. cabnets for cabinets. p. 7. l. 16. betw^^ for betwixt. p. 9. l. 17.
acto^s for actions. p. 13. l. 14. This ^or thus. p. 18. l. 10. tansported for
transported. p. 20. l. 4. laeves for leaves. l. 12. th^^^ for those. l. 26.
uffice for suffice. p. 31. l. 9. his for their. p. 37. l. 10. age for
equippage. p. 50. l. 14. Patrochus for Patroclus. p. 56. l^ 25. never so for
never so. p. 57. l. 2. nota for not a.

A Catalogue of Books, of several sors^ to be sold by Willam Lee at the
Turks-Head in Fleet^^street 1665, Many of them Printed for him.
Large Folio.
PLutarch's Lives in English, with a New Additons of the several Da^es of the
years of the World, before and after Christ, when those famous Grecians and
Romans lived; together with twenty Lives, added out of the French Author Andrew
Theves. 1657. The Additions to Plutarch's Lives may be had alone. Parkinsons
Herball, the Largest.
Small Folio
A System or Body of Divinity In 10. Books, wherein the Fundamental Grounds of
Religion are Opened. Contrary Errors Refuted; seasonable for these Times,
wherein the Articles of our Faith have been questioned. The great Usefulness
of this work, for Families, and Scholars. The like has not been Extant in
Print. The ad. Addit^on with 10^ sheets added. With the Authors promise (in the
Epistle) never to to add any more. 1662 price (...). 3^4 sheets. Annotations on
the New Testament 8. ^. Critic^ Sacra, Explaining hard words of the old and New
Testament, the fourth Edition, in Folio; Printed for John Douse 1662. The
Saints Encouragement in evil Times; p. 1. ^. all by Edward Leigh Esquire of
Magdalen Hall in Oxford. Silva Silvarum or a Natural History in 10 Centuries,
whereunto is added the History of Life and Death, or the Prolongation of Life;
and this year 1664, is reprinted and added to it; Articles of inquiries
touching Metalls and Minerals. Resuscitatio, or bringing into public Light,
several pieces of the works, hitherto sleeping; of the same Author the ^ight
Honorable Francis Lord Bacon Baron of V^rulam: together with his Lordships
Life, never before Printed. Gods Revenge against Murder, in thirty Tragical
Histories, the 4 Edition, whereunto is added the lively Pourtractures, of the
several Persons, and Resemblances of chief passages mentioned therein: Engraven
in Coppe^-Plates 1664. Books in Quarto of my own and other men's Printing. Dr.
Charletons two Books together, or single, Viz. of Athesm. of Defluxions.
Certamen Religiosum.
The Law of Tithes: and two other Treatises of Tithes. Dr. Holyday's Sermon of
Faith. Er. Clark's Sermons at Hartford Feast. Critica Sacra. In Quarto Large.
Sir Richard Baker on the Psalms. Write on the Passions.
A Discourse of the King of Spain, Surprising the Valtoline, Translated by Sir
Thomas Roe.
In Octavo Large.
The Abridgement of Reynold's 30 Tragical Histo^ies. The true Copy. Royal
and Loyal Blood, with the names of all the Commanders slain in the la^e Wars.
Paget's Heresiography of all the Sect^ties the last hundred years, with
P^o^ractures of the most Eminent. Dod's ten Sermons on the Sacrament, with his
Life lately added.
Grotious of War and Peace in English 3 Books. The Chronicle of the Civil wars
of England, Sco^land and Ireland, from 1637, to to this present year 1663. by
James Heath. Graves of the Roman Foot and Denaries. The Strong Helper.

In Octavo small and in Twelves
Latham's Falconry with many New Additions, whereunto is newly added, the
Gentlemen's Exercise: never before Printed. Youths Behavior in Octavo, much
enlarged, with three Tables, and many New Additions of hard words, and other
use^ull matter, 1664. Also the Second Part concerning the Education of young
Gentlewomen, with excellent Porverbs: never yet printed till this year 1664.

