headpiece containing the Royal coat of arms of the Kingdom of Scotland,
flanked by unicorns

De verborum significatione. THE EXPOSITION OF THE TERMS AND DIFFICILL WORDS,
CONTAINED IN THE FOUR BUIKES OF REGIAM MAJESTATEM, and uthers, in the Acts of
Parliament, Infestments, and used in practique of this Realm, with diverse
rules, and common places, or principalles of the Laws.

Collected and Exponed be M. JOHN SKENE, Clerk of our Sovereign Lordis
Register, Council and Rolls.

And now Reprinted by His Majesty's special Command.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by DAVID LINDSAY, Anno DOM. M.D.C.LXXXI.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

TO THE READER.
I Have rather opened and schawen ane occasion to the good Reader, to perform
this warke, then exponed, or declared the samin; being an matter nocht pleasand
in it self, nor treated be uthers of before: Gif I have preased to do weil, or
attempted that, quhilk uthers may accomplish and make perfect, the profit and
commodity redounds to thee, quha at thy pleasure, may big upon this little
ground and fundament. Gif utherwaies be error or ignorance, I have nocht
satisfied thy desire and expectation, Sic erranti medicina confessio. For ane
absolute memory, and perfect knawledge, in na thing erroneous, is proper to
God, and not competent to man. Quhat ever I have done, I did it not to offend
thee, or displease any man, but to provoke uthers to do better, always for
thine awin weil, be war to reprehend my doings, flowand from ane benevolent,
and good mind: except thou be assured to be reprehended of na man, quha cumis
after thee and sall censure thy doings. I am affrayed of all Readers, for ilk
man hes his awin Judgment and opinion, quhairof their is als money
contrarieties, as diversities of persons. Advise therefore, and or thou do any
thing rashly, gif thou may, transact and agree with all the posterity, that
albeit thou do as well as Homer in his Poesy: nane of them be unto thee,
successor or imitatour of Zoilus: so great is the variety of ingines, and
inclinations, that nane can be sure fra reprehension. Read therefore, and make
thy profit of good things. Correct modestly al errors, quhilks are ignorant,
and nocht wilful. Eik all necessaries omitted. Cut away al superfluities
adjected. And whatever thou do, esteem of me, as I do of thee and of al, to
quhais knawledge, this my little labor shall happen to cum. And swa.

Vive, Vale: si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum.

THE EXPOSITION Of the difficil words and terms, contained in the four Buikes
of REGIAM MAJESTATEM, And uthers: In the Acts of Parliament, Infeftments, and
used in the practicque of this Realm, with diverse Rules, and commoun places,
or principal grounds of the Laws.
ACTILIA, Armor, Weapons, Harnishing, Sta. 2. Roberti Bruyse. c. ordinatum 27.
Quhair it is statute that ilk man havand Ten pounds worth of gudes sall have
for the defense of his body and Realm, ane sufficient Acton, and basnet, The
pain of them quha cums evil armed to the Kings hoist.
with gluises of plait, an speir, ane sword, and quha-sa-ever hes nocht ane
Acton, and basnet, sall have ane sufficient habirgion, or ane Irone jacke, an
Knapiska of Irone, and gluifes. Swa that ilk man sall be ready cum actiliis
and harnesiis suis, under the pain of escheit of all his guides, the ane half
thereof to the King, and the uther half to his Master, and Lord. Acton ane
aulde French word, Hocqueton, quhilk corruptly is pronunced Octon, sagum
militare. Sum affirmis Acton to be an auld kind oi armor, for preservation of
ane man's oodie, maid of Steill or Irone, quhilk covered his head alsweill as
the rest of his body: Quhairof it sum are extant as auld monumentes in the
Hielandes; Bot nocht daily used, or worn. Uthers mair probably alledgis
Acton, to be ane form of armor, quhilk covers ane man's body (except his
head) down to his knee, maid of Taffitie, Ledder, or Linen claith, stuffed
with caddes, and stiked very thick with threid, or silk of diverse coullers,
and partial gilt, with spranges or streams of Gold fuilie; And is commonly
used in time of battle under the habirgeon, to save ane man's body; fra the
schot of ane arrowe: or fra the bruising of the straik of an sword. It is
ankinde of that abuilement, quhilk in Latin is called vestis virgata, variis
virgis seu aureis lineis distincta, and variegata, ut est illud Virgilii
Aeneid. 8. Virgatis lucent sagulis. ACTORNATUS Lib. 4. c. siquis defendens 46.
actor, alienorum negotiorum gestor, utherwaies in the Laws of this Realm
called responsalis, quha makis answer for ane uther in judgment, specially
for the defender, Responsalis.
Lib. 1. c. Esto. 27. Lib. 3. c. Placita. 12. cum seqq. Like as Prolocutor is
he quha speaks for the persewer, as his forespeaker. Lib. 1. c. consequenter
13. Proloqutour.
Alswa actornatus is he quha dois any thing in an uther man's name or behalf;
As he quha compeiris for an uther in Courts, or Justice air, to pass upon
inqueistes; and serving of retoures, to the Kingis Chapel, or to give presence
for him, quha sendis him. For he quha aucht both suit, and presence in onie
Court, should nocht only send an sutour to decide actions, and causes, conform
to the Law, but also should compeir personally, or send an Actornay, quhilk also
he should do, quha aucht presence allanerlie, for ather he should compeir, or ane
Actornay for him, with the seall of his Arms, the quhilk all friehalders,
dwelland within the schireffdome, are oblished to do, in all Schireff courts. l.
1. p. 9. c. 130. In justice aires Actornaves, should be honest and sufficient
persons of discretion. Ja. 1. p. 3. c. 35. And Actornatus Justitiarii, is taken
for the Justice depute quon. attach. c. praepositus. 61. Ass. Reg. Da. c.
nullus 16. Actornay is not only the procuratour quha is sent: But also the
procuratorie or mandat quhilk is given to him, and it they are different, for
an procuratorie is commonly maid be ane privy man: And an Actornay called
litera Actor natus, is granted be the King, or onie uther, havand Chapel
Stat. Rob. 3. c. ult. generally, in omnibus negotiis, loquelis, and placitis
motis, seu movendis. And therefore the Lords of Session decerned ane
requisition of ane air, anent his marriage, maid be ane Actornay; to be null.
Because all sike requisitiones should be maid be the superior, or be ane
procuratour havand special power, to that effect. ADJURNATUS, ane French word,
summoned or called to ane certain day, like as Adjurnamentum is called an
summonds, or citatio, summonitio, Quhilk is defined, certi diei and loci
exhibitio partibus, ad diem legalem, quoniam attach. c. 1. Praeceptor meus
Matthaeus Wesenbecius in paratitl. Tit. de in jus vocando. Nu. 13. definit
citationem. ut sit actus Judicialis, seu Judicii praeparatorius, quo is quem
coram sisti opus est, Judicis mandato, legitime vocatur, Juris experiundi
causa. Et assisa dicitur adjornata ad alium certum diem. That is continued to
ane certain day Lib. 4. c. Si Petens. 57. and curia dicitur respectuata, That
is continued or respleited. Stat. 2. Rob. Br. c. Item quaecunque. 34.
Chessanaeus in consuetudine, Burgundiae Rub. 1. Sect. 6. verb. messiers and
serients. Nu. 88. muita (inquit) sunt nomina, quae idem important, ut est
citatio, in jus vocatio, monitio, edictum, denunciatio. conventio, and aliud
quod in vulgar: nostro dicimus, adjurnamentum. Adjournal is the Justice air,
as ane act of Adjournal. so called, because it is maid in the Justice air. vid.
Iter. ADVOCATIO Ecclesiae, Is the richt of patronage, or the title and richt to
present onie person to ane Kirk vacand, and nocht havand ane lauchfull
Ecclesiastical person to rule and govern the samin. Lib. 2. c. Dos. 19. Lib.
3. c. sequitur 30. Dicitur autem advocatio Ecclesiae, vel quia patronus
alicujus Ecclesiae, ratione sui juris, advocat se ad eandem Ecclesiam: and
asserit se in eam habere jus patronatus, eamque esse quasi suae clientis loco.
Vel potius cum aliquis (nempe patronus) advocat alium, jure suo, Avowson of
Kirkes.
ad Ecclesiam vacantem eumque loco alterius (veluti defuncti) praesentat, and
quasi exhibet. In the English Laws it is called, Avowson of Kirkes. AFFIDATIO,
Lib. 2. c. unde 49. In the quhilk place; Mutua affidatio, is taken for ane
mutual faith, truth, and obligation of fidelity, quhilk is betuixt the wife
and the husband. And sicklike it signifies the mutual league; and band of
fidelity; quhilk is betuixt the over-lord, and his vassal, quha are bound and
oblished hinc inde to uthers, quhilk is called mutua dominii and homagii
fidelitatis connexio. lib. 2. c. mutua 68. in sik sort, that how far the
vassal is bound be reason of homage to his superior: sa far the superior is
oblished to his vassal, except reverence and honor allanerly; for the ane should
obey and serve his master: the uther should interteine and defend his man. And
the vassal should honor and reverence his master as his superior: But the
master should not reverence the vassal: for like as of the Law, there is na
soveraintie, nor impyre amangis them that are pares; conform to the rule of
the Law, par in pareni non habet imperium. Even swa, the superior is not
oblished to make onie reverence to his inferior, bot should receive honor fra
him. Item Diffidatio; (h. e. inimicitiarum capitalium denunciatio, quhen ane
defies an uther, Diffidutio.
and gives up kindness with him) is contrair to Affidatio. Both the ane and
the uther is driven a fide, vel fidelitate: or fra ane word used in the fewes.
Faida, that is battle, feid; injury, hatred. Faida.
As we commonly say deidlie feid. And foemina dicitur faidam non facere, gl.
in Sect. ult. de lege Conradi. li. 2. defend: be reason women be the Law, are
nocht subject to weirfair, to battle; or proclamation maid for that cause.
AMERCIAMENTUM, or FORIS-FACTUM Curiae. The un-law or amerciament of a court,
for absence in lawful time, for ane fault, trespass, or any uther cause, as is
manifest in the Register, in the action persued be the Thesaurar contrar the
burgh of Perth, The unlaw of courts.
16. December 1541. The un-law in the Chalmerlanis air or court, is fifty
schillings: and two schillings to the Serjandes of the burgh of ilke un-law.
The unlawe before the Justice on the North pairt of the water of Forth, aucht
Kye, ane colpindach to the Crowner, and two schillings to the Clerk: And in
the South Side of the water of Forth, as in Louthian, and betwixt the water of
Tyne, and Forth, ten pundis, and ane colpindach, or threttie pennies to the
Crowner, and two schillings to the Clerk. In the Schireffe-court, it should nocht
exceed sextene schillings, and two schillings to the Clerk, or ane colpindach,
or threttie pennies. In the Barrone court the samin laws and un-lawes, should be
keiped, quhilks are used in the Schireffe-court. In the court of them quha
haldis of Barrones, and are called milites, their un-law is half of their
superiors un-law. The un-law of them quha are called subarmigeri, is ane Kowe,
ane owe, or three schillings, leg. Malc. Make. c. 4. The un-law within Burgh
should not exceed the sum of aucht schillings, leg. burg. c. forisfactum 42.
The un-law of them quha compeiris nocht in Parliament, being lauchfullie warned
thereto, is ten pounds. Ia. 1. pri. Iulij p. 4. c, 82. and p. 5. c. 99. Quhilk
is like-wayes the un-law of them quha compeiris nocht in general Councelles,
quhilk now is altered be the new act of Parliament, maid be OUR SOVEREIGN
LORD King James the Sext. 29. Iulij. p. 11. c. 34. Quhair it is statute that
every Earl sall pay three hundred pounds, ilk Lord two hundredth pounds, Ilk
Praelate ane hundredth pounds: And every Burgh ane hundredth marks, incase it
sall happen onie of them to be absent fra the Parliament.

ANNEXATION, Ane Latin word, quhilk signifies ane fast knitting and binding,
as quhen ane thing is bund or knit with ane uther and both as it were united
togidder, and incorporate in ane. As quhen any Lord-shippes, lands, Castelles,
Customs, Offices, Fischinges, or uther rents are annexed to the Croun, to
remain perpetually their-with quhilk is called incorporatio, quando bona
aliqua, velut terrae, rediguntur in corpus fisci, cum eorum scribitur
Inventarium, manu publica, continens eorum nomina and qualitates, and ita
ponuntur in numero rerum fiscalium l. si quando 3. and ibi gl, C, de bonis
vacan. lib. 10. In the Laws of this Realm their is two kinds of annexation:
The ane quhilk may be called tacita, quhairin the word of Annexation is nocht
expreemed, bot uther words equivalent theirto. Two kinds of annexation.
The uther is expressa, quhilk conteins manifest mention of annexation or
union. The first form is used in the days of king David the secund 6. Novem.
1357. quhair it is statute and ordaned, that al lands, rents, and possessiones,
quhilkis of auld perteined to the crown, or the Kingis domaine and property,
should all and hail, and perpetually remain in the hands and possession of the
King, for his sustentation and living, without any alienation theirof. And
sik-like 27. Septem. 1367. with consent of the three Estaites, it was statute
for the Kingis better sustentation, and living, that all rents, fermes, kanes,
customs, forests, offices, and uther emolumentes quhat-sum-ever: And also all
lands, alswell the property, and uthers, in possession quhairof King Robert
1. father to King David the second, deceased as of fie; and that all
possessions, and lands quhilkis perteined to the richt and property of the
Crown, the time of the said King Robert, or of King Alexander the third, or of
the said King David the second, should return all and haill to the crown, with
all advocations of Kirkes, and all service perteining theirto; To remain
perpetually with the Crown, nocht-withstanding onie alienation theirof, maid
to onie person, and that na disposition theirof be maid thereafter, without
consent of the three Estatis. And gif onie person had onie of the saides lands
labored with his awin pleuch: It was ordained that he should pay alsmeikle
ferme and dewtie therefore, as the samin micht gudlie pay, or as onie uther
lands as good, and alsmeikle, used to pay. And siklike all the great and small
customs, and burrow mailles of the Realm, are ordaned to abide and remain
with the King, till his living, be ane act maid be Ia. 1. Parl. 1. c. 8. Of the
second form of Annexation quhairby lands, The second kind.
possessiones and uthers, per expressum, are annexed, united, and incorporate
diverse and sindrie examples are extant in the acts of Parliament of King
James the 2. 11. Par. 4. Aug. c. 41. and of uthers maid theirafter. Lands
annexed and nocht dissolved may nocht be analied. Of the profits of landis
annexed wrangouslie analied.
Lands, and uthers duties, or possessions quharsum-ever annexed to the crown,
being annalied or disponed, na lauchful dissolution maid theirof, it is lesume
to the King, nocht-withstanding the said allienation to put his hand to the
saides lands, and take tham back again to the Crown, brevi manu. without onie
ordour or process of law. And as concerning the proffites theirof, quhilkis are
extant, pendentes and nondum consumpti, the time of the said intromission, the
king, or his comptrollar may intromet their-with, in the samin manner, as he
may intromet with the lands, Iure soli, quia fructus pendentes, and extantes
censentur pars soli. And tuitching the fructes, and proffites of the lands
quhilkis are spended, and consumed; The King and his comptrollar, aucht and
should repeete the samin fra the possessoures, and uptakers of the saidis
fructes, of all eires of their intromission therewith, be way of action,
because they are consumed and spended. Quhilk deed consistand in facto, should
necessarlie be proven be ordinar way of action. To the quhilk hail proffites
the King hes good richt, in respect that of the Law, malae fidei possessor, can
never acquire and conqueis to himself, onie fructes or proffites, ather extant
or consumed. And true it is that al they, quha receivis any infeftment or
unlauchful disposition of the Kings annexed property, ar malae fidei
possessores: they receiving the samin against the manifest law of this Realm.
the ignorance quhairof excusis na inhabitant of the samin. And mairover, true
it is that the foresaid form of intromission with the Kingis annexed lands,
and repetition of the proffites theirof, hes been in use and practik sen the
making of the acts of Parliament theiranent: Likeas in the beginning of the
reign of King James the Fourth 18. Ian. 1488. the lands and Lord-ship of
Brechen, and Nevar were taken fra David Earl of Crawfurd, and ane term
assigned to prove against him, the availl of the mailles and duties of the
saides Lands with the pertinentes, The Kings property wrangouslie analied.
intrometted with be him, sen the time of the gift thereof. Item the King may
intromet with his annexed property, and proffites theirof, quhidder he be
Major or minor, For gif their be na lauchfull dissolution of the samin, he is
aye as it were minor anent his said property. Al annexations ar perpetual,
and induris continually, ay and quhill ane lauchfull dissolution be maid be
onie King: Enduring the time of the quhilk dissolution, the annexation ceasis,
and sleepis, and the dissolution being ended be decease of the maker theirof,
Annexation is perpetual.
the said annexation beginns to quicken and quasi reviviscere; In sik sort that
the King quha succeid is to the maker of the said dissolution may set na fewes
of his annexed property, be vertew of the dissolution made be his
predicessour, bot mon make ane new dissolution to the effect foresaid. Quhilk
fault and vice, I find in diverse and sindrie infeftmentes of the property:
and specially in the minority of King James the Fifth, quhilkis are
wrangeously given be vertew of the disolution maid be King James the Fourth,
his Father. vid. Dissolution. ANNUELL ane word used in the practik of this
Realm, for an eirelie revenue, or dewty, paid at certain terms, ather
legal, quhilks are called termini legales vel legitimi, prescrived and
appointed be the law of this Realm, sik as Martin-mes and Whit-sonday; Or
conventional as pleasis the parties till agree and appoint, be paction and
contract, as betwixt ule and Candl-mes, or onie uther time. In the Acts of
Parliament maid be Queen Marie 4. Parlia. 29. Maij, c. 10. mention is maid of
ground annuell, few annuell, and top annuell, quhairof I have red nathing in
onie uther place: and am uncertain quhat they do signify: Ground annuell.
bot referris the samin to the judgment and opinion of the Reader. Always
ground annuell is esteemed to be quhen the ground and property of onie land
bigged or unbigged, is disponed and annalied for ane annuell to be paid to the
annalier theirof, or to ane uther person, Top annuell.
sik as onie Chaiplaine or Priest. Top annuell is ane certain dewtie, given
and disponed forth of onie bigged tenement, or land, Few annuell.
of the quhilk tenement the property remains with the disponer, and he is
only oblished to pay the said annuell. Few annuell, is ather quhen the few
maill, or dewtie is disponed as ane yeirlie annuel. Or quhen the land, The
annuell of Norway.
or tenement is serte in few-ferme heretablie for ane certain annuell to be
paid nomine feudifirmae. The annuell of Norwaie quhairof mention is maid in
the acts of Parliament of King James the third, and in the Register of this
Realm, was ane annuell of the sum of an hundred marks, sterling money,
quhilk the Kings of this Realm was oblished to pay yeirlie to the King of
Norwaie, for the cause after specified. Because Donald Bane, brother to King
Malcolme Cammoir, wrangeouslie after the decease of his brother usurped the
richt of the Crown against his brother sons, Edgar, Alexander, David, and
uthers. And for help, and supply, gave all the Isles of Scotland to the King of
Norway, quhairthrow, and for uther occasiones, money bluidie and cruel
battalles followed, until the battle of Larges 3. August, 1263. In the time
of King Alexander the third. And Acho King of Norway: Quha thereafter in the
samin eire 22. Januarie departed in Orknay. And the Scottis beand victorious,
Magnus the fourth of that name, King of Norway, son to the said Acho, maid
peace and concord, with the said King Alexander in anno, 1266. and renunced,
quite-clamed, and discharged all richt, or title, quhilk he or his successors
had, or micht have, or pretend to the Isles of Scotland. The King of Scotland
payand theirfoir yeirlie to the said Magnus, and his successors ane annuell of
ane hundredth marks, sterling money. Quhilk contract and agreeance was ratified,
and confirmed be Haquinus King of Norway, the fifth of that name, and Robert
the first, King of Scotland, in anno 1312 Bot at the last the said annuell,
with all the arrierages, and by-runnes thereof, was discharged, and renunced
simpliciter, in the contract of marriage betuixt King James the third, and
Margaret, only daughter to Christianus the first. King of Norway, Denmark, and
Sweden, 8. September. 1468. Quhilk discharge is nocht only ratified, bot also
renewed thereafter be the said Christianus 12. Maii. 1469. And like-wise the
said King James the third. 24. Fe. 1483. commanded his Ambassadors send to the
Paip, to desire confirmation of the said perpetual renunciation, and discharge
of the contribution of the Isles. ARAGE, utherwaies Average, from Averia, Quhilk
signifies ane beast, as salbe hereafter exponed: And swa consequently Average,
signifies service, quhilk the tennent aucht to his master, be horse, or
carriage of horse 18. Jan. 1501. John Stewart contrair William Blair. In the act
of Parliament Ja. 4. p. 2. c. 10. It is written Avarage. And likewise, in the
indenture at Perth pen. Mart. 1371. betwixt Robert Steward Earl of Menteith
upon the ane part, and Dame Isabell Countes of Fife, Isabell Countes of Fife.
on the uther part, it is plainly written, cum Avaragiis and Cariagiis. In the
quhilk indenture, the said Isabel dauchter and air to Duncane Earl of Fife,
and spouse to Walter Stewart brother to the said Robert, in the time of her
Widuitie, after the decease of her said husband, oblished her, to resign the
said Earldom of Fife, in the Kingis hands in favor of the said Earl, for new
heritable infeftment thereof, to be given to him. The quhilk indenture is
subscribed be Ioannes Rollo, quha was secretary to the said Earl. And conform
thereto, resignation was maid: for the quhilk scho received eirlie for her
sustentation, an hundredth forty five pounds, sterling money. Like as also the
said Isabell 22. Junii 1389. resigned ad perpetuam remanentiam, in the hands of
K. Robert the third, the Barrone of Strathurd, Strabraun, Discher, Toyer, with
the I Will of Tay, Sundry Land, perteining to the Crown.
lyand within the Schiresdome of Perth. The Baronne of Cowll, and Oneil, with
the fortalice theirof, and patronage of the Kirk of Kincardin within the
Schiresdome of Aberdene, the Barrons of Crumdail, and Affyn, within the
Schireffdome of Innernes, the landis of Strahovie, and Abrandolie, within the
Schireffdome of Bamf. The lands of Logyachry, within the Schireffdome of Perth,
the Barronie of Calder, within the Constabularie of Linlitheow, and
Schireffe-dome of Edinburgh, and the lands of Kellynsyth, within the
Schireffe-dome of Striviling. This I thoucht good to advertise the reader how
the Earldom of Fife and uthers lands foresaids, perteined to the Crown.
Duke Murdo son to the said Earl of Fife, being forefalted And that be King
James the First. 1424. The said Earldom was decerned to remain perpetually
with the Crown, like as it dois, as ane special pairt of the annexed
property. As also the Lord-ship of Methven within the Schireffedome of Perth,
and the barronie of Kellie, within the Scheriffedome of Forfar, did fall in the
hands of King Robert the first, be done of forefaltour pronounced against
Schir Roger Moubray Knicht.

ARRENDARE, ane Spanish word, commonly used in chartoures and infeftments of
this Realm, in latin, locare seu rem aliquam vtendam, fruendam, non gratis,
sedcena mercede interveniente concedere. For conform to the French, rent is
ane certain dewtie, as annuell-rent and arentare and theirfra arrendar, quasi
ad certum rentum seu reditum dimittere to set and give, lands or tenements to
onie man for an eirlie duty. ARRERAGIUM, or properly Arrieragium, an French
word, arrier, bakward: in latin retro, as Iamais arrier, used be the Earls of
Angus, in their arms, to quhom it perteins to fecht the Kingis wantgard, as of
auld it did appertain to Makduffe Earl of Fife, as writ is Hector Boethius.
Arrieragium firmarum, signifies the by-run annuel, mails. fermes, profits or
duties of onie tenement, or lands, the quhilk restis upon the samine unpaied.
quoniam attach. c. si tenementu^. 27, Leg. Burg. c. si quis voluerit. 156.
ASSISA, ane French word, Quhilk signifies properly assisa is taken for ane
constitution, ordinance or law. Lib. 3. c. sequens. 23. quhair it is called
recognitio. lib. 1. c. si non 23. mention is maid of ane essonie, or excuse,
conform to the Law and assise of the land. And assisa is called ane
constitution, law or statute. lib. 4. c. die lunae. 13, as assisa regis David
Stat. Alex. c. assisa 18. And assisatum signifies statute, or ordaned St. 2.
To. Br. c. Item ordinatum 26. King David maid an assise, or constitution of him
quha was accused in judgment, and clenged, for the death of his wife, assisa
Reg. Da. c. si quis velit. 33. assisaterrae is taken for the Law and
constitution of the land, Lib. 4. c. si vir. 16. c. sciendum. 64. assisam
infringere, is to violat and transgres the Law. And assisa of King James the
First of weichts and measures maid at Perth. 11. Mart. and the First eire of
his reign. Juxta assisam. lib. 2. c. dicitur autem. 74. is conform to the
law, or Juxta legem, is conform to the time prescrived be the Law, Lib. 3. c.
sequens. 33. in fin. assisa is called ane measure, or certain quantity, as the
barrel bind of Salmond should keep and contain the assise, and measure of
fourteen gallons. Ja. 3. 1. October. Parl. 14. c. 110. and all Salmond should be
packed in barrels, of the measure of Hamburgh, after the aulde assise, and na
smaller barrels nor vessels. Ja. 3. 6. August: Parl. 10. c. 76. assisa
halecum, Assise herring.
the assise herring, signifies ane certain measure, and quantity of herring,
quhilk perteinis to the King as ane pairt of his custumes, and annexed
property, Ja. 6. p. 15. c. 237. For it is manifest that he should have of every
Boat, that passis to the drove, and slayis herring, an thousand herring of ilk
tack that halds, viz of the Lambmestak, of the winter tack, and of the Lentrone
tack, in December. 1516. The Kings Advocat contrair William Harper, and his
Colleges. December 1466. and 11. Mart. 1500. In the action betuixt James Ogilbie,
contrair Patrick Gray, certain oxen was poynded for sundry unlawes, and for
the rent Assise aucht to the Kings Hienes for the blench ferms of the lands of
Airlie. And sik-like the third of the Kings rent of the Assise, That is to say,
the lands and customs, should peneine to the Queen, as her dowry, Ja. 3. 9.
October. p. 1. c. 2. Two formis of assizes.
Stat. Alex. c. 3. Quhair of their is two kinds. Ane ordinarlie in use, quhilk
may be called ane litil assise, of the nummer of 13. or 15. persons, lib. 3. c.
generalia 25. The uther called ane great assise, quhilk consists of 25.
persons, l. 1. c. poena. 16. lib. c. 2. dos. 19. and all the assisors, in both
the ane and the uther assise should swear ane solemn aith, to judge and decerne
richtly. vid. bona pat. For the quhilk cause they are called Juratores li. 1. c.
poena. 16. and in sum buiks assisa, is called jurata patriae, and in the
English laws an Jury. The great assise (quhilk is not commonly used in this
Realm) is chosen against sik persons, as hes bin upon an litil assise, and ar
accused de perjurio vel temerario juramento: and that they have done wrang
against the laws in clenging onie trespassor quha is guilty and foul of the
crime. In the quhilk case, the man that is clenged, albeit wrangously, cannot
be filed again or punist: for he being anis quite, he is ever quite for that
crime: bot the assisors may be accused of their wrangous deliverance. I. 3. p.
8. c. 20. N-c. 63. The great assise should be of 25. persons, Nobill and
gentilmen. And the Lords of the Session, upon the first day of Junij. 1591.
declaired all them to be esteemed, halden and repute as Nobil persons and
gentilmen, that sal happen to be summond upon sik an assise, quha are
landed-men, albeit they be inferior in rank and dignity to them, upon quhais
assise they should pass. ATTAYNT, Taynt, an word meikle used in the English
laws, Attayntus, is accused, filed or convict, for any crime or cause. Stat.
2. To. Br. c. Item. 9. c. Item dominus 21. c. Item. 24. An Judge being convict,
or attaynt of taking of budds, or of partiality, should be punished at the Kings
will, and tine his office. Sta. 2. To. Br. c. c. dominus rex. 22. Stat. 1. To.
Br. c. Item quod nullus. 8. I. 5. p. 7. c. 104. Bot attaynt or Taynt, is called
the deliverance or probation of 24. ( alias 25) leill men, the quhilk may be
called an great assise. lib. 1. c. poena. 16. ATTACHIAMENTUM, from the French
word, attacher, ligare, nectere, ane charge or binding of any person, to the
effect he may be drawn and compelled to compeir in judgment and answer as law
will. In the preface and beginning of the buik called quoniam attachiamenta,
attachiamentum dicitur quoddam vinculum legitimum, per quod pars defendens
invita astringitur, ad standum Juri, and respondendum parti de se conquerenti
juridice. And attachiament sumtimes is of guds and gear, as in contractes,
conventiones, and actions of moveabill gudes, in the quhilk the gudes and gear
of the defender are attached, until he find caution and pledges to answer as
law will, quhilk being funden, the attachiamente is relaxed and lowsed.
Sumtimes attachiament is of ane man's person and body, as in actiones of wrang,
or criminal causes. In the quhilk the person of the transgressors should be
first attached, and gif he be disobedient, or fugitive, his gudes and gear, may
be attached, until he find caution to underlie the law. Swa commonly, bot not
perpetually, attachiamentum, vel est bonorum, vel corporis, sicut arrestamentum
bonorum, as gif the Crowner can nocht apprehend onie man indicted, to attache
him personally to compeir in the Justice air: then he should arreist all his
gudes moveable and unmovable to remain under sure pledges, And to be
furth-cummand to the King, in case he compeir not. l. Malc. Make. c. 1. And in
criminal causes, specially in treason the person or body of the defender should
be first attached, and put in sure firmance, until he have tholed ane assise,
quhidder he be quite or foul. I. 2. p. 12. c. 49. And in civil causes the
guds and geir, of the defender should be first arreisted. Li. 4. c. 1. as writes
Matthaeus de afflictis, in consuetudines Siciliae. constit. Humanitate. Nu. 33.
Be the civil Law in execution of decreites, first the moveabill gudes
perteining to the debtour, should be first discussed, thereafter his lands and
immoveabill gudes may be comprised. Thirdly the debts auchtand to him, quhilks
are called nomina debitorum, may be persewed and discussed, L. a Divo Pio. 15.
Sect. 3. De re Judicat. Quhilk is conform to the act of Parliament, quhairby
it is statute, that the lands perteining to the debtour should nocht be
comprised, until his moveabil guds be first searched, socht, and discussed.
Ja. 3. p. 5. c. 36. AVERIA. li. 4. c. si quis sederit. 23. c. quicunque. 31.
ass. Reg. Da. c. si quis sederit 41. In the quhilk place it is called melius
animal, the bestaucht, from the French, le meilleur auoir. Quhilk be the Law is
given be the husbandman to his master, as ane hereelde, and lib. 4. c.
quicunque, 31. averia is called animal: The quhilk place is de namatione
animalium, that is of poynding of cattle. AVUNCULUS properly is the
mother-brother, bot sumtime conform to the French manner of speech, it is taken
for the father-brother, in Latin patruus, li. 2. c. si quis liberum 24. c.
deficientibus 34. de judic. c. Item nota 15. In quibus loeis jus successionis
dicitur pertinere ad avunculum ejusque liberos quod non est consentaneum juri
nostro civili, si avunculus proprie accipiatur pro fratre matris, quia
cognatorum, h. e. consanguineorum, ex part matris apud nos nulla est
successio, h. e. cognati non succedunt aliis.
B.
BAGIMONT, his taxation of benefices. Ja. 3. p. 6. c. 43. Ja. 4. p. 4. c. 39.
The Pape in the time of K. James the third, send in this Realm ane cardinal
and legate, called Bagimont, Quha did make an taxation of all the rentalles of
the benefices, that the samin micht be knawin to the Pape. To the effect, that
quhen onie person came to Rome seikand bulls or richt to onie benefice fra
him, he micht conform to the said rentall as he pleased, sell the samin for
sameikle Silver, or Gold, as he thocht may profitable. Quhilk taxation is
grounded upon the Canon Law, in the Extravagant. suscepti regiminis, lib. 6.
BAIRMAN. Vid. Dyvour. BALLIVUS, an French word, Baielif, Ane baillie or judge,
li. 1. c. 10. c. 31. quha hes ane ordinar power and jurisdiction. Nam ballivus
sieve judex non potest esse arbiter. li. 2. c. 4. Ballia, in Latin provincia,
ane baillerie or jurisdiction. li. 1. c. 7. c. 18. stat. 2. Rob. Br. c. 4 c.
Robertus. 28. Dicitur autem Ballivus a Baall, h.e. domino, quia ballivi
dominantur suis subditis, quasi earum magistri and domini, Rebuftus in constit.
regias, de sentent. execut. art. 7. gl. 1. And in the Checker compts, the
Baillies of Burrowes are properly called ballivi. Quha be the Laws of this
Realm, makis count eirlie in the Checker, of their burrow mailles, as ane part
of the Kingis annexed property, and also of their commoun good, quhilk should be
employed in the necessar affairs of the burgh. And likewaies in the cheker,
count is maid of the Kingis property, be sik as are called Ballivi Regis, and
intromettis with his rents: quhais compts are called computa Ballivorum ad
extra Scil. Extra Burgos: And ar improperlie called Ballivi, Computum
ballivorum ad extra.
being Chalmerlanes in-put, and out-put be the Comptroller, for quhom he should
be answerable. Mair-over, in the Checker count maid per rotulos, is quhen the
Compter is charged in his count, conform to ane former count, rolled of
before: And computum extra rotulos, Computum per rotulos, and extra rotulos.
is quhen the compter is charged in his oneration, be any precept direct be
himself, or be any intromission maid be him of the Kingis rents, before the
making of his count, or with onie dewrie silver, or uther thing perteining to
the King extraordinarlie, and not eirlie, as ane part of his patrimony.
BANRENTES, Banerets. Ja. 1. par. 7. c, 101. In the quhilk place, it is
manifest, that Ban-rent is ane kind of estaite, greater and mair honorable
then Barrones: For the Barrones are permitted to choose their Commissioners, to
be sent for them to Council and Parliament, to propone all and sindrie needs
and causes, perteining to the commounes, in the Parliament, or general
Council: Bot the Ban-rentes should be warned be the Kingis special precept, to
compeir personally in the Parliament or Council: In sik manner, as Bishops,
Earls, Lords, Abbots, Priores, usis to be summoned. This word is commonly
used in the English laws, and in sindrie laws of uther Cuntries. Cuia. l. 2.
de Feud. Tit. 7. de nova fidelitatis forma. Boerius in decisiones
Burdegalenses, Tract. de authoritate magni Consilii. Guido Papae quest. 614.
and 326. jus Normand. l. 5. c. 2. Nu. 7. Zasius de Feud. Tit. qui Feudum dare
possunt. Some callis Banrents them quha hes Baner rent, and divided in sundry
parts. Uthers callis them quha hes the rent or eirlie dewtie of an Barronne.
And sik-like, some understandis them quha bearis the Kingis Baner in his hoist
and army: quhilk office and honor, perteins heretablie, and allanerlie, to
the Constable of Dundie, the Kings Baner man. But all men when they are belted
and maid Earls, are called Barronne Banrent, and Lord of our Sovereign Lordis
Parliament: Quhairby it is manifest, that the said dignity is common to many,
and nocht proper to ane man: And therefore seeing Zasius in the place foresaid,
writis, that Ban-rent is ane dignity concerning weir-fare: I think in my
opinion, that Banrents are called Chevaliers of arms, or Knichtes, quha for
obteining of great honors, dignities or riches, hes power, or privilege
granted to them be the King, to raise and lift up an Baner, with an company of
men of weire, either horsemen, or futemen, quhilk is nocht lesum to any Earl
or Barronne, without the Kingis special license, asked and obtained to that
effect: As Henry Pasquier Advocat. lib. 2. des re cerhes de la France. c. 9.
Fol. 100. provis be money and sundry arguments of the History of France. And
Doctor Thomas Smith, ane learned man, in his buike, anent the commoun weill of
England. Lib. 1. c. 17.

Says that Knights, Banrentes, ar maid in the field, with the ceremony of
cutting of the point of their standerd, and making of it as it were ane Banner,
they being before Bachelors, are now of ane greater degree, allowed to display
their Arms in ane Banner, in the Kingis hoist and army.

BANNITUS, Banished for onie crime or uther cause. Bannum, signifies ane
trumpet, in latin tuba, as writis Alciatus. l. 2. parer. c. 2. ex Procopio, l.
4. belli Persici. And be the common use and consuetude of this Realm, quhen
onie person is banished, or put to the home, the same is done with three blasts
of an horn, or an trumpet. And for that effect, it is statute and ordained
that the Kings maire, or serjand sall have ane horn and wand. Ja. 1. p. 7. c.
99. for with the horn he denunces men rebels, and with the wand, he receives
them to the Kingis peace, quhilk therefore is commonly called the wand of
peace. An Bannitus possit impune, offendi in corpore and bonis. vid.
Chessanaeum in consuetud. Burgund: R. 2. Sect. 1. ver. confiscationis. Nu. 7.
cum seqq. BARO, Ane Barronne. Zasius de Feud. Tit. qui feudum dare possunt, Dux.
writes conform to Cornelius Tacitus, In Libre de Germania;

That Dux, or ane Duke, is the Governor of ane Province, or Army, Comites, or
Earls, are they quha are assessours to the Duke or Prince. SWA called a
comitando, because they accompany the saidis Dukes, and never passis out of
their presence. Comes.


Marchio.
Marchiones, ar Marquesses, Wardaines, or keipers of the Bordoures: For Mark,
March, in Latin Limes, and Mark-grave in Dutche, is Comes Limitaneus. And all
Marchiones dwelling on the Bordoures, or Marches, of the Cuntrie. As in this
Realm the Earldome of March, quhilk perteinis to OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, As ane
part of his annexed property. Bot Comes Martialis, or Earl Martial, is ane
man of dignity or jurisdiction, Cames Martialis.
a mart, vel bello: Because the jurisdiction of weir-fare perteinis to him.
Alciatus libro de singulari certamine. c. 32. Affirmis, that like as the Earl
is inferior to ane Duke, swa ane Barronne is inferior to ane Earl: And that
Baro, cummis fra the Greek word Barus, gravis, wise, grave, prudent, and
discreit: Bot contrary wise, Petrus Pithoeus. Lib. 1. Adversariorum writis,
That Baro signifies ane baird, fuile, or un-wise man. Quhais opinion, I cannot
gudlie approve.

Baldus in Cap. Innotuit de electione, definit Baronem, ut sit quisquis merum
mistumque habet imperium in aliquo castro vel oppido, ex concessione principis.
In this Realm he is called an Barronne, quha haldis his lands immediately in
chief of the King, and hes power of pit and Gallous.

BARRATRIE, or Barrataria, ane kind of Simonie, especially in obteining the
richt of benefices. Socinus reg. 55. Baldus in consilio 21. Part. 5. For all
men passand to Rome and buyeand benefices commits Simonie, and are called
Barratoures. Be quhome Barratrie is committed, and quhat is the pain theirof,
it is manifest be the acts of Parliament. It is ane Italian word, and be the
Italiane interpretours of the civil Law, Barrataria, is quhen ane Judge
corrupted be buddes (sik as gold and silver) judgis wrangeouslie, Petrus de
Raven. singula. 156. and swa doing sellis Justice for meid and profit, and make
is his office ready to be boucht be him, quha will give may theirfore.
Angel. de Syndicatu. Nu. 4. For the quhilk crime he may be deprived, and
sharply punished. Bartol. 1. l. Maevia. 13. Sect 1- nu. 2. de. annu. legate.
And likewaies Barrattours in the Laws of England, should nocht be suffered to
make suit, or to give judgementes or pronunce sentence or domes, anno 3. Edward
1. c. 32. BASTARDUS, in French Bastard, an barn unlauchfullie gotten outwith
the band of Marriage. Quhilk word is barbarous, and (as I suppone) na reasone
can be given quhairfore it is so called. Bot Gabriel Palaeotus, in his buik de
nothis, spuriis que filiis. c. 18. alleagis it to cum fra Bassaris; quhilk
signifies ane huire, or common woman: Be reason that bastards are commonly
gotten and procreat with sik weemen, in Greek he is called nothus, for ta
notha signifies that part of the fathers gudes and gear, Nothus.
quhilk be the law of the Athenians leasumlie micht be given be the Father to
his bastard son, extending to the sum of mill drachmae, and theirfore
Nothon was called all that was not true or lauchfull, as writes Budaeus in
Pandectas. And swa Nothos cums fra no, privativa particula, and theion, h.e.
divinum, test Suida. Because he wantis that quhilk is godly and lauchfull,
that is ane honest and lauchfull birth, or parentage. And swa nothos dicitur
qui non sit legitimus, to the quhilk their is na proper Latin word
correspondent, as Quintilianus testifies lib. 3. c. 6. Nevertheless, he is
commonly called Spurius, Spurius.
for in. l. 1. ff. de posses. contr. tabul. Spurii dicuntur para ten sporan, h.
e. statione, vel seminatione, eaque vaga, and promiscua, ubi doctiores sporaden
legunt, quasi sparsim concepti, like as they are called vulgo concepti. l. in.
adoptivis. 14. de ritu nuptiarum. Likewise Spurius was the proper name of ane
man amongis the Romans, as Titus, or Caius, and was written with two letters
Sp. and likewaies they quha had na certain Father, was designed with the said
two letters, S. and P. And swa be common use and consuetude, Spurii dicebantur
sine patre, as writes Plutarchus in problematibus, because their Father and
mother nocht being lauchfullie married, they have na certain Father: quia pater
dicitur quem legitimae nuptiae demonstrant. l. 5. ff. de in jus vocand: And it
is alike to have na Father, and to have incertaine Father, as we say, he quha
will have money Gods, hes na God. Postremo Blondus lib. 8. Romae triumphantis,
is (inquit) qui illegitime natus esset ex coucubina vel scorto, contumeliae
causa, spurius dicitur, eo quod Sabini, muliebre pudendum sporon appellarunt:
Sporon. Spare.
haec ille Inhonesto originis genere in lucem editos, infami and inhonesta
appellatione notare voluerunt veteres. And that part of weemens claiths, sik as
of their gown, or petticot, quhilk under the belt, and before, is open,
commonly is called, the spare. As concerning the succession of bastards, De
successione activa, and passiva Bastardorum. Bastardus non potest esse haeres.
their schort rules are to be observed, conform to the Law, and practicque of
this Realm. First na bastard, nor na person, nocht procreat, and gotten in
lauchfull marriage, may onie ways be lauchfull air and successor to onie of
our Sovereign Lordis lieges. lib. 2. c. in custodiis 50. for be the law of God
Ismaell being bastard, gotten upon ane bound woman Agar, micht not be air to
Abraham, with Isack. Genes. 21.10. Because all richt of succession is be reason
of bluid, and consanguinitie of the Father side, quhilk is called jus
agnationis, and theirfra ane bastard, quhais Father is incertaine, be the law
is understand, be reason of bluid to be sib to na man, and nane to him, and ubi
nullus est pater legitimus, ibi nulla est agnatio aut successio ratione
agnationis.

Secondly the bairnes maill, or female, Legitimi bastardorum liberi, ipsis
succedunt.
lauchfullie gotten be ane bastard, with ane lauchfull married wife, succeids to
him as righteous and lauchfull aires, in his Lands, gudes and gear, in the
samin manner, as gif their father had been gotten and borne in lauchfull band
of marriage, quia filius est haeres legitimus, quem nuptiae demonstrant. lib. 2.
c. in custodiis 50.

Thirdly gif the lauchfull bairne maill or femaill of ane bastard, Fiscus
succedit filio vel filia, Bastardi.
succeides to him, and thereafter deceasis without lauchfull aires gotten of
his awin body, or without lauchfull brother or sister: and lauchfull testament
and latter will maid be him, all and haill his lands, guds and gear, nocht
being disponed and analied be him in his lifetime, aucht and should perteine to
the King, be the privilege and richt of his Crown: Because, as said is, there
is na richt of succession in this Realm, be the Mother side, and the son or
dauchter of the bastard deceasand as said is, hes na person sib to him be his
Father side: And swa all richt of succession ceasand both upon the Mother and
Father side, tam ratione eognationis, quam agnationis, the King be reason of
his Crown, Bastardus res suas alienare potest, tanquam liber earum dominus.
is universal successor to him in his lands, guds and gear, as ultimus haeres.

Fourthly, an bastard being legitimat, or not legitimat, may in his lige pousty
and enduring his lifetime, annalie and dispone his lands, gudes and gear
moveable, and unmovable, to quhom he pleasis, in the famine form and manner
as onie person gotten in lauchfull bed may do be the Law.

Fiftlie, Fiscus succedit bastard^.
all gudes moveable and unmovable of ane person borne bastard and deceasand
bastard, without lauchfull aires gotten of his body, and na disposition
theirof maid in his time, perteinis as escheite to the King, be reason of the
richt of his Crown. lib. 2. c. quaeri autem. 51. leg. forest, c. si bastardus.
50. de judic. c. si bastardus. 54.

Sextlie, Bastardus legitimatus potest testari legitime^.
Ane bastard being naturalized or legitimat be the King under the great seal,
be the practicque now used and observed, hes allanerlie power to make
testament, dispone his moveable gudes and gear, and nominate executors,
conform to the Law of this Realm: be the quhilk Law, na man lauchfullie, or
unlauchfullie gotten or borne, Bastardus legitimatus potest testari legitime^.
may make onie disposition in his testament, bot of his moveable gudes
allanerlie. For na man upon his deathbed, or in his latter-will, without
consent of his air, may dispone any part of his heretage. Lib. 2. cap. Potest
21. cap. Cum quis. 36.

Seventhlie, gif ane bastard legitimat and rehabled in his lifetime, makis ane
testament lauchfullie: The King thereby is excluded fra all richt and
intromission with his moveable gudes: Bot gif he makes ane testament, quhilk is
null and unlawful: Or gif he makis na testament: Testamentum illegitimi factum
non excludis fiscum.
The King be reason of bastardrie, succeedis to him in all his movables, and
unmoveables. For in this case, the effect and power of the legitimation ceasis,
and hes na operation.

Auchtlie, quhen ane Bastard deceasis without any lauchfull testament maid be
him, or not havand aires lauchfullie gotten of his body: Bona mobilia Bastardi
fisco deferuntur.
The King, be his Thesaurer, or any uther havand gift and power fra him, may
intromet with all the moveable gudes quhatsumever, perteining to the Bastard,
the time of his decease, and not disponed be him in his lifetime, as escheit
perteining to his Hienesse, be reason of his crown and Kingly power.

Ninthlie, Sick-like all lands and tenements pertaining to the said Bastard,
the time of his decease, Bona immobilia D.N. tenta, fisco inferuntur.
and halden immediately of our Sovereign Lord in chief, after his decease
perteinis to the King, and the property thereof, be decease of the Bastard,
and be reason of escheit of Bastardrie, belangand to the Crown, is consolidat
with the superiority in the Kingis person; in sik form and manner, as gif the
Bastard in his lifetime, had maid resignation thereof, in the Kingis hands.

Tenthlie, Concerning lands and heretage, perteining to ane Bastard, In aliis
bonis immobilibus Rex habet jus presentationis.
not halden of the King, bot of ane uther superior, Spiritual, or Temporal;
the King hes richt of presentation: Be the quhilk, after the decease of the
Bastard, he may present any person quhom he pleases, as heretable tennent to
the Bastardes immediate superior, be his letter, under the quarter seal,
bearand: That for-sa-meikle, as N. borne Bastard, and deceaseand Bastard,
without any aires, lauchfullie gotten of his body, and na lauchful disposition
maid be him in his lifetime, had the lands called B. perteining to him, in
heritage, halden immediately of the said superior: And his Hienesse being
willing not to prejudge the superior, anent his superiority: Therefore
presentis to him, sik ane man, charging the superior to receive him, and give
him sik infeftment of the lands, as the umquhile Bastard had of him of before.

BERTHINSEK, Or Birdinsek. Be the Law of Birdinsek, na man should die, or be
hanged for the thieft of ane scheepe, ane veale: Or for sa-meikle meat as he
may bear upon his back in ane seck: Bot all sik thieves, should pay ane scheepe,
or ane cow, to him in quhais land he is taken: And mair-over, should be
scurged. Lib. 4. c. De Y burpanan seca. 14. quoniam attach. c. per
constitutionem. 44. Ass. Reg. Da. c. 1. In fine. Stat. Alex. c. de Berthinsek.
19. Quhilk is conform to the Civil, and Cannon law. Nam omnia delicta and
maleficia aestimantur voluntate, and proposito delinquentis. L. qui injuriae.
53. In prin. ff. de furtis. L. 1. ff. de Var, and extr. Crim. Ideoque si quis
necessitate famis sedandae, egestate, aut paupertate coactus, rem alienam
contrectat, quia non adest animus furandi cupidus, excusari potest. e. si quis.
Extr. de Furt. non enim factum, sed causa faciendi inspicitur. l. Verum. 39 ff.
de furti. Et vuglo dici solet, necessitatem non habere legem. L. Non solum Vlt,
de excusationib. Tutor. BLUDUEIT, UYTE In English is called Injuria, vel
misericordia. Ane un-law for wrang or injury, sik as blood: For they quha ar
infest with Bludueit, hes free liberty to take up all vnlawes or amerciamentes
of Court, for effusion of blood: And to hald Courts thereupon, and to apply
the samin to their awin utilitie and profit. BONA PATRIA, Lib. 1. c. si vero.
29. Ane assise of cuntrie-men, or of good nichtboures: Sometimes it is called.
Assisa bonae patriae, quhen twelve, or maa men ar chosen forth of any part of
the Cuntrie, to pass upon Assise, quha ar called Juratores, Juratores.
because they should swear judiciallie, in presence of the party, ane solemn
aith. Lib. 1. c. Post hoc. 14. Iam 1. P. 13. c 138: The aith of the assisors.
In this manner following. We sall leill suith say, and na suith conceal, for
na-thing be may, sa far as we are charged upon this Assise, be God himself, and
be our part of Paradise, and as we will answer to God upon the dreadful day
of judgment.

BONDAGIUM; or Villenagium, slaverie, or servitude: For bondi, nativi, Bondi.
Nativi.
and Villani, signifies ane thing. Lib. 2. c. Consequenter 13. cum seqq. Bondi,
be reason of their band and obligation, as bound and oblished men. Nativi, be
reason of their nativitie and birth, as borne men within the land, Quasi
ascriptitij glebae, That is depute, destinate. or ordained be their master, to
dwell and remain upon the land, for keiping and laboring thereof. Lib. 2. c.
Pluribus 14 And therefore utherwaies ar called Villani, Villanis.
be reason of their office: in sa far as they have the cure of Villages, and
landwart husbandry committed to them. Bondagium per anteriores crines capitis.
Bondagium per anteriores crines.
quoniam attach. c. de brevibus. 31.15. quhen any free man, renuncis his
liberty, and makis himself ane bond, or slave to ane great man in his
Court, and makis tradition, and delivering of himself, be giving ane grip of
the hair of his forehead: to the effect he may be maintained and defended be
him thereafter. The Quhilk bondmen, gif they reclaim to their liberty, or
happen to be fugitive fra their master, may be drawn back again be the Nose,
to servitude: Fra the quhilk the Scottish saying cummis, quhen ane boastis and
menacis to tak ane uther be the Nose. And it is leasum to any man to sell his
liberty; bot gis he dois, he may never recover the samin. Assis. Reg. Da. c.
Quilibet 12. quoniam attach. c. quilibet, 56. To this the Civil Law is
conform. Nam his qui ad precium particidandum sevaenundari passi sunt, ad
libertatem proclamare non licet. L. 1. ff. quib. ad lib. Petrus Pithaeus. li.
1. Adversariorum, makis mention of ane kind of adoption, per comam sive
capillos, quhen any person tuike ane grip of ane uther mannis hair, and did
cut it: Quhairby the ane, became the Father adoptive, and the uther, the Son
adoptive. BORCH, ane Cautioner, pledge, or sovertie, Iam. 3 Par. 14. c. 99. In
Latin, Fide-jussor. vide Free Borgh. vid. Plegius. Borgh of Ham-hald. de
Maritag. Borgh of Ham-hald.
c. Sciendum. 17. Ane Caution or sovertie used in byeing and selling, quhilk
the seller findis to the byer, to make the gudes furthcummand, as his awin
proper gudes, and to warrant the samin to him. For it is Statute, that na man
sall bye any gear, except the seller thereof find him ane lauchfull pledge:
quhilk is called Borgh of Ham-halde. And gif it fall happen the gudes sauld and
bocht, to be challenged be ane uther, and the said pledge cannot find him,
for quhome he is pledge, to relieve him of the said challenge: He sall pay to
the Challenger, the triple of the thing challenged: And aucht Kye to the King,
as ane un-law. And gif he quha faunde the said pledge, relievis him not from
the said damnage, he he sallbe banished the realm. Lib. 1. c. Statuit etiam
19. St. Alex. c. Statuit etiam 13. For generally the Cautioner hes good action,
contrair the principal, for his relief. Lib. 3. ca. 1, Is fine. And siklike
within Burgh, the like caution should be found in byeing and selling of all
merchandice, except meat and drink, and uther things of small consequence.
Leg. Forest. c. Nullus, 48. Et de jure civili venditor per evictionis
praestationem, cogitur servare emptorem indemnem, eodem modo ac si domimium
nactus esset. L. exempto. N. in prin. ff. de actionibus emp. vid. Hambaldare.
vid. Hamsuken. Mair-over, gif any man becummis ane furth-cummand borgh for, ane
uther, to make him forth cummand as ane haill man, it is sufficient, gif he
produce him personally, hail and sound before the judge, in lauchfull time
and place. Bot gif he be pledge for ane uther, that he salbe answerable as law
will* he man satisfy for him in court, and to the party, to quhom he is
pledge in all things, as the principal should have done. Quoniam attach. c. vbi
aliquis 11. BOTHNA, Buthna, Bothena. L. 4. c. Si quis namos. 30. appearis to be
ane Park, quhair cattle ar sed and inclused, vt in Libro M. Alexandri Skene,
fratris mei germani, quandam in supremo Senatu Advocati. Quhlk in confirmed be
Hector Boethius. l. 7. c. 123. Nu. 35. Cum scribit maritimam Thessaliae partem a
vectigali, quod Regiis procuratoribus ab incolis in annos pendi solitum erat,
cum gregum multitudine abundarent, Buth qahaniam appellata^, est enim, quhain,
ide^ quod vectigal, prisca Scotorum linguaret Buth, oviu^ collectio: haec ille.
And it is manifest, that the place in the quhilk the owes ar enclosed quhen
they are milked, is commonly called an Bucht. Sicklike Aulus Gellius l. 11. c.
1, writts that Italy is so called a Bubus, Italy.
because Italoi in the auld Greek language, signifies Oxen, of the quhilk there
was great abundance and multitude in Italy, quhilk is confirmed be Paulus
Vanefridus lib. 2. c. 24. Italia (inquit) ab Italo, Siculorum duce, qui eam
antiquitus invasit, sive ob hoc Italia dicitur, quia magni in ea boves, h.e.
Itali habentur, ab eo namque quod est Italus, per diminutione^, una litera
addita, altera immutata, vitulus appellatur. Item Bothena. Stat. Wilb. c. 11.
Signifies ane Barronnie, Lordship, or Schireffdome, as is manifest, Ex Libro
Sconens. ca 99. Assis. Regis David: Et Dominus Bothenae, is the lord of the
Barronie, land, or ground: Leg. Port. ca. 1. in Libro M. Willielmi Skene,
fratris mei, Commissarij Sancti Andreae. Page 149. c 79. item, It is statute
and ordained, that the Kingis Mute, that is, the Kingis Court or ilk Bothene,
that is, of ilk Schireffedome, salbe halden within forty days. Ass. Reg. Da.
ca. 6. in Libr. quondam M. Roberti Carbraith. I. C. Doctissimi. BOTE, Ane auld
Saxon word, signifies, Compensation, or Satisfaction: As man-bote,
theift-bote; And in all excambion, or cossing of lands or gear moveable: The
ane part that gettis the better, givis ane Bote, or compensation to the uther.
Quhairof there is ane example in Si familiae, instit. de Offic. Iudic. and id
quaedam actiones. Instit. de actionibus. Man-boate. Kin-boate. Thieft-boate.
Ane man-bote is assithment for the slauchter of ane man. Kin-bote, for the
slauchter of ane Kins-man. Thieft-bote, is quhen any man agries with ane
thief, and puttis him fra the Law. I. 5.12. Iul. Par. 1. c. 2. Or quhen any
sellis ane thief, or finis with him, for thieft-dome done, or to be done. Ia.
1. Par. 13. c. 137. BOVATA TERRAE, ane oxen-gate of land. Li. 4. c. Si quis
sederit. 23. Quhilk in sum buikes, is wrangeouslie written, Davata terrae. The
Lords of the Session be their decreete. 18. Iulij. 1541. Esteemed and modified
ane Oxen-gate of land, to twenty shillinges in all duties eirly. Bot in this
I find na certain rule; For some land is mair fertile, and uther mair barren:
Always, ane Oxen-gate of land, should contain threttene acker: And four
Oxen-gate, extendis to ane pound land of auld extent, conform to the decreetes
given be the Lords of the Checker. 11. Mar. 1585. Patrik Mony-penny of Pilrig,
and uthers, contrair Adam Bishop of Orlenay. And at the instance of John
Criechtonne of Bruntstoun, contrair John Fontoun. BREVE, Ane commoun word in
the Laws and practicque of this Realm: And also in the Civil Law. Lib. 1. C.
De exactorib. Tribut. Li. 10. leg. ult. c. de conveniend fisci. Debitorib. Lib.
10. Quhair, in the Gloss, it is called Schedulae, ane schort compendious
write: Like as all brieves ar conceived in few words, and ar alswa called
Brevicula. And in Rubr. C. de sentent. ex periculo recitand. Alciatus Lib. 1.
Dispunct. cap. 21. Et Jacobus Cuiacius, Antonio Contio repugnante, Legunt ex
Breviculo, id est, ex scripto breviori formula concepto. Because the sentences
and decreetes of Ordinar judges, should be red and pronounced in writ. Breve
testatum, is ane writ or instrument, subscrived be ane public Notar; Or be two
witnesses, Breve testatum.
quha ar called, pares curtis, vel curiae. b. c. Convassalli: Quha both halds
their land of ane superior. Cuiacius Lib. 1. and Lib. 2. Tit. 3. De feud. in
the auld Laws of this realm, diverse and sindrie Brieves hes been used and
wont, quhairof mention is maid Quon. attach. c. de brevibus 31. And in sindrie
uther places. Brieves now in use.
Bot seven forms of Brieves allanerlie, are now commonly used. The first,
the Brieve of Mortancestrie. The second, the Brieve of tutorie. The third the
brieve of Idiotry. The fourth the brieve of Terce. The fifth the brieve of
line, or lineation of lands, and tenementes within Burgh. The sext the brieve
of division. The seventh, the brieve of perambulation. Quhairof the three first
brieves are answered, and retoured again to the Chancellarie. And the uther
four receivis na retoured answer. The cause of the diversity dependis upon
the form of the brieves direct forth of the Chancellarie. Because the three
first brieves in the end of ilk ane of them conteinis an command to the judge,
to quhome they are direct, to send back again his answer to ilke point of the
brieve. And the remnant four brieves hes na sik command; And theirfore
requiris na answer. BREVE de divisis faciendis, Is the brieve or summonds of
cognition, or molestation anent the property and commontie of Lands, anent
the bounds, meithes and marches theirof, betuixt Neighbor, and Neighbor.
Quhilk be the new act of Parliament, should be decided be ane assise, before the
Schireffe, and his deputes. Ja. 6. p. 11. c. 42. It may be likewaies called
the brieve of division, or of perambulation, or onie uther concerning the
marches of lands, lib. 2. c. dicitur. 74. BREVE de nova dissasina, quo.
attach. c. de brevibus. 31. Is the brieve or summondes of ejection, or spuilie.
For dissasitor, is he quha ejectis onie man forth of the possession of his
landis, without ordour of the law, as writis John Rastel. verb. dissasitor. And
nova dissasina, signifies alswa spuilie, maisterful, wrangous, or violent
spoliatio^ and away taking of moveable guds and gear. 22. March. 1547. William
Lindsay contrair Alex. Chene. Molinans in stilo curiae parliament. part. 1. c.
10. c. 18. affirmis that noua dissasina, is that quhilk in the civil law, is
called interdictum unde vi. And co^prehends also interdictum uti possidetis.
And in the Law of Normandy, li. 8. c. 3. it is called interdictum recuperandae
possessionis. vid. dissasina. BREVES pleadable, breve placitabile, are all sik
brieves, quhilkis are persewed and defended be ane ordinar form of process
before ane competent judge, at the instance of ane persewer against ane
defender. For it is Statute, that na man sall be ejected forth of his land or
tenemente, quhairin he alledgis him to be vest and saised, bot be an brieve
pleadable or sum uther brieve accordand theirto, and that the said person be
lawfully summound, to answer upon his heritage, at ane certain day and place.
Stat. 2. Rob. Br. C. Item. 25. quhilk is conform to the acts of Parli. Ia. 3.
P. 6. c. 41.

BREVE de recto, the brieve of richt was used before the Justice general and
his deputes in decision of the ground, richt and property of lands, and
reduction of infeftments, the quhilk form of process is declared at length, in
the first buike of Regiam Majestatem, and in quo. attach. c. de brevibus. 13.
and be the Lords of council and session is decerned nocht to have been, nor it
to be their money eires in use, and theirfore they find themself, conform to the
institution of the College of Justice, and jurisdiction granted to them, to be
judges competent in all causes of heretage, vlt. Februar. 1542, Patrick Weemes
contrair Forbes of Reres. BREVE de morte antecessoris, the brieve of
Mortancestrie. l. 2. c. generalia, 25. Or the brieve of succession, or of
consanguinitie, de iudicib c. Natura. 158. Or breve inquisitionis. Stat. Rob.
3. c. 1. Or the brieve of inquest. I. 4. p. 6. c. 94. Albeit all brieves are
inquisitions, because they are determinat per inqusitionem patriae, de iudicib.
c. cum quis. 152, or the brieve of recognition, breve recognitionis Stat. 2.
Rob. Br. c. Item. quia 23. It is the may necessar, common and profitable
brieve, or inquisition that is used be the lieges of this Realm, quhairby ane
desiris, to be served and retoured, as narrest and lauchfull air to his father
or uther predicessour. This brieve is rased forth of the Chancellarie and
persewed be ane appeirand air of perfect age, The persewer of the Brieve.
for recovering of his lands, forth of his superiors hands: togidder with
all the proffites and commodities theirof. leg. forest. c. et si haeres 71. The
raiser of the brieve at the samin time should find caution to persew and follow
the brieve, and his clame conform theirto. lib. 3 c. generalia. 25. The Judge.
Be the auld law of this Realm, the Justice general and his deputes haveand
jurisdiction nocht only in criminal causes, bot also in civil actions, was
judge competent to the service of this brieve. quo^ attach. c. de brevibus. 31.
Bot now the samin is served before the Schireffe, Stewart, baillie, or onie
uther judge havand power and jurisdiction. Stat. Rob. 3. c. 1. Or before judges
delegat be commission, granted be the Lords of Council, Proclamation
for the serving of the said brieve. Ia. 5. p. 6. c. 82. The brieve should be
proclaimed upon fifteen days warning exclusive. That is upon fifteen days,
nocht comptand the day of the service of the brieve to be ane of them, be sik
persons, as hes power be their office or commission, to proclaim the samin,
in ane lauchfull, public, and convenient place: That is to say, in the
principal Burgh of the Schireffe-dome, Balliery, or uther place quhair the
lands lies: at the market croce theirof, and in market time of day, before
two witnesses at the least, to the effect that the knawledge theirof may cum to
the audience of all parties, havand or pretendand entres theirintill, and
theirafter the brieve should be lauchfullie execute and indorsate, Indorsation.
be the officiar, executor theirof, and stamped with his seal or signet before
the samin be presented in judgment. Stat: Rob. 3. c. 1. I. 1. p. 9. c. 127. 1.
4. p. 6. c. 94. 1. 6. p. 11. c. 60. In registro 16. No. 1537. It is necessar
and also lesum to the Schireffe, or onie uther Judge of this brieve, Assise
should be summound.
to su^mmond certain persons may worthy within his jurisdiction to pass
upon the assise, and that upon the space of fifteen days, or it gif he
pleasis upon ane schorter time, and gif they be present in the tolbuith
un-summoned, it is leasum to the Judge to compel them to pass upon the said
inquest. Ia. 4. p. 6. c. 94. And all sik persons summoned and nocht
compeirand, ar charged at the bar and dissobeyand, should be decerned in ane
unlaw and amerciament of court; The brieve beand lauchfullie proclaimed, and
the persons of inqueist like-waies summoned, and the day of compeirance being
cum: the persewer exhibitis and presentis the brieve dewlie execute and
indorsate, in judgment to the Judge, and desiris him to cause the samin be
red, and put to the knawledge of ane assise: Thereafter the officiar; executour
of the said brieve, be his great aith, Verification of the brieve.
sall swear judiciallie, that he did execute the samin brieve, conform to the
indorsation thereof in all points, and the witnesses insert there-in-till,
sall also make faith, that they heard, saw, and bystude, quhen the said
officiar did execute and proclaim the Brieve, in sik manner, as is contained
in the indorsation thereof: The brieve and indorsation being swa verified,
Defender.
gif any person havand entresse, compeiris to defend and object against the
brieve, he sulde have inspection thereof, gif he desiris the samin: And gif he
proponis any relevant exception, declinatour, dilatour, or peremptour: He
thereby castis and annullis the Brieve, either until ane new brieve be raised
again, or simpliciter in all times cumming: utherwaies, gif he hes na
reasonable exception or defense to stop the brieve; the samin sall pass to the
knawledge of ane assise, Quoniam attach. c. de brevibus. 13.

An assise is chosen.
THEN Certain lauchfull men maiste worthy, and quha best knawis the
verity, to the number of Thretteene, or fifteen, ar chosen in judgment, in
presence of the persewer, and defender: Or in presence of the persewer, and in
absence of the defender, knawin to have enteresse, and being lauchfullie
summoned, and nocht compeirand, to the said election, to object against sa money
persons, as he may leasumlie stop be the law, to pass upon the assise: For
like as it is necessar, that he be anis summoned: Swa gif he compeires nocht,
being lauchfullie summoned, the brieve should receive process, and pass to the
knawledge of ane inquest, at the desire of the persewer, in absence of the
defender. Lib. 3. c. Generalia. 35. ass. Reg. Da. c. sciendum est. 44. lib. 4.
c. Si petens. 57. Continuation of the brieve.
Quhilkis persons, na lauchful objection maid against them, should be received,
sworn, and admitted: And therefore ar called Juratores. vid. Bona Patria. And
gif they, or onie ane of them be sworn and received, the judge may continue
the brieve to ane uther day, gif he pleasis, and as necessity requiris:
utherwaies the continuation thereof, is nocht leasum, without the consent of
the party, after the claim is given in; And inquisition taken in the cause,
gif the persons of inquest, being weill counseled, The claim Service
negative.
and advised, deliveris and servis Negative, in favoures of the defender, and
finds the persewer na ways nearest and lauchfull air to him quha died last
Vest, and saised in the Lands acclaimed: In that case the defender dois bruik
and joyis the possession of the said lands, and the persewer is debarred and
secluded therefra. Bot gif the assise deliveris and servis negative, as said
is, or affirmative, Service affirmative.
in favors of the persewer against the defender, conform to the claim in all
points: This their answer to all and sundry the points of the brieve,
sealed with all their seals, or of the may part of them, togidder with the
seal of the Schireffe, or uther judge closed, and the brieve enclosed therein
(to the effect the same may be conferred with the answer) is sent back and
retoured to the chancellarie, conform to the Kingis command, Retour.
contained in the end of the brieve. Stat. To. 3. c. 1. Quhilk therefore is
called ane retoure. Two kinds of retours.
And it is to wit, that there is two kinds of retoures, or answers maid be
the persons of inquest, to this brieve, and retoured to the Chancellarie: The
ane is general and the uther special: The general is, General retoure and
air.
quhair na lands or tenements ar specially acclamed or soucht be the persewer
of the brieve: Bot only it is desired, that he may be served and retoured
generalie, nearest and lauchfull air to his Predecessor: To the quhilk
general claim, ane general retour is maid, be virtue quhairof the said
general air, hes good richt and title to all contractes, obligationes, and
reversiones, and to the moveable aire-schip guds. quhilkis perteined to his
predecessor, and were not discharged, or disponed before his decease, in his
liege poustie: And sik-like, he may persew, and defend quhat sumeever action
competent to him, be decease of his said predecessor, to quhom he is served
air general. 8. March. 1540. James Scot, contrair (...) Blair: The special
answer and retour is, Special retour.
quhen the persewer of the brieve, claimis special lands, and the persons of
inquest givis ane particular and special answer to ilk special point of the
brieve. l. 16. 4 c. statuit Dominus 45. The quhilk is direct and send to the
directour of the Chancellarie, to be tried be him, gif the samin be conform to
the direction and ordour of the brieve in all points. Here is to be
understand, that the lands contained in the retour, ar halden immediately of
our Sovereign Lord the King, or of any uther superior. Gif the lands be halden
of the King in chief, the directour of the Chancellarie, commandis his Clerks
to direct ane precept, under the testimonial of the great seal, called the
quarter seal, in quhite Walx, to the Schireffe of the Schire, quhair-in the
lands lyis: commanding him to give saising to the person retoured, or his
Actournay, of the lands contained in the retour: And to take security of the
mailles and duties of the lands, sa lang as they are retoured, to have been in
the hands of the King, or his Predecessoures, be reason of ward, or
none-enteresse, quhairof ane memorial is made in ane buike called, Responde,
vid. Responde. Of lands retoured, halden of an uther superior.
Gif the lands retoured be halden of ane uther immediate superior then the
King: The directour of the Chancellarie, directis ane precept, chargeing the
superior, to give saising to the person retoured, of all and sindrie the
lands contained in the retour: He doand to him therefore all quhilk he is
obished to do be the Law: Quhilk precept, gif the superior dissobeyis, beand
required personally, or at his dwelling place, to obey the samin: And for
verifying thereof, The second precept.
ane authentic instrument reported to the Chancellarie: Then the second
precept, called Meminimus, is direct to the said superior, bearand in effect,
that the King remembrand, that of before he gave command to him to give
saising: quhilk command as it is nocht obeyed, quhairof he mervailis: And
therefore it, as of before, chargis and commandis the said superior, to give
saising to the person retoured, of the lands contained in the retoure. The
third precept.
And gif ane uther authentic instrument be reported to the chancellary for
verification of the superiouris disobedience the second time; The third precept
called Furchae, is direct, commanding him to give the said saising, or
utherwaies gif he disobey, the king certifies him, that he will direct his
uther precept to his schireffe to give the samin. In the execution of al their
three precepts, it is not necessare, that the superior sall be personally
apprehended. The fourth precept of the schireff.
But it is sufficient gif he be sa charged in the execution of any ane of them.
The third precept and charge being likewayes disobeied, and the samin
disobedience lawfully verified, as said is: ane precept is direct forth of the
chancellarie, to the schireff and his deputes of the schire within the quhilk
the lands retoured lies. Make and mention, that the King hes given command be
his uther letters, to N. Barron and his deputes, that he without delay should
give saising to the person retoured, or his attornay of the lands contained in
the retour, quhilk gif he dois not, he commands and chargis the schireff, to
give saising of the said lands with the pertinents without delay, saisand ilk
man's richt. Quhilk precept being obeyed be the schireff, and saising given
conform theirto: the superior who was three times charged of before and
refused, be reason of his disobedience, tynis and forefaults the superiority of
the lands quhairof he refused to give saising enduring his lyfe-time. Quhilk
superiority, sall pertein to his immediate superior, quhidder that be the King
or any uther. And after his deceas, his air being served and retoured to the
superiority of the samin lands, recoveris the said superiority quhilk his
father did tine throw his disobedience. Two manners of tinsell of superiority.
And sa be the law and practicque of this realm, ane superior may tyne and
forefault his superiority. First, quhen he is entered and saised in the
superiority, and being charged be precepts of the Chancellarie, refusis to
receave his vassal, and tennent, served and retoured to the property. In the
quhilk caise be reason of his contempt and disobedience of the Kings precepts
and command, he tynis the superiority, enduring his lyfetime, without any
declaratour, or decreit of ane judge. Secondly, quhen the superior is not
entered nor saised in the superiority, and is charged be the Lords letters
raised be his vassal, to enter within forty dayis thereto, to the effect he
may enter to the property. The quhilk forty days being bypast, at the
instance of the vassal, he may be decerned be decreit of the Lords of the
Session, to have tynt his superiority, and to satisfy the party grieved. Ia,
3. p: 7: C: 57: And in both the caises foresaid, the vassal, or tennent, salbe
entered and hald of the King, or the uther immediate over-lord, to him quha
contempnandly disobeyed. Precepts of saising given conform to retoures be
commission.
Last of all, concerning the giving of saising conform to brieves served and
retoured before the judges, commissioners the form and ordour of the
Chancellary above written, should be kept and observed, and gif the lands
retoured be halden immediately of the King: the precept of saising should be
direct to the Schireff and his deputes. For the Lords auditors of the Checker,
statute and ordained, 8. Aug. 1528. that in time coming, the clerk of the
Chancellarie, upon the brieve served be an commission, sall direct the precept
of saising, to the principal schireff of the schire, and make the responsion
upon the schireffs head, notwithstanding the said commission, quhilk is
ordained allanerly to have effect, anent the serving of the brieve, and not
anent the giving of the saising. And true it is, that all saisings past upon
precepts of the chancellary, should be given be the schireff clerk or his
deputes, for the quhilk the schireff sall answer. Ia. 5. p. 6. c. 77. Mar. p.
6. c. 34.

BROCCARII, In statutis gildae, signifies lockers, brockers, mediators, or
intercessours in onie transaction, paction or contract. As in buying and
selling, or in contracting of marriage. In the civil law they are called,
Proxenetae. Lib: 1: and tot. tit. de Proxenetis. BULLION ane French word,
Bilon, signifies uncunied silver or gold, quhairof silver or gold is, or may be
cunied or stricken: sik as Balluca, in greek Chrysamenos. h e. aurea arena, quae
ex terra effoditur lib 1. c. de metallar. l. 11. In the English laws it is
called Plate. In the acts of parliament of this realm, it is statute and
ordained, That merchands sall bring hame Bullion, quhair-anent the Lords of
checker maid this ordinance, At Edinburgh the 10. day of Janua. 1597. In
presence of the Lords of checker compeired personally, the Provest, Baillies
and Thesaurer of Edinburgh, with certain merchands their nichtbors, and gave
in their supplication, desiring the A. B. C. of Bullion to be explained, and an
solid order to be taken with the expres quantity of Bullion, quhilk they
salbe astricted to pay presently, and in all time heirefter. After
consideration quhairof, and conference had at length with them, upon the
particularities concerning the said matter of Bullion. The said Lords of
checker, with consent of the said Provest and Baillies, for themselves, and
their remanent nichtbors, and merchands of this realm; hes statute and
ordained, that all merchands sall in bring and pay in all time coming, for ilk
last of hydes, sex ounces Bullion: For ilk last of Salmond, four ounce bullion:
For ilk 4. hundredth claith, four ounce bullion: Forilk serplaith of woolle,
four ounce bullion. And for all uther waires and merchandice transported be
them forth of this realm, for ilk serplaith of gudes, or sa-meikle as payis
ane serplaith of fraucht: The said Merchand sall pay, four ounces of bullion:
And until mair perfect knawledge, be had of the just quantity of the
serplaith, ordainis two tun fraucht, to be compted to the sek: And two sek
fraucht to the serplaith. And the said bullion to be in-brocht to the
Cuinie-house be the merchandes: And payment to be maid to them for the samin,
conform to the act of parliament maid there-anent, upon the nineteenth day of
December, last bypast.

Ane A. B. C. of the Bullion, set down be the Lords of Checker, for gudes
transported forth of the Cuntrie. And declared be them, to be conform to the
acts of Parliament, And the act of Checker, above specified. 13. Febru. 1597.
The last of drinking bear. ij. ounce burnt silver The last of Quheate iiij.
ounce The last of Bear iij. ounce The last of Malt iij. ounce The last of Rye,
and Rye meal, ij. ounce The last of Killing, Codlinge and Ling ij. ounce The
last of Olie ij. ounce The last of Orkney butter ij. ounce The last of Herring
ij. ounce The last of Salmond iiij. ounce The last of Saipe ij. ounce The last
of Ass ii. ounce The last of Pick and Tar ij. ounce The last of Lint and
Hemp ij. ounce The last of Irne ij. ounce The last of Copper containing 14.
schip pund ij. ounce The last of Heart hides, dry hides, and salt hides vj.
ounce The tun of wine i. ounce Ilk four hundredth of claith iiij. ounce Ilk seck
of scheip-skinnes containing 500. ij. ounce The serplaith of lamb-skins
containing 8000. iiij. ounce The serplaith of cunning-skins containing 16000.
iiij. ounce Ilk serplaith of futfelles containing 4000. iiij. ounce Ilk seck of
gait-skins containing 680. ij. ounce Ilk three chalder of salt i. ounce Ilk
hundredth of dailles i. ounce Ilk last of Narvis talloun ij. ounce Ilk tun of
lead i. ounce Ilk four chalder of coals i. ounce Ilk three hundredth of dry
fisch ij. ounce Ilk thousand ling or killing in peill ij. ounce For ilk four
cradill of glass ij. ounce For ilk seck of wool containing xxiiij. stanes ij.
ounce The last of wax, containing xiiij. schip pund ij. ounce
BURLAW, Byrlaw. Laws of Burlaw are maid, and determined be consent of
nichtbors, elected and chosen be common consent, in the courts, called the
Byrlaw courts. In the quhilk, cognition is taken of complaints betuixt
nichtbour and nichtbour, lib. 4. c. The quhilk men sa chosen, as judges and
arbitrators to the effect foresaid, are commonly called byrlaw men. It is an
Dutch word, for haur or haursman in Dutch, is rusticus, an husbandman. And sa
byrlaw burlaw, or baurlaw, leges rusticorum: Laws maid be husbandmen,
concerning nichtbour-heid to be kept amangs themselves.


C
CADROW, quhairof mention is maid in the act of P. printed. 1568. Ia. 2. 4. An.
1454. c. 41: wrangously, for cadou, because forth of the barony of Cadou; an
eirly pension or annuel-rent of 26. pound 13. schil. 4. pen. was paid to the
King in the checker; as is manifest in the Schireff-rolles. Ia. 2. 1456. and
likewaies in the Schireff-rolles, Ia 3. 1487. in the quhilk roll, the barronny
of Cadou is called Hammilton, and in diverse uthers rolls. CANUM, Cana. In
sindrie charters and infeitments of lands, specially halding of the kirk, is
commonly used; for the duty and revenue quhilk is paid to the superior, or
lord of the land, and specially to bischops, or kirk-men, quhidder it be
quheat; beir,, aites; or uther kind of victuals: salt; or sums of money, as
is manifest, ult: feb. 1509. The King contrare the L. of Balmonth. it
nevertheles, the lands of Kilconquhair; liand within the schirefdome of Fyfe,
are retoured to be halden be service of ward and relieve, payand an certain sum
of silver, nomine cani. to the B. of S. Andrews. Quhilk to be weill done, I
cannot affirm: for it is certain, that all lands halden nomine cani, payis
ane certain sum of silver, or some uther certain duty, particularly expressed
in the infeftment. Sa gif that manner of halding be like to the halding be
service of ward and relieve: of necessity the samin mon be ane taxed ward, and
during the time thereof, the tennent should pay na mair but the particular sums
or duty contained in his infeftment: Canum, appeirs to be an Irisch word; for
Keane signifies the head, as King Malcolm Kenmoir, grandis Capite, vel capito,
great head: and likewaies kain or Chan, is called tribute, paid be the
servand, or subject to the master, as I have red in ane auld authentic
register of the bischoprik of Dunkeld, quhair it is called Chan or Chanum. And
amangis the Romans there was two kinds of tribute: ane real, quhilk was
impute be reason of the quantity of the lands and guds immovable, quhilk is
called jugatio^, quod pro modo jugerum imponebatur. l. 9. C. de agricol. and
censil. lib. 11. Ane uther personal, quhilk was enjoined to the person: and is
called capitatio, quod pro capite hominis praestatur. d. l. 9. cum. l. seq. and
ibi gl. l. sacrosanctae. 8. C. de sacrosanct. eccles. l. ult. C. de annon. and
tribut. lib. 9. And in the Evangel, licetne dare censum Caesari. Theod. Beza
interpretit, licetne dare capitationem Caesari. Aulus Gellius, and uther latin
writers makis mention of them quha was taxed be the head or pow. In latin
capite censiti. Sa this word Cane signifies the head, or rather tribute or
duty, as Cane fowls, Cane cheis, Cane aites, quhilk is paid be the tennent
to the master as ane duty of the land, specially to kirk-men and prelates,
quha in the time of their greatness and supremacy, used ane form and style,
diverse from uthers: and the auld form of precepts, given in the time of K.
Robert it extant, anent the in bringing of the K. rents, conteins censum, Cana,
reditus, custumas. And canage of wol, or hyds, is taken for the custom
theirof, le. navium fol. 171. in li. M. Willielmi Skene, commissarij
Sanctundreae fratris mei germani. Specially, quhilk is given for the mending
and up-halding of the haven for schips. leg. burg. c. ult. in lib. Carbraith.
CAMPIONES, ane word commonly used in singular battle: For in auld times, quhen
controversies, and debates culd not be utherwise decided, bot be singular
battle: the parties did either fecht in proper person, or conduced, and fied
for wage uthers to fecht for them. Quha war called campiones, because they
faucht in campo, or in the fields, de judic. c. 93. Albeit sumtime they did
fecht in the K. palace. lib. 4. c. stat. 38. and sumtime in the common streits.
quo. attach. c. apud Dumfreis, 59. stat. Alex. c. apud 28. from the quhilk
consuetude cummis the common saying: Do thou richt, do thou wrang, cheis thou a
campion strange: for this is the law of Scotland. Because in all actions* and
quarrels decided be campions in singular combat: That party did win the cause,
quhais campion was victorious, and he quhais campion was vanquished and overcum
in battle, did tine his cause. vi. Duellum gladiatores, or duellatores, are
forbidden. l. unic. C. de gladiatoribus. CATALA, an French word, Chattel, as is
commonly taken in the laws of this realm, for all guds and gear moveable, li.
2. c. cum quis. 52. c. usuratii, 53. c. 55. ubi res mobiles dicuntur catalla:
and likewise in the laws of Normandy gudes moveable, signifies all things, as
possessions quhilkis may be removed fra ane place to an uther, and commonly are
called cattle, as horse, claith, gold, silver, and uther sik things. li. 5. c.
1. l. 8. c. 1. Like as haereditas, or heritage, signifies all lands, and
immovable guds in the said law of Normand. li. 8. c. 1. And also in the laws
of this realm. li. 2. c. 53. stat. gild c. item quod quicunque 19. and leg.
burg. c. si contigat. 104. gif ane burges deceas without an testament, his
air, and his cattle, salbe in the keiping of the kinsmen of the mother side,
called cognati. And his heritage in the keiping of his kinsmen of the fathers
side, called agnati. CATHORIUS, Catherius, The pain of him quha is convict in
battle, or break the Kingis protection.
quhat it signifies, I cannot well declair, always it is equivalent to the
valor of 9. Ky, St. Alex. c. apud. 28. quo. at. c. apud 59: quhair it is
statute, that gif any person beis convict in singular battle, or utherwaies of
breaking of the K. protection, or peace: he sall give to the K. viginti duas
vaccas, and tres cathorios, vel pro quolibet cathorio novem vaccas. It is true,
that cantherius in latin, signifies an gelded horse: fra the quhilk cums the
latin proverb, cantherius in fossa, against them quha being unable, and not
qualified, seiks and cravis offices, quhairin they can do na mair service nor a
horse or horsman can do, being enclosed within an sowse: and siklike cantherius
in porta, Cantherius
quhen ane horse being led forth of the stabill, in the port, or in the
beginning of his journey, snappers or fallis with his master: The
superstitious peopill esteemed that to be ane evil presage of the journey.

CARRUCATA terrae, Ane French word, for charron, is ane pleuch, aratrum, and
conteins alsmeikle an portion, or measure of Land, as may be tilled, and
labored within yeire and day be ane pleuch. lib. 1. c. dos. 19. Hida terrae.
Utherwaies in the samin place it is called hilda terra, vel hida terrae,
quhilk is ane word used in the auld Briton Laws. CARTA extensa, or extenta,
Ane chartour quhilk conteinis ane disposition of lands, with certain meithes,
and marches, utherwaies called an boundand chartour, quon. attach. c. stat.
dominus rex. 62. ass. reg. Da. c. statuit per consilium, 36. Stat. Wilh. c. 7.
CAUPES, Calpes, in Galloway, and Carrict, quhairof mention is maid in the Acts
of Parliament. Ja. 4. p. 2. c. 18. 19. signifies ane gift, sik as horse, or
utherthing, quhilk an man in his awin litetime, and liege poustie gives to his
Master, or to onie uther man, that is greatest in power and authority, and
specially to the head and chief of the clann, for his maintenance and
protection, like as for the samin effect and cause sindrie persons payis
Blackmaill to thieves, or mainteners of thieves, contrair the laws of this
Realm. Bot in the Isles and Hie-land of this Realm, the calpes are presently
paid be him quha oblishis him theirfore, after his decease. Swa the Hereelde
is paid be provision of the Law: and the Calpe is given be special paction,
and obligatione, both the ane and the uther after the decease of the debtour.
Bot the Hereelde, should be first paid to the Lands-lord, and an notable
oppression is used in taking up of the Caupe. For gif the chief of the clanne
oblishis him to pay ane Calpe: after his decease, ane Calpe is paid for him.
And also quhen onie of his clanne deceasis, ane calpe likewaies is paid for
ilk ane of them, he reasoun of the promise maid be their master and chief.
Perinde acsi obligatio sactaper principem tribus, obligaret singulos ex tribu.
CEPUM animalium, the taulch, creische or satnes of beasts leg. burg. c. si
quic scienter. 71. CHAMPERT, ane bud, or gift, taken be onie great man, or
judge sra onie person, for delay of just actiones, or furthering of wrangous
actions: quhidder it be lands or onie gudes moveable. Stat. 2. To. Br. c.
dominus Rex. 22. Champert in the laws of England is quhen the judge be
himself directly, or be onie uther indirectlie, manteines the pley, to
obtain the maintenance of the ane party against the uther, John Rastell, ver.
Champert, In the civil law, pactum de quota litis, is unlesum and forbidden l.
5. C. de postuland. l. si contra 22. C, mandati. CHARDONES vel Cardones, Cards
quhairwith wol is carded and wrocht. leg. burg. c. de parva custuma 137. fra
the French word, Chardon from Cardum ane thrissill, to the quhilk the Cards
are like in scharpnes and in multitude, or similitude of money scharp pykes,
and teith. CHAUDMELLE, in latin Rixa, ane hot sudden tuilie, or debaite,
quhilk is opponed as contrar to forthoucht fellonie. Ja. 1. p. 6. c. 95. vid.
Melletum, vid. Forthoucht fellonie. CHECKER, and the form of Comptes maid
theirin. vid. Scaccarium, vid. Ballivus. CLAN-MAKDUF de judic. 78. The croce of
Clanmakduf dividis Stratherne fra Fife abone the Newburgh, beside Lundoris. The
quhilk had privilege and liberty of Girth; in sik sort, that quhen onie
manslayer, being within the ninth degrie of Kin and bluid to Mak-duff, sumtime
Earl of Fife, come to that croce, and gave 9. kie and an colpindach, he was
free of the slaughter committed be him. In the stanes of this Croce, I saw
sindrie barbarous words and verses written, quhik here willingly I pretermit,
and it sum of them appearis to be conform to this purpose; Propter makgidrim
and hoc oblatum, Accipe smeleridem super lampade limpida labrum.

King David the 2. gave and disponed the Earle-dome of Fife, with all
privileges and cum lege quae vocatur Clan-makduff, to William Ramsay and his
aires, quhilk charter is it extant in the Register. Hector Boethius lib. 12.
declairis three privileges given to Mak-duff, his clanne and family, 1. that
the Earl of Fife should set up the King in his Chyre, the time of his
Coronation: Chyre.
the 2. that in the time of battle, he should secht the want-gard. The 3. that
Mak-duff and his clanne should have the privilege and richt of regalitie. And I
saw an auld evident bearand, that Speus of Wormestoun beand of Mak-duffs Kin,
enjoyed the benefit and immunitie of this Law, for the slauchter of ane called
Kinnynmouth.

CLAREMETHEN, Clarmathan, the Law of Claremethen concernis the warrandice of
stolen cattle, or gudes: for quhen sik gudes are challenged, or repeated be
the just awners theirof: It is statute and ordained that all persons, quha
should warrant the samin, sall cum to certain places, specially nominat and
appointed to that effect, and lauchfullie warrant the samin. lib. 1. c. haec
sunt loco. 22. Stat. Alex. c. de Catallo, 12. CLARIFICATIO quo attach. c. si
quis appelat. 46, The purging or clenging of ane assise. assi. Reg. Da. c. 3.
Clarificatio debiti, the clearnes of ane debte, quhilk is not our and clear in
the self: Or clearlie, and sufficiently proven and verified. leg. Forest c.
probato. 86. CLEP, and Call, ane form of Claim petition, or libell, or
certain solemn words used specially in criminal causes, for sum claims
were conceaved simply, without onie solemnity of words, as in the brieve of
distres, or poynding for debt. quon attach c. de brevibus 31. uther clames were
libelled and conceaved in ane certain solemn form, as in pleyis of wrang and
unlaw, in the quhilk clepe, and call, was used as ane certain solemnity of
words prescrived be the Law, and observed in the practik* as when the persewer
did clep, and call, the defender with wouth wrang and unlaw, in harming and
skaithing of him of sik ane thing, or of sik ane sum of silver mair or less,
to his great harm and skaith. COLPINDACH, an oung beast, or Kow, of the age of
an or two eires, quhilk now is called an Cowdach, or quoyach, quhairof the
price was 30. d. leg. Ma. Ma. c. 4. It is an Irish word, and properly signifies
ane sut follower. COLLISTRIDIUM, Collistrigium, quod collum stringat. Quhilk
may be called the Joggs, and is ordaned for punishment of baxters leg. Burg.
c. si aliquis. 21. quhair it is called an pillorie, or stocks, or onie band
quhairwith the craig, or hals is bund, as an halse-sang, in the laws of
England, anno. 51. Henr. 3. in latin Numellae. Numelia.
CONQUESTUS, quhairof frequent mention is made in the laws and practik of this
Realm, is different from heretage. Because heretage signifies lands and
immoveabil gudes, quhilk perteinis to onie person, as air and universal
successor, to his father, or onie uther predecessor: and be the civil laws
hareditas nihil aliud est quam successio in universum jus, Heretage.
quod defunctus habuit. l. hereditas. 62. de regul. jur. l. nihil. 24. de verb.
signif. and be the municipall law of this realm, the eldest son succedis
jure universali in universam hereditatem patris sui. lib. 2. c. cum quis. 29.
Conquestus signifies lands, quhilk onie person acquiris and possessis privato
jure, vel singulari titulo, veluti donatione, vel singulari aliquo contractu.
lib. 3. c. cum vero. 28. Quhilk is conform to the civil law, ubi quastus
dicitur lucrum, quod exemptione, Venditione, locatione, conductione, vel
generaliter ex opera cujus descendit. l. coiri. 7. cum seq. ff. pro Socio. Et
de jure hujus regui, conquestus cujuslibet liberi hominis legitimi, qui moritur
de ipso sasitus haereditarie, sine haerede de corpore suo, gradatim ascendit:
haereditas vero gradatim descendit. Stat. Wilh. c. notandum. 24. leg. Burg. c.
sciendum. 155. Stat. Rob. 3. c. 3. vid. post-natus. And it is to be observed,
that gif conquest lands, after the decease of the conqueror, do is anis
ascend, to any person, quha theirafter happenis to decease, the samin lands
sall descend, as heretage to his hear air, because conquest do is
allanerlie anis ascend, and thereafter perpetually descendis to the righteous
air, gif onie be; quia conquestus dicitur ratione primi conquestoris, and cum
transmittitur ad ejus haeredem, exuit naturam conquestus. and induit naturam
haereditatis. CORONER, Crouner inquirs be ane inquest anent murder and
slaughter done, and committed quietly. The quhilk inquisition should be taken in
the hie streites, or in open places, in corona popuit, for the quhilk cause he
is called coronator, or it because the violent death of the subjectes perteins
to the Kingis Crown, and power. Quhair anent the crouner takis inquisition, as
said is D. Thomas Staith lib. 2. c. 23. of the common weill of England, Read
the English laws anno. 4. Edward. 1. c. 2. CREFFERA, or hara porcorum, ane
cruife, or ane swines cruif. leg, burg. c. Nonlites. 87. quhilk in sum auld
buikes is called ane Stye. CRO, Croy, in the acts of Parliament. Ja. 1. p. 6.
c. 93. is ane satisfaction or assithment for stauchter of any man, The quhilk
the judge should pale to the narrest of his kin, in case he minister nocht the
Law as he should do. Ja. 1. p. 6. c. 89. CULRACH, sumtimes is called an forth
command borgh, but mair properly it may be called an backborgh, or cautioner,
for quhen any havand power, or jurisdiction replegis any man fra an uther man's
court, to his awin court, he should leif behind him in the court, fra the quhilk
the replegiation is maid, an pledge or cautioner quha salbe bundin and
oblished, that he quha usis the replegiation, fall do justice within eire and
day in his awin court, to the party complainand, upon the person quha is
repleged. Quhilk cautioner left in the court be him, and behind him quha usis
the replegiation, is called Culrach. lib. 4. c. si qu is in alterius 20. quo
attach, c. 3. mod, ten, cur. c. 12. de Judic. c. 28. And gif the party
complainand gettis na reason in that conit, to the quhilk, the defender is
borrowed and repleged, he sall have regres again to the first court, fra the
quhilk the replegiation was maid, and their sall the mute, and pley be ended,
and the Cultach salbe in ane unlaw, gif the party persewed compeirs nocht, and
he quha used the replegiation, and did nocht Justice, sall tine his court for
eire and day. CURIA, Ane court, quhairof sum are superior and sum inferior,
leg. Malc. Make. c. 4. vide Amerciamentum. The supreme court is the Parliament,
quhilk hes jurisdiction of all matters Ecclesiastical, civil, and criminal.
All courts by and attour the ordinar persons of the judge, the persewer and
the defender should have certain uther persons and members, quhilkis are called
claves curiae, the keys of the court, that is ane lauchiull officiar or
serjand, quha should summond, Claves curia.
attache and arreist the parties. Ane lauchfull Clerk quha should inform the
assise, and the dempster, and hes the cure and keiping of the process. Ane
sutour quha wardis and pronunces the waird, and interlocutour of the Court. Ane
dempster or doomester quha gives the doom or sentence definitive, conform to
the information of the Clerk or Judge. CURIA christianitatis lib. 2. c. debet
autem, 37. lib. 1. c. platitum, 17. Is called the ecclesiastical jurisdiction
or court, uther ways forum ecclesiasticum, lib. 1. c. 5. Curia Christianitatis
opponitur laicali seu saeculati, lib. 2. c. cum aliquis 59. lib. 3. c.
preterea, 23. For unto the ane perteinis the ecclesiastical, and to the uther
the temporal or secular jurisdiction. CURIALITAS, curialitie, courtesy, from
the French Curtoise, civilitie, gentleness, humanity, for the law of
courtesy, is an gentill and favorable ordinance or constitution, granted and
observed in this Realm, and nocht universallie keiped, or used in uther
cuntries, And therefore it is called Curialitas Scotia, the courtesy of
Scotland. And in the laws of England lex Anglia, or the courtesy of England,
within the quhilk two realms and nane uther this law is in use. That is quhen
onie man mary's lauchfullie ane wife, and receivis land and heritage with her:
And it happen that he beget with her ane bairne, quha being borne, is heard
cryand betuixt four walls of ane house: And thereafter his wise deceasis before
him, he sall bruik and possess, all the lands quhilks perteined to her,
in-during his lifetime, albeit the bairne live or decease. Lib. 2 c., cum
itaque 58. The bairne borne, being son, or daughter, maill, or femaill de
Iudic. c. Maritagium. 127: Quhilk law hes place in lands and heretage, lyand
without burgh, halden of the King or any uther superior: And also in lands
and tenementes lyand within burgh and halden in free burgage. Leg. Burg. c. si
aliquis. 44. This Law is nocht introduced in favoures of the wife or bairnes,
bot is maid in favoures of the husband allanerlie. And therefore it is nocht
necessar that he have onie saising, infeftmente, or uther richt, to the lands
quhilk perteined to his wife heritablie: Bot only the benefit and privilege
of the courtesy, quhilk is valiable and sufficient to him enduring his
lifetime, for bruiking and possessing of the lands, and for remooving,
out-putting and inputting of tennentes, in sik manner as gif he were
proprietare, lyfe-rentar, tackes-man or rentaller. And maire-over, the Law of
the courtesy is extended in favor of the Second hus-band. And theirefore gif
ane man mary's ane heretrix, and after his decease, she marie ane Second
hus-band, and bear to him ane son, or ane daughter, and thereafter she
deceases, her second hus-band aucht and sulde bruike and jois the privilege of
the courtesy, in sik manner as gif the first hus-band micht have done, incase
his wife had deceassed before him. lib. 2. dic. cap. 58. de Iudic. Cap. 127.

As concerning the estaite and quality of the woman that is married, it is
necessar that she be heretablie infest and saised in the lands as air to her
father or uther her predicessoures. Bot it is nocht necessarlie required, that
she be ane virgin and maiden. Because the courtesy perteines to the second
hus-band, quha mary's ane widow as said is. Always quhidder the wife* be
widow, the time of her second marriage: or virgin and maiden, the time of her
first marriage, necessarlie she should be ane heretrix, air, or universal
successor to her Father, Mother, or to sum uther of her predecessors. For gif
the wife hes only richt and titill to the lands and heretage, as singular
successor, be virtue of onie contract, veluti titulo emptionis: Her husband
after her decease can never clame richt to the landis, enduring his lifetime,
be the courtesy of Scotland. Twenty aucht Januar, an thousand, five hundred,
nintie five. Robert Lundie of Balgony: contrair Robert Balfoure of Dovane. The
courtesy hes nocht place quhen na bairne is borne in lauchfull marriage, for it
is necessar that ane bairne be borne maill or femaill, quick and liveand: And
for probation theirof, he mon be heard cryand, for the courtesy hes place in
puero clamante, (or as it is written in sum buikes) brayand, squeiland, or
loudlie cryand. For in French brayer, in the latin vagire, is to cry or
greite with ane loud voice. Quhilk word in our language, is alswa attributted
to Hose. Hearts, and uther beasts. And gif contraversie arise annent the life
or crying of the bairne, it is leisum to the Father to pruise the samin be two
lauchfull men or women, quha heard the bairne clamare, plorare, vagire seu
brayare leg. burg d. cap. 44. The husband or Father should bruike the courtesy
after the death of his wife, albeit the bairne being borne quick happen to
decease immediately, or shortly after his nativitie. Or albeit the bairne and
the Mother both depart this life; for suppose the bairne happen to decease
before his Mother and she decease thereafter, or albeit both the bairne and
the Mother decease at ane time, or it gif the bairne levis, and the Mother
before the hus-band depart forth of this life, the hus-band survivand after her
death sall bruike the privilege of the courtesy of all Lands quhairin his
wife was heretablie infest: ninth of Iulij, ane thousand, five hundredth nintie
seven. Martha and Eupheme Mackaleanes, contrar Master James Ward-law
advocate* swa the substantial heads of the courtesy are their following,
quhairof gif onie ane failie the courtesy ceasis. First is required ane
lauchfull marriage betuixt man and wife. Secondly, the wife should be ane
heretrix haveand ius universal, quhairbe she succeids to her Father, Mother,
or some uther her forbear. Thirdly; She should be heretablie infest and saised
in the Lands. For gif she decease, nocht beand entered and saised, her
hus-band should have na courtesy. Fourthlie; She should decease before her
hus-band, for sa lang as she and the husband livis, he hes ius mariti. And
after her decease, he hes ius curialitatis. Fiftlie, Bairnes should be
lauchfullie gotten and borne, at the least ane bairne, maill or femaill, quick
and livand. Last of all the courtesy is als effectual to the husband, tuiching
wairde-landes, perteining to his wife, as the Kingis confirmation. For lands
halden of the King in chief, and confirmed be him, fallis nocht in wairde,
enduring the lifetime of the person to quhome the confirmation is granted. He
being theirby immediate tennent to the King. And like-wise, gif onie man mary's
ane heritrix of waird lands, and after her decease her air is Minor, and of
less aige: Nevertheless the lands fallis nocht in the superiors hands, be
reasoun of ward. Bot the husband sulde bruike and posses the samin enduring
his lifetime, be reason of the courtesy of this Realm. Because the richt of
the waird Perteining to the superior, ceasis quhair the courtesy belanged to
the hus-band hes place. Penvlt. Februar, ane thousand, five hundredth, fifty
three: George Gorthie contrair the Lord Methven. And it the hus-bande being
only life-rentare may nocht sell or annaillie heretablie the said Lands, or
onie pairte theirof, in hurt and prejudice of the richteous air. leg. burg.
c. 44.


D
DISCLAMATION is used in the law, and practick of this realm Clamare.
Clamare idem est quod dicere, affirmare: As clamare aliquod tenementum, aut
aliquam terram esse suam, to claim, and affirm onie heritage or lands to be
his awin. Clamare aliquem dominum to clame, avow, and affirm onie man to be
his master or superior, to quhom he aucht service, and of quho^ he haldis his
lands in chief. Disclamare.
Disclamare is to disclame, disavow or deny as to deny ane uther to be his
superior, as quhen the superior affirmis the lands to be halden of him, and
the vassal denies the samin. In the quhilk case gif the contrar be fund of
verity, the vassal tines and amittis all the lands quhilk he haldes of that
superior, and the property theirof returnis to the superior, de maritag. c,
18. Stat. To. 3. c. primo. 20. Quhair the auld form and manner of disclamation
is declared. lib. 1. c. solet. 26. lib. 3. c. tali, 18. To the decision of the
quhilk controversy, both the said alleged over-lordes should be called. And
he quha failies to prove himself superior, sall never be heard to claim the
samin afterward, and the vassal being convict; tynis the land and property
theirof, quhilk is adjudged to him, quha was wrangouslie denied be the
superior, and is found to have richt theirto, lib. 1. c. sivero 28. qui fief
deny, fief pert. The reason is because the vassal denyand his halding, his
master or lands, contemnis and dishonours his master. Bot it is necessar
that the vassal or tennent deny fraudfully, that is wittinglie, quia
vassallus feudum quod sciens abnegavit, amittit: ignoranti vero subven tur.
Quod si dubitet, dubitanter respondere potest. Cuiacius. lib. 4. de feud tit.
S. and. Tit. 21. and. Tit. 39. de poena negantis feudum. DISRATIONARE, from the
french word Disrener. In Latin Duellare, Duello contendere, to fecht in
singular battle, and commonly is understand of the appealer, or persewer,
quia cum vadiatur duellum provocans dat vadium disrationandi, and defendens
vadium defendendi. Sumtime disrationare is mair generally taken, for to tine
onie thing in judgment be form of process, concord or aggrieance lib. 3. c.
cum itaque. 14. lib. 2. c. fieri autem. 67. quon. attach. c. 4. Item it
signifies to prove onie thing conform to the consideratione of the Court be
battle, write, or be ane assise of the cuntrie. lib. 1. Cap. si vero. 18. Cap.
si vero Dominus. 29. Iter camer. Cap. apparens. 24. Or be the aith of the
party, and certain conjuratoures quhilks are called Sacramentales, Quha
sum-time maa, Sacramentales.
and sum-time, fewer in number makis faith and swearis in onie cause with ane
party haveand entresse in persute or defense. Cuia, lib. 1. de feud. And in
the Laws of this Realm, dicitur aliquis Jurare cum tertia, septima, Duodecima
manu. Quhen three, seven or twelfe persons swearis with him. Quhilk in the
Cannon Law is called Purgatio Canonica. DISSASINA, Sasina is ane French word,
and signifies possession, to the quhilk Dissasina is contrare, and signifies
dispossession, quhair ane person beand in possession of onie Lands, as mailler
to his master, or haveand onie uther title theirto in write, is wrangouslie
ejected and put fra the samin, without onie warning or ordour of Law. Like-wise
Dissasina is called spuilie, quhen onie person is spuilied violently and
wrangouslie of moveable gudes and gear, Ejection Spuilie.
pertaining to him, as his awin proper gudes: and being in his possessioun
certain days or months. For ejection concernis Lands and gudes inmoveable:
and spuilie is of cattle, and gudes moveable, and both the ane and the uther
is comprehended under Dissasina ass. reg. Da Cap. Statutum fuit. 31. Quhilk is
conform to the English Laws. Henry. 3, Stat. de Mertoun. c. 3. and to the
laws of France. Molinaeus in still. cur Parl. part. 1. c. 18. And be the auld
law of this realm, Dissasitor, or committer of spuilie or ejection, being
convict theirof should pay ane unlaw of ten pundis to the King. Stat. Alex. c.
Stat. 7. And may be accused criminallie before the Justice and his deputes. Ia.
5. p. 4. c. 33. DISPARAGIUM, like as parage is called equality, from the latin
word paritas. Sa disparagium is called inequality in bluid, honor, dignity,
or utherwaies, from the word disparitas, leg. Forest. c. de haeredibus. 64.
cum seq. DISSOLUTION, an latin word, quhilk signifies lowsing of that thing
quhilk was bound of before. And like as lowsing is contrair to bining: Swa
dissolution is contrair to annexation, specially in the Kingis property,
annexed and united to the Crown. For the samin being dissolved is maid lowse,
and free of that nature and quality, that it may be annalied and disponed to
sik as pleasis his Hienes, with certain conditions and provisions. Dissolution
of the property is maid to the effect the samin may be sauld and annalied be
the King, and therefore can nocht be lauchfully maid in his minority. Ia. 6.
p. 14. c. 203. For like as the King being Minor may nocht sell his property:
The King in his minority, may nocht dissolve his property.
evin sa at that time it is nocht lesum to him to do onie thing that may be
ane preparative to the alienation theirof. And likewise gif onie man haveand
heritable infestment or uther richt to onie part of the Kings annexed
property, for the crime of treason, is forefalted: and theirafter be the three
Estaites in Parliament is restored in the minority and less age of ane King.
Albeit this restitution may rehable his person: it is na sufficient richt to
repone or restore him again to his richt of the said annexed property. For
like as an dissolution maid in the Kings minority is null: Evin swa, ane
restitution maid in his les aige, concerning his annexed property is of nane
availl: for the dissolution, and restitution ar both of ane nature, and
producis ane effect, Quhen and be quhome dissolution should be maid.
hurtful and prejudicial to the King, in Registro. 18. Julij. 1597. The
Kingis advocate contrar Alexander, Lord Hume, and tennentes of Dumbar. And sa
it is manifest that ane dissolution of the annexed property should be maid be
ane King in his maioritie, in an Parliament with consent of the three Estaits,
Ja. 6. p. 15. c 233. Bot an annexation may be maid in Parliament in the Kings
minority, quia rex eodem modo quo quilibet minor conditionem suam potest
meliorem facere. It is lesum to the King after the dissolution, to set his
proper lands annexed, or unannexed in few-ferme to onie of his lieges, and
specially to the kindly tennentes and possessours theirof, as he pleasis. To
quhom may the King set his property.
Dissolution induris only for the lifetime of the King, maker and author
theirof, and quhen he deceasis, the same ceasis and endis. And theirfore the
samin beand temporal, and personal, his aires and successors may not set
onie annexed lands in fewferme, be vertew of onie dissolution, maid be his
Father or predecessor. Dissolution is temporal.
Albeit dissolution be temporal, as said is, it the Lands set and disponed
heretablie after the dissolution, remainis perpetually with them and their
aires, to quhom they are disponed, after the form of the conditiones, contained
in their infestmentes. And swa the alienation and disposition lauchfullie maid,
Disposition of lands disolved, is peret nall.
is perpetual, and transitoria ad haeredes. Albeit the dissolution be Temporal
and personal, as said is. The dissolution expyrand and ceasand, be the decease
of the author thereof, as said is: All the lands annexed of before, returnis
again to the form and nature of the annexation; Swa that the same may not be
set in few-ferm, nor annailed be the King, The dissolution being expired, the
annexation beginnis to quicken, and revive.
succeed and to him, quha maid the dissolution, until ane new lauchfull
dissolution be maid thereof be himself. In respect that all annexationes of
their awin nature, ar perpetual; and albeit, they may be interrupted and
stayed, for ane certain space, be ane dissolution; it after the end thereof,
the annexation dois quicken, revive, and walken, as it were, out of sleep, and
returnis to the awin perpetual nature, and swa remainis until ane new
dissolution be maid.

The King may set his property in fewferme allanerlie.
The King after ane dissolution, may set his lands in few-ferme allanerlie, and
not in blench, or nomine albae firmae, nor be service of ward and relief, or
utherwaies, bot in few-ferme, as said is. Iam 6. par. 15. ca. 234.

The King may not set his lands in few-ferme, except the samin be done with
express augmentation of his rentall: That is, his gressumes, customs,
burrow-mailles, fermes, martes, mutton, pultrie, avarage, carriage, The Kings
rental of the property, both unannexed and annexed, should be augmented.
or any uther duties and service. Quhilk is not only manifest in the
alienation of the annexed property: Bot likewise should be observed and keiped
in the disposition of the un-annexed property. For it is certain, that the
Kingis of this realm, the time of their Coronation, makis faith solemnly,
that they sall not annalie, transfer, nor dispone the richt and rents of the
crown: As it is statute be David 2.6. No. 13 57. and sa as the K. may not sell
the richt of the crown; na mair may he annalie the rentes theirof, quhairof
the un-annexed property is ane part. Mair-over, albeit an dissolution is not
necessar in the allienation of the unannexed property (because that quhilk is
not bound, requiris na lowsing) it in all dislutions, maid be kingis of this
realm; expres mention is maid both of the annexed and unannexed property, to
be set in fewferm, for augmentatio^ of the K. re^tal, quhairby it is certain,
that the an, alsweil as the uther, being set in fewferm, cannot be disponed in
diminution of the rental. And concerning that quality and condition, expreemed
in the form of all dssolutiones; the un-annexed, and annexed property, ar of
like nature: Et in hoc casu pari jure censentur: Sa that neither the ane, nor
the uther, may be disponed, with diminution of the rental, utherwise the
mention of the unannexed property, in the acts maid annent dissolution, were
superfluous. Their ar the substantial conditiones, expreemed in the
dissolutiones of the property, The annexed property may be annalied be the
three Estaites.
maid be the Kings of this realm, quhairof, gif any ane be not observed, the
alienation and disposition maid after the dissolution, is null, and of nane
avail: l, 6. p. 15. c. 236. By and attour, the form of dissolution above
expreemed; it is leasum to the King, with advise, deliverance and decree of
the haill parliament, and for great, seand and reasonable causes, concerning
the weil-fare of the realm: first advised and digestlie considdered be the
three estaites: To sell, annalie, and dispone the kings annexed property. Ia,
2. par. 11. cap. 41. Ia, 5. p. 6. c. 84.

DOS hes two significationes, First it signifies that quhilk is given to the
husband, Maritagium.
with the wife, be reason and in contemplation of marriage In the civil law is
called Dos, in our municipall law, Maritagium, Tocher good. Lib. 2. c. Dos
autem. 19. Secondly, Dos is taken fot that gift and disposition of lands and
tenements, quhilk ane man givis to his wife, quhen he mary's her at the Kirk
dure, or in the face of the halie kirk: Quhilk aucht and should be, ane
reasonable third part of all and haill, the tenement of land, quhilk the man or
husband hes the time of the desponsation or marriage. lib. 2. c. Dosautem. 19.
c. 20. lib. 4. cap. quatuor. 49. Sta. Alex. c. 8. de Iudic. 163. And is given
in recompensation of the tocher, paid be her, or in her name, Antidos.
to her husband: And therefore is called antidos: Cornel. Tacit callis dos that
quhilk the husband givis to the wife, and not that quhilk the wife gives to the
husband. Livius lib. 3. callis it munus nuptiale. In France it is called
Dotalitiu^, Dotalitium. Doarium. Vitalitia. Morganaticum.
or doarium. It is given to the woman, to the effect, that after the decease of
her husband, she may sustain and nurish her self, enduring all the days of
her lifetime: Therefore it is called Vitalitia. Morganaticum for the Dutch
word Morgengab, morning gift, is ane kind of dowry, in the second
signification; and signifies the gift of guds moveable or immovable, quhilk
the husband givis to his wife, the day or morning after the marriage, and
commonly is used in the Dutch laws, in speculo Saxonico; and Landrecht, in
Greek hypobolon in latin matutinale donum. Cuiacius li. 4 de fewd. DUELLUM,
duorum bellum vel plurium, singular battle, or combat: vide Campiones, Noble
persons, or landed men, may fight in proper person, or be uthers in their
name, quha ar called Campiones, in Latin, duellatores, Specially, sik as ar
their awin bondmen, or tennentes, quha in body and guds ar under their
masters protection and maintenance; And therefore should hazard and employ the
samin in the defense of their masters honor, and actiones. Bot husbandmen,
ignoble, and unlanded men, should fight personally, and nocht be Campiones. Ass.
reg. Cap Statutum fuit per regem. 32.

Bot all men that are decreeped, lamed, mutilat, or passed the age of
threescore eires, ar excused from singular battle. Lib. 4. c. 4. leg. Burg. c.
Si burgensis. 24.

And siklike, religious persons, clerks, and weemen may not be compelled to
fight. Lib. 4. c. 3. stat. Alex. c. 5. Ass. reg. Dav. cap. statuit dominus 38.
It is in free will and election of the defender, to fight, or to pass to the
knawledge of ane Assise. Lib. 4. Cap. 2. Quia defendens debet primo eligere
deinde vadiare, and postea jurare. lib. 4. ca. Iexstatuit 46.

The appealer or prover, should swear that his quarrel is just, and the
defender swear the contrair, avowand the equity of his cause. Iter. camer c.
Comparentibus 29. It is not leesum to any person to provok ane uther to battle,
or being provoked to feght without license of the King, utherwaies, both the
appealer, and the defender, tinis and forefaltis al their guds moveable, and
immovable. de Iudic. c. 87. Because na Barrone hes power of singular battle,
or of probation be water, or Irone; except the Kingis Schireff, or his deputes,
be present to see justice done. stat. Alex. c. praetered 32. Mairover, gif any
man havand the Kings license, happenis to be convict be battle, or of breaking
of the Kings peace, he sall pay to the King xxij. Kye, and tres cathorios, vel
pro quolibet cathorio, novem vaccas. Stat. Alex. c. apud. 28. Quhilk pain and
unlaw, appearis to be ordained, to stay sik ungodlie strife and dabate; for the
law of singular combat is ungodlie, and should not be used amang Christianes,
albeit the same was permitted and used be the Longobardes, in civil and
criminal causes. Alciat. de sing-certam. Cuiac in Lib. feudorum. Quhilk is
conform to the Canon law. cap. 1. 2. de purgat. vulgar.

DYOUR, Dyvour, utherwaies Bair-man, quha being involved and drowned in debtes,
and not able to pay or satisfy the same: For eschewing of prison and uther
pains makis cession and assignation of all his gudes and gear, in favoures of
his creditoures: And dois his devour and dewtie to them, proclaimand himself
Bair-man, and indigent, and becummand debt-bound to them, of all that he hes.
Leg. burg. ca. Bairman. 144. In Latin, cedere bonis, quhilk is most commonly
used amangst merchandes, to make Bauk-rout Bankrupt, or Bankrompue, Because the
doer thereof, as it were breakis his bank, stall, or seat, Cedere bonis.
quhair he used his trafficque of before. de Iudic. c. Bairman 46. Be the
civil law, sik cession of gudes and gear may be maid judiciallie, or forth of
judgment, be him quha is present, or absent, be writ or epistle, or be ane mid
person, called Nuntius. l. ult. de cess. bonor. Bot to the effect that
debtoures should be feared to deceive their creditoures, and should the mair
willingly pay their debtes in sindrie places, diverse shameful forms of
dyvourie, ar used and observed: for sum-times the debtour naked, sittis upon
ane cauld stane, in presence of the people. Alciatus lib. 3. Parerg. c. 47.
Sumtimes his hinder parts, or hippes ar dashed to ane stane. Guido Papae.
decis. 343.

Or in public place, bair headed, his belt is cutted, quhairby he is
proclaimed indigent of gear and credit: And therefore may pass and repasse
quhair he pleasis, without any trouble of his Creditoures.

Iuxta illud Horatii, Epistola secunda 28. Ibit eo quo vis, qui zonam perdidit.
Conform to the quhilk, in this realm, he is said to have his belt cutted,
Zonam perdere, quha hes na gold, silver, guds nor gear. For in auld times, like
as it is it used in diverse places, ilk man carried his silver and his gold in
his belt, either in ane purse hanging at the end thereof, or sewed and enclosed
within the samin. Sueton. in Vitellio. cap. 16. Quia zona aureorum plena se
circumdedit. Et Gracchus apud Gellium. Lib. 15. ca. 12. Zonas (inquit) quas
plenas argenti extuli, eas ex provincia inanes retuli. And in the tenth chap.
of Mat. and ninth verse: Christ commandis his Apostles nocht to possess Gold,
Silver, or Money, in their Girdles. Mairover the form of the aith quhilk be
the Laws of this Realm, the Dyvour should make, conteinis that he sall swear,
that he hes nocht in free gear, above five shillinges, four pennies: Fra the
quhilk cummis ane commoun speech daily used amangst puir and indigent persons,
quha hes nocht in gudes nor gear, the valor of five shillings and ane plack.
In the Law of Normandy. Lib. 2. c. 10. Lib. 12. c. 21. Dyvoures ar called
Banqueroutieris. And if they do the samin fraudfullie, they may be punished to
the death.


E
ENACH. Lib. 4. c. statuit dominus 64. Ane mendis or satisfaction for ane
fault, crime, or trespass. As gif the master lyis with the wife of his
bondsman, or slave: The servand therefore salbe put to liberty, and fall
receive na uther Enach, mendis, or satisfaction, for the violation or defowling
of his wife. Lib. 2. c. pluribus 14. Like as utherwaies, si vassallus,
Cucurbitaverit dominum suum, That is, gif the vassal makis his master ane
Cuckold: That is, gif he hes carnal copulation with his masters wife, he
tinis and forefaultis his lands. lib. 1. de Feud. Tit. quib. mod. Feudum
amittatur, 2. Corbita, in the Laws of the Longobardes, is adultery: Corbita.
Cucurbita. Arga. Argos.
And Cucurbita signifies ane Cuckold, quhais wife is ane huire: quha utherwaies
is called, arga. Gl. in. D. Sect. 2. From the Greek, argos desidiosus, otiosus,
quha sittis idle, and payis nocht his debt, bot sufferis ane uther to woork his
labor. Alciatus in lib. de singulari certam. c. 32. and in lib. problematum.
Horatium sequutus Cucullum vocat. ENCHESONE, the cause, occasion, or reason,
quhairfore any thing is done: As quhen we say, that ane is condemned for
Enchesone of thieft: That is be occasion or be reason of thieft, committed be
him. Mod. ten. cur. c, 21. Or that the vassal is in the keiping of his
Over-lorde, be Encheson of ward quoniam attach. Cap. 51. And ane action or
pley, may be advocate fra the Schireffe Courts, to the Kingis Court, for money
causes. Lib. 2. c. Dos autem 19, Quhilk in sindrie English buikes, is said for
money Enchesones. And Ed. 1. King of England. Westminster, 1. c. 6. Statutis and
ordainis, that na-man salbe ane merchand, without ane reasonable Enchesone.
ENEYA, Pars haereditatis, ane French word: for the first, chief, and
principal part of the heritage, Leg. Forest. c. si. Haereditas. 96. For in
the French tongue, and specially in the Law of Normandy, the eldest and first
begotten son, is called l'aisne, and in the Laws of England Hen. 3 in stat.
Marlebrig. Cap. 9. It is called Enitia pars haereditatis. And likewise in ane
uther place of the laws of the samin King, Ius esniciae, quhilk in this Realm
is the law of birth richt: In Latin, jus primogeniturae, De jure successionis.
de quo Tiraquellus copiose scripsit. Be the auld civil Law of this realm,
there is na richt of succession in the richt line ascendent. And therefore the
father succeedis not as air to his son: Except special provision be maid in
the contrar. Quia provisio hominis tollit provisionem legis. Et pacta conventa,
legem contrahentibus praescribunt. Swa all succession, is either in the richt
line descendent, or in the line collateral.

De linea recta descendentium.
THey quha ar of the richt line desce^dent, should be preferred to all uthers: As
the son, the dauchter, the nepuoy, the neipce, and sa descendand in
infinitum: observeand and leipand always the prerogative of the degree: For
the Prior degree, excludis the posterior from all commodity and title of
succession: As the son in the first degree, excludis the nepuoy in the second;
and the nepuoy excludis the pronepuoy in the third degree.

De filio.
Gif any man havand lands and heretage deceasis, leaveand ane son allanerlie
behind him, without all distinction, the son succeedis to all and haill the
heretage; quhilk is in Latin, succedere in assem, vel ex ass. lib. 2. c. cum
quis. 29.

De filiis.
Gif any man deceasis, and leavis behind him maa sons nor ane, either he is
soccommannus, and haldis not his lands be service of ward: and then his
heretage is divided amangst all his sons: or he is Miles, and haldis his
lands per servitium militare, be service of ward and relief. In the quhilk
case, the eldest son succeedis in the hail lands; quhilk heretablie perteined
to his father. Lib. 2. c. Si quis plures 30. Bot this distinction is not
observed be the practicque of this realm. Be the quhilk the eldest son
succeedis to his father, ex ass, that is, to all and haill his fathers
heretage and lands; Albeit, sindrie uther Nationes hes diverse laws
hereanent: Like as be the law of God, in the auld testament, amangst the Jews,
the first borne son, after the decease of his father, receivis double
portion. Deu. 21.17. That is (as some interpretis) as meikle as two of his
brether. Josephus de Antiq. Iud. li. 4. c. 8. writtis that the eldest son, be
reason of his birth-richt, should have duplicem facultatum paternarum partem, the
double part of his fathers gudes.

De filiis diversarum uxorum.
Gif ane man had diverse wives, quhairof ane is ane heretrix, havand lands
perteinand to her heretablie; and hes procreat upon ilk ane of them bairnes,
maillor femail; the son gotten upon her, succeedis to her heritage. lib. 2.
c. Si autem. 31. For as generally the son succeedis to the father; Swa in
this case, the son should succeed to his mother. Leg. Forest. c. Si quis
habuerit 26. de Iudic. c. 24. Conform to the commoun rule of the law. Paterna
paternis, materna maternis.

Quhen any man deceasis, leavand ane son, and dauchters ane or maa; The son
allanerlie succeedis to all his fathers heretage. Li. 2. c. Maritus. 32. As
gifane man hes procreat with his first wife, De filio and filia vel filiabus.
dauchter, ane, or maa, and after her decease, begettis ane son, upon ane
uther wife, the son only succeedis to him. Leg. Forest. c. Si quis habuerit
26. Because the Son borne of the first, second, or last wife, succeedis as
universal air to his father, and excludis all his sisters. De judic. c. Item
nota. 115. As it is written in some buikes, foemina non succedit cum masculo.

Failieing sons and bairnes, lauchfullie gotten of their bodies, the dauchter
succeedis. De filia.
For gif the defunct hes ane dauchter allanerlie, she should succeed to all her
Fathers heritage, in the form and manner, as the son succeedis to his
Father. De judic, Cap. Item nota. 115. Lib. 2. cap. Haeredum. 28.

ITEM, Gif ane man deceasis, leavand behind him maa dauchters nor ane, De
filiabus.
gotten upon ane mother, his heritage should be divided equally amangst them, in
als money parts or portiones, as there is dauchters to succeed. Quhilk form
of succession, is called, successio in capita, cum scilicet haereditas adeunda,
dividitur in tot parts quot sunt capita, vel personae succedentes. Successio
in capita.
Bot the eldest dauchter, should bave the principal message, without division,
be reason of her dignity, and birth-richt, and satisfaction therefore should be
maid to the remanent dauchters. Lib. 2. cap. Si autem 31. De Iudic. c. Item.
Nota. 115, Togidder with the superiority of the portiones, perteining to all
her ounger sisters, to quhome their husbands should make homage, acknawledgeing
her to be their superior, and their aires should give the relieve of their
lands, quhen it sall happen. Lib. 2. c. Maritus. 32.

De filiabus diversarum uxorum.
Gif ane man have sindrie wives, and of ilk wife, ane or maa dauchters: All his
dauchters succeedis to him in his heritage equally, Per capita, as gif they
were all gotten upon ane mother Libr. 2. c. porro contingit: 33.

ITEM, Gif maa dochters nor ane, ar procreat upon sindrie wives, of the quhilk
wives, ane is ane heretrix: Swa that the heretage cummis be her, and not be her
husband: The dauchter, or dauchters gotten upon her, succeedis to her heritage,
and excludes all the rest of the dauchters theirfra. Leg. Forest. c. Si quis
habuerit. 26. De Iud. ca. 24.

De liberis burgensium ex diversis uxoribus.
Be the Laws of the Burrowes, gif an Burgess have maa wives nor ane, and
bairnes procreat of ilk ane of them: All the lands perteining to him, be reason
of heretage, or conquest, in the time of his first wife, should perteine to the
bairne gotten with her, in the first marriage: And all the lands conquest be
him, the time of his second wife, fall perteine to the bairne gotten with her,
in the second marriage. Leg. burg. c. Si Burgensis. 26.

De secundo gradu nepotum vel neptium.
Failieing sons and dauchters, quhilk is are nearest and lauchfull aires, the
richt of succession perteinis to the Nepuoy or Neipce, gotten upon the Son,
or the dauchter. Quia deficientibus proximioribus haeredibus, nempe filio vel
filia, vocantur haeredes remotiores, ut Nepos vel Neptis ex filio, vel filia,
recta linea descendens. l. 2. c. Haeredum. 28.

De nepote uno vel pluribus ex filio.
Gif any man deceasis, leavand behind him ane Nepuoy or Nepuoyes, ane or maa,
procreat be his son already deceased. (Ex filio praemortuo) they should
succeed to him in the samin manner, as is above said, of the succession of
sons: That is, gif there be ane Nepuoy allanerlie, he is only universal
successor: And gif there be maa Nepuoyes, the eldest allanerlie succeedis to
all. De nepote and filio.
l. 2. c. Porro. 33.

Gif any man deceasis* leavand behind him ane Nepuoy, begotten be his eldest
Son, already deceased, And ane second son, quha is father brother to the
said Nepuoy: The second son is excluded from all richt and commodity of
succession to his father. Because the Nepuoy lauchfully begotten be the eldest
son representis the person of his father, and therefore Jure
repraesentationis succeedis in his fathers richt: and consequently is only
air to his Gud-schir: like as his father wauld have been, gif he had not
deceased before him. Lib. 2. c. Porro. 33.

The like is to be understood of ane Neipce, or Neipces, ane or maa, De nepte
filio.
begotten be the eldest son already deceased, quha should be preferred to
their father brother, anent the succession of their Gud-schirs heritage: Except
special provision of tailie be maid in favoures of the aires maill. Quo casu
haeredes masculi succedunt, non dispositione juris, sed ex provisione hominis.

ITEM, Ane Neipce or maa, of ane son or dauchter, succeedis to their
Gud-schir or Guddame, in the samin manner as their father or mother should have
done, gif they were it living. Lib. 2. c. Porro. 33. And in this case it is to
be observed, that quhen maa Nepces nor ane, borne of sindrie mothers succeedis,
that the heritage should be divided ratione stirpis, in as money parts, as there
is stocks, of quhom the saidis Neipces descendis and proceedis: As for
example, gif there be ane Neipce begotten upon ane dauchter, and two Neipces
begotten upon ane uther dauchter, they all three should succeed to their
Gud-schir; bot the heritage should not be divided in three parts, ratione
capitum; bot in two parts allanerlie, De nepta una vel pluribus. Successio in
stirpes.
ratione stirpium: That is, of the two sisters quhilkis are the two stocks, of
quhom the saidis Neipces descendis: And swa the ane Neipce, gotten upon the ane
sister, should have the ane half: and the uther two, the uther half allanerlie
of the heritage: Quhilk form of succession, is called successio in stirpes,
quhen the bairnes being maa in number, succeedis to als meikle allanerlie, as
wauld have perteined to their mother, gif schoe had been living.

De linea obliqua collateralium.
QUHEN the succession failies in the richt line descendent, then they quha ar
of the side line, or collateral should succeed: De fra.
as quhen the sons and dauchters, and all persons descendand of them
lineallie, failies: Swa that there is nane of them to succeed: Then the
brother of him quha is deceased, should succeed to him. Lib. 2. c.
Deficientibus. 34. Illi enim qui ex linea recta descendunt semper praeferuntur
illis qui ex transversa linea proveniunt, and illis deficientibus, hi ad
successionem admitti debent. lib. 2. c. Porro. 33.

The heretage, and all moveable gudes perteining to the eldest brother, De
fratre natu maximo.
deceased without lauchfull aires of his body, perteinis to the second
brother, immediately nearest to him, Quia haereditas gradatim descendit ad
immediate proximum. lib. 2. c. Si ergo. 23. c. Praeterea 25. Leg. Burg. c.
sciendum. 150.

Gif there be three brether germain, borne of ane father, and ane mother; And
the second brother deceasis without aires, De fratrenatu minori.
procreat lauchfullie of his body: His elder brother succeedis to him in his
lands, and immovable gudes. And the younger or third brother is alluterlie
excluded therefra. Quia conquestus gradatim ascendit. lib. 4. cap. Si tres 50.
lib. 2. Cap. Praeterea 25. Bot be the practicque of this realm, the aire-schip
of the moveable gudes, perteining to the second brother, the time of his
decease, descendis and perteinis to the younger, and third brother, as
lauchfull air: To quhome likewise perteinis the lauchfull tutorie of his said
second brothers son, quhen it sall happen to fall.

Gif there be maa brether nor ane, three, or maa in number, De fratrenatu
minimo.
and the youngest of all happen to decease without lauchfull aires, gotten of
his body. His immediate elder brother succeedis to him as lauchfull air:
Because conquest ascendis fra ane degree to ane uther immediately to the first
degree. Stat: Rob: 3. Cap: 3: Stat: Wilhelm: Cap: Notandum. 24.

Failiand the brether, and their aires, gotten of their bodies, the sister, De
sororibus.
or sisters, gif there be maa nor ane, succeedis in Capita, to their brother,
in the samin manner, as the dauchters succeedis to their father. Lib. 2. c.
deficientibus 34. de Iudic. cap. Si quis 24.

Gif the brother deceasis without aires gotten of his body, De sororibus ex
diversis marribus.
his full sister gotten with him bean father, and of ane mother (quhilk is
called soror germana ex eodem utroque parente) succeedis to all his heritage,
and excludis all uther sisters, gif any be gotten be his father, upon ane uther
wife, quhilk in Latin is called soror consanguinea, Lib. quart. Capite Si homo
48.

After the decease of the sisters, their bairnes succeedis in stirpes, in the
samin manner, as their mothers micht have done, keipand always the distinction
betuixt the maill and femaill, De sororum liberis.
be the quhilk the sister son excludis the sister dauchter. Lib: 2. cap.
deficientibus 34. de judic. c. Si quis 24. Quia (ut dictum est) mulier numquam
cum masculo partem capit in haereditate aliqua.

Failieing the sister bairnes, and the aires gotten of their bodies, De patrum
ejusque liberis.
The father brother (Avunculus, hoc est patruus) And his bairnes descendand of
him, succeedis. Lib: 2: Cap: Deficientibus 34. De judic. Cap. Si quis 24.

Failieing the father brother, and the aires lauchfullie gotten of his body:
The father sister (Matertera, De amita ejusque liberis
hoc est Amita) and her bairnes should succeed, conform to the foresaid
distinction, betuixt maill and femaill. Lib. 2. Capite Deficientibus. trigesim,
quart. de Iudicibus. Capite. Si quis 24. Be the quhilk distinction, the father
sisters son, excludis the fathers sister dauchter.

It is to be diligently observed, De jure accrescendi.
quhen maa persons nor ane (sik as money sisters or neipces) succeedis, and it
happen any ane of them to decease without aires lauchfullie gotten of their
awin bodies: the portion and part of the heretage quhilk perteined to the
defunct, accrescis to all them that remainis on life, and should be divided
amangis them all. Lib. 2. c. Maritus. 32. de judic. Cap. Item nota. 115.

Last of all, gif any man gotten and borne in lauchfull marriage, deceasis
without ane lauchfull air, and it cannot be knawin, quha sulde succeed to
him: Or gif it be in question or doubt, quha is his richteous air: Be the auld
law of this realm, the King, or any uther superior, retained the lands in
his awin hands, until the pley was ended, in favoures of the just air: Or
until it was knawin, quha was the lauchfull air. Lib. 2. Cap. ult. 53. Bot
now, gif there be na lauchfull air, to enter to the heritage: the King, as
ultimus haeres, recognoscis, and reteinis the samin as escheitte, ad perpetuam
remanentiam, and may sell and dispone thereupon, at his pleasure, as his awin
proper lands and heritage. vide Bastardus.



ERECTARE Essonia ab aliquo facta, to reckon, esteem, or judge Essonies, or
excusationes, maid be any person. Quoniam attach. Cap. de brevibus 31.
ESSONIUM, an Essoinie or excusation. Lib. 1. Cap. 10. Jam. 2.13, October. p. 11.
c. 55. Jam. 1. par. 9. c. 114. From the French word Exoin, quhairof mention is
maid in the Laws of Normandy. Lib. 9. Cap. 10. And be Molinaeus in Still.
suprem. cur. part. 1. cap. 6. de contumacia, And be D. Tho: Smith. lib. 2. cap.
14. of the commoun weill of England. ESTOVERIUM, Iter. Camer. Cap. Si quis
captus 25. de Iudic. Cap. 156. Sustentation, Nurishment: for the superior,
during the time of the ward, should sustain the air honorably, conform to
the quantity of the heretage, Lib. 2. c. Plenam 42. Jam. 4 p. 3. cap. 25.
Quhilk is conform to the English Law in Magna Carta, quhair it is statute,
That the warder fall give the air his reasonable Estovuerie, Anno 9. Hen. 3.
c. 12. quhair also it is written, that the relict of any man, sall have his
reasonable estoverium, of the commoun gudes of her husband that is deceased,
until her dowry be paid to her, Vid. Quarentena viduarum. EVE Et Treve,
dicuntur nativi de ave and triavo, quorum majores servitutem servierunt: That
is, sik slaves or servandes, quhais father, gudschir, grand-schir, and
for-bears, hes been servandes to any man, and his predecessoures. Quoniam
atttach. ca. de brevibus 31. vid. Bondagium. EXITUS Terrae, The rentes,
fruits, and profits of the land. Lib. 2. Cap. Si quis liberum 24. lib: 3: c:
cum autem 6. quoniam attach. cap. secus, 28. leg. Forest. c: Probata 87. Exitus
justitiariae, The profit or commodities of the justice air, Iter justic: c.
3, 4. Exitus curiae, the commodity and profit of the court, sik as unlawes
and sums of money, paid be them quha are amerciat, or convict of any crime,
or comes in will therefore, as is manifest be the form of the precept, direct
be the Chalmerlane, to the Schireffe, to take up, and intromet with exitus
camerariae, or the profits of the Chalmerlane air. Exitus haereditatis de
actorn. cap. 1. is called the fruits, rentes, profits, and emoluments of the
heretage, quhilk in the English law is called the issues of the heritage. Mag:
Cart: Anno 51. Hen: 3: cap: 17. And siklike Exitus tenementi, signifies the
mailles and duties thereof, Quoniam attach. c: Secus 29: Mod: ten: cur: c: 30.
EXTENT of lands, signifies the rents, profits, and issues of the samin,
quhairof there is two kinds. The auld extent, and the new extent; For it
appearis, that the rentall and valor of lands, hes been taxed, and liquidat
to ane certain sum of silver, conform to the profits and duties, quhilk
the lands paid at that time: Quhilk is called the auld and first extent,
tempore pacis. Bot because the revenues and duties of lands be progress of
time, did incresse and grow mair and mair: ane uther taxation and extent was
maid in the time of peace, as the former extent, conform to the profits
augmented, as said is; quhilk therefore is called the new, or second extent:
And properly is the very avail that the land is worth, and givis the day of
serving of the brieve. Ja. 3. p. 7. cap. 55. To the quhilk, the word Nunc,
contained in the brieve and retour, should be referred. For tempore belli, or in
time of weire; there is na ordinar or certain extent of lands, prescrived be
any law: for in sik time, either the lands are wast, and are not labored; or
the lands-lordes servis in proper person: And it is na reason, that they should
both make personal service, and also pay extent or taxation. The lords of the
Session esteemis ane mark land, of auld extent, to four mark land of new
extent. 21. Mart. 1541. Quhilk commounlie is called, the fourth maill; and should
be generally used in retouring of lands to the Kingis Chancellarie, and
uthers Chappelles: Albeit the samin is nocht perpetually observed. This
distinction of the auld extent, and new extent, is necessar; For taxation of
lands are raised, conform to the auld extent, and the relief of lands, is the
retoured maill, according to the new extent. And sik-like, quhen lands are
fallen in the superioures hands, be reason of none-entres, he should have
allanerlie, the retoured maill thereof, conform to the new extent. vide
None-entres.
F
FALSING of doomes, Reduction of decreets. vide Sok. FARANDMAN. De Judic. c.
47. Ane stranger or Pilgrimer, to quhome justice should be done with all
expedition; That his peregrination be not stayed or stopped. Peregrini
mercatores, dicuntur Farandman. lib. 4. c. 30. in lib. Sconensi. FELONIA,
signifies nocht only the falsed, or the contumacie of the vassal toward his
over-lord, or of the over-lord toward his vassal. Bot also all and
quhatsumever capital crime in Latin, scelus, in Dutch, Schelmerie, or any
uther fault or trespass. Iter Camer. c. Si quis captus 25. Stat: Alex: ca. 2:
lib: 2: cap: ultim. 54. As to hurt or assailie any man, with sword, either edge
or ure. Ja: 1: par: 6: c: 97. Or any less or private crime, as suspicion of
theift, or quhatsumever fraud, deceate, commonly used in contractes,
pactiones, and uther conventiones. Lib. 3. cap. ex causa. 8. in fine. Cuia.
lib. 1. de feud. Writtis that fellonie is not only rebellion: bot also
perfidie, fraud, or any kind of fault. perfidia, fraus, culpa, improbitas.
FEODUM, Feudum, signifies nocht (as some affirmis) life-rent, in Latin, usus
fructus. For he that is saised in the life-rent of lands, is nocht understand
to be saised in feodo, or in the fee thereof; For the ane is different from the
uther. 7. Mart: 1561. The Countess of Crawfurd, contrair the Earl of
Crawfurd. And sik-like, Feodum signifies nocht the superiority of lands. For
gif any married man happenis to decease, vest and saised in the superiority of
lands, his wife should not have ane terce, or third thereof.

Bot Feodum commonly signifies* the heretable fee, and property of any thing,
and specially of lands, as is commonly contained in brieves and retoures. Cum
aliquis dicitur obiisse sasitus and vestitus, in terris, ut de feodo. Lib: 3:
Cap. Cum vero 28. c. sequens. 33. Stat: Rob: 3: cap: 1: Of the quhilk lands,
the just third, and reasonable terce, will perteine to the wife, fra the time
of her husbands decease, enduring her lifetime. vid. Quarentena viduar. Dom:
feodi or feudi: Is called the Lord of the ground, or land: li: 2: c. Usurarii
53. Quhair feodum and haereditas, ar both ane, and haereditas damnati propter
crimen, dicitur pertinere ad dominum feodi, tanquam escheta. Item, si quis
condemnatus fuerit de furto, res ejus mobiles, and catalla solent vicecomiti
remanere: Terram autem si quam habuerit, dominus feudi habebit. Lib: 2: ca:
Forisfactum 55. He is called utherwise, Dominus fundi. Lib. 2. c. Defuncto: 69.
Et fendum idem est quod fundus. lib. 2. cap. Mutua. 68. And Actio feudi, is ane
action or pley of lands or heretage. Lib. 1: cap. 2. Feodum militare,
signifies lands halden be service of ward, and relief: Lib: 2: cap:
Maritagium. 56. Feudum laicale, Is lands perteining to Laics and Temporal
men. lib: 2. cap: 59. As feodum Ecclesiasticum, signifies, lands perteining to
the Kirk, or Kirk-men. Lib: 3: cap: sequitur 31. Cum seqq. Swa be the laws of
this Realm, all gudes and gear ar moveable, and called Catalla: Or
immovable, and ar called feodum, haereditas, terra, fundus, tenementum. Fee or
property, in latin, dominium, cannot pertein to maa persons nor ane. Quia
dominum unius rei uno eodemque tempore non potest esse in solidum penes plures.
And therefore, gif two or maa persons happenis to be infeft, conjunctlie in any
lands, the property perteinis to him in quhais aires and successors, the
infeftment resolvis. As for example, The husband and the wife ar infest in
certain lands, the langest liver of them two, and the aires gotten, or to be
gotten betuixt them, quhilk sailieing to his aires: In this case the husband is
proprietar, and the wife is conjunct fear, or liferentar. Bot gif it be said
(quhilks failieing to her aires.) In that case the wife is proprietar, and the
husband is conjunct fear or liferentar.

Feodum, is taken for the sea, wage, or stipend, given to ane servand for his
service, as in the Laws of K. Mal: Make: c: 4: de feod: offic: dom: reg: quhilk
utherwaies is called liberatio, ane livery vid. Liberatio. Quhair anent the L.
of secreit Council, and checker, made their ordinances, as follows. At
Edinburgh the third of June, 1597.
FOr-sameikle as the Lords of his Majesty's secreit Council, and checker,
according to the special power and commission* given to them be his hienesse,
and his estaites, quhilks conveened at Dundie, in the month of Maij last
bypast; Hes thocht meet and convenient, to set down the prices of his
Majesty's signet, privy and great sealles, of all infestments, Prices of the
seals.
and uther signatures, quhilks ordinarlie should pass throw them: And of the
chalmer fees, quhilkis sall be received hereafter, fra his hienesse lieges, in
manner following: That is to say; That the signet, according to the ancient
custom, salbe the rule to the privy and great seals, in all infeftments,
and uther signatures, quhilks ordinarlie should pass throw the hail three: And
that the privy seal, sall receive na mair, nor the double of the price, set
down hereafter: for the signet, nor the great seal, mair nor the quadruple
of the said signettis price, under the pain of deprivation of the
contraveeners, fra the office and seal, quhilk he possessis.

Prices set down to the signet, for letters and uthers writtes, quhilkis
passis throw na uther seal.
FIrst, for all sorts of summondes of quhat-sum-ever quality. vj shillinges,
viij pennies. For letters containing, both inhibition, and arreistment. xj
shilling viij d. For letters of law-borrowes, and uther criminal letters; how
money persons soever be insert. vj shilling viij pen. For ministers letters
eirlie raised vj shilling viij pen. For all letters of horning of quhatsumever
quality, except letters of law-borrowes, and criminal letters xxj shilling
viij d. For an relaxation vj shillinges viij d.
And gif maa nor ane be insert, the like price of every person to be
relaxed, or compositione for them, at the discretion of the keiper of the
signet.

Prices set down to the signet, for signatoures passing the privy and great
seals.
For ane Legitimation vj shillinges viij pen. For signatoures of infestmentes
of lands, within five mark land of auld extent vj shilling. viij pen. For
ane remission to ane person only vj shilling. viij pen.
And gif it be to maa nor ane, als money half marks, as they are persons, or
composition therefore, at the discretion of the keiper of the signet.

For ane infestment of ane five mark land of auld extent xiij shil. iiij d.
And for sa money maa mark lands, as the signatoure conteinis proportionallie:
Providing, that quhat ever be the extent of the lands, the samin not being
styled ane barronnie, in the infestment the heichest price for the signet, sall
not exceed l. shillings For ane or maa barronnies of land, contained in the
signatour, quhilks are nocht unite in ane Earle-dome, nor Lord-schip, for the
hail signatour iij pounds For half ane baronnie, swa styled in the signatour
xxx shillings For ane Earl-dome, or ane Lord-schip of dignity, having vote in
parliament, including never sa money baronnies. vj pounds For ane comprising,
quhilke exceedis nocht ane thousand marks. vj shillings viij pennies And if
the same exceed that sum, to pay proportionally, providing that the heichest
price exceed nocht l. shillings For ane bischoprick, abbacie, or priorie,
exceeding an thousand pounds of eirly rent to the posseissour vj pounds Being
within ane thousand pounds l. shillings
Reservations. Nathing to be taken for reservations of life-rentes, contained in
the signatoures. In respect the reservation is na new benefit to the
receaver, except quhair the resigner is a bastard. In the quhilk caise,
respecting his Majesty's prejudice be the resignation: quha utherwise micht
succeed to the lands resigned, be the present possessours decease, without
lauchfull aires: sik reservations sall pay according to the price before set
down for the lands resigned, comptand always, the man and wife to be ane
person.

Tailies. Nathing to be taken hereafter for onie tailies, except the foresaid
price, according to the quantity of the land resigned, in respect the Fear
may alter his tailie at his pleasure, except quhair the Fear that resignis the
lands is bastard. In quhilke caise, the like price may be taken for every
person contained in the tailie, as it is set down for the quantity of the
land resigned.

Benefices. For infestmentes containing patronages of benefices never before
disponed, nor annexed to they lands or new infestmentes of heritable offices:
The land is to pay according to the quantity and rate, before set down, and
the patronage gif it be of ane only benefice, the ane half of the duty of
the lands. Gif their be maa, to pay the said haill price of the lands for the
saides patronages. Quhilk price, the keeper of the signet sall not exceed.
Offices. Sik-like for new and heritable offices.

Prices set down to his Hieness Privy seal, to be taken hereafter, of sik
gifts and uther signatours, quhilk passis the said seal allanerly.
FOr escheits of eemen men, and uther mean persons xx shillings For escheits of
landed gentlemen and substantious burgesses xxx shil. For escheits of Baronnes
xl. shillings For escheits of Earls and Lords iij pounds For their
life-rents, respective -- dowble price. For presentations to Vicarages xx
shillings For presentations to Parsonages l. shillings For respettes to eamen
men, and uther mean persons xxx shillings For respets to landed gentlemen,
and substantious burgesses xl shil. For respettes to Baronnes iij pounds For
respettes to Earls and Lords v. pounds And gif there be ma persons contained
in the signature, to pay per capita, according to their ranks. For the wards
and marriages, non-entresses and relieves of landed men, under Baronnes,
included in ane signatour iij pounds For the wards, marriages, non-entresses,
and relieves of Barons vj pun. For the like of Earls and Lords x. pounds For
the ward allane of gentlemen xxx shillings Of Baronnes iij pounds Of Earls
and Lords v. pounds For the marriage allane of simple gentlemen xxx shillings
Of Barrones iij pounds Of Earls and Lords v. pounds For the non-entresses
allane of mean landed men xx shillings Of Baronnes xl shillings Of Earls and
Lords iij pounds For gifts of prebendaries or chaplanaries xxx shillings For
tutories xxx shillings
For the multitude of denuntiations included in ane signatour of escheitte, or
life-rent, na payment, but for the gift only. In respect they can import but
ane gift of escheit allanerly.

For presentations to prelacies, legitimations, signators of infestments of
Baronnies, and uther lands, remissions, and sik uther writtes, as passis first
the signet: The keeper of the privy seal, sall take for them allanerlie, the
double of the price, quhilk ilk ane of them paid to the signet.

In tailies, reservations, patronages, heritable offices, erections in free
Burrowes and siklike, to take payment, according to the order and proportion of
the signet.

Anent the Chalmer-sees.
IT is ordained, That na signatoures hereafter, sall pay Chalmer-fee, except
resignations, and confirmations, irredemable allanerly: and of sik lands as
are neither of his Majesty's property, nor temporality annexed, quhilks are
declared to be free of all sik fees, in time cumming.

Prices set down to the great seal.
THat the keeper of the great seal, exceed not the quadruple of the signet,
or double of the privy seal, under the foresaid pain.

That to this effect the keiper of the-signet, sall upon the backside of the
prent of the signet, set down the price quhilk he receives for every precept,
and for all uthers letters after his name. Likewaies the keiper of the prievie
seal, his price for precepts, and uther letters after per signaturam: that
theirby the keiper of the great seal, pretend na occasion of ignorance.
Sik-like that the said keiper of the great seal, set down his price in the
fore-face of every tag, quhairunto the said seal salbe appended. And that
theirafter their be na drink silver exacted fra the party, uther nor he will
be content to give at his pleasure and discretion. And ordains ane herald,
maisser, or uther officiar of arms, to pass to the market Croce of the said
burgh of Edinburgh, and their be open proclamation make publication, and
intimation of the premises, to all and sindrie his Hienes lieges, quhairthrow
nane pretend ignorance theirof. As alswa, to command and charge the keipers of
the signet, privy, and great seals, Ischers of his Hienes chalmer, and all
uthers quhome it effeiris, to conform themselves to the will and direction of
the saides commissioners, signified to them in manner foresaid: and on nawaies
tak upon hand to alter or contravene the same in onie point hereafter, as they
and ilke ane of them will answer to his majesty, upon their obedience at their
uttermost charge and perrel, and under the pain of deprivation of them fra
their offices, certificing them and they sailie, that they salbe deprived fra
their saides offices, and utherwaies punished in their persons as efseiris.



Apud Edinburgh quarto Junij, Anno 1597.
THe Lords of secreit Council and Checker, following the commission given to
them be his Hienes and his Estaites, laitlie conveened at Dundie, anent the
ordour taking with the exorbitant prices of all sorts of writes and letters,
usual amang the lieges, and likewaies of the seals, registers and chalmer
fie, quhilk a great number of the same mon pass, procuring daily both
private grudges and public exclamations against the tolerance and with gang,
given to sik shameful extorsion and abuse, highly to his Majesty's dishonor
and offense, and to the manifest undoing of the puire anis of this Realm,
constrained to have ado with the saides writes: Have for remeid of that abuse,
decerned and ordaned in time coming, and quhill a mair particular and solid
ordour may be taken theirin. That all and quhatsoever Clerks of session,
Justice, secret Council and checker, Clerks to quhatsoever Commissar,
Admiralles, Schireffis, Stewartes, Baillies of regalitie, and royalty,
Provestes and Baillies of quhar-sum-ever his Hienes burrowes, and of all uther
courts or Judgementes within this Realm, all writers to the signet, privy
and great seals, all keipers of quhatsoever rolls, Registers and records,
all public notares, and uthers writers quhatsoever, quha sall hereafter
register and inroll, form, extract, writ, or give out for payment, to any of
his Hienes leiges, any signatour, contract, obligation, decree, act or
ordinance of ane court or judgment, chartour, saising, or uther evident,
bills, letters, or uther writtes quhatsum-ever of any importance to the
receiver: Sall subscrive with their hands the said writ, and subjoyne to their
names, the just and ordinar price; quhilk they receive fra the party for their
pains. To be a testimony of their discretion, in valueing of their travelles
taken in the saidis writtes, and to give further licht to the said Lords,
quhat constant prices they may set upon the like in time to come, under the
pain of deprivation from their offices, and punishment of their persons at
his Hienes further pleasure, incaise of failie. And ordainis letters to be
direct, To make publication of the premises to all and sindrie his Hienes
lieges, quhairthrowe nane pretend ignorance thereof.



FERCOSTA, ane Italian word: Ane kind of schippe or little Boat. In ane
privilege granted to the Burgh of Dundie, for reparation and bigging of their
Port and Haven be King James the second, in the eir of God, an thousand four
hundred, fifty aucht eires, and of his reign, the twenty two eire: Mention is
maid of ane Fercost, quhilk is inferior in birth and quantity to an schip,
because the imposte and taxation laid upon ilke schip is ten schillings, and
upon the Fercost, twelve pennies, and of every Crear, busch, barge, and
ballinger, five schilling, and ilke great boat six pennies. FERDINGMANNUS, ane
Dutch word, ane penni-maister, or Thesaurar. Stat. gild. c. 5. FIDELITY, maid
to superiors, and over-lords. vid. Homagium. FINIS, finance, or composition
maid with thieves. Statut. 2. Robert Bruyse. Item 9. In the quhilk place, it is
called rachetum, or thift boat. Finis curiae, ane composition quhilk onie man
gives in ane court, sik as the justice air, to the King, In registro 28.
December, ane thousand, five hundred forty ane eirs, the Thesaurar contrar
the burgh of Perth. Finem facere cum rege: to fine with the King: Or to make
ane finance, and satisfy him for any trespass committed against him or his
laws. Ass. reg. Da. cap. 2. lib. 4. cap. 3. c. sivir. 16. or finem reddere
regi, to pay an fine or composition to the King for ane crime, sik as
thift-boat. St. 2. To. Br. c. item ordinat. 9. Finem facere cum molendinario de
multura, To agree and compone with the millar for the multer. Statu. Wilh. cap.
item statuit quod detentor. 11. FIRMARIUS, ane mail-payer, ane mailer, or
mail-man. leg. burg. c. si firmarius 56. quo. attach. c. nullus 26. Firma
signifies the duty quhilk the tennent paies to the landis-lord, quhidder it be
silver-maill, victual, or uther duty. In statutis gild. c. 48. In the quhilk
signification, it is commonly used in the French laws. FORENSIS, from the
French word Foraine. In the burrow-lawes of this realm, signifies ane
un-free-man, quha dwellis not within burgh, or out-dwelland man. And therefore
is called rure manens, quha dwelland aland-ward, hes na privilege, or
immunitie within Burgh. Rure manens.
Commonly all strangers are called Forinseci, or foreines; uther-waies
advenae. Quhair-anent it is statute, that na burges dwelland in burgh, fall
harbourie onie strange man in his house, Servitium ferinscium.
langer nor ane nicht, without borrowes, and caution. leg. burg. Cap. nullus in
burgo 88. quoniam attach. Cap. nulli 47. servitium forinsecum signifies sik
service as the vassal, or tennent, should do to his over-lord and master, sra
hame, or in time of weir-faire. In England they quha are nocht borne
Englishmen, are called alienes: Quha injoyes nocht liberty within the realm,
except they be Denied, Denied. Ambani. Albini, jus Albinagii.
quhilk word appears to be driven a Danis, quasi danisatus, that is maid
lauchfull and free, as onie Danes-man was, quhen the Danes did occupy and
possess ane great part of that Realm. And in France they are called ambani,
or albini, quasi alibi nati, strangers, nocht borne within the Realm of
France, quha therefore deceaseand in France, without lauchful succession of
their bodies, hes na power to make testament. For their gudes and gear, are
nocht given to their aires, or successoures, bot are confiscat to the Kingis
use, be the law quhilk is named, Albinage, ius albinagij. Chessan. in
consuetud. Burgund, Rubric. 21. verb. des confiscationi. Nu. 37. in the acts
of Parliamente Marie p. 8. Cap 66. it is called droict d' Aubeyne.

FORESTARIUS, ane forester, or kelper of woods, to quhom be reason of his
office. perteinis the bark and the hewn branches. And quhen he rides throw the
forest, Foresta.
he may take ane tree als heich as his awin head. leg. forest. Ca 10.
Foresta, is called ane large wood, without dyke or closure, quhilk hes na
water. Sylva is ane wood near adjacent to ane flude of water: Sylva.
bot quhen the samin is enclosed with dike or hedginges, is called ane park,
Chessa. in consuetud. Burgund. Tit. des Forests 13. in prin. per. gl in. c. cum
dilecti. de donationib. Felin in c. Rodolph, Parcus.
extr, de rescript. Nu. 21. Quhair foresta, is called a place quhairin are
included wild beasts and quhair some hes liberty of hunting. Bot quhair
their is ane flude of water, it is Sylva. And beand circled about and environed
with watters Insula. Insula.
And enclosed with dikes or hedginges, parcus. Ia. Andr. in. d. Cap. dilecti.
Infeodatus in liberam forestam, in: est in free Forest, hes power to hunt,
Libera foresta.
halk, and cut trees, quhilk we call potestatem venandi, aucupandi, and
secandi. quhilk liberty na person may use bot be special license granted to
him. vid Varenna vid. Venison. vid. Werd. FORISFACTUM, ane unlaw, quhilk
utherwaies is called amerciamentum. lib. 1. c. dos autem 19 Stat. Alex. c. si
quis conquestus. 9. l. b. 4 c. 3. leg. burg. c. forissactum 42. vid.
Amerciamentum. It is taken for fornication committed be ane woman being ane
air semaill within waird, ut cum foemina dicitur forisfacere de corpore suo,
to forfair, or abuse her body. vi. Putagium. Item it signifies quhatsumever
fault, trespass, and crime, and is called forefault in the Acts of
parliament. Iam. 2.2. August. c. 6. And quhair it is written pro vno forisfacto
non debet esse nisi vnum amerciamentum. leg. burg. c. de uno. 3. In ane other
place it is said, pro vno delicto, non debet esse nisi vna misericordia. Ass.
reg. Da. C. ad hoc 28. That is for ane fault their should be bot ane unlaw. And
in the English Laws, Hen. 3. in carta de forest, c. 15, all outlawes for the
Kingis forestes, fall return to his peace, and fall find to him sure pledges,
that they sall nocht do onie forefault, Forisfactum plenarium Regis.
or wrang in his forestes. Forisfactum plenarium regis, may be extended to the
death, as plenaria justitia, quhilk should be execute upon him quha stops the
sleuthhound, in persewing of thieves and thieft, lib. 4. c, and si quis, 35.
And it is statute that nane sall stop the Kingis burgesses to bye and sell
freely throw-out all the parts of the Realm. super plenum forisfactum regis,
leg, burg, c, si burgenses, 141. vel super plenariam forisfactura^. lib, 4, c.
Statutum, 38. Stat. Wilh. c. Item statuit. 19. conform to the quhilk
constitution, he quha troublis or molestis merchandes dwelling within burgh, to
use their freedom and privileges, may be accused as an oppressor of the
Kingis lieges. Ia. 5 p. 4. c. 26. FORISFAMILIARI, forisfamiliat, put forth of
his fathers house, or maid free, and delivered forth of the fatherly power,
the son is called to be forisfamiliat be the father, quhen he with his awin
consent and good will, receivis from his father onie lands: and is put in
possession theirof, before his fathers decease. lib, 2, c, porro, 33, and is
content and satisfied theirwith. Swa that he nor his aires may nocht claim or
crave onie mair of his fathers heritage. de Judicibus. capit. Item nota, 115.
FORESTALLERS, vid, Regraters. FORTALITIUM la, 2, p, 3, c, 3, Stat. 2. Rob. Br,
c, Item ordinatum 8. Ane fortalice, ane Castle, and properly ane house or
Tower quhilk hes ane batelment an barmekin, or ane fowsie about it 7, Feb,
1566. Lord Fleming contrair James Rosse. FORTHOCHT felony, praecogitata
malitia, quhilk is don and committed wittinglie and willingly, after
deliberation and set purpose, and is different from chaudmelle. quia ut seribit
Cicero. l. 1. offic in omni injusticia. permultum interest vtrum perturbatione
aliqua animi, quae plaerunque brevis est, and ad tempus: an consulto and
cogitato fiat injuria. Leviora enim sunt ea, quae repentino aliquo motu
accidunt, quam ea quae meditata and praeparata inferuntur. FOSSA. ane pit, or
fowsie. Furca, an gallous, in Latin cabalum, Cabalum.
quhilk was first institute and granted be King Malcolme, quha gave power to
the Barrones to have ane pit, quhairin women condemned for thieft should be
drowned, and ane gallous quhairupon men thieves, and trespassoures should be
hanged, conform to the doom given in the Barron Court thereanent hector
Boethius. l. 12. Erectio furcarum est meri imperij, et aliae justiciae, et
significat dominium aeris, Merum Imperium.
quia suspensi pendent in aere. and merum imperium consistit in quatuor, sicut
sunt quatuor elementa. In aere, vt hi qui suspenduntur. In igne, quando quis
co^buritur propter maleficium. In aqua, quando quis ponitur in culco and in
mare proiicitur, vt parricida: vel in amnem immergitur, ut faeminae furti
damnatae. In terra, cum quis, decapitatur and in terram prosternitur. Chessa.
in consuetud. Burgund. Rubric: 1.. 1. verb an territoire. Jurisdictio mistum
imperium.
Nu. 14. and rubric. 1. 8. Nu. 2. porro jurisdictio dicitur notio, quae juri
magistratus competit. Mistum imperium, est potestas quae jurisdictioni inest.
Merum autem imperium estjus gladij, vel alicuius gravioris coercitionis
nominatim lege concessum. Cuia. l. 4. de. feud. tit. 19. FRIEBORGH, liber
plegius, vel fideiussor, quem Galli francum plegium vocant. In the auld Britton
laws, Bopher vel Bores, is that quhilk we call borrows, borgh, or cautioner.
And Aluredus King of England, divided England in satrapias, centurias, and
decurias, as fall be declared in the word Schiref: and ordained that decuria,
should comprehend ten persons, and centuria should contein 100 persons, quhairof
ilk ane was cautioner and sovertie for uthers: in sik sort that the haill
number, and ilk ane of them, was answerable for the fault and deed of onie ane
of them, and swa was called free-borgh, free-pledge, or cautioner. vide
antiquas leges Brittonum. FURCHE, ane word, quhairof I find na mention in the
written laws of this Realm, nor of onie uther cuntrie: And it is used in the
form and ordour of the Chancellarie, from furca, ane forke. For quhen onie
person is served and retoured narrest, and lauchfull air to onie of his
predecessors, of any lands halden in chief, of any uther superior then the
King: The directour of the Chancellarie, causis his Clerks direct to the said
superior three precepts, commanding* him to give saising to the person
retoured, of all and sindrie the lands, contained in the retour, he doing
therefore to his superior, all quhilk he auclit to do of the Law. Of the
quhilk precepts the second is called Meminimus a forma verborum qua praeceptum
concipitur. Meminimus.
For the precept bearis that the King remembers, that he directed his first
precept and command, quhilk was nocht obeyed, quhairof he mervailis: And
therefore it as of before commands the superior to give saising. The 3.
precept is called furch, for quhat cause I know nocht certainly: Bot like as
ane fork hes two grains, this precept hes ane alternative command of two
parts, for the King commandis the superior to give saising, or else he
certifies him, he will commandis the Schireffe to give the samin. Itaque hoc
praeceptum est furcatum, vel bifurcatum, in eadem significatione, qua barba
bifurcata, quhilk is divided in two taits or parts. And in French furche, is
called cloven sutted, or forked.
G
GAlenes, lib. 4. c. si. quis. 37. c. statuit. 66. Ane kind of mendis,
assithment, or satisfaction for slauchter. Of the quhilk word I find na
mention in onie uther place, or law of uther cuntries. GANGIATORES, Iter.
camer. c. gangiatores. 14. signifies them quha should mark the claith, bread, or
barrelles before they be sauld. with the mark of their office: or tryis or
examinatis all measures, and weichts, both dry and weete, for the French Iage,
is that quhilk we call jug, met or measure. GARBA sagittarum, ane schaife of
arrows, containing 24. utherwaies called schaffa sagittarum. Stat. 2. Rob. Br.
c. ordinatum est. 27. GARCIFER ane French word. Ane Garson, an servand quha
servis in the* myln, ane myln-knave. leg. burg. c. quicunque. 64. GILDA, ane
society and company of merchandes. For in the auld Britton laws, gilder
signifies the ordour or society of religious men, or of craftes-men. Vide
antiquas leges Brittonum, verbo Contubernales. GIRTHOLL, girth, sanctuary, in
latin, asylum, ass. reg. Da. c. si quis in aliquo. 27. Asylum is driven from
the greek, a, particula privativa, et Silao, b. e. trabo. gl. in. l. si quis.
17. ff. de aedilit, edict. Because it is not leasum to draw forth onie person
forth of the girth. Quhairanent sindrie acts of Parliament are maid, conform
to the law of God. Exodus 21.13. Joshua. 22. 1. etc. GLEBA, ane gleibe, given
and granted to Kirk-men and Ministers of the Evangel. vid. Mansus. GVERRA, lib.
2. c. sunt quidam. 72. Stat. 1. Rob. Br. c. 17. Stat. 2. To. Br. c. ordinatum
est. 27. Utherwaies called Verra, battle, weir, and signifies nocht only
publict weire and hostility, Verra.
quhilk is proclaimed and denunced be the lauchfull authority of the Prince:
Bot also private deadly feed. quhen onie particular person wauld revenge onie
private injury, done to him. For it is statute be K. David the second, quod
nullus de caetero moveat guerram contra vicinos suos quoscunque, sub poena
plenariae forisfacturae, 6. November. 1357. Mention is maid of courts of Guerra,
12, 3, p, 8, c, 69. quhilkis were halden be schireffes, Stewards, Baillies, and
uther Officiars. Bot quhat was the special jurisdiction belangand thereto, I
know nocht: and find is na mention theirof in onie uther part of the laws of
this Realm, always as it appearis that they were halden be the ordinar judges
foresaides, anent strife, debates, crimes and trespasses committed betuixt
familiar and domestik persons, subject to ane master, within the jurisdiction
of the saides judges conform to the laws of the fewes in. ult. de pace
tenend. li. 2. de feud. Si ministeriales alicujus domin. inter se Guerram
habuerint: comes sive judex, in cujus regimine came fecerint, per leges and
judicia, ex ratione prosequatur. Quhilk form of courts being particular
justice courts, was prejudicial to the jurisdiction of the justice and his
deputes, and grievous to the lieges of this Realm, and theirfore are
discharged be King James the third, in the place foresaid. GYSARUM, ane hand
axe. Leg. Forest. Cap. sciendum est. 67. quhair it is statute and ordained,
that all men of the age, betuixt sextie, and sexteene, fall have armor,
conform to the quantity, and the valor of their lands, and moveable gudes,
that is, he quha hes fifteen pound land, or forty marks in movables,
fall have ane horse, ane habergeon, ane bonnet of iron, ane sword and ane
dagger. And he quha hes forty schilling land, or abone, within ane hundredth
shilling land, sall have ane bow, arrows, dagger and knife. And he quha hes
less then forty shilling land, fall have Gysarum, quhilk is called ane hand
axe, ane bow, and arrows. And all uthers, quha should, or may have armor, fall
have ane bow and arrows.
H
HAIMSUKEN, lib. 4. c. raptus, 9. in sine, quo. attach. c. de caetero. 48.
Stat. Will. c. Item. stat. 9. Ane Dutch word. For Haim signifies an house or
habitation, quhair anedwellis, and quhair he hes his winning, rising and lying.
As we say, aneman is at hame, or nocht at hame. In the quhilk signification
Cuninghame, is called the King is house or hame, specially quhen the Kings of
this Realm, quha of before did dwell in the Isles, came to the maine land to
dwell, and remain in Doundonald, and uther places. Suchen in the Germane
tongue, signifies to seike, or search, persew, or follow, as quhen ane gives up
kindness to ane uther, he says. Harr, harr, Ich wol euch suchen, swa
hame-suchen, or hame-sucken, is quhen onie person violently, without license,
and contrair the Kings peace, enters within an man's house, or seiks him at the
same, or assailies his house (as is written in the best buikes) quhilk crime is
punished. as ravishing of women. quo. attach. c. si quis aliquem. 50, Stat.
Wilh. c. Item stat. 10. quhilk is esteemed an great crime contrair the common
weill, quietness, and peace of the cuntrie, quia unicuique domus sua est
tutissimum refugium: Ideoque de domo sua nemo debet extrabi. l. sed and si. 21.
ff. si quis in jus vocat, quod verum esse in causa civili, non autem in
criminali, notatur in gl. ibidem, quid sit domus. vid. l. 1. ff. de agnoscend.
liber. HAWBERT, there is four manners of halding of lands outwith Burgh. Sum
lands are halden be the Kirk nomine pure eleemosynae, and paies nothing bot
devota animarum suffragia, as was used in the time of blindness and papistrie:
De quatuor modis tenendi terras.
uther are halden in few, or few-ferme of the King, Kirk, Barrones, or uthers,
quhilkis pays ane certain dewtie called feudifirma, few-ferme: uther are
halden blenche, be payment of ane penny, an rose, ane pair of guilt spurs,
or sum uther dewtie quhen it is asked, in name of blenche, or nomine
albaefirmae: uther lands are halden be service of ward and relieve, and the
air heirof beand minor, is in the gairde, that is wairde, custody, and
keiping of his superior, with all his saides lands, until he be major and of
perfect age. And siklike his marriage beand Major or minor, and nocht married
before the decease of his predecessor, perteinis to his superior, vid. Varda.
Lands halden in this last form and manner, are called feodum de Hauberk, or
Haubert, or feodum militare, de maritag. c. diversa. 7. ass. reg. Da c.
statutum fuit. 32. Or feodum Hauberticum, or feodum loricatum. Because it is
given upon condition, that the vassal possessour theirof, fall cum to the
hoist and army, with Iak, Lorica.
and arms: for lorica a loro, signifies ane abulement maid of cords, and
Haubert, signifies ane kind of armor, maid of mailies, or circles like ringes,
called an Haubergion, conform to the common proverb, Haubergion.
many mailies makis an Haubergion, money littles makis an meikle. Of the manner
of tenures in the English laws read Litleton, and in the Normand law. lib. 5.
c. 3. cum seqq. HAIMHALDARE, vindicare, action reali repetere, to repeit and
seek restitution of proper gudes and gear, and bring the samin hame again.
quo. attach. c. 4. as lauchfull and haimhald cattle. mod. ten. cur. c. 13. and
haimhald lint, or haimhald hemp, is that quhilk growis at haime, within this
realm, and is opponed to lint, and hemp quhilk is inbrocht forth of uther
cuntries. hamhaldatio catallorum, is quhen onie man seikis restitution to be
maid to him of his awin guds and gear, wrangously taken fra him, quhair of
frequent mention is maid in the auld laws of this Realm. And he quha seikis
the said restitution, should swear in this manner, ane buike beand put within the
horns, or upon the forehead of the beast, that is clamed before two lauchfull
witness, that the said cattle acclaimed be him did wander away from him, and
that the samin was nocht given, sauld, or onie manner of way annalied be him to
onie kind of person. vid. Catalla. HARA porcorum. vid. Creffera. HERREELDA, is
the bestaucht, ox, kow, or uther beast quhilk ane husband man possessour of the
aucht pairt of ane dauach of land: (four oxen gang) dwelland and deceasand
theirupon, hes in his possession, the time of his decease, quhilk aucht and
should be given to his Landislord, or master of the said land. lib. 4. c. si
quis. 22. ass. reg. Da. c. si quis. 41. for Herr in dutch, in latin herus,
dominus, signifies ane lord, or master, and eild is called ane gift, Here.
elde.
tribute, or taxation, as in the auld acts of parliament maid be King James
the first, it is written, that ane eilde was gaddered, for the relief of him
out of England. And ane uther eilde, was collected, for resisting the rebels
in the North. Swa Herreelda, is ane gift given be onie man to his master and
Lord, quhilk should be his best aucht 17. October. 1470. Quhilk is conform to
the aulde laws. li. 2. c. tenentur 35. quhair ilk person makand his testament,
should recognosce, and acknawledge his master with the best thing he hes Swa it
is manifest that the Herreelde is given, be reason of the tennents deceis to
his master, as ane gift, for acknawledging, and honoring of him, and
therefore in the civil law is called, laudemium, a laudando domino. Item in
the auld Saxon, Laudemium.
and Dutch language Herr, is ane hoist, army, or weirfare. Swa (as sum
thinkis) Herreelda, signifies that quhilk is given to the Lord, or master
passing to the hoist, Here.
or be reason of weirfaire. For sik small husbandmen having only four
Oxen-gang of land, and thereby, be reason of their poverty, nocht able to
pass to weirfare in proper person, should help their master, Herischulda.
passand fordward theirunto: like as Herischulda; is the pain of him quha
obeyis not the proclamation maid for weirfare, for schuld is debitum. or debt,
and heribannum is ane charge or proclamation maid for weirfare. Heribannum.
Curia lib. 1. de feud. HILDA, terrae, Hida terrae, an pleuch of land. vid.
Carrucata. HOMAGIUM, dicitur quando aliquis promittit se esse hominem alicujus
domini, and stare and habitare, ubi voluerit dominus. Et super hoc facit
homagium, id est promissionem, ut sit suus homo. Vel homagium dicitur fidelitas
hominis, pro rebus temporalibus facta domino. Chessan. in consuetud. Burgund.
rubric. 3., 1. verb. des fieds. and in. 3. nu. 3. It is a band of man-rent,
quhen onie person promisis to serve ane uther, in sik sort, that he sall be
friend to all his friends, and foe to all his foes, against all deadly. Lib.
2. c. praedictis. 60. le. Forest. c. quando 60. It is therefore called
hominium, and should be maid be the vassal being minor, or major, to his
over-lorde. Lib. 2. d. Cap. 60. And the samin being maid generally, without
exception of any man, is called homagium cum ligeantia factum. vid. Ligeantia,
homage differrs from fidelity, first be reason of the persons makeris
theirof, for weemen makis na homage, bot only fidelity. lib. 2. c
praedictis. 60. Because homage concernis service specially in weirfaire, to the
quhilk weemen are nocht subject. And likewaies consecrat bishops, makis only
fidelity for their lands, and barronies, lib. 2. c. fieri. 61. In this form,
I sall be leill and true; to ow my liege Lord, and schir N. King of Scotland,
and sall nocht hear our skaith, nor see it, Form of fidelity.
but I sall let it at my power, and warn ow theirof, our Council conceill,
and heill, that e schaw me: The best counsel that I can to give ow, when e
charge me in verbo Dei, and as help me God, and the halie Evangell. The second
difference is be reason of the form and manner, for he that makes fealty,
kneilis nocht on his kneis, Bot he that makes homage kneilis down: utherwaies
the form of homage maid be barrones to the King, and the form of fidelity
maid be them to the King, are nocht far different, for the form of homage maid
be them is this: Form of Homage.
I become our man my liege King in land, lith, life and lim, warldlie honor,
homage, fealty and lawtie, against all that live and die. our counsel
conceiland that eschaw me: The best counsel schawand, gif e charge me: our
skaith and dishonor not to hear or see, bot I sail let it at all my gudlie
power, and warn ow theirof. Swa help me God. The form of fidelity maid be
the barrones to the King is this, I sall be leill and true, to ow my liege
lord, Sir. N. King of Scotland. I sall never see our skaith, nor hear it, bot I
fall let it at my power, and warn ow theirof. our counsel schawin to me, I
sall conceill: the best counsel I can, I sall give ow, quhen e charge me
theirwith, sa help me God. Fiunt autem Homagia de terris tenement is liberis
tantummodo and servitiis: For quhat things homage should be^ maid.
de redditibus assignatis in denariis, and aliis rebus, Fro solo vero dominio,
non solet fieri homagium excepto domino principi, lib. 2. c. fiunt. 66. Ita hic
locus corruptus and difficilis legi debet. Concerning the exposition of the
quhilk it is to wit, that all homage is maid to the over-lord and master,
quhairof sum are may chief and principal, sik as the King, to quhom without
onie exception suprema fides, quae nullam exceptionem patitur jure optimo
debetur. Uther over-lords are inferior and subalterne, to quhom their
vassalles are bund and oblished, and should make their homage. And swa their is
two kinds of homage, aut enim est ligium, aut non ligium. vid. Ligeantia.
Both the ane and the uther may be maid pro terris, tenementis, Homagium ligium
and non ligium.
annuis redditibus: Because ane free halder of lands, tenements, and
annuell-rentes, may make homage to his immediate superior for his lands or
tenementes, exceptand the King and his elder over-lord, quhilk is Homagium non
ligium, lib. 2. c. fieri. 61. leg. forest. c. quando. 60. Or he may make homage
to his over-lord simpliciter, without exception of any person or uther
over-lord, quhilk is homagium ligium. Pro solo dominio, na homage can be maid,
bot only domino Principi, quhilk is Homagium ligium: Because it is upon
condition, and covenant that he to quhome it is maid, falbe master, Lord and
maintener allanerlie to the maker thereof. And he quha makis the samin, sall
acknawledge him and nane uther, to be his Lord and master for his maintenance,
protection and defense, quhairanent he makis exception of na person, and swa
this kind of homage, is maid to the King allanerlie, pro folo ipsius dominio,
quem solum and nullum alium omnes debent agnoscere pro solo domino. Hic locus
admodum difficilis me diu, multumque torsit, neque aliter me hinc extricare
possum, sed in hac re suum unicuique liberum esto judicium. HUESIUM, Hoyesium,
ane French word. Oyez, in latin audite, ane hoyes, or cry used in
proclamationes, quhairby ane officiar of arms, or messenger dois conveen the
people, and foirwarns them to hear him, de maritag. c. sciendum. 17. de judic.
c. 57. It is called alswa, an out-hoy, or cry, leg. forest. c. si quis 91. And
ane thief should be taken with the blast of ane horn with clamor, or hues, and
presented to the Kingis Baillie. And gif thereafter he flies away, he may be
slain leisumly, and hanged up in the next gallous. lib. 4. c. si quis
latronem. 33. Quhilk in an pain is conform to the Act of Parliament. Ja. 6.
p. 1. c, 21. And in the laws of England; ann. 4. Edward. 1. he quha followis
not the hue, raised for apprehending of malefactoures, salbe accused therefore.
HUSBANDLAND, conteines commonly 6. aikers of sok and syith land: That is of
sik land as may be tilled with ane pleuch, or may he mawed with ane syith. For
as sum auld writers testifies, the Earl of March for the time, caused his
servand Simon, or Sim Salmond, to divide the hail land in the Mers into husband
lands. Ilk husband land containing 6. aikers, quhair pleuch and syith may
gang. Quhat Earl of March this was, Forefaultour of Alexander Earl of March,
etc.
I am nocht certain, bot I find that ane called Simon Salmound is foresalted
with Alexander Duke of Albanie, Earl of March, Mar, and Garrioch, Lord of
Annanddale, and of Man, brother to King James the third, 8. Julij. 1483. Bot
the Lords of Council esteemis the eirlie mailes, fermes, and duties of ane
husband land, to five marks, in Registro. 1. December. 1545. And ane uther
husband land lyand beside Dumbar, they esteem it to 14. bolles bear, and 3.
bolles quheit, in Registro. 14. Feb. 1544. And ane uther husband land to 3.
pound. Swa I find na certain rule prescrived anent the quantie and valor of
ane husband land.
I
INFANGTHEFE, lib. 1. c. 3. ane Dutch word, quhairof I find diverse
interpretationes, for in the auld laws of the Brittones maid be King Edward,
infangthiefe is ane liberty or power perteining to him quha is infest
theirwith, to cognosce upon thieft, committed be his awin man, taken within his
awin dominion, and lands, like as in sindry auld buikis, conteinand the lawis
of this realm. Infangthese dicitur latro captus de hominibus suis proprijs,
saisitus de latrocinio: and outsa^gthiefe is an for a^ thief quha cums fra an
uther man's land, or jurisdictio^, and is taken and apprehended within the lands
pertenand to him quha is infeft with the like liberty. In sindry uther buiks it
is written, that insangthiefe is an liberty, to sit and deceid upon theft,
committed within the jurisdiction of him, quha is infeft theirwith, be his awin
man; or any uther man quhatsu^ever, taken therewith, within his awin
jurisdiction. And Out-fang-theife, is power or liberty to reduce, replege, and
bring-hame to his awin court, all thieves being his awin men, and committand
thieft within his awin bounds, quha ar fugitive and taken within ane uther
mannis jurisdiction, with the fange, that is, hand haveand, and back-bearand,
Lib. 4. c. Si quis 11. Quoniam attach. c. nullus 22. Quhilk fang in the civil
law, Furtum manifestum.
is called furtum manifestum. Bot sindry uthers ar in the contrair opinion,
affirmand that it is not leasum to any man havand liberty of out-fang-thief,
to repledge or reduce his awin man, taken without his awin liberty for thieft,
to his a win court, and there to do justice upon him; Because all thieves should
underly the law, and be judged be him, within quhais jurisdiction the thieft is
committed: in sik form and manner, as is statute anent slauchter, and punition
thereof. Ia. 1. p. 2. c. 89. Amangst the interpretours of the civil law, I find
the like controversy in this matter. For. Bart. in. l. Sidom. 48: Nu. 2. ff. d.
furtis. Quocunque (inquit) in loco reperitur fur cum re furtiva, ibipotest
puniri. Veluti furtum faciens Floentiae, Si reperitur in alia jurisdictione,
veluti Mediolani, cum furto, potest a Mediolanensibus puniri, Quhais opinion
sindry Doctoures follow is, as writs Chessanaeus In consuetud. Burgund. Rubr..
Verb. simple larrecin. Nu. 15. Albeit sindrie uthers ar in the contrair
opinion; alleagand, that the thief should he punished in the place quhair he
commitis the thieft, ut in additione ad Bartol. in. d. l. 48. Conform to the
quhilk, it is statute be the Law of this realm, that ane thief of stolen
woodde, taken with the fang in an uther Lords lands, should be arreisted with the
wood, and sall suffer the law in his court, fra quhom the woodde was stolen.
Ia. 1. p. 2, c. 34. Mair-over, ane thief is ordaned to be punished in the
place quhair the thieft was committed, because the crime may be best tried
there, Stat. 2. Rob. Br. c. 4.

INFENSARE curiam. That is, quhen the judge insormis the suitors in sik things
quhairof they are ignorant. Quoni. attach. c. vbi ab aliqua. 10. Like as the
civil law. Iudex potest supplere ea que advocatis in jure desunt. ITER, From
Itinerare. b.e. Iter facere: As Iter camerarij, The Chalmerlane air, quhairof
ane good form is written and extant in the buiks, conteinand the auld laws of
this realm. The form of the justice air, or court.
Iter iustitiarij, the justice air, quia Iustitiarius debet itinerare per
regnum, as it is written in the English laws: For he should make course throw
the realm, for ministration of justice, and ride in competent and easy
number, to eschew grievance, and hurting of the people. Ia. 2. p. 6. c. 21.

The justice air should be halden twice in the eir. For King David statute and
ordaned, that the justice and his deputes, should hald two head courts eirlie.
Justice air should be halden twice in the eire.
Ass. Reg. Da. cap. statuit dominus. 18, Quoniam attach. c. statuit 77. And the
Kingis justice, the Lords of the regalities, and also the Kingis Baillies in
his regalles, should hald their justice aires twice in the eir. Iam. 2. parlia,
3. cap. 5. Universallie in all parts of this Realm, anis on the grass, and
anis on the corns. Iam. 2. par. 13. cap. 94, Iam. 4. par. 3. c. 29. And over
all the Schires of the Realm, in the Months of April, and October. Ia. 6. p.
11. c. 81. Both in the inland, and alswa in the Isles, South and North. Iam.
4. par. 6. ca. 59. Because the Isles and inhabitants thereof, should be ruled be
the Laws of this realm. Ia. 4. p. 6. c. 79.

Justice aires should be halden, for increase of justice and tranquillity of the
realm, for stanching of combers, slauchters, riefes, thieftes, extorsiones,
For what causes justice courts should be halden.
and oppression of the Kingis lieges. And to the effect justice may be
universallie, throw the haill realm ministered, for punition of the said
crimes, sik authority should pass with the justice, throw all the realm, to
the justice aires, that trespassoures; sik as men-slayers, rievers, thieves,
and committers of uther enormities, in dissobeying, and licht-lying of the
Kingis laws, may be punished without favoures. Iam. 4. par. 3. c. 29. Iam. 3.
par. 13. cap. 90.

The justice air, or court being proclaimed at the Kingis command, to be
halden sik ane day as he pleasis, in the head burgh of the Schire: The justice
should cause dittay to be taken up be his clerks diligently and faithfully.
Dittay, and for quhat crimes it may be taken up.
For the dittay is the principal and chief substantial point of the justice
air; and the justice should follow the ordour thereof.

Dittay may be taken up, upon all crimes perteining to the justice, and his
jurisdiction, as is manifest be the acts of parliament. Read the word Dittay
in the table of the saidis acts, and als upon the crime of lose majesty, or
treason: As the death of the King, sedition within the Realm; betraying of the
Kingis hoist or army; Breaking of the Kingis protection; fraudfull hiding and
conceilling of ane huird or treasure; wilful fire, robbery, ravishing of
weemen, murder, slauchter, thieft, forestalling, all kind of falsed in doing
of justice; in money, assise weichtes, measures, writs; And generally, al
uther like crimes, quhilk be the law, ar punished be death, or cutting of ane
member. Lib. 1. cap. 2. Leg. Malcolm. Make. cap. 3. Ass. Reg. Dav. c. nullus 17.
de Iudic. c. Placitorum. 8. Mair-over, the justice general, may set particular
justice Courts upon any manner of crimes, quhen need is, for punishment of
particular faults that occurris; Sik as recent slauchter, mutilation,
ravishing of weemen. Quhilk heinous and capital crimes, may be first
criminally persewed before him. And as for the depredationes, ejectiones,
spuilies. the samin being first civilie discussed before the civil judge
ordinar; Thereafter may be criminallie persewed before the justice and his
deputes, at particular diettes, set and appointed therefore, or be way of
dittay in the justice air. Ia. 5. p. 4. c. 33.

Dittay may be taken up two manner of ways; privatlie and publicly; For the
justice and his deputes may privilie take up dittay, Dittay may be taken up
privatlie, or publicly.
be privy inquisition of malefactoures, and their receipters, be the aith of
three good, honest, and faithful men, and of the principal man; sik as the
Chalmerlaine or officiar within ilk village or town. Stat. Alex. c. 2. And
mair-over, all Lords and heades-men of all parts of this realm, should give up
dittay upon notour trespassoures, without exception of any person, to be
taken and justified without remission. l. 3. p. 13. c. 94. And sulde make true
relation there-anent to the Chancellar or justice, quhen they salbe required.
Ia. 3. p. 14. c. 98. And gif they be convict be ane assise in the contrair,
they sall perpetually tine their court, in all time cumming. Li. 4. c. ass.
20. stat. Wilh. c. Ass. 5. Secondly, the justice should direct publicly the
brieve of dittay to the Schereffe and his deputes, for taking up of dittay,
quhairof the tenor followis. The brieve of Dittay.


Wilhelmus etc. Justitiarius Domini nostri regis generaliter constitutus,
Vicecomiti and Pallivis suis de. E. salutem.
Quia indictamenta Regia, Deo duce, decimo die mensis. N. proxime futuri, cum
continuatione dierum. apud. F. Infra vicecomitatum vestrum levare intendimus,
vobis praecipimus and mandamus, quatenus summoneatis, seu summoneri faciatis,
legitime coram testibus legalibus, de qualibet baronia, duodecim vel quindecim
homines, ad hoc opus magis sufficientes. Et de qualibet tenendria, seu villa
quatuor vel sex homines. Et de quolibet burgo, duodecim, vel sexdecim
burgenses, ad hoc opus magis sufficientes, secundum quantitatem locorum, and
numerum personarum, in iisdem existen. una cum seriando, fabro, molendinario,
brasiatore, and sectatore, cujusque baroniae, villae seu tenendriae. Quod
compareant coram clericis nostris, pluribus aut uno, dictis die and loco, cum
continuatione dierum, ad sursum reddendum indictamenta regia. Et saciendum ac
subeundum, id quod in haec part, juris ordo requirit. Et sitis vos vicecomes,
and ballivi vestri, ibidem, coram clericis nostris, dictis die and loco, cum
continuatione dierum. Haben. vobiscum summonitionis vestrae testimonium, and
hoc breve. Provideatis etiam pro expensis dictorum clericorum, quas vobis in
primis computis, de exitibus justitiariae reddendis, faciemus before allocari.
Et hoc nullatenus omittatis sub omni poena, quae competere poterit in haec
part.

Datum sub sigillo officii nostri justitiariae.


Quhilk brieve, the Schireffe should report at the day appointed, in the place,
quhair the dittay sulde be taken up, to the justice Clerk, and two witness at
the least with him, for to verify the execution of the brieve, to be
lauchfullie done, conform to the command of the justice. Co^form to the precept
and command above written; the justice Clerk ane, or maa, conveenis the day,
and in the place appointed, and there remainis sustained upon the Schireffis
expenses (quhilk is allowed to him in his comptes, of the issues and profits
of the justice air) and takis up dittay be the relation, and deposition of the
persons summoned, for the giving up thereof Quhilk dittay they should keip quiet,
and should na-waies reveal the samin to any person, nor translate it utherwaies
then it was given to them, nor change names, ane for ane uther: Nor put out any
surth of the rolls; bot lauchfullie and trewlie should report and deliver the
samin to the justice, and his deputes. Ia. 2. par. 6, cap. 28. Dittay should be
given up be virtue of the Kingis commission; direct to Earls, Lords,
Barrones, Knights, and special Landed Gentlemen: And be four of the
Council of every Burgh, quha sall make and give up dittay, be their awin
knawledge, or be ane sworn inquest, or sworn particular men: Upon all
persons suspect culpable of the crimes and faults, perteining to the
jurisdiction of the justice and his deputes. Iam. 6. parlia. 11. cap. 81.
Quhilk should be likewise keiped quiet, and reported, as said is, to the justice.
And dittay being taken up, upon any crime against any persons: Neither judge,
bot the justice and his deputes, may mell therewith. Like as the Wardaine on
the Bordoures, in his wardaine court, may nocht intromet with any thing that
perteinis to the dittay of the justice air. Iam. 2. par. 11. cap. 42.

The dittay taken up, in manner foresaid; The justice Clerk, at command of the
justice, makis ane catalogue, The portuous
conteinand the names of the persons indicted: And upon quhom dittay is given
up, quhilk is called ane portuous. Togidder with ane uther Catalogue, quhilk
conteinis the particular dittay, given and taken up, upon transgressoures and
malefactors, called the traistes: Both the ane, and the uther, is delivered
be the justice Clerk, to the crowner: To the effect, Traistes.
that all the persons quhais names ar contained in it, may be attached, and
arreisted be him to compeir in the justice air, to answer to sik crimes as
salbe im put unto them. Ia. 1. p. 13. c. 139. Ia. 3. p. 14. c. 99.

The crowner, in making his arreistmentes, should pass to the habitation and
dwelling place of the persons, given to him in portuous, Attachementes,
arreistments and form thereof.
and thereafter make proclamation at their Paroch Kirkes, upon festuall days,
and take sovertie of them, sik as he will stand for to the King. And gif the
persons swa arreisted, be nocht streinicable; The Crowner sall areist their
gudes, and put them in sure keiping, to the Kingis use: quhill the said
sovertie be found: Or else take their persons, and put them in the Kingis
Castle, gif any be within the Schire. And gif there be na Castle, he sulde
deliver them to the Schireffe to be keiped. Ia. 5. p. 3. c. 5.

And mair-over, because sindrie persons indicted, usis to fly and absent
themselves; swa that the Crowner can nocht apprehend them personally,
Arreisting of fugitives.
to arreist them. In that case, it is sufficient that the Crowner cum to the
dwelling place of the saidis persons, and make them warning, and charge to
compeare in the justice air nixt following, to answer to sik accusationes of
crimes, as salbe im-put unto them. And thereafter upon the nixt Sabbath day
following the said charge, the Crowner sall make open and public intimation of
his warning, charge, and premonition, maid to the said persons, be their
names, in their Paroch Kirkes. Quhilk charges, premonitiones, and intimationes,
sall stand to them for sufficient arreistmentes, the samin being lauchfullie
proven, as effeiris of the Law. Jam. 5. p. 4. c. 33.

And mair-over, gif he cannocht attache any man personally, be reason of his
absence; he should arreist all his gudes moveable, and unmovable, to remain
under sure pledges, and to be forth cummand to the King: In case he be nocht
answerable to the law, before the justice, Leg. Malc. Make cap. 1.

The Crowner sall arreist at all times, alsweil before the cry of the air, as
after the samin, all them quha are given to him in portuous, be the justice
Clerk, and nane uthers. James 1. Parliament 13. cap. 139. Bot all
arreistmentes, sulde be maid before the time of the beginning of the justice
air and seat of justice, and na-waies after the samin. Ja. 3. par. 7. ca. 58.
All persons charged to compeir, in the justice air, should be attached and
summoned be the auld law of this Realm, upon the space of forty days at the
least. ass. Reg. Da. c. ad Summonitiones. 19. And albeit na man should be
attached or arreisted, except dittay be given up upon him. Stat. Alex. c. 2.
Nevertheless, in attachementes, or arreistments of any person indicted, na
mention should be maid of the cause or crime, for the quhilk he should be indicted;
bot the same should be concealed be the clerk, and na ways revealed be him.
Stat. Wilh. c. statuit etiam 6. leg. Forest c. Si aliquis 52. quoniam attach.
c. Si aliquis 49. Ass. reg. Da. c. 6.

All the indwellers within the town or village, should concur and assist the
crowner, Arreisting of disobedient persons.
in attachement or arreisting any malefactor to compeir in the justice air,
to underly the law. Stat. Alex. c. 2. And sik-like, quhen the crowner receivis
his portuous, conteinand the name of any person indicted, quha will not obey
him, or quhom he dare not, nor is it of power to arreist; he sall pass to the
Lord of the Barronnie, quhairin that person dwellis: Utherwaies gif he dwellis
not within ane Barronnie, he sall pass to the Schireffe of the Schire, and
require them to be borgh and sovertie, to enter the said person to the justice
air; quhilk gif the Barrone or Schireffe refusis; the Crowner fall require
them to send their officiares, and sufficient number with them, to fortify and
supply him, in making of his arreistment, taking and keiping of the said
disobedient person. quhill he be brocht to the Schireffe, to be keiped be him,
until the time of the Justice air. Jam. 3. p. 14. c. 99. Mair-over the
crowner sall bring all persons arreisted be him, quha hes not, or may not find
borrowes to the Schireffe of the Schire, quha sall receive him in surety, and
firmance, upon the Kingis expenses; and quhair it failies, on their awin gudes,
quhill the nixt justice air, and there present them to the justice. Ja. 3. p
14. c. 102.

The crowners expenses.
The Crowner, or makers of the attachements and arreistments, should not intromet,
or carry away any gudes or gear, perteining to the persons attached: Bot the
Lord, or officiar of the town, sall sustain them reasonably, upon the
expenses of the said person, be the space of ane day, and ane nicht. Stat.
Alex. c. 2. And gif the said person cannot be personally apprehended: The
crowner may remain in his dwelling house ane day and ane nicht, and should be
sustained with two servandes, and uther two as witnesses, and his clerk should
have two schillings, and sa may nocht take any mair of the gudes and gear,
perteining to the said person attached, albeit he be absent. leg. Malc. Make. c.
1.

Probation of arreistments.
Attachements and arreistments maid be Crowners and serjandes; may be provin be
them and witness. Ia. 3. p. 7. c. 52. That is, be the aith of the Crowner, and
ane witness, conform to the auld consuetude. l. 5. p. 4. cap. 33.

The crowners fee.
The crowner sall have for his fee, for ilk man amerciat or componand, ane
colpindach, or threttie pennies. For him that is clenged be ane assise, the
crowner sall have na thing. For ane man filed or condemned, the crowner sall
have all the dantoned horse not schod. Leg. Mal. Mac. c. 1. Quhilk is to be
understand, of dantoned Horse, depute to wark, and not to the sadle; that was
never schod, nor used to schoone. J. 3. p. 14. cap. 113. The crowner should have
all the corns lyand in binges and mowes, casten and broken, all the in-sight,
utensile, and domicile, within the inner part of the house: That is, within the
cruik hingand upon the fire. And all and sindrie scheip within twenty: And all
the swine and Gaites within ten. Leg. Mal. Make. c. 1. Attachements and
arreistmentes being maid, or directed to be maid; Of persons quha should compeir
in the justice air.
or in the time of the making thereof: The justice general, directis ane
charge, called praeceptum itineris Iustitiariae, Praceptum itineris justiciaria.
to the Schireffe and his deputes, in manner and form following. Wilhelmus
Iustitiarius domini regis generaliter constitutus,
Vicecomiti and Ballivis suis de E. salutem.
Quia ordinamus iter justitiariae domini nostri regis, Deo duce, tenen. de tota
ballia vestra, apud. E. Decimo die mensis. N. proxime futuri, cum continuatione
dierum Vobis pracipimus and mandamus, quatenus summoneatis; seu summoneri
faciatis, legitime and coram testibus legalibus, omnes Episcopos, Abbates,
Priores, Comites, Barons, and ceteros libere-tenentes, totius balliae vestrae
qui sectas debent. Ac etiam omnes illos, qui nihil nisi suas debent
praesentias, qui de domino nostro rege tenent in capite. Quod compareant coram
nobis seu deputatis nostris, pluribus aut uno, dictis die and loco, cum
continuatione dierum, ad perficiendum, subeundum, and determinandum, id quod in
hac part, juris ordo postulat. Praemoneatis etiam, omnes indictatos, tam de
novo, quam de veteri, and suos plegios, qui nondum coram nobis comparuerunt,
and judicium subierunt, ac etiam illos, qui prosequi habent, vel defendere in
dicto itinere, secundum formam juris. Quod compareant coram nobis, seu
deputatis nostris, pluribus, aut uno, dictis die and loco, cum dicta
continuatione dierum, ad perficiendum and subeundum, id quod in hac part juris
ordo requirit. Et fitis vos Vicecomes, and Ballivi vestri, ibidem, dictis die
and loco, cum dicta continuatione dierum, haben vobiscum summonitionis, ac
praemonitionis vestrae testimonium, and hoc breve. Provideatis in-super pro
expensis nostris, been and competenter. Quas vobis, in vestris primis computis,
de exitibus Iustitiariae reddendis, vobis faciemus before allocari. Et hoc
nullatenus omittatis, sub omni poena, quae competit in hac part.

Datum sub sigillo nostri officii Iustitiariae.


Quhilk precept and command, is conform to the Laws of this realm: Because
all free-halders, haldand lands in chief of the King, within the Schireffdome,
Assessours and counselors.
quhair the justice air is halden, should compeir and be present all excuse set
aside, except the same be of sickness, the Kings service, or tinsell of lands
and heritage; To certify and inform the justice and his deputes, in sik
question and doubts, quhilk incidentlie arisis, as emergent, and of before
could nocht be foreseen, nor knawen. Ass. reg. Da. c. stat. 18. quoniam
attach. c. stat. 77. Sik as Bischops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and uther
free tennents, being summoned and warned to that effect, quon. attach. c. ad
summonitiones 78. l. 4. c. Stat. 19: and they being lauchfully warned and not
compeirand, incurris, the pain of the unlaw of the court. Li. 4, c. statutum.
c. 19. And may be punished as favorers of the transgressors, and airt and
part with them. Ia. 4. p. 3. c. 29. And they and all uther the Kingis lieges,
should cum to the justice air, and to all uther courts, in sober and quiet
manner; and should not bring with them, maa persons, then ar daily in their
houshald and families. And being cum to their Innes and ludgeing, should lay
their armor and weapones from them, and use na weapons, bot their knife. Ia.
2. p. 12. c. 83. Mairover, all Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, Barrones and
uthers, cummand to the justice air, should na-waies maintain, fortify,
supply, defend, nor be Advocattes, nor stand at the Bar, with mani^est
traitoures, men-slayers, thieves, rievers, nor uther trespassoures, nor
persons perteining to themselves, or utheris: Saisand, it salbe leasum to them
in sober ways, to stand with their kin, and friends, in defense of them, in
their honest actiones. Ia. 3. p. 14. c. 98. Quhen the justice air is to be
halden upon the Bordoures; The Wairdaines, within their Wairdainries, and their
deputes, with the free-halders of the Schireffdome, being warned thereto be the
Schireffe, be open proclamation, should convoy the justice and his deputes, to
the place appointed for halding of the Court: And accompany them, in-during
their residence, and until they be out of the bounds of their Schireffdome,
and received be the nixt Schireffe. Ia. 6. p. 11. c. 81.

In the justice air, should compeir all persons attached, and arreisted,
Persons attached.
conform to the dittay given and taken up upon them; quhairof, some were
arreisted of before, to have compeired in the justice Court preceiding,
already ended, and expired, and compeired nocht in the samin: quhais names ar
given to the Crowner, to be of new attached, and arreisted, to the air
following, as of before: Uthers are of new indicted, upon quhom nae point of
dittay was taken up, in any time by-gane, quhais names ar comprehended in ane
Catalogue, called portuous. All the foresaidis persons indicted, both of auld
and of new, should be attached and arreisted be the Crowner, to compeir and
underly the law, the time of the justice air, as is manifest be the precept
foresaid, direct be the justice general, to the Schireffe.

All persons arreisted, that may be apprehended, the time of the air, in the
Tolbuith, or in the town, quhair the justice is, salbe taken and delivered to
the justice, to be justified for their crimes and trespasses. Swa that the
arreistment be maid before the time of the beginning of the justice air, and
seat of justice. Jam. 3. par. 7. cap. 57. And quhair lands lyand in sindrie
Schireffdomes, ar annexed and united in ane Barronnie: Inhabitants of annexed
lands.
The inhabitants thereof, sall answer in the justice Court, quhair the lands
lyis, and the Lord, or proprietar of the lands annexed, givis presence or
service, in the court of the Schireffdome, within the quhilk the barronnie
lyis, to the quhilk the lands ar annexed. Ja. 4. par. 6. c. 93. For in this
case, respect and considderation is had to the natural situation of the
lands, and to the jurisdiction, within the quhilk they lie: rather nor to the
imaginar, and civil form of lying, of the lands be annexation.

Attour, all inhabitants of stewardries and baillieries, Stewardries, and
Baillieries
sall cum to the head burgh of the Schireffdomes, quhairin they lie: And within
the quhilk head burgh, the Kings justice aires are halden. Ja. 6. par. 11. c.
81.

The judge in the Kingis justice air, is the Kingis justice general, The
judge.
or the Kingis baillie, in his regalles, havand lauchfull power and commission
granted to them. Ja. 2 p. 3. c. 9. For the King, or the justice general, may
make aucht deputes, quha with ane depute of the Thesaurer, and ane uther of the
justice Clerk, should pass severallie throw the aucht quarters of the realm,
and hald justice Courts. I. 6. p. 11. c. 81.

The justice general, should have for his sustentation, ilke day of the air,
five pound. Like as the justice Clerk should receive for ilk man clenged, The
justices expenses.
be ane assise, and drawn forth of the rolls, four pennies. And for ilk man
amerciat, or componand, ij. s. Leg. Mal. Make. c. 2. For ilk Actorney and
commission, two shillinges. For ilk man quha producis ane remission, two
shillinges. For ilk man that cummis in the justice will, two shillinges. For
ilk man convict and filed, two shillinges. For ilk letter of witness, sex
shillinges, aucht pennies.

The Schireffe should be present, as he quha is warned be the justice precept, to
answer to all the points thereof: The Schireffe. The crowner.
And touching the execution of his office, togidder with the Crowner, quha should
answer for his attachementes and arreistmentes, and verification thereof: And
the Schireffe, with the Crowner, should thoill ane assise, the last day of the
air, anent the using and execution of their offices, to quhome justice should be
ministrat, as they sall be found innocent, or culpable. Jam. 3. parlia. 14.
cap. 103.

The day of compeirance being cum, to the quhilk the justice air is cried and
proclaimed; The justice and his deputes, The form of the court.
should compeir with all uther persons, charged and commanded to concur and
assist with them. Ar the quhilk time, the suits should be first called, The suit
of courts.
with their Lords. For albeit the Suitors compeir, nevertheless, their Lords
and masters ar oblished likewise to compeir, and give presence to the justice
in his air: They being lauchfullie summoned, and charged to that effect, be
open proclamation, and be the justice precept above written.

2. The Commission and power given to the justice, should be produced and red:
Commission.
And gif the Commission be given and granted to maa persons nor ane
conjunctlie. They should be all present; utherwaies it is na lauchfull court.
Bot gif they be constitute conjunctlie and severallie: It is sufficient that
any ane of them be present. And mair-over, the justice may nocht make and
constitute deputes and substitutes under him, except he have special power in
his commission, to do the samin. Lib. 4. c. si unus. 27. The fensing of court.
Thirdly the judge should begin and fense the court, conform to the common
ordour and consuetude used and observed. Ia. 6. par. 11. c. 81. The dempster.
The suits.
Quhilk should be done at elleven hours before noone. Ja. 6. p. 11. c. 86.
Fourthlie, the court beand affirmed, the dempster should be called and caused to
be sworn, that he sall leallie and trewlie, use and exerce his office.
Fiftlie, the suites should be called. Ia. 6 p. 11. c. 81. it again as of before
ilk man, twice with their lords and masters, and the absents decerned to have
failied, and therefore should be unlawed, and gif both the suitor and his
Master be absent, ilk ane of them be themselves should be amerciat.

The assise.
Sextlie, the assisouris being summoned be ane precept direct be the justice to
that effect, should be called, ilk person under the pain of forty punds, and
the justice may chief assise ane or man, as he pleasis, of the best and may
wurthie of the cuntrie, before quhom the haill accusation, reasoning, writtes,
witness, and uther probation, and instruction quhat-sumever of the crime,
salbe reasoned and deduced in their presence; and also in the presence of the
party accused, in face of judgment. Ia. 6. p. 11. c. 90. 91. And it is to
wit, that he quha givis up dittay upon ane uther, should not pass upon his
assise. Ia 1. p. 3. c. 50.

The persons attached.
7. The justice should proceed in his court, and put the offenders gif any be
already in prison, to the knawledge of ane assise; and minister justice upon
them, as they salbe found innocent or culpable. Iam. 6. p. 11. cap. 81.

Pledges for entres of uthers.
8. He sall call thereafter the pledges, and cautioners of persons attached,
quha faund sovertie before the justice any time preceding, at any particular
diet, or court, to compeir the third day of the air, or sooner, upon fifteen
days warning. Ia. 6. p. 11. c 81.

9. This being done, the clerk sall visit and considder the haill rolls, and
journell, and call all them quha ar absent from the aires preceding. Upon
quhais heads and names is written, prima dies, secunda dies, tertia dies: Be
the quhilk, he understandis, tra quhat air or court they were absent. And that
they may be therefore amerciat, ilk ane of them be themself, be reason of
their absence. And gif the saidis persons, nocht compeirand of before, now
compeiris and ar present: The clerk sall luik the auld dittaies and rolls, and
accuse them, conform thereto, in the best manner he may gudlie. And gif there
be na particular point of dittay, or accusation; he sall lay commoun dittay to
their charge.

10. Thereafter the justice sall call the persons newly in-dited and
arreisted; And gif they or onie uther of the arreisted persons foresaidis,
compeir; they should be presented to the court, and to the Schireffe, quha should
answer for them, until justice be done upon them.

Excuse for non-compeirance.
11. They quha ar attached, and compeiris not, may na-waies be accused for their
nocht compeirance, bot be the Kingis service; quhilk should be verified be the
Kingis letter, produced in court: Or be reason of seiknesse. Quhilk be the auld
law, was tried be ane assise, quhidder it was true, or feinied: Albeit the
party was absent. Stat. 2. Rob. Br, c. 5. Bot now it should be proven and
verified be the Minister of the Paroch, within the quhilk the person excused
dwellis: And be two witness personally compeirand in judgment. Of persons
absent or fugitive.
I. 1. p. 9. c. 114. And concerning persons absent, it is generally ordained,
that every barrone and free-halder, sall answer in the justice air, for his
awin men, dwelland upon his awin proper lands, tackes, steadinges, towmes, and
baronies, and salbe halden to enter them, or else answer to the King, for their
unlawes. I. 5. p. 3. c. 6. Quhat is the unlaw in the justice air. vid.
Amerciamentium. Bot for the better understanding of the laws, concerning
fugitives and absentes: It is to wit, that be the auld laws of this realm,
gif the party defender being lauchfullie warned, compeired not, bot send ane
essoinie, or excuse; the samin being reasonable, was received and admitted to
the judge, three sindrie days or courts: And gif he compeired afterward, and
verified not his essoinies to be lauchfull, he was distreinied, and poynded
therefore. Bot gif he neither came, nor send ane excuse: The party persewer
compeared at lauchfull day and time of court, and offered him reddie to persew,
quhilk he did be the space of three days. And the third court beand bypast,
the defender was summoned to compeir the fourth day: The quhilk fourth court
was peremptour; because sentence definitive was given against him, conform to
the claim and petition, gif he compeired nocht. Lib. 1. c. summonitus. 9. The
fourth court.
The like form and ordour of process was observed in justice courts. For
mention is maid of the first air. Ia. 3. p. 13. c. 94. And of the second air.
I. 5. p. 4. c. 32. And of the fourth court. I. 3. p. 14. c. 101. And gif any
person indicted, and lauchfullie attached, compeired not, the said three
courts, his pledge or law borgh was called and amerciat for the first, second,
and third court, and at ilk time after ilk ane of the saidis courts, the said
pledge was poynded and distreinied, and the distress or poynd was letten to
borgh, and maid free under caution; that the said person indicted, should compeir
in the nixt air following, to underly the law. And gif he was absent at the
fourth court, the peremptour doom was given against him, That sik ane man was
in ane amerciament, and at the Kingis horn, and his lands and all his gudes
escheit to the King, except he come within forty days, and did bide the law:
And thereafter the court being ended, the said person was denunced rebel, and
put to the horn openly at the market croce of the head burgh of the Schire.
Quhilk form of process, was sa lang and prolixt, that in money eires, parties
hurt and grieved, gat na justice: And trespassoures and crimes passed
unpunished: quhilk was the occasion to money persons to commit crimes, trusting
na hasty punition nor correction to follow. Therefore King James the Fifth,
The second court.
statute and ordained, that the process of justice air, and justice courts,
should be peremptour at the second air or court, swa that fugitives not
compeirand at the second air or court, should be denunced the Kingis rebels,
and put to his horn, and all their gudes his escheit. Iam. 5. Parl. 4. Cap.
32. Replegiation be reason of regalitie.


12. Hereafter the Lords of regalitie may desire their men to be remitted to
their awin justice court, and replege them, schawand their commissiones,
power, and payand therefore; and leivand ane caution behind them, called
Culrach, quha salbe acted and oblished, in the justice Court, that justice
salbe done and ministrat, in the court of the regalitie, to the party
compleinand upon the person repleged.

13. The justice or his Clerks, Replegiation of burrowes.
sall demand and spear at the Baillies of Burrowes, gif they be reddie to
present ilk Burges within their Burgh, indicted to the Kingis justice air:
Quhilkis persons should all enter personally before the justice, under the
pain of ane un-law and amerciament of court: quhais names the said baillies
sall put in writ, and deliver the samin to the justice, or his clerks. And gif
they will borrow or replege their saidis nichtboures; they sall schaw their
Commission, and pay therefore; and thereafter they sall draw, or oblige
themselves, their Commission, and burgh in pledge: That they persons quhom
they replege, and quhais names they give in write, salbe furth-cummand, and
answerable to the laws, and challenge of the justice. At the quhilk time, he
and his deputes sall assign to them ane certain day, to underlie the law,
either in that air, or thereafter quhen he sall think speedfull. And at the
samin time, it is leasum to the Kings justice, sittand in the principal burgh
of the royalty, to give ane assise to all the saidis burgesses. repledged of
their awin nichtboures, that best knawis the verity, dwelland in the same
burgh with them. And gif there be nocht ane sufficient number of the said
con-burgesses: It salbe leiffull to choose ane assise of the burgesses of the
said head burgh, quhair the justice and his deputes sittis, as he sall think
expedient. Ia. 4. p. 1. c. 1.

14. Gif the party accused compeirand, alleagis to his remission or respet; he
sall produce the samin in court, Remissiones, or respettes.
and sall find sicker borrowes to assith and content the party compleinand,
within forty days following: Quhair-upon ane act is maid in court, quhairby
he and his cautioner, ar oblished to assith and satisfy the party, within the
space foresaid; Quhilk is called the act of Adjournall. Act of adjournall.
And gif he refusis to find caution, he sall remain in the Kingis prison,
quhill the said forty days be run, and then his remission salbe expired,
and of na value. Ia. 2. pa. 14. c. 75. And in this case, quhen any man takis
him to his remission, respet, or composition, in the justice air, or justice
court, and findis sovertie to assith the party: It is leasum to the party to
call the said sovertie before the Lords of Council, conform to the act of
Adjournall, maid thereanent. Ia. 5. p. 3. c. 7. As gif any man becummis
sovertie for ane uther, anent spuilie committed be him; and for restitution or
satisfaction to be maid be him therefore. He as sovertie may be called and
conveened for the gudes spuilied. For the violent prices thereof, for the
damnage, skaith, and interest sustained be the persewer, throw the committing
of the said spuilie. 10. Martij. 1500. William Keith, contrair the Earl of
Caithnesse. And the said sovertie being condemned, hes good action against the
principal party, for his relief, be ane simple charge, upon sex days
warning, without peremptour summoundes, or ordour of table, 11. Julij. 1543.

15. Gif the person attached compeiris in the Court, and beand accused, hes na
relevant exception, or reasonable defense; of necessity he should pass to the
knawledge of ane assise, conform to the Laws of the Realm. At the quhilk
time, the haill assisours should be called, and the absentis amerciat. Ia. 6. p.
11. c. 76. And the party accused, should be heard to propone all and sindrie,
his lauchfull defenses, against the haill assisoures or any of them, to repel
them, as he may best of the law, and stay them to pass upon his assise. At
this time the person compeirand and accused, cummis in the will of the justice,
or he is clenged be ane assise; Persons cummand in will.
or he is filed and convict. Gif he submittis himself, and cummis in will; It
is leasum to the justice, to draw him forth of the rolls, and to declare his
will, and to charge him to pay ane composition, or sik ane sum of silver, as
he pleasis to modifie, after the quality of the crime and person, for
up-taking and in-bringing quhairof, the justice air being ended, the justice
directis his precept, called, Praeceptum extractus itineris justitiariae, in
this form. The precept of extractes:


Wilhelmus justitiarius generalis,
Vicecomiti and Ballivis suis de. E. salutem.
Quia in itinere justitiariae Domini nostri regis, per nos ultimo tent. apud.
F. decimo die mensis. N. Anno Domini etc. Diversi fuerunt amerciati, and pro
suis delictis convicti, and in nostra voluntate positi. Quare vobis praecipimus
and mandamus, quatenus de infra scriptis personis subscriptas summas levari
faciatis, and pro eisdem secundum formam juris distringatis. Et primo de N.
summam etc. De quibusquidem summis solvatis pro expensis nostris in dicto
itinere summam. N. Residuum vero dictarum summarum solvatis cofferariis Domini
Nostri Regis: Vel cui vobis assignabitur infra tempus legitimum, hoc est infra
quadraginta dies primum diem dicti itineris proxime and immediate sequen. Et
hoc nullo modo omittatis.



Quhen any person is clenged be ane assise, Persons charged.
the justice directis his Testimonial, called Litera testimonialis de homine
mundato per assisam, in manner following.

Wilhelmus justitiarius generalis,
universis and singulis ad quorum notitias praesentes literae pervenerint,
salut.
Noveritis quod comparens coram nobis itinere justitiariae Domini nostri Regis,
tent. apud. F. decimo die mensis. N. anno Domini etc. I. de. B. indictatus. and
per rotules Regios calumniatus, de art and part talis furti, vel talis
rapinae, vel incendij etc. Quamquidem calumniam dictus. I. in facie judicij
penitus denegavit. Et super hoc ad recognitionem assisae utique se submisit.
Quaequidem assisa hinc inde diligenter consultae, Et before avisata, dictum.
I. a dictis calumniis sibi impositis, quittum declaravit, penitus and immunem.
Et hoc omnibus quorum interest, vel interesse poterit, notum facimus per
praesentes.

In cuius rei testimonium sigillum officij nostri appendi curavimus.


All they persons quha cummis in will, and drawn forth of the rolls, and also
they quha ar clenged be ane assise, can na ways in any time thereafter be
called or accused for that crime, for the quhilk they cum in will; for anis
quit and clenged, ay quit and clenged. it nevertheles, gif any person be
accused criminallie of life and lim, at the instance of ane uther private man
allanerlie, and is clenged and maid quite: the Kingis justice and his deputes,
be reason of their office, may thereafter tak inquisition anent the said crime;
and in the Kingis name accuse the committer thereof, conform to the Law.
Notwithstanding that of before, he was clenged thereof be ane assise. Lib. 4.
c. Si querela. 58. Because the action or persute of ane privy party, prejudgis
not the King in his richt or rentes, competent to him, be reason of his royal
power. And therefore the Thesaurar, and the Kings Advocate, may persew all
malefactoures: Albeit the parties desist, or privatlie agree amangst
themselves, Ia. 6, par. 11, ca. 76.

Persons filed and convict.
Quhen trespassours and malefactoures ar convict, as breakers of the statuts,
and acts conteinand dittay; they aucht and should be punished according to
justice, and conform to the tenor and pains contained in the acts broken and
contraveened be them. Ia. 4. p. 4. c. 45. And sa gif the pain contained in the
act be pecunial, they should pay the samin. And gif it be capital, they should
underly and suffer the samin, except the King give them remission, and special
grace there-anent. As for example, landed men, lauchfullie and ordourlie
convict of common thieft, recept of thieft, stouth, or riefe, incurris the
pain of treason, and therefore should be punished be tinsell of life, and
confiscation of lands and gudes. Ia. 6. p. 11. c. 50. Always the Crowner may
not intromet with any gudes or gear perteining to any trespassour, convict and
condemned to the death, as his awin hand, until the Scheriffe or his deputes,
pass, or send with him, and visie all the haill gudes; and deliver to the
Crowner sa-meikle, as he sulde have be reason, and as perteinis to his office,
and bring the remanent to our Sovereign Lord, and his Thesaurar. I. 3 par. 14.
c. 102.

The end of the air.
The justice air beand ended; the justice sall deliver the extract thereof;
subscrived be him to the Thesaurar quha sall cause take up the soumes contained
thereintill, and make count thereof in the nixt Checker, in the quhilk count
salbe allowed the expenses and charges of the justice, and his deputes and
Clerks, as the samin salbe modified be the Lords, Auditoures of the Checker.
Ia. 6. p. 11. c. 81.


L
LAST Of gudes, how meikle it conteinis. vid. Serplaith. LET Lands to borgh,
dimittere terras ad pleg. vid. plegius. vide Recog. LEX Apparens lib. 4. cap.
4. de iudic. c. 24. Leg. Forest. cap. Item in placito. 16. signifies the law
concerning singular battle. And lib. 4. cap. 1. it signifies ane inquisition,
maid, or taken be ane inquest or assise. And in the Law of Normandy. li. 9. c.
10. It is called Loy apparisant. And lib. 8. c. 3. All quarrelles of
possessiones or movables, quhilkis are called Chattell, or of lands and
immovable gudes, should be decided be commoun and simple quarrelles, conform to
ordour of law, or be laws Apparisantes; Loy apparisant.
quhilkis ar determinat, ather be singular battle, or be ane inquest of of the
cuntrie, utherwaies called, Loy recognoissant. It is likewaies called, Lex
paribilis.
Lex paribilis, a parium pugna, vel concertatione, from the combat of peers
and Campionis, or lex duellonum, quhilk law is ungodlie, and not to be used
among Christianes. Cuia. lib. 1. de feud. LIBERATIO, ane see given to ane
servand, or officiar, quhilk is called ane liverie. Leg. Malcoln. Mackenneth.
c. 4. Feodum, or fee, is commonly of silver and money, and ane liverie is of
meat or cleithes. Bot this distinction or difference, is nocht perpetual.
LIBERUM Tenementum, is commonly, and properly called, franck tenement, or
life-rent: In Latin, vsus fructus, conform to the daily practicque of this
Realm. And nevertheless, Liberum tenementum, signifies, the property, fee or
heritage. Donatio liberi tenementi, and concessio haereditatis, is both ane.
Lib. 2. c. potest. 21. Tenementum Regium, is called the Kingis heretage. Lib.
2. c. Dicitur. 74. In the quhilk signification, Minor dicitur esse in
tenemento. lib. 3. c. Generalia. 24. c. Remanere 26. Et placitum de recto and
liberis tenementis per breve domini Regis de recto debet terminari. Lib. 1, c.
6. And King Alexander gave and disponed to Duncan Forbeys, tenementum de
Forbeys. That is, the lands and heretage of Forbeys: quhilk Charter is it
extant. vid. Tenementum. LIGEANTIA, Lib, 2. c. Fieri. 61. From the Italian word
Liga, ane league, Alodium.
band or obligation: as homo ligius, ane man, quha is oblished and bound fra
the quhilk cummis, Alodium, in libris feudorum, quasi possessio sine Leode:
Cuius possessor nemini est leodes sive ligius. And ligeantia, is the mutual
band or obligation, betuixt the master and the servand. Lib. 2. c. plurib. 14.
lib, 4. c. Si quis super. 36. Vid. Affidatio. Item, the mutual band and
obligation, betwixt the King and his subjectes, quhairby we ar called his
lieges, because we are bound and oblished to obey and serve him. And he is
called our liege King, because he should maintain, and defend us. And the
doctors of the law writis: Quod imperator dicitur dominus totius mundi, eodem
modo quo rex regni l. been a Zenone. C. de quadr. praescript. Quhilk should be
understand, concerning the defense and maintenance, and not anent the
property. Homagium ligium.
Quia reges non sunt domini privataru^ possessionum. Glos. in. L. Barbarius de
Offic. praetor. Homagium ligium, vel cum ligeantia factum, Is quhen the
vassal, absolutely makis homage to his superior, against all, and
quhat-sum-ever persons, without exception of onie man. quhilk should be done to
na uther, Non ligium.
bot to the King allanerlie. Homagium non ligium, vel sine ligeantia, is that
quhilk the vassal makis to his Over-Lord, excepting and reserving the
fidelity, quhilk he aucht to the King, or his elder Over-lord, or master.
Lib. 2. c. fieri. 61. Chessanaeus. in Consuetud. Burgund. Rubric. 3.. 3. Verb.
and homage. Nu. 10. cum. seqq. Quhilk vassal is called, vassallus non
homologus. Likeas the uther is vassallus homologus, in quhais aith na person is
excepted. Cuia. lib. 2. de feud.
M
MACHAMIUM, Mechamium, from the auld French word Mehaigne, quhilk we call,
Many, hurt, mutilation, demembration, or the loss or tinsell of any member of
ane mannis body: Or the breaking of ane bane; or quhen ane mannis harn-pan, or
any part thereof, is cutted away, or dung in. Li. 4. c. 4. Res cum mahamio
dicitur res minus sana. Lib. 3. c. ex causa. 8. Be the auld Law of this realm,
he quha is mainied, hes ane just cause to excuse himself fra singular battle,
and it he will be compelled to purge, clenge, and defend himself, Per ignem
and aquam. li. 4. c. 4. cap. Si quis pro latrocinio 15. Quoniam: attach. c. Si
quis 58. Lib. 4. c. assisa 20. Stat. Alex. c. quicunque 31. Quhairof the power
perteinis not to any Barronne; For na subject may compel ane uther to purge
himself be fire or water. Stat. Alex. c. praeterea 32. This kind of purgation
was ane may scharp and extreme kind of purgation and trial: Like as we
daily use in commoun proverb; quhen we say be way of menacing, and boasting,
that we sall gar any person pas per ignem and aquam; That is, to suffer and
underly that kind of trial that is may severe and extreme. It is called,
judicium Dei, the judgment of God, as knawin to him allanerly. Iter. Camer. c.
cum hoc. 25. And was in great use amangst the Longobardes, Judicium Dei
as is exponed be Hotomannus de feud. c. 44. In the auld Saxon tongue, and it in
dutch, it is called Ordeil, ordalium, from, or, quhilk they use as privativa
particula, and Del, quhilk signifies ane part or portion: Ordalium.
quhilk word we use in the same signification: and swa Ordeil signifies
innocent, quha hes na part, or is not participant of the crime, quhairof he is
accused. Purgation be the fire, is quhen any man with bair feet, passis throw
the fire, without any harm or hurt, or quhen any man dois carry and bear in
his bare hand hot burnand iron, without any hurt of his hand, quhilk is called
ferri candentis judicium. In the quhilk case, he was decerned to be Ordeil, or
na ways participant of the crime. Utherwaies, Purgatio per ignem.
gif his fute or hand was hurt be the fire, or hoate iron: he was condemned, as
participant and foul of the crime. And siklike, Purgatio per aquam, is quhen
any man suspect or accused of ane crime, Purgatio per aquam.
was casten in hoate or cauld water. And gif he passed to the bottom, without
any hurt of his body: he was decerned ordeil and innocent. Bot gif he did not
fall to the ground, bot did swim abone; he was condemned as foul of the
crime; as is written in the auld laws of the Brittones. Verb. Ordalium. And be
Cuiac. li. 2. de feud. Purgatio vulgaris, is discharged be the Canon Law. c,
dilecti. exer. de purgatione vulgari. c. ex tuarum. 8. de purgat. canonica:
Purgatio vulgaru^.
And likewaies be the laws of this realm it is forbidden as unleasu^. Ass.
Reg. Da. c. Stat. etiam. 30. In fine ubi pro fossam, lege aquam. Stat. Alex. c.
Statuit Dominus 6. And be the law of God it is commanded, that nane sulde
suffer their son or dauchter to go throw the fire. Deuteronomy. 18.10. MANELETA, Ane
kind of evil and Pestilent herb, quhilk grows amangst the corns, called
Guld. de Iudic, c. 7. The law of maneleta, or of the Guld, was first institute
be King Kenneth, quha ordained that he quha throw his fault or negligence,
sufferis sawen lands to be filed with noysum herbs: For the first fault, sall
pay ane Ox; for the second fault, ten Oxen; and for the third fault, sall be
remooved fra the possession and laboring of the land. Hector Boethius. Lib. 10.
And gif ane mailer, or tennent, filis the land with guld, and will not clenge
the samin, he may be punished as ane seducer, quha bringis, or convoyis ane
army within his masters land, to wrack and destroy it. Leg. Forest. ca. Si
nativis. 28. de Iudic. c. 6. And gif thy awin native man, or bondsman (nativus
tuus) hes guld within thy land; For ilk stock or plant thereof, he should pay
ane Mutton, as ane unlaw. Leg. Forest. d. c. 28. de Iudic. c. 27. The quhilk
law, and constitution is keiped and observed, within certain parts of this
Realm; quhere the tennent sufferand the guld to grow amangst his corns, payis
ane wedder or scheipe, to his master. MANERIUM, lands labored with hand
warke, quasi manurium, a manu. Ane mainnes, or domaine lands; Or terrae
dominicales: Terrae dominicales.
Because they are labored and inhabited be the Lord, and proprietar of the
samin, gif there be two mainnes, perteining to any man that is deceased, the
principal maines should not be divided; bot should remain with his air and
successor, without division; togidder with the principal message. And full
satisfaction should be maid to his wife, or relict therefore, forth of the second
mainnes, or utherwise. Lib. 2: cap. Dos autem. 19. de Iudic. cap. 112. MANSUS,
A manendo, ane habitation or dwelling place, specially quhair husbandmen,
laborers of the ground dwellis a-landwart; to the effect they may labor their
land mair commodiouslie. L. Si. plures. Nu. 9. C. de. condit. insertis.
Molinaeus in Still. cur. part. 3. c 85. Bot Bartol. in l. Si ita. Nu. 10. de
Aur. and argent. legate. affirmis, ane Manse to be als meikle land, as may be
gudlie tilled be two oxen in the eir. Cuiac. lib. 1. de feud. writtis, that
mansus, is sa-meikle land, quhairby ane man may sustain honestly himself,
and his family, and pay the dewtie to his Master, quhilkis called Haeredium.
Bot in the practicque of this realm, it is rather called Gleba; That is, ane
certain portion of arable land. Haeredium. Gleba.
In Latin Terra culta: Or terra veluti nativi venditi cum gleba h. e. terra,
Qui nativi ascriptitij vocantur. Lib: 2. c. Pluribus. 14. And the four aickers
of land, quhilk is granted to the Ministers of the Evangell, within this
Land, is called ane gleebe, the quhilk should be free fra payment of any
teindes. I. 6. p. 5. c. 62. And Carolus Magnus, to the effect, that the
Ministers of the word of God, should not perish be hunger or poverty, gave to
ilk Kirk ane manse. For the quhilk they should pay na dewtie or service. Cuiac.
Lib, 1. de Feud. MANUS Mortua, dimittere terras ad manum mortuam, hoc est, ad
multitudinem sive universitatem, quae nunquam moritur. Quhilk utherwaies is
called Mortificare terras: That is, to give and dispone lands, to the hand or
power of the Kirk, College, Community, or any Universitie, capable to
posseede, bruik, or joyis gudes or lands; The quhilk is said per Antiphrasin,
seu a contraio sensu, Because sik Kirks, Colleges, Communities, or
universities, dois nocht die; albeit the particular members thereof ar mortal,
alters, and deceasis. Ius Normand. Lib. 5, c. 7. Quhilk is conform to. L.
Proponebatur. 76. ff. de judiciis. Swa Manus may signify power, as in the
Latin tongue. Or Manus mortua, may be conform to the Scottish word, borrowed
fra the Dutch word Meinie, quhilk signifies ane multitude; Meinie.
and specially of folk and people. And swa dimittere terras ad manum mortuam,
it is to give lands to any Universitie, and multitude of people. Always it is
not leasum to any man to mortify any part of his lands to the Kirk, without
consent of the King. Lib. 2. c. Notandum. 26. Because the King may be thereby
prejudged in his tennendrie, dewtie and service fra the quhilk the Kirk-men in
auld time were exeemed.

MARK, In tractatu de ponderibus and mensuris, signifies ane ounce weicht, Dram.
or half ane pound, quhairof the dram is the aucht part. Like as the ounce is
the aucht part of ane mark. Chessa. in Censuetud. Burgund-Rubric. 1.. 7. Verb.
65. solz Turnoys: Solidus. Libra.
solidus. (inquit) in jure capitur pro aureo, quorum. 72. faciunt libram auri.
Et duodecim vnciae faciunt Libram, and octo vnciae marcam. Gl. and Ia. Fabr.
in.. nos autem. verb. solidos. instit. de attil. tutor. MARCHETA, King Evenus
did wickedlie ordain, that the Lord or master of the ground, or Land, should
have the first nicht of ilk married woman within the samin. The quhilk
ordinance, was after abrogate be King Malcolme the Third; quha ordained, that
the Bridegroom sulde have the use of his awin wife. And therefore should pay
ane piece of money, called Marca. Hector Boethius. lib. 3. c. 12. For the
quhilk, certain Kye, was used to be paid. Lib. 4. cap. Sciendum. 63. Bot
utherwaies in my opinion, Mark, or March, signifies ane horse: In the auld
French, Irish, and Dutch tounges. For in the French tongue, Marcher, is to ride,
or gang; as Marcher devant, to ride or gang before. And Paulus diaconus.
Histor. Longobard. writtis that Mar is called in Latin, Mar.
Equa, quhilk we call ane Meare. Alciatus de singulari certamine. c. 32.
Marcam (inquit) Germani equam dicunt. unde Marcomanni (qui hodie dicuntur
Moravi) equitatu pollentes populi. Et Maroboduus Rex Mar comannorum, cui corpus
instar equi erat. Mairover, I find ane auld constitution, written be Lotharius
Imperator, and Carolus Rex, in this manner: Vt missi nostri, in illorum
missatijs (h. e. commissarij nostri in iis locis ad quos mittuntur) curam
habeant, ne homines nostri, aut alij quilibet, vicinos suos majores, vel
minores, tempore aestatis, quando ad herbam suos caballos mittunt: vel tempore
Hyemis, quando Marescalli illos ad fodrum dirigunt depraedentur aut opprima^t.
Be the quhilk it is manifest, that fodrum, is a dutch word, pro paubulo
equoru^, quhilk we call fodder, and marchalcus or mariscallus, Fodrum.
Marschallus. March. Schalk. Trimarchisia. Hors-marsceall. Down.
is a master of stable, or a servand that hes cure of the horse for March
signifies ane horse, and Schalk in Dutch, is ane servand, as Godschalk, the
servand of God. And Alciatus. d. c. 32. Affirmis that the troops of horsemen,
in the army of Brennus, was called Trimarchisia, because ilk man had three
horse. And in the samin signification, we use the word, Hors-marschel: Quhair
horse is adjoined, for interpretation of the word March. As likewaies in
Silverdown hill: This word hill, is the interpretation of the uther word Down,
quhairof the ane, and the uther signifies anething. In Latin, Mons. Swa
horse-marschel, is ane servand that keipis or curis horse, as is commonly used
within this Realm; Quhilk oppinion sindrie Germane writters confirms, and
specially the Scholiastes of Guntherus. lib. 8 Austriados. Swa leavand to ilk
man his awin oppinion and judgment, free to himself: I think that Marcheta
mulieris, is the raide of the woman, or the first carnal copulation and
conjunction with her; quhilk in respect of her virginity, is may esteemed be
men. Quhilk interpretation is confirmed alswa be Cuiac. Lib. 1. de feudi.
MARITAGIUM Haeredis, The marriage of ane air maill or femaill, Maritagium
legale.
quhilk is modified and liquidat be the Lords of the Session, to ane certain
sum of money, after consideration of the rentall, and valor of the lands
perteining to the air; quhilk is either legal, or conventionall. The marriage
Legal, is that quhilk be disposition of the Law, perteinis to the superior,
and Over-lord. For the marriage of ane air maill, or femail of lands halden be
service of ward and relieve, being within less age, or being of perfect age,
and not married the time of the decease of his father, or uther predecessor, to
quhom he is air, perteinis to his immediate superior; be the commoun
disposition of the law of this realm. The marriage perteinis to the King.
And gif there be maa superioures, the marriage perteinis to the first, and
eldest superior, to quhom the predecessoures of the said air, maid first
leageance and homage: Or of quhom they have the first infestment of their
lands. Leg. Forest. c. si alicui. 75. Mair-over, gif an air haldis certain
lands be service of ward of the King immediately: And certain uther lands be
the like manner of halding immediately of ane uther superior, Spiritual or
Temporal: The Marriage of the air, should perteine to the King allanerlie,
without any respect of the quantity of the lands, or of the prioritie, or
posterioritie of the hading: Because the King hes not ane peer or companion,
far les ane superior within his realm. Lib. 2. c. Restituere. 44. c. 45
Maritagium conventionale, is that quhilk cummis not be disposition of the law,
Maritagium conventionale
bot be the convention and consent of parties: As quhen any man haldis his
lands in blench, or in few-ferme: His awin, or his aires marriage, na-waies
thereby perteinis to his superior: Bot it gif he payis any dewtie for his
lands nomine albae firmae, or nomine feudi-firmae, vna cum maritagio haeredis
cum contigerit: Gif he happenis to decease, the marriage of his air, nocht
being married, perteinis to his superior, not be the nature of the halding of
his lands, bot be the convention and provision contained in his infestment.
Single and double avail of marriage.
The avail of ane aires marriage, is either single or double. For gif the
superior requires not ane air, to marie, and the air marie with out his
consent: The superior should obtain allanerlie for his marriage, be the
estimation of the ordinar judge, sa-meikle as may be ane competent sum, or
tocher to the said air, conform to his eirlie rent: Or gif the air refusis
to marie, he cannot be compelled to do the samin; Quia matrimonia debent esse
libera. Bot quhen he cummis to perfect age, he sall give to his superior, als
meikle as he micht have fra any uther person for the samin marriage, before he
receive his lands out of the hands of his superior quia maritagium eius qui
infra aetatem est, de mero jure pertinet ad dominum feudi. leg Forest. c.
Siquis. 66. The double avail of the marriage of ane air, perteinis to the
superior, quha makis ane lauchfull offer of ane party, to the air in
marriage: Providing that the party offered, be of equal parage. For gif the
superior dois marie the air, with any person in disparage, as with ane
burgess man, or with ane villain. Gif the air, be of the age of fourteen
eires, or mair, and givis his consent to the said marriage; the samin is good
and valiable of the law. Bot gif the air be within the age of fourteen eires,
quhair-throw he may nocht give ane lauchfull consent to his marriage. In that
case, gif his kinsman compleinis, the Over-lord sall tine and omit the ward;
and all commodity that he may have thereby, until the air be of lauchfull
age of twenty ane eires; Quhilk salbe converted and employed, be the sight of
his friends, to his use and commodity. be reason of the schame and dishonor
done to him. Leg. Forest. c. Si qui domini 65 Quhilk is conform to the Laws
of England. Hen. 3. stat. Merton. c. 6. c. 7. Swa gif the Marriage of any air,
or heretrix, be fallen in the superiors hands; and the air beand lauchfullie
required be the superior, or his donatar, or be any cled with their richt, to
marie any agreeable party without disparage offered to him, refusis to do the
same, and mary's any uther person, without the license and consent of the
superior, or his donatar; He aucht, and should be reason of his contempt and
dissobedience, pay not only the single avail of his marriage; bot also the
double thereof: That is, als meikle again, as the single, be the modification
of the judge, after the eirlie rental, avail, and quantity of the lands and
living, perteining to the air. And mair-over, in this case, be the auld law of
this Realm, it is leasum to the superior, to hald and retain the lands,
albeit the air be of twenty ane eires of age, until he be compleitlie
satisfied of the said dowble avail. Leg. Forest. c. de haeredibus. 64. And it
is to wit that the said requisition, should be maid in this manner. The
superior, his donatar, The form how ane air should be required to marie.
or the assignay maid and constitute be the Donatar, or any uther person,
havand richt thereto; aucht, and should be himself, or be his lauchful
procuratour, havand special power in writ, to that effect; offer to the air,
personally apprehended, then being of lauchfull age for marriage, ane agreeable
party, expreemand the said personis name, and sur-name, without disparage to
him: Sick-like beand of lauchfull age, and convenient for marriage, and require
the said air to solemnizat, and compleit the band of matrimony, in face of
halie Kirk, with the person that is offerred; And for compleiting thereof,
assign and affixe ane lauchfull day; To wit, the space of threttie days at
the least to him to compleit the samin; within any Kirk, appointed be the maker
of the offer, to that effect. And in the mean time of the said requisition, or
before, or after the samin, the donatar, or any uther assignay, havand richt
and title of him, or of the superior (for the superior himself, needis nocht
to make any intimation of his richt and title, he beand notourlie knawin to be
superior) should make be himself, or be his procuratour, intimation of the
richt, and disposition maid to him; and schaw the same, and make the samin
patent, in presence of the said air; and cause the samin to be read before
him, or give or offer him ane copy thereof: To the effect, that he thereafter
may not pretend nor allege ignorance there-anent. And thereafter the said
person, viz. The superior, or any uther cled with his richt, be quhom, or in
quhais name the said requisition and intimation was maid; aucht and should
personally, or be his procuratour, compeir at the day, and kirk appointed of
before: Bringand with him the said party offered, in proper person, reddie and
willing to marie, quha was offered in marriage; And there in lauchfull time,
before twelve hours of the day, offer him reddie to accomplish and fulfill
that quhilk he offered, and required to be done of before. And to that effect,
there remain quhill the Sermon, or divine service be done, or quhill ane
hour after noone. And gif the air compeiris nocht, or compeiris and refusis
to marie; he should take instruments thereupon, in the hands of ane sufficient
Notar, of the refuse maid be the air, or of his none-compearance; and the
offer of the agreeable party; togidder with the intimation foresaid; quhilk
cannot be proven be witness, bot be writ. Pen. Feb. 1567. The Lord of
Drumlangrig, contrair Marion Carrutheris. 21. Iunij. 1575. The Lord of
Glenberuie, contrair the Lord of Vdny. MARITAGIUM Tocher good. Lib. 2. c. dos
autem 19. in fine. c. potest: 21. cum seqq. Vid. Dos. MARUS, ane officiar, or
executour of summondes. I. 1. p. 9. c. 111. p. 13. c. 140 Vide Recordum. He is
utherwaies called, Praeco Regis.
Praeco regis. Lib. 1. cap. cum autem. 8. Quhair it is said, Quod die dominico
vox praeconis cessare debet becauss na summonds should be execute upon ane
Sunday. The Kings Maire is of ane greater power and authority, nor the
messengers or officiares of arms, and specially in justice aires, and
punishing of espassoures. Bot now the said office is given in fee and heritage
to Maires of fee, quha knawis nocht their office: Bot are idle persons, and
only dois diligence in taking up of their fees, from them, to quhome they do
na good, nor service to the King. MATERTERA, properly is the Mother sister,
Quasi Matter altera. Bot sum-times improperlie it is taken for the Father
sister, in Latin Amita. For Lib. 2. c. Deficientibus 34. Post Avunculum. h. e.
patruum eiusque liberos, Matertera eiusque liberi habent jus successionis. And
be the Law of this Realm, the bairnes descendand of the mother sister, hes na
richt of succession: Quhilk in the awin place and degree, is competent to the
bairnes borne of the Father sister; quhilk is manifest. De judicib. c.
haeredum. 113. c. Item Nota. 115. Vbi express, Matertera dicitur esse Amita.
vid. Avunculus.

MELLETUM, Medletum. lib. 1. c. 2. Ane French word, Melle, dissension, strife,
debate, as we say, that ane hes melled or tuilied with ane uther. And in the
acts of Parliament, and practicque of this realm, Chaudmella is ane fault or
trespass, quhilk is committed be ane hoate suddaintie, and nocht of set
purpose, or praecogitata malitia. Iam. 1.11. Mar. c. 51. And in Libro M.
Willielmi Skene fratris mei, Commissarii Sancti Andreae. Fol. 121. It is
written, that Flycht-vvt is liberty to hald courts, and take up the un-lawe
pro melletis. Because Flycht, is called flyting; In French, melle, quhilk some
times is conjoined with hand-straikes. And in sum buikes Placitum de
melletis, is called the Mute, or pley of beating or stricking. Lib. 1. c. 2.
MENETUM, Leg. Forest. c. 2. Ane stock horn. In the quhilk place, it is
wrangeouslie written Cornare minutim, pro Cornare menetum, to blaw ane stock
horn, quhilk commounlie is made of Timmer, wood, or tree, with circles and
girds of the same, quhilk is et used in the Hie-landes and Isles of this realm:
quhairof I have seen the like in the Cuntrie of Helvetia, in the eir of God,
ane thousand, five hundredth, sextie aucht, amangst the Zuitzers MEREMIUM,
muremium, The timmer of ane house. Lib. 4. c. Si quis 55. In the English Laws,
Carla de Foresta. It is called maremium. And ane charter given be Jacobus
Senescallus Scotiae (king James the first, before his Fathers decease) To
Thomas Browster, of the lands of Sacerland, beside Paslay; now perteining
heretablie to Matthew Steward of Barscube, conteinis potestatem incidendi
merentium; That is, license and power to cut sa meikle green woodde in the
Kingis Forest of Raise, as should be necessar to the said Thomas, to big houses
to his own use. MESE Of Herring, conteinis five hundredth, for the commoun use
of numeration, and telling of Herring, be reason of their great multitude, is
used be thousands; And therefore ane Mese, comprehendis five hundredth, quhilk
is the half of ane thousand. From the Greek word Meson, In Latin medium.
MESSUAGIUM, Lib. 2. c. Dos autem 19. c. Si quis plures 30. cum seqq. Ane
principal dwelling place, or house within ane Barronnie, quhilk in the laws of
England, Manor.
is called Manor, ane hall, place, or court, ludge, or Manor house. Albeit
Valentine Leigh, in his buik of surveying of lands affirmis messuagium to be
the tenement or lands arable, And the dwelling house or place, or Court hall
thereof, to be called Sit, from the Latin Situs: quhilk we call the seat, or
on-sette. And it is not leasum to give the principal message, to the wife
within burgh, in life rent. Leg. Burg. c. Nullus. 107. MILITES, Leg. Malc. Make.
c. 2. And generally in the auld laws of this realm, ar called free-halders,
haldand their lands of barons in chief; quha hes na power to hald courts of
life and lim: bot only of injuries, wrang, Servitium militare.
and unlaw. Bot militare servitium. Knichtes service, is that manner of halding
of lands, quhilk is called, service of ward and relieve. Et miles opponitur
Soccomanno, and he quha haldis his lands, Per militate servitium, lib. 2. c.
Si quis 30. MISERICORDIA, Ane merciment, amerciament or unlaw. Leg. Forest. c.
5. de judic. c. 40. Misericordia domini regis, or the Kingis merciment in
purpresture. Lib. 2. cap. dicitur. 75. vid. Forisfactum. vide Amerciamentum.
MOTE, Mute, pley, action, quarrel. Quhen King Malcolme the Second, gave all
his lands to the Barrones of this realm; he retained to himself montem
placiti de Scona, The mute hill of Scone: quhair he micht hald his courts, and
do justice to his subjects, in deciding their pleyes, and controversies. Leg.
Mal. Make in prin. Mute in the Laws of this realm is called placitum. And like
as in the civil law, actiones ar divided in civil and criminal: Swa
platitorum, aliud est civil, aliud criminale. Pleyes ar civil or criminal:
Civil ar called actiones of injuries, wrang, and unlaw. Leg. Malc. Make. c. 2.
And concernis pecuniall pains, or lands and heretage. Criminal pleyes,
touchis life or lim, or capital pains, called poena sanguinis. Lib. 1. c. 2.
c. 3. MORT-GAGE, mortuum vadium, dicitur pignus, cujus fructus, vel reditus
percepti, in nullo se acquietant. It is ane French word, signifies ane deed
wed, sik as ane certane sum of silver, given upon lands in wed-set, and
under reversion; quhilk is called ane deed wed; Because be the auld law of
this realm, the profit thereof: that is, the annual of the silver, is reckoned
as ane part of the stock and principal sum. And therefore the said stock is
dead, without any profit, as ane barren and dead tree, quhilk producis na
fruit. Lib. 3. c. 4. c. 6. Contrair the commoun form of alienation of lands
under reversion, daily used within this realm, called pactum de retro
vendendo, quhair be the annuell, is eirlie paid, until the redemption of the
lands. At the quhilk time, the principal sum should be likewaies compleitlie
paid. And swa both the annuell, and the stock being paid, the profits are
nocht reckoned in the stock, bot ilk ane of them ar severallie reckoned, and
severallie paid, sa-meikle for the profit, and sa-meikle for the principal
sum Vide Vadium. MULIERATUS Filius, is ane lauchfull son, gotten with ane
lauchfull wife. Lib. 2. c. Si autem 22. Ex legitima muliere seu uxore, quia
mulieris appellatione uxor continetur. L. Mulieris. 13. and ibi Gl. de verb.
signif MURTHURUM, Lib. 1. c. 2. lib. 4. c. 7. Quhairof sum is called, private,
that is mannis slauchter, quhairof the author is unknawin: Quhairof the
inquisition perteinis to the crowner; As quhen ane person is found slain, or
drowned, in any place or water. Uther is public committed be
forethocht-fellonie, Quia non debet murthrum adjudicari ubi infortunitum
intervenit: sed locum habeat murthrum, in interfectis per feloniam: And swa
murder is committed be fore-thocht-felonie, and not be suddaintie,
Chaud-mella, or infortunium: That is, be chance or fortune. Leg. Malc. Make.
cap. 2. And in the laws of England. Anno 13. Edward. 2. cap. 1. Murder is
quhen any man be ane propensed malice, lyis in wait to slay ane uther man. And
according to his malicious intent, slayis him. Molinaeus in still. Cur. Parl.
part. 1. cap. 13. Conform to the law of Normandy Lib. 12. cap. 1. Affirmis,
that murder is different from simple slaughter. Because murder is committed
wittinglie, and willingly, be ane quha of set purpose lyis quietly in awaite
for that effect. And slaughter is committed without any fore-thoucht-fellonie,
upon ane haistie suddaintie, quhilk in Latin is Rixa; And in French, Rixa.
Chaud-mella, In the quhilk place he writtis, that three crimes perteinis to
the high justice; wilful fire, ravishing of weemen, and murder. Pleyes of the
crown.
Bot be the law of this Realm, four crimes ar called the four points of the
Crown; wilfull-fire, ravishing of weemen, murder, and robbery or riefe:
Because the jurisdiction, or cognition thereof, perteinis allanerlie to the
King, and to na subject Spiritual, nor Temporal, except the samin be
specially granted to him be the King. Lib. 1. c. 2. leg. Malc. Make. c. 4. lib.
4. cap. Die lunae. 13. ass. rest. Da. c. 1.
N
NAMARE, Namos capere, to take ane poynd, or ane distress. It is ane auld
Saxon word: For Naman, in Latin Pignorari sive pignus auferre. And Namatio,
signifies the taking of ane poynd. Nami.
Leg. Britonum. verb. Pignorari. In the law of Normandy, Nami commounlie
signifies any gudes or gear moveable, or un-moveable, taken for execution of
ane decree. Pignora capta, and bona capta pignori. ut in L. a Divo Pio. 15.
ff. de re judicat. Be the laws of this realm, na poynd should be taken, bot for
ane confessed or proven debt. And the samin should be publicly schawin, and
maid manifest to all passengers be the way, and to all parties following the
samin. Lib. 4. cap. Si quis namos 30. cum seqq. Na man may poynde within ane
uther mannis bounds or jurisdiction, bot for debt auchtand to him, except the
Kingis Baillie be present. The poynd or distress, should be conform to the
quantity and valor of the debt. Na person may be poynded, bot the debtour, or
his sovertie or pledge. The poynd should remain within the samin Barronnie,
quhair it is taken, in ane place perteining to him, quha takis the samin, or at
the least, in the nixt adjacent barronnie, within the samin Schireffdome, and
not in Fortalices or Castelles. Stat. 2. Rob. Br. cap. Item ordinatum 8. Curia
de namo vetito; that is, of deforcement, be the auld Law, perteinis to the king
allanerlie. De Maritag. cap. Sciendum 17. NATIVE, Borne slaves or servandes,
vide Pondagium. NONE-ENTRES, Is quhen ane vassal, vest and saifed in the fee
and property of the lands deceasis, leavand behind him ane air, quha beand
of lauchfull age, may enter to the lands, be taking of saising thereof, and it
enters nocht. In the quhilk case, the lands ar in the hands and power of the
immediate superior, be reason of none-entresse, Two kinds of none-entresse.
Propter negligentiam haeredis, jus suum non prosequentis. Stat. Rob. 3. Cap.
Nota. 21. Mair-over, there is two kinds of None-entres: The ane simple, nocht
follow and after ane ward, in the quhilk, the superior of the Lands, until
they be declared be decreete of ane ordinar judge, to be in None-entresse, should
have allanerlie the retoured maill thereof, conform to the new extent. And
after the declaratour, the superior may remove the tennentes, or occupy the
lands, as he pleasis, enduring the time of the None-entresse. The uther kind
of None-entresse, is that quhilk followis after ane wairde: As quhen lands are
halden be service of ward and relieve; and the air is Minor, and may nocht
enter: The samin lands perteinis to the superior, be reason of ward, and
nocht of None-entresse. For quhair there is ward, there is na None-entresse,
be reason the ward, sa long as it indures, stops the none-entresse. Bot quhen
the ward expyris, togidder with the two terms of the relieve; The
None-entresse beginnis, gif the air beand of perfect age, enteris nocht to the
lands, and obteinis saising thereof. The quhilk None-entresse, requiris na
declaratour, bot is of the like nature, with the ward preceidand. And enduring
the time thereof, the eirly mailles and duties of the lands, as they give be
tack and assedation, perteinis to the superior; or he may remove the tennentes
and possessoures therefra, and occupy the samin as he please, like as he micht
do, in the time of the ward. Mair-over, this kind of None-entresse, beand
given and disponed be the King, or uther superior, to the appearand air
himself, or to any uther person, is sufficient and valiable to the donatar,
for all eires and terms preceiding the gift and disposition, and three terms
after the perfect age of the air allanerlie. And endis and ceasis after the
ischue and out-running of the said three terms. And gif the air enters nocht
within the said space: It is leasum to the King, or uther superior, to dispone
of new, the said none-entresse, to quhom he pleasis, to be used be him, unto
the entry of the lauchfull air; as was decerned and ordained, be the Lords,
and Auditoures of the Checker, in the Month of Julij. 1596. And conform
thereto decided be the Lords of the Session 9. Julij. 1597. The Lord of
Capringtoun, contrair the Lord of Hessilhead, quhilk is not disconforme to the
Laws of the fewes, quhair be the air of the vassal, not desirand investiture,
or possession fra his superior, within eir and day, after the decease of the
vassal his predecessor, tines and forefaltis his few, and the samin perteinis
to his superior.. 1. Et ibi. Gl. quo temp. miles investitur, petere debent.
lib. 1. de feud. NOVA Dissasina, recent spuilie or ejection. vid. Dissasina.
O
OCHIERN, Ogetharint, is and name of dignity, and of ane freehalder. Stat.
Alex. c. recordatio. 26. and appeiris to be of equal honor, and pre-eminence
with the son or daughter of ane Thane, quha both hes the like Marcheta, viz.
two Kids, or twelve pennies. lib. 4. c. sciendum 63. And likewise the Cro of
ane Oye of ane Thane, and of an Ochiern is four Kye. lib. 4. c. statuit. 64.
And the un-lawe quhilk the King may take fra ane Thane, is sex Kye, and from
ane Ochiern, fifteen scheip, or sex schillings. Ass. reg. Da. c. recordatio.
17. ORA, ane auld Saxon word and signifies metal, sik as brass or goldes.
And mairover, in auld times it was ane piece of cunied silver or gold. Ure.
For tres orae aureae, are the price of ane Cow. lib. 4. c. sciendum 63. From
this comes the word it commonly used, Ure, as leid Ure: and in the Garviach
within the Schireff-dome of Aberdene, there is ane hill called Dounyndure,,
monticullus metalli: and the scheep there pastured, hes their teeth colloured
with ellowe color, quhilk is ane taken of abundance of metal. ORIGELLUM,
quasi aurigellum, ane Habergion, maid of mailies quhairof the edges are of
mailies of ellow coulor, resembland the color of gold or brass. Stat. 2.
Rob. Br. c. ordinatum 27. quhair it is caled Habergellum. vid. Hawbert.
OUT-FANG-THIEF, vid. Infang-thief.
P
PANNAGIUM Porcorum, ane French word, signifies the deutie quhilk is given to
the King, for the pastorage of Swine in his Forrestes, Leg. forest. c. 5. 6. 8.
As it is maniefest in the laws of England, in the chartour of Forrestes,
quhair Pannage, is called ane certain sum of silver, quhilk the awner of ane
Park, or of some great wood, quhair-in there is great store and abundance of
Maste, Aik, Betche, or uther trees, usis to take of his tennents or uthers, for
their swine, that sall feed there, betuixt Michael-mes and Martine-mes. Item
Pannagium, signifies ane pairt of the Kingis demaine, or property, given to
his second, or uther ounger son, or cousing, quhairof Chopinus writes, de
domanio regis Franciae But hereof no mention is maid in the laws of this
Realm. PARTICATA, vel perticata terrae. From the French word perch, meikle
used in the English laws, ane ruid of land. leg. burg. c. 1. c. particata.
140. stat. Wilh. c. particata. 13. quon. attach. c. de brevibus 31. It is of
verity, that three bear corns without tails, set togidder in length, makis
ane inche Of the quhilk corns, Inche. Fute. Eln. Fall.
an sulde be taken off the mid rig, an off the side of the rig, and an off the
furrow. Twelve inches makis ane fute of measure: Three fute and ane inche,
makis ane Elne: Sex elnes lang, makis ane Fall: quhilk is the common lineall
measure and met. And sex elnes lang, and sex elnes broad, maks an squair and
superficial fall, of measured land. Rod. Raip. Fall lineall and superficial.
And it is to be understand, that ane rod, ane raip, ane lineal fall of
measure, are all ane, and signifies ane thing, for ilk ane of them conteinis
sex elnes in length, albeit ane rod is ane staff, or gade of tymmer,
quhairwith land is measured, in latin pertica. Ane raip is maid of towe, sik
as hempt, or uther stuff, and sa meikle land, as in measuring falls under
the rod, or raip, in length is called ane fall of measure, or ane lineall fall,
because it is the measure of the line, and length allanerly. Likeas the
superficial fall is the measure, both of the lengh, and the breadth quia linea
est mensura solius longitudinis, superficies vero est mensura longitudinis,
Ruid. Aiker.
and latitudinis. Item, ten salles in length, and four in breadth, makis ane
ruid: four ruid makis ane aiker. And swa ane discreet and true man, may measure
ilk aiker of land, lang or schort, with rod or raip, be the measure of the
fall. Swa that he keep just count, and good remembrance, Landimers.
Agrimensores.
that the ends of the rod, or raip, be richtly and eaven laid, without fraud
or guyle. But it is necessare, that the measurers of land, called landimers, in
latin, agrimensores, observe and keep, ane just relation, betwixt the length
and the breadth of the measures, quhilk they use in measuring of lands,
quhairanent I find na mention in the laws and register of this realm, albeit
ane ordinance thereanent be maid be King Edward the first, King of England, the
33. eir of his reign: and because the knawledge of this matter is very
necessare, in measuring of lands, daily used in this realm. I thought good to
propone certain questions, to John Naper, fear of Merchifloun, ane gentleman
of singular judgment and learning, specially in Mathematicque sciences, The
tenor quhairof, and his answers maid thereto followis. Length and breid of
ane fall.


First, be quhat rule sall we understande the length and breadth of the fall? It
is answered: There is two sorts of falls, the ane lineall, the uther
superficial: the lineall fall, is ane met-wand, rod, or raip, of sex elnes
lang, quhairbe, length and breadth, are severally met. Ane superficial fall of
land, is sa meikle boundis of lands, as squairly conteinis ane lineall fall
of breadth, and ane lineall fall of length, quhairof followis, that be the
lineall fall, land is measured, and be the superficial fall, land is rekned.
Now quhair itis inquired be quhat rule the length and breadth of ane fall sall
be understand. I answer: That quhen-soever the elnes of breadth being multiplied
be the elnes of length, do produce 36. elnes: the number product, is ane
superficial fall: and the said breadth and length, are the just breadth and
length that makis ane fall. Swa 36. elnes lang, of ane elne broad, are ane fall
of land. Item, auchteene elns lang, two elnes broad, are the like: alswa,
twelve elnes lang, of three elnes broad. Or nine elnes lang of four elnes
broad, are ane fall. Lastly, sex elnes alwayis, that is to say, sex elnes lang,
and sex elnes broad, makis ane fall. To this sall the little ruid, or ruid of
warke, or of buirdes, or of maison, or sklait warke, is equal, quhilk is may
properly the ruid, as after followis.

Two kinds of ruid.
Secondly, how money kinds of ruids are in use? Answer. Two, quhairof the ane
is proper, the uther improper. The ruid properly is ane superficial fall, and
conteinis threttie sex squair elnes: Ane squair elne being the bounds of ane
elne in breadth, and ane elne in length, squarely inclused. The uther vulgar
and improper ruid of land, conteinis forty of their former ruides, or
superficial fallis, and is the quarter of ane aiker of land, because four of
their ruides makis ane aiker as said is.

Thirdly, be quhat rule may the just measure of ane aiker in length and breadth
be understand? It is answered, Multiply be Arthmeticall multiplication, the
number of the falls that are in the length of the land, Length and breadth of
ane aiker.
be the number of fallis that are in the breadth thereof: Every aucht-score
fallis of the number produced, and resulting of the said multiplication, is ane
aiker: and therefore aucht-score fallis of length, and ane fall of breadth,
makis ane aiker: and foure-score fallis of length, and two fallis of breadth,
makis ane aiker. Item forty fallis of length, and four fallis in breadth
makis ane aiker. Alswa twenty fallis in length, and aucht fallis in breadth,
makis ane aiker. Lastly, ten fallis in breadth, and sextene fallis in length
makis ane aiker.

Fourthly, seeing there is ane kind, of measuring of land be Rod, and raip:
quhat is the form thereof? And gif there be any maa forms, how are they
called? and quhat is the form and manner of the samin? The manner of measuring
of lands, be rod or raip.
It is answered. There be knawin to expert Mathematiciens, money and diverse
ways to met land, all agreand togidder in ane, bot of the vulgar people
there is bot ane form of metting used and understand, to wit, be rod and raip,
that is to say, be ane rod or gade of sex elnes lang: Or be ane string or
coard, of sex elnes lang, stented betwixt two staves. The coarde being ane
schaft length abone the pykes, or nether ends of the staves. The said rod or
raip, or either of them, is called ane fall: to wit, the lineall fall foresaid.
With these fallis, ilke square piece of land, is met over the middis, quhat
falls and elnes it hes of length and thereafter is met croceover the middis,
quhat fallis and elnes it hes of breadth. Thereafter the fallis and elnes of the
length on the ane pairt, and the fallis and elnes of the breadth, on the uther
pairt, are multiplied togidder, and the producte schawis the number of the
aikers, ruides, elnes, quhilk the said piece of land conteinis. As for example,
gif the piece of land be 51. fall, three elnis of length, and 10. fallis 2.
elnis of breadth: multiply 51. fallis 3. elnis. or 51 1/2 fallis to be 10.
fallis 2. elnis: Or be 10 1/3 fallis; The product will amount to 532 1/6
fallis: Or 532. fallis, 6. elnis: quhairof every aucht-score fallis, ar ane
aiker. Swa 532. fallis 6. elnis, are three aikers and ane quarter, 12. fallis,
and 6. elnis of met land.

PATRIA, Assisa, vel recognitio per assisam, Ane Assise or inquest of cuntrie
men, quhilk is called recognitio patriae, lib. 3. c. cum autem. 6. vid Bona
patriae. PEDELLUS, Leg. burg. c. citatio. 109. The serjand or beddle of the
burgh, quha should execute summondes: make attachementes, or take poindes. quon.
attach. c. nullus 57. quhairof they have na power, without their awin
jurisdiction. Ass. reg. Da. c. nullus 13. Dicitur autem pedellus a pedo hoc est
haculo, because all sik serjandes should use ane wand, staff, halbert. Ia. 1. p.
6. c. 99. PEDE. pulverosus, ane French word. pied puldreux, dustie-fute, or an
vagabound, specially ane merchand, or cremar, Pedder.
quha hes na certain dwelling place, quhair the dust may be dicht fra his
feet, or schone, de Maritag. c. si quis. 9, leg. burg. c si burgensis. 141, de
judic. c. 47. To quhom Justice should be summarlie ministered, within three
flowinges, and ebbings of the sea. Ane pedder, is called ane merchand, or
cremar, quha beirs ane pack, or cream upon his bak, quha are called beirares
of the puddill be the Scottesmen in the realm of Polonia, quhairof I saw ane
great multitude in the town of Cracovia. anno Dom. 1569. PENSION, ane dewtie,
sik as ane annuel-rent, for that quhilk in the act of Parliament. Ia. 2. p. 11.
c. 41. Is called the pension of Cadow: In the Checker rolls is called the
annuel-rent of Cadow. Pension of Cadow. Pension of Kirk patrik.
And siklik in the samin place mention is mad of the pensio^ of the ferme meil
of Kirk patrik, quhilk conteinis five chalder of air-meill, quhilk the Abbot,
and convent of Pajslay payis eirlie forth of the kirk of Kirk-patrik to the K.
as an pairt of his annexed property, as is manifest in the Schireffe rolls of
the Checker of K. Ia. 3. 1487. In libris seudorum, Soldata is an eirly fry
gift and donation, enduring the lifetime of the giver, and is swa called, a
solido, Soldata.
quia plaerumque in solidorum donatione consistit.. 1. quis dicatur marchio.
lib. 1. de feud. PLACITUM, From the French word, Plaider, pley, contention,
strife, or debate. Placitare, significat litigare and causas agere. Pleyes of
the Crown.
Molinaeus in still. suprem. cur. par. Part. 1. c. 6. part. 2. c. 3. Et D.
Smith. lib. 2. c. 10. Of the commoun weil of England. Vid, Mote. Placita
coronae, pleyes, or criminal actiones perteining to the Kingis Crown and
jurisdiction allanerlie, or to his justice general, quhilkis ar four in
number, robbery, or riefe: ravishing or deforcing of weemen: murder, and
wilful fire, sik as burning of houses wilfully, and maliciously, vid.
Murthrum. Quhairof, or of any ane of them, gif any happenis to be convict, all
his gudes perteinis to the King allanerly, in the samin manner, as is statute
of the gudes of traitoures. Leg. Mal, Make. cap. 3. PLEGIUS, ane pledge, borgh,
or cautioner, dimittere terras ad plegium, To let lands to borgh, is quhen any
controversy, being for the possession of lands; the samin after inquisition,
and trial taken there anent given and committed to the last lauchfull
possessour of the samin lands, under borgh and caution, that he sall restore
the samin to him, quha sall be found to have richt thereto. Ia. 2. p. 14 c. 26.
Or quhen two persons contendis be way of deed and (...), for the possession
of any lands. The superior thereof may recognosce, or take to himself, the
possession of the lands, until it be tried, quha was last lauchfull possessour
thereof; And then let the lands to him to borgh, and under caution, as said is.
Stat. Rob. 3. c. Nota. 21, Item, the 12. No. 1500. Certain corns grow and upon
debatable lands, betuixt the L. Ruthven, and the Lord of Copemalindie, be
decreit of the lords, are let in to borgh to the said lord, he findand
caution that the samin salbe forth cummand to them, quha recoveris the samin be
law, without prejudice of the richt of onie of the parties theiranent in time
cumming. And likeas the over-lord, or judge for the causes foresaid, Ietere
terras ad plegium.
lettis lands to borgh, to the possessour thereof, the tennent or possessour,
petit terras demitti ad plegium, desires the lands to be letten to him to
borgh, or under caution. Stat. Rob. 3. c. 4.

PORTEOUS, portuis. Ia. 1. p. 13. c. 139. Ia. 3. p. 14. c. 99. Ia. 5. p. 3. c.
5. a portando, quhilk signifies to carry, or beire: in French ports vous, and
signifies ane catalogue, contenand the names of the persons indicted to the
justice air, quhilk is given and delivered be the justice Clerk, to the
Crowner, to be attached, and arreisted be him, to compeire, and answer, to sik
accusationes and crimes, as salbe impute unto them, and the porteous conteins
the names of them quha ar of new indicted, and the names of them quha were
indicted of auld and of before, and compeired not: And quhen onie justice air
is cried, or proclaimed, command is given be the justice to warn all persons,
alsweill indicted of auld, as of new, to compeire in the said air, to underlie
the law. The Crowner receivis the porteous as said is, and caries the samin
with him, until the attachements and arreistments be maid, conform thereto,
and reports the samin again to the Justice court: That theirby he may be
controlled in execution of his office, sa far as concerns the making of
attachements and arreistments or probation thireof. POST-NATUS filius, ane
second son, narrest to the first begotten, conform to the French word,
lepuis aisne lib. 2. c. si ergo. 23. c. praeterea. 25. c. maritus 32. l'aisne,
is the first borne son, and therefore le puis aisne is post primo-genitum,
the second son. PRISAE, ane French word prinses, in latin captiones, sik as
ane poynd, distres, or moveable gudes, taken for execution of ane decreit: for
be the laws of France, prisae sunt rerum mobilium: sasina vero immobilium,
quia bona immobilia non capiuntur, sed saisiuntur. Rebuffus in constitut. Reg.
in tract. de liter. obli. art. 5. gl. 2. and de praeconum licitationibus. ar.
1. gl. 2. Quhairanent I find ane ordinance maid de modo capiendi prisas, be
King David 2. 18. Februar 1369. the 40. eire of his reign. Prisae seu
captiones domini regis, persolventur and capientur, secundum consuetudines
antiquitus approbatas, and de terris illis de quibus prisae regis, and servitia
debent sumi, and quod in iis faciendis non fiet taxatio juxta numerum
davatarum, sed secendum verum valorem bonorum. PROPORCITAS, proportatio
assisae, the proport, report, declaration, or deliverance of ane assise. Stat.
Alexand. c. statuit dominus, 5. quon. attach. c. si quis appellet. 53. assisa.
reg. D. c. 9. c. statuit 30. c. statuit dominus 38. Veredictum.
Utherwise, it is called, veredictum assisae, the verdict or suithsaying of ane
assise. Because the assisours are sworn to declare the truth and verity,
Juratores. Jurata. Jurie.
and therefore are called Juratores. Like as the assise is called Jurata, or
Jurata patriae, sive vicineti, lib. 2. c. dicitur. 74. And in the English
laws, ane Jurie. PURPRESTURE, Purprision, ane French word, for ane wrangeous
usurpation, taking, or occupation of ane uther man's lands, quhairof there is
three kinds, Three kinds of purprision.
Lib. 2, c. dicitur. 74. de judicib. c. purprestura, c. 138. The first is,
quhen any man occupies unjustly any pairt of the Kingis domaine, and proper
lands. Or quhen any stoppis, or closis up the Kingis common way, passage or
street: Or returnis or divertis rinnand waters fra their richt course: Or
within the Kingis town and burgh, occupies the Kingis calsay, or commoun
gaite, biggand upon onie pairt thereof: Or removeand onie thing there-fra: Or
converting onie pairt thereof to his awin use. And generally, quhen onie
wrangeous occupation is maid to the hurt and skaith of the Kingis tenement, the
Kingis street, or common way: Or of the Kingis Burgh. The quhilk kind of
Purpresture should be decided before the Kings justice and his deputes, be ane
condign assise. And he quha is convict thereof, salbe in the kingis mercy,
and punished conform to his will in his body, and in all his lands quhilk he
halds of him: and mair-over sall restore that quhilk he injustly bigged and
occupied. The second kind is, quhen onie vassal occupies, and usurps any
lands against his over-lord, uther then the King. Quhilk controversy may be
decided be the over lord in his awin court, and gif the vassal is convict to
have done wrang, he tynis perpetually all the lands quhilk he haldis of that
superior. The quhilk jurisdiction and power of halding of courts of
Purprision, perteinis to ane Barron, and to uthers, quha are abone him in power
and dignity, sik as Earls and Lords. For na vassal, subject, nor uther tennent
under ane Barron, hes power to hald sik courts. Ia. 3. p. 30. c. 79. The third
kind of purprestura, is against any uther except the King and the superior: As
betuixt nichtbor and nichtbor, subject and subject: quhen ane wrangeouslie
occupies the land perteining to ane uther, or troublis him in his meithis, and
marches: quhilk molestation perteins to the Schireff, to be tried before him,
be ane brieve, de nova dissasina, or de rationabilibus divisis. Be the law of
England. an. 4. Edward. 1. de bigamis c. 4. gif onie usurpis, and occupies
within the Kingis liber^^ or any uther place, contrair the King: Incontinent
(...) process or ordour of law, the King tuik the land in his awin hand, and
thereafter it was leisum to any person, havand entres to compleine thereanent,
The like son is permitted be the laws of this realm, anent the Kingis
customs. Ja. 1. p. 1. c. 8. And his annexed property. Ja. 2. p. 11. c. 41.
PUTAGIUM, ane French word, huiredome or fornication, lib. (...) in custodiis.
50. c. ult. 53. Quhair it is manifest, that ane (...) femaill, being within
ward, and of les aige, and committand fornication, tynis and forefaults her
pairt of the heritage, and the samin accrescis, and perteinis to the rest of
the coheirs, or comportioners gif onie be. And gif their be an heretrix
allanerly, quha commitis the said fault, all and haill her heritage, perteinis
to the superior: But gif an heretrix of lands, hes bairnes lauchfully gotten
in marriage: and after the decease of her husband, in the time of her viduitie,
committis fornication: neither sche nor her bairnes, tynis the heretage. Quia
putagium matris non adimit haereditatem; The huiredome committed be the mother,
dois nocht disherish the lauchfull bairnes.
Q
QUARENTENA viduarum, in the statutes Rob. 3. c. deviduis. 22. from the French
la quaresme des vefues, signifies the privilege of forty days, granted to
widows, after the decease of their husbands, conform to the Laws of
England, anno. 20. Henr. 3. c. 1. Quhair it a statute anent widows, quha
after the death of their husbands may nocht have the dowry, without pley: That
quha-soever deforcis them of their said dowries, of the lands quhairin their
husbands died vest and saised, and it sall happen the said widows to recover
the samin theirafter be pley or process: They quha troubled and molested them,
being convict of sik wrangeous deforcement, sall eild and pay the damnages and
skaith, to the samin widows. That is to say, the valor of the haill dowry
belanging to them, from the time of the death of their husbands, unto the day
that the saides widows, obteinis decreit in judgmente. And the said
deforceres nevertheles salbe amerciat, at the Kingis pleasure. In the quhilk
place it is plain, that Quarentena viduarum, conteines the space of forty
days: during the quhilk space, ane widdowe may tarry and remain in the chief
dwelling place of her husband, until her dowry be assigned to her, and in the
mean time should be sustained upon the proffites of the heritage. As it is
likewaies written in magna carta, anno. 9. Henr. 3 c. 7. quhilk is conform to
the laws of France, as writis Joan. Papon in his arreistes. lib. 15, Tit. des
dots. c. 7. and lib. 10. tit. substitutiones. c. 30. per authenticam praeterea,
C. unde vir and uxor, and in the Burrow laws of this Realm, the second, or
third wife of any Burges, after the decease of her husband, may nocht remain
in the house perteining to his air gotten of ane uther wife, bot only forty
days. leg. burg. c. si burgensis duas. 25. QUHATECUS, ane kind or form of
bread, quhilk we call ane fage, or phage, from the greek word phago, comedo
to eat.
R
RACHETUM ane French word, Rachapt, ane ranson; in sum buikes it is called
Rechatum, transpositis literis. Stat. 1. Rob. Br. c. 1. Stat. 2. Rob. Br. c. 7.
quhair it is called thieft-bote: and in sum auld buikes Rachatum is called
thieft-bote or redemtion taken for thievis, robbers, or uther malefactors.
RAPTUS, rape, ravishing or deforceing of weemen, quhilk is ane of the four
points or pleyes perteining to the Kings Crown, and to nane uthers. vid.
placitum. vid. murthrum. Ravishing is an crime, quhairof ane woman accusis ane
man alledgand she is oppressed, or defiled be him, against the Kings peace.
lib. 4. c. raptus 9. The quhilk complaint sulde be maid the same day, and
night, in the quhilk the crime is committed, quia lapsu diei hoc crimen
praescribitur. Quo. attach. Cap. De caetero. 48. Statut. Wilh. c. Item.
Statuit. 9. In the laws of England Westminster. 11. c. 34. Rape is quhair ane man
ravishis, or takis ane uther man's wife, widow, or maiden, violently, and hes
a do with her against her will. And albeit she afterward consent, it it is
fellonie, quhilk is confirmed be Chess. in consuetud. Burgund Rubric. 1. verb.
Es droicts d'icellis. Nu. 43. REIF, or robbery, is likewaies ane of the four
points of the Crown. lib. 4. c. die lunae. 13. leg. Malc. Mack. c. 4. ass.
reg. Da. c. 1. Robbery is quhen an man lyis by the Kings hie way, passing to
market Towns, in woods, ditches, or onie uther secreit place, quhair people
cummis forth by, and robbis, and spuilies them, albeit he take away bot the
valor of ane penny, or less, it is felony: for the mala-pertnes of the
deed, breaking of the Kings peace, and the danger in the quhilk ane man is of
his life, causis the offense to be the greater, then gif the gear swa robbed or
spuilied had bin thiefteouslie stolen, as it is written in the laws of
England. an. 23. Hen. 8. c. 1. In the law of Normandy. li. 3. c. 1. Robbery is
the taking of uther men's gear be force and violence: And the committers theirof
in latin are called raptores, in French voleurs, or Robeures, Difference
betwixt riefe and thieft.
and is different from theft quhilk is committed quietly, and privilie,
without violence. Mair-over reife is ane greater crime then thieft, because
reife is committed both in the gudes, and in the person of the possessour
theirof, and thieft is of the gudes and gear allanerlie, Ches. in consuet.
Burgund. rab. 1.. 5. Be the law of this Realm, the complaint of reife or
robbery should be maid be him quha is robbed, and damnified within the like
time, as is foresaid, of the ravishing of weemen. quo. attach. c. de caetero.
48. lib. 4. c. raptus. 9. RECOGNITION of lands is commonly used in the law,
and practicque of this realm. Sicut feudum dicitur aperiri domino: ita terrae
dicuntur cadere in commissum: sicuti fit in hoc casu ob culpam vassalli, and in
Emphyteusi. or few lands, ob non solutum canonem seu pensionem. lib. 3. c. ex
locato. 11. For the vassal tynes lands halden be him be service of ward, be
reason of his awin fault, as salbe hereafter exponed: and the proprietar of
few-landes, may tyne and for-fault the samin, for non-payment of the eirly
duty. Cognoscere is to know and understand, recognoscere is to know again or
at the 2. time to understand. For generally, all superiors of quhom lands ar
halden in chief, first hes bin proprietars of the samin lands: quhilk lands
being annalied, and sauld be them heritably; to be halden of themselves and
their aires, ceasis to be property to them: and becomes tennendrie immediately
halding of them and their aires. And gif it happens the vassal, or possessour,
to quhom the lands are sauld, to commit ane fault or crime, quhairby he tynis
and fore-faultis the lands: the superior hes entresse and regresse to the
property of the lands, and may recognosce the samin, and as it were the
second time vindicate to himself the property thereof. Swa the samin lands,
quhilk were first property to him, and thereafter tennendrie, be reason of the
alienation, now becomes again property, and returnis to their first nature
and condition, Iure acerescendi, seu potius consolidatione proprietatis cum
superioritate, ob culpam vassali. Recognition properly in the practicque of
this realm, is quhen any vassal, or free tennent, haldand his lanies be
service of ward and relieve, sellis and annalies all and haill his lands with
their pertinents, or the may pairt thereof, without licnce, consent, or
confirmation of his over-lorde. In the quhilk caise, all and haill his lands,
alsweill nocht annalied, as annalied, and halden as said is, may be recognosced
and resaised in the superioures hand^s, and both the property and possession
theirof perteinis to to him to be bruiked, or disponed be him, at his pleasure;
quhairof diverse and sindrie practicques are extant in the Register in the days
o King James the Fourt, of good memory. The superior understanding the lands
to be wrangouslie annalied, as said is: incontinent theirafter may use the
recognition theirof, and without process, or ordour of law, may take saising of
the samin, conform to the auld practik of this realm: Because the samin
alienation is done to his dishonor and contempt be his vassal, quha should do
reverence, and service to him, and therefore without his consent should nocht do
onie thing to dissolve the league and band, The causes of recognition.
quhilk is betuixt them. Mairover the vassal, may nocht make the said
alienation, because theirby, he may becum puir, annd unable to do to his
superior sik service, as he should do of the law. Cuiac lib. 1. De feud. And
nocht withstanding that the saising is taken be the superior; it the vassal
or possessour tinis nor forfaultis na ways the property of the saides lands,
until eire and day be outrun: Swa that he do diligence within forty days
after the said recognition, and taking of the saising, to crave and ask fra
his superior the saides lands to him to borgh, that is to repledge them,
findand pledge and caution, that he sall be reddie to do to his superior anent
the saides lands, all that equity and law requiris. Stat. Rob. 3. c. 2. This
kind of recognition is conform to the laws of the fewes, Libellarius
contractus.
quia feudum amittitur. si fidelis libellario nomine, amplius medietate in
feudum dederit, aut pro pignore plus medietate obligaverit.. 1. quib. mod.
feudum amittatur, and.. 1. de alienatione feudi. Et in jure Canonico. c. 2. and
ibi. gl. extr. de feud. Porro libellarius contractus dicitur, venditio, quae
fit scriptura interveniente, certo pretio, and certa pensione constituta, in
annos singulos, ut post Feudistas scribit Cuiac in d,. 1. Recognition of lands
is sum times generally taken money ways. Stat. Rob. 3. c. nota quod iste. 21.
Sindrie forms of recognition.
First gif the vassal deceasis the superior may recognosce, and retain all
the lands halden of him until they be recovered fra him be the entresse of
the righteous air, and that be reason of none-entres.

2 After that the air hes recovered the lands, forth of the hands of his
superior: Nevertheles the superior may recognosce, and retain the samin,
until security be maid to him for payment of the relieve.

3 Gif the vassal is fugitive for slauchter, and nocht law bidand, the
superior may recognosce the land halden of himself, sa lang as the felon or
manslayer happenis to live. Conform to the quhilk be the acts of Parliament,
the liferent of the vassal, being eir and day at the horn perteins to the
immediate superior, except he be rebel for treason, in the quhilk case; his
life-rent, and all his lands, gudes and gear moveable, and immovable,
perteinis to the King allanerlie, Quia poena debet eidem applicari adversus
quem committitur culpa. 4. Gif the vassal annalies his lands, or the may
pairt thereof, without license, consent, or confirmation of his Over-lord; The
Overlord may recognosce the same, as said is. Bot in this case he is oblished
to let the lands to borgh, to his vassal; askand, and cravand the samin
within the lauchfull space of forty days, after the recognition; and saising
taken until it be tried be the judge Ordinar, quhidder the cause of
recognition be lauchfull or nocht, quhilk being found lauchfull, the judge
should counsel the King, and decern any uther superior, to hald his hands fra
the lands, and let them to borgh to his vassal. And gif the cause be found
just and reasonable; The judge should decerne the property and possession of all
and haill the lands, to perteine and remain with the superior. 5. Quhen two
or mair parties contendis be way of deed and arms, for the possession of
lands, the superior thereof may recognosce and sequestrat the samin, until
it be tried, quhilk of them is lauchfull possessour; and thereafter let the
lands to borgh to him, quha is found to have best richt of the possession.

6 The superior may recognosce and retain lands halden of him in chief, for
service aucht to him, forth of the samin lands. Bot be the practicque of this
realm: The service aucht to be proven and liquidat, and thereafter the lands
may be lauchfully comprised.

7 Lands halden in fewferm, payand ane certain eirlie dewtie, Nomine feudi
fermae, may be recognosced be the superior, for none payment of the few duty,
and that two manner of ways. The first, ex provisione legis, and natura
contractus. For the few sermorer not payand his few-ferm, for his ingratitude
and un-thankfulnes, tinis and fore-faltis his few-ferm, be the disposition of
the Law, quhilk as it was not in practicque and use within this Realm.

The second is, ex provisione hominis. et conditionibus contractui insertis,
Clause irritant.
quhilk is called ane clause irritant, as quhen ane clause and provission is
contained in the infeftment, that if two or maa terms run in ane of non
payment of the few-ferm duty: then and in that case; the infeftment of
few-ferme to be irritum, null and of nane availl, quhilk, is conform to the
daily practicque of this realm, Quia pacta conventa legem contrahentibus
praescribunt. vid. l 1. et Tit. c. de jure emphyten. Always, be the act of
Parliament maid be Ia. 6. p. 15. C, 246. Alienations of lands maid in few-ferm,
are null for not payment of the fewe-dueties, be the space of two eires, albeit
na paction or provision be maid thereanente in the infeftment.

RECORDUM, Recordatio lib. 1. c. contingit. 31. quhair-anent I find
difficulty. Always recorda summonitionis, signifies the rehearse, report, or
testification of the execution of the summondes, brieve, or uther precept. Ia.
1. p. 9. c. 112. quhilk execution, Indorsation.
is now called Indorsation. Because commounly it is written in dorso, and upon
the back of the summondes, leg. Forest. c. 25. and be the practick and daily
consuetude of this Realm it observed, the execution of all brieues before
inferior judges, and of all criminal summondes before the three Estaites in
Parliament, are verified in judgment, be the record of the executor theirof,
and two witness at the least. And in auld times the serjandes, or maires, maid
the record of the summondes, be word, or be writ, as they pleased: and verified
the samin as said is. And until the samin were done, the defender could nocht
be compelled to make ane answer. lib. 1. c. cum autem. 8. de iudic. c. 50. And
King David the second. 18. Febr. 1369. and of his reign the forty eire,
statute and ordained annent the record of serjandes, or maires, that the
summounds and record theirof, salbe put in wreit gif it please the serjand or
mair, and he sal read the samin gif he can, in plain court Utherwaies, he may
make the record be word: in the best form he may, and gif he failies, he may be
helped and supplied be interrogatours of the judge, concerning all and sundry
clauses or artickles, necessarlie used in the record of ane summondes, quhilk
record the serjand or maire sall prieve sufficiently be lauchful witness. And
the said record being swa maid, the samin salbe received as lauchfull, and the
contrair party sall nocht be heard, to object against the same, or to propone
any exception against the lauchfulnes theirof: And it sall be leisum to the
schireffe, his depute, serjand, mair of fie, or onie uther depute serving in
the office of ane serjand or mair, be the authority of the King, or of onie
uther having power to make rehearsal of the summondes of the record or
indorsation theirof, swa that they be qualified, and abill to do the samin.
Ia. 1. p. 9. c. 112. ITEM, recordum curiae, signifies the report, rehearsal,
or minute of that quhilk is done in court or the interloquutour of the court.
lib. 1. c. contingit. 31. Quo. attach. c. nullus sectator. 20. In the Normand
law. li. 9. c. 31. vid. Sectator vid Varda. quhilk in auld times was nocht
written in buiks, bot enrolled togidder in paper. Rollment of Court.
Like as the Kings rolls are it written in parchement in the Checker.
Therefore they are called the rolment of court. As the Kings rolls or rotuli,
and the Clearke of Registar clericus rotulorum, in latin properly volumina,
quia involvuntur, and in se quasi retorquentur. And it is to wit that actiones
and pleyes, are aither directly and from the beginning persewed in ane court:
or they cum fra an inferior court, to ane superior per translationem. lib. 3.
c. praeterea. 16. as quhen ane pley or cause, is advocat from ane inferior
judge, to ane superior: quhilks advocations ar permitted and leisum to be maid
to the Kings court allanerlie, be the auld law of this Realm, sik as the
justice court, or schiref court: and now be the practik used, and observed,
to Lords of Session, and College of Justice. And swa because he quha alleged
that wrang was done to him in the inferior court, raised the record, or
interloquutor pronunced against him, and summound the judge to compeire before
the Kingis Justice, or schiref, to hear and see him decerned to have done
wrang. Therefore sola curia domini regis, dicitur habere recordum. h. e.
Potestatem cognoscendi de recordis and interloquutorijs, quae transferuntur ab
inferiore curia ad superiorem. Albeit ilk lauchfull court, sik as ane Barrone
court, hes their awin records, in all sik actiones as are intended and decided
before them, and nocht Advocate to ane superior judge. REGRATERIS. leg. burg.
cregratarij. 70. Quha byis onie merchandice or uther thing, Dardanarii.
and takis unlesumlie greater price for the samin afterward, as is exponed be
Ia. 2. p. 6. c 23. 24, Ia. 6. p. 12. c. 148. In the civil law, regrateris are
called dardanarij qui emunt, vt possint postea pluris vendere. l. annonam. 6.
de var. and extraord. crim. A quodam Dardano, qui annonam flagellabat. Alciat.
lib. 4. de verborum significatione. Forestallers.
And swa regrateris are so called be reason of the augmentation and hichting of
the prices. Forestallares are properly they quha pre-occupies and byes
merchandes before it cume to the market, or to the stall, or place quhair it
should be sauld, or the time of day statute and ordained theirto. Ia. 5. p. 4. c.
20. And mairover it is statute that na man dwelland within burgh, or without
the samin, sall upon the Fair day, bye onie thing outwith the ports of the
burgh leg. burg. c. nullus. 75. And likewaies na person should bye fish, flesh,
victual, or onie uther thing before market day, or the ringing of the bell in
the steipell. Stat. gild. c. 29. And mairover forstallers are challenged, and
accused because they sell their gudes, and payis nocht the Kings custom: that
they sell their gudes privatlie upon their awin fluire, that they are
fore-byars of quheat, bear, aits, cattle, and are coperis and sellers theirof,
turnand the samin in merchandice. leg. burg. c. de modo calumniandi
foristallatores. 154. RELEUIUM ane French word, from the latin relevare,
quhilk is to relieve, or to take up that quhilk is fallen, for it is given be
the tennent or vassal being of perfect age, after the expiring of the ward to
his over-lord, of quhome he haldes his lands be knicht service that is be
ward and relieve, and be payment thereof he relievis, and as it were raisis up
again his lands, after that they were fallen down in his superiou^^ hands,
be reason of waird. lib. 2. c. dicitur autem. 72. leg. Forest. c. si quis Comes
73. de judic. 65. And the proffites of the lands of the eire foresaid, after
the end of the waird, quhilk should be given in name of relieve, are understande
to be the retoured maill, of the saides lands, conform to the new extent
thereof. And therefore gif there be bot only wairde, and the air enter
before ane term run thereafter, the King or uther superior should have na
relieve, quia haerede ad aetate^ perveniente, et facta ei haereditatis
restitutione, quietus erit a relenia, ratione custodiae. lib. 2. c. tandem 70.
Be the auld law and consuetude of this Realm, the superior micht nocht be
compelled after the waird, to restore the lands to his vassal, until he had
been first satisfied for the relieve: because he had liberty to retain the
lands, until the said satisfaction were maid. Stat. Rob. 3. c. nota quod iste
21. Or else it was lesum to him as he pleased, to poynd the ground therefore
quia dominus potest distringere tenentes suos pro suo relevio, and servitio de
feudo suo, sibi debito, li. 2. c. Sunt quidam. 73. But now be the common
practicque, the non-payment of the relieve, is na lauchful excusation to the
superior, anent the receiving of his vassal. But he will be compelled be
precepts of the Chancellarie, to receive his tennente, or else he tynis the
superiority, enduring his lifetime. And it is leasum to him to poynde the
ground for payment of the relieve. Quia relevium est debitum reale, and
adhaerei fundo. The beginning, and the first institution of the ward and
relieve, was in the time of Malcolme the second, called Malcolme-Mac-Kenneth,
quha gave all and haill the lands of this realm to the inhabitants thereof,
and reserved nathing to himself in property; bot only his royal power and
the Mute hill of Scone, quhair he should hald Court, and receive homage, and
fealty of his vassalles: In recompensation quhairof, all the Barronnes gave
unto him, the ward, and relieve of the air of ilk barronne, for his princely
sustentation. In the English Laws, read in Magna Carta. Anno. 9. Hen. 3. cap.
2. And the statute of wards and relieves, maid be King Edward the first. 18.
eir of his reign.

REPLEGIARE, To replege, thatis, quhen any man, be virtue of his awin
jurisdiction, bringis back again, or reducis to his awin court his awin man,
fra any uther mannis court, and leavis ane plege, or cautioner behind him, for
administration of justice. vid. Culrach. It is not leasum to any man to replege
fra any uther court any person, bot his awin liege man, or halding land of him,
or remainand in his service, as ane of his family or consanguinitie. Stat.
Alex. c. Anno 4. Statut. 2. Rob. Br. cap. 11. Ass. reg. Da. c. Statuit. 37.
RESEANTISA, Lib. 1. c. Essoniorum. 10. Ane seiknesse and infirmity, quhairby
onie man is heavilie vexed. Essonium de Reseantisa, idem valet quod excusatio,
Essonium de Rescantisa.
de malo lecti, Bed evil. Cum quis morbo ita affligitur, ut sit lecto
affixus. In French, Mal. de Lit. stat. 1. Rob. Br. c. 5. In the Law of
Normandy. Lib. 9. c. 10. Essoinie, or excusation of Mal reseant, is quhen any
person lyand bed-fast in his awin house, or any uther place, is heavilie vexed
with seiknesse, that he may not travel without danger of his life. In jure
civili morbus Sonticus dicitur, qui eujusque rei agendae, impedimento est,
Morbus Sonticus.
veluti febris: Et legitimam excusationem ac dilationem praebet. L. Quaesitum
60. ff. de re Iudic. Aulus Gellius. Lib. 20. cap. 1. Appellat Morbum Sonticum,
quemlibet morbum vehementiorem, vim graviter nocendi habentem. RESPONDE, Or the
buike of Responde. Ia. 6. par. 11. c. 73. It is maid and written be the
directour of the Chancellarie. For quhen he directis precepts to the
Schireffe, to give saising of any lands retoured before him to the
Chancellarie: He makis ane memorial of the dait of ilk precept, and dewtie of
the lands; and commandis the Schireffe, to take security for the samin, during
the time of the ward, and non-entres, and of the relieve auchtand to the King,
gif the lands be halden be service of ward and relieve. Or of the doubling of
the few-ferme, or of the blench ferme, according to the halding of the lands.
Quhilk buike eirlie is presented to the Checker: And ilke Schireffe, and uther
judges, givers of saisinges upon precepts, direct forth of the Kingis
Chancellarie, are charged therewith in their comptes, compelled to make
answer thereto, and payment of all sums contained therein: for the quhilk
cause, it is called Responde, quhilke is the first word of ilke artickle of
the said buik. Further in the end of the saidis precepts, it is said,
praesentibus post proximum terminum minime valituris. And therefore, gif the
obteiner of the precept forth of the Chancellarie, lie out and take nocht
saising upon the samin, quhill ane term and maa be by-run after the dait
thereof, he sulde come again to the Chancellarie, and raise ane new precept,
quhairin is augmented the by-run mailles of the lands, sen the dait of the
first precept, and ane new memorial or Responde, is maid thereof. RETOUR,
quhom be it is maid, and quhy it is sa called. vid. breve de morte
antecessoris. REGRES, from Regrediendo, likeas REVERSION, a revertendo: For
like as the buyar of lands, lettis them return to the seller thereof, be the
reversion given unto him. Even swa be the regresse of the superior of lands
wed-set, be his vassal, after the redemption thereof, suffers the first seller
of the samin to come back again to his awin place, anent the halding of them as
he did before the said alienation. Swa reversion and regresse are different,
for reversion is given be him quha buyis the land, Reachept.
Cum pacto de retro-vendendo, to the annalier thereof. In French it is called,
Jus reacheptus or reachept. And ane regresse is given be the superior of
lands, to the annalier thereof, quhairby he promisis to receive again him, or
his aires to be his vassalles, as they were of before, quhen it sall happen any
of them to redeem the said lands. 27. November 1567. George Halyburnton,
contrare the Lord of Haltoun. Lands annalied to be halden of the annalier and
his aires.
And gif any man annalies lands under reversion, to be halden of him and his
aires, ane regresse is not necessar: For they being afterward redeemed, he quha
first annalied them, recovers the property theirof, without any new saising,
and the same returnis to him, and is consolidat, with the superiority quhilk
he reserved to him and his aires, the time of the alienation. Lands annalied
to be halden of the superior.
But gif ane man annalies lands to ane uther, under reversion to be halden of
the superior, and the byar thereof obtain infestmente, and saising halden of
him: The annalier thereby is denuded of the property, and alswa is na langer
vassal to his former superioure, and can na ways recover his former estait,
but be redemption of the lands, conform to the reversion granted be him quha
boucht them. And alswa be ane regresse, given to him be the superior: In the
quhilk caise it is necessare to him, quha first annalied the lands, and
there-after redeemed them to take new saisinge, To the effect, the property
quhilke was first annalied, may return to the seller. And that he may halde
the samin lands in chief of his superior, and his aires, as he did before
the alienation. And it is generally to be observed, that quhaire ane regresse
is required, ane new saising is necessare. In aulde times, the reversion was
contained in the chartour, as is manifest be diverse chartours, it extant in the
register, given in the time of King David the second: conteinand the tenor of
the reversion after the clause, Tenent. and habent. and uthers aulde chartours
in the form after following. Ane form of chartour contenand ane Reversion.


OMNIBUS hoc scriptum visuris vel audituris. I. dominus de A.
Salutem in domino.
Noveritis me concessisse, impignorasse, and ad immobile vadium dimisisse, and
hoc praesenti scripto meo confirmasse, nobili viro. V. de F. Omnes terras meas
de A. cum pertinentiis, in baronia de C. infra vicecomitatum de B. proviginti
Marcis usualis monetae Scoticae, mihi per praedictum V. tempore confectionis
praesentium, ad opus meum valde necessarium, gratanter mutuatis, and in usus
meos conversis. tenent. and habent. praefato V. haeredibus suis and assignatis
a me haeredibus meis and assignatis in feodo and haereditate, cum omnibus
commoditatibus, libertatibus, and asiamentis ac justis pertinentiis
quibuscunque adeo libere, and quiet, plenarie, and honorifice, been, and in
pace: sicut ego vel praedicessores mei, praefatas terras cum pertinentiis,
liberius aut quietius tenui, aut possedi, tenuerunt, aut possederunt, aliquo
tempore praeterito. Et semper quousque ego praedictus I. haeredes mei, vel mei
assignati viginti marcas praefatae monetae, praedicto V. haeredibus suis, vel
suis assignatis, in uno die inter solis ortum and occasum ejusdem, apud
Abirdene in Ecclesia parochiali ejusdem; super magnum altar, simul and semel,
persolvero, vel persolverint sine fraud. Fructibus, firmis, vel quibuscunque
aliis commoditatibus seu emolumentis medio tempore per praedictum V. haeredes
suos vel assignatos, perceptis vel percipiendis, levatis vel levandis, indicta
summa viginti marcarum, aut ejus solutione, nullatenus computandis. Quia dedi,
contessi, and assignavi praefato V. haeredibus suis, and assignatis, omnes
praefatas firmas, fructus, and alias commoditates quascunque, and emolumenta de
dictis terris cum pertinentiis, provenient. toto tempore, quo praedictae
viginti Marcae (ut praemittitur) non fuerint persolutae: ex mea libera
donatione, and pura voluntate, pro suis consiliis, auxiliis, and
gratitudinibus, multipliciter mihi factis and impensis. In quibus-quidem terris
cum pertinent. praefato V. tradidi saisinam, and possessionem corporalem sibi,
haeredibus suis, and assignatis, juxta tenorem praesentis scripti remansuram.
Ego vero praedictus. I. haeredes mei and assignati, totas terras praedictas de
A. cum pertinent. praefato V. haeredibus suis and assignatis, juxta vim,
tenorem and effectum, praesentis scripti; In omnibus and per omnia, contrae
omnes mortales varrantizabimus, acquietabimus, and defendemus. In cujus rei
testimonium huic praesenti scripto meo, sigillum meum opposui, and propter
majorem rei evidentiam, sigillam Andreae Giffard, tunc aldermanni de Abirdene,
praesentibus apponi procuravi.

Apud Abirdene. 23. Augusti Anno Domini 1419. Testibus Laurentio de Abernethie,
Domino de Rothemay, Domino Wilhelmo de Lundoris vicario de Abirkerdour, cum
multis aliis ad praemissa specialiter vocatis.


But now the Chartour is given be the sellar of the lands, and the reversion be
the buyar thereof, severally, sealed and subscrived be them, and the buyar
keepis the chartour, and the annalier keeps the reversion. Quhilk form
appears to have the beginning in the days of King James the third, quha in
his acts of parliament. p. 5. 20. November, cap. 27. callis the buying and
selling of lands, be chartour and saising, and taking again of reversions, ane
new invention, and for the mair security, ordainis all reversions to be
registrate, vid. Sterlingus. vid. Vadium.


S
SCACCARIUM, the Checker, in French Eschequier, the place quhair the Kingis
rentes and patrimony, alsweill property, as casualities, is inbrocht, compted
and received, and the profits of all lands fallen in the Kingis hands be
reason of ward. Lib. 2. cap. Si vero dominus. 46. Some callis it the
sovereign and supreme court, in the quhilk all causis and actiones are
decided in the second instance, specially in the cuntrie of Normandy: For it
is written in the law of Normandy. Lib. 15. c. 1. in fine. That Philippus
pulcher, did institute two parliamentes in Paris, and two Checkers in Roan.
Paulus Aemilius writes, Scaccarium to be as it were, Statarium, quod homines
ibi in Jure sistantur, vel quod fit Stataria and perennis curia, cum caeterae
curiae essent indictivae, nec loco, nec tempore statae. As writes Budaeus in
Annotationibus in Pandectas. Be reason as said is the Checker was ane certain
stable court, and nocht deambulatoure, or runnand fra time to time, or fra ane
place to ane uther: As the Session of this Realm was before King James the
Fifth. Qui instituit Statariam curiam, cum anteo esset indictiva: Be reason it
did sit thrice in the eire, quhair and quhen it pleased the King. Uthers
thinkis that Scaccarium is so called, a similitudine ludi Scacchorum: that is,
the play of the Chesse: because money persons conveenis in the Checker to
pleye their causes, contrare uthers, as gif they were fechtand in ane arrayed
battle, Scata.
quhilk is the form and ordour of the said play. Jus Normand. Lib. 15. cap.
1. in fine. Uthers alleadgis, that it cummis fra ane aulde Saxon word, Scata,
as writis D. Thomas Smith: quhilk signifies treasure, taxation, or imposte,
quhairof, and of uther casualities, count, and reckoning is maid in the
Checker. Quhilke compte (like as all uther comptes) is maid in sik sort and
form, that tabulae accepti, that is, the charge, and tabulae expensi, that is
the discharge, ar equal, and sic aeque, because the compter hes given forth na
mair, nor he hes received: and alswa hes given als meikle forth as he hes
received. Quhilk is called pariare rations; and this compter is called
Pariator, Pariare rations. Pariator.
l. ult:. idem quesiit de condict. indeb. l. penult.. conductore de jure
immunitat. Or else the charge and discharge are inequall, in sik manner, that the
compter hes received mair nor he hes expended, and sa at the fute of the count,
he is found restand awand certain sums up-taken be him, and not given forth,
quhilk is reliquare rations, and this compter is called reliquator, Reliquare
rations.
and is oblished reliqua infer to pay the rest auchtand be him, l. creditor
102.. Valerius de solutionibus. Or thirdly, tabulae expensi superant tabulas
accepti, quhen the compter hes given forth nor he hes received, and swa is
superexpended, Superare rations.
quhilk is called Prosdapanan, h. e. supererogare, vel superare rations seu
tabulas accepti. And the compter quha makis sik ane count, is called
Prosdapanetes, supererogator. Quhilk word is used in the Evangell of S. Luke c.
10. 35. quhair the Samaritane haveand pity and compassion upon the man, quha
betwixt Jerusalem and Jericho was spuilied, and wounded be thieves and robbers,
did commit him to be cured be the host of his ludging, and gave him two
pennies, and promised to recompense, quhatsumever he spended mair. vid.
Ballivus.

SACREBORGH, or rather Sickerborgh, securus plegius, ane sicker, sure,
sufficient cautioner. quo. attach. in prin. Ia. 2. p. 14. c. 75. Is ane manner
of borgh, or caution, quhilk ane findis to ane uther, and specially in
actions, or pleyes; for quhen onie man hes action to an uther for thieft or
slaughter, quhairof he offers to accuse him judicially, it behuiffes the
persewar, to knit and oblish him, in the hands of ane officiar, or before ane
judge competent: and find sure caution, and sicker borgh, that he sall persew
in form of Law. Mod. ten. cur. c. 44. lib. 4. c. 1. Stat. Alex. c. 9. c. si
quis conquestus. 10. In the civil law, the accuser in criminal causes cogitur
inscribere nomen. l. 3. ff. de accusat. And conform to the practick and law of
this Realm, the persewer quhan he raisis the letters, finds caution, to
report the samin again, dewlie execute and indorsat. And also to persew at ane
certain day, conform to the tenor of the letters. And moreover quhen he
accuses ane uther criminallie, before the justice and his deputes, he should
swear the dittay to be true, quhairupon he accusis the defender, bot the Kings
advocat, accusand criminally, any of the Kings lieges, is na ways oblished to
swear in this case. SAK. lib. 1. c. 3. In sum auld buikes it is called placitum
and emenda de transgressione hominum in curia nostra. In the Britton laws of
King Edward it is written Sacha, Sacha.
est si quilibet aeliquem nominatim de aliquo calumniatus fuerit, and ille
nagaverit, forisfactura probationis vel negationis (si evenerit) sua erit.
Garba.
Quhilk may be called the unlaw or amerciament paid be him quha denies that
thing, quhilk is proven against him to be true, or affirmis that thing quhairof
the contrar is of verity. SAISINA, ane French word saising or possession, vid.
Dissasina. SCHAFFA sagittarum, ane schiefe of arrows, containing twenty
four. Utherwais called garba. Ane scheife of Irone, contains sexteene gades,
ane scheife of steile conteines fourteen gades. leg. navium, or schip laws.
c. 2. SCHIREFF, ane principal ruler, or judge of ane certain part of the
Realm. In latin praeses provinciae. Aluredus in the confederation maid with
Guntherus king of Denmark, divided England in Satrapias, centurias, and
decurias, and called Satrapiam ane schire, That is ane cutting or section,
Schira.
as is written in the auld Britton laws verb. centuria: like as we say as it,
scheire corns, or scheire grass, or an pair of scheirs, quhairwith claith is
cutted. And swa ane schire, or schiref-dome, is an part of land, cutted and
separate be certain meithes and marches from the rest, within the quhilk the
schireffe, as judge, dois justice, and pronuncis decreites and doomes, to all
the inhabitants theirof. Quhilk is called comitatus, provincia, vel
vicecomitatus. lib. 3. c. tali autem. 18. lib. 4. c. si quis 28. c. si quis in
manibus. 42, schireffs in this realm hes their offices given to them be the
King in heritage, contrair to the act of Parliament. Jam. 2. par. 11. Cap. 44.
Quhilk is the cause of great enormities and wranges, be reason the Schireffes
being infest heretablie, thinkis themselves sure of their office, and regairdis
nocht the execution theirof. And to the effect that good men may make
conscience of their calling, (quhairof they sall make count and reckoning to
God, of all evil committed, and of all good omitted) And that uthers may be
instructed of their dewtie, and ather moved to do the samin, or else be
punished for neglecting theirof: I have collected and gathered forth of the
laws of this Realm, ane schort rehearsal, and sum, of all things
perteining to the office of ane Schireffe: And first of persons, sik as
Schireffes, deputes, Clerks, and serjands. Secondly, of Schireffe courts.
Thirdly, of his office, and jurisdiction, quhilk generally consists, in
observation and execution of all the Kings laws. And particularly, in
particular actiones and pleyes, perteining to his jurisdiction and court.
Quhairof sum ar civil, uthers are criminal, and last of the pains and
punishment of malicious, or negligent Schireffes.

Deputes and Clerks.
First, Schireffs should be in all and sindrie parts throwout the haill realm,
and specially in the North parts, and West parts of the samin, sik as the
North Isles, and South Isles, for the acquieting of the peopill be justice: and
in Rosse and Caithnes. Ia. 4. par. 6. Cap. 59. Cap. 61. And to the effect they
may the better exerce their office, and do justice to every person, as
effeiris, they should be good, sufficient, and qualified men, as is statute be
King David 2, 6. November. 1357. In ilk schireffdome they should do justice to the
Kings lieges, hauld courts in lauchfull time, and continue the samin
according to law, swa as that Actiones and process, begun and intented before
them, sall na ways be delayed throw their negligence, fraud, or malice. Stat.
Rob. 3. ex libro Sconensi, and should do justice and full law, alsweill to puire
as to rich, under all pain and charge that may follow. Ia. 1. p. 2. c. 45. and
briefly all Schireffes and uther ordinar Judges, their deputes and Clerks,
should know and understand the laws of this Realm, and acts of Parliament,
quhairof the execution is committed to their charge, quhilk they should cause be
execute without delay. Ia. 6. p. 12. c. 124. and should not only be qualified
in judgment and knawledge, to minister justice, bot also should have
sufficiently of their awin, in lands, gudes and gear, quhairin they may be
punished, being found culpable in execution of their office. Ia. 1. p. 1. c. 6.

The Schireffes fee.
The schireff should have for his fee of the escheittes, ten pundes. Leg. Mal.
Make. c. 1. Quhilk fee should be paid to him of the extractes and escheittes of
his awin court, and na utherwise: but na fee should be allowed to him until
first he make count to the Checker of his intromission. Ass. reg. Da. ex libro
Sconensi. And under pretense of his fee, he sulde take nathing, nor use onie
extorsion upon them, quha cummis to faires, parliament, or general councelles.
Iam. 3. par. 5. c. 33. Nor sulde take na distress of gudes and gear of little
price and quantity, cummand to the faires or mercattes. Always he sulde have
the best Ox, or Cow, or unridden horse, quhilkis are stalled, or brought to
be saulde. James 2. parlia. 13. cap. 60.

All Schireffs sall have good and sufficient deputes, or baillies, Schireff
deputes and their quality.
for quhom they sall answer. And gif any person be infeste with sik office in
aulde time, and is un-able, or un-apt to use and exerce the samin in his awin
proper person: he sall present to the King, ane sufficient depute, to exerce
the said office in his place, for quhom he salbe answerable, as is statute be
King Da. 2. 6. November. 1357. quhilk is confirmed be Iam. 1. p. 1. c. 6. And
generally it is true, that ilk Scheriff, and uther ordinar judge, salbe halden
to answer for their deputes, as themselves. Iam. 3. p. 5. c. 26. And therefore
all Schireffes, and judges, for their awin better security, sulde make their
deputes ane or maa, good and wise substantious men, of best fame, knawledge,
understanding, and experience, and least suspect within the Schiref-dome, and
should cause them be sworn the time of their admission, that they sall leilly
and truly use their office: and gif they continue them fra an eir to ane
uther: they sall cause them be eirly sworn, for administration of justice, at
the head court after Michaelmes. I. 5. p. 6. c. 73.

Schireff-Clerkes should be honest famous men, quha be themselves and their
sufficient deputes, salbe always resident, within the head burgh of the
schire, for registration of letters of horning, and better execution of their
office. I. 6. p. 6. c. 75. Be the auld law of this realm, the Schireff Clerk
was in-put, and out-put be the King: and had na league nor band with the
Schireff, but was bound and oblished to the King allanerlie, and was sustained
in his hienes house, as occasion and time required, Schireffes Clerks.
and did all things concerning his office, with the counsel and advice of the
King. Ass. reg. Da. in libr. Sconensi.

The Schireff Clerk receivis for his fee of ilk amerciament or unlaw, two
shillings. leg. Mal. Make. c. 1. gif he sall happen to be found culpable in
execution of his office, and specially anent the registration of letters of
horning: he should be punisched of all his gudes moveable, to be applied to the
Kings use, and the Schireff sall pay for the fault of his Clerk, ane hundredth
pounds to the King, and all damnage and interesse of the party grieved. Jam.
6. p. 11. c. 71.

Schireffes should send their deputes and Clerks, ane or maa eirlie, Deputes and
Clerks.
at the first day of November, to the Lords of the Session, to be examined and
admitted be them; under sik pains, as the Lords sall please to modifie,
in-case of failie, to be employed to our Sovereign Lords use. Ja. 6. p. 11. c.
80. Ja. 6, p. 12. c. 124.

The Schireffs serjand, or officiar, should have ane horn, Serjand.
and ane reide wand of three quarters of ane yairde lang at the least, and gif
he have nocht the samin, he should be challenged therefore, be the Schireffe in
head courts, Ja. 1. p. 6. c. 99. Quhairof the ane and the uther is necessar to
him in the execution of his office, for with the sound or blast of the horn,
he denuncis the disobedient rebels: And also persewis malefactoures, quha are
fugitive fra the Law, and raises the inhabitants of the cuntrie, to concur and
assist in taking and apprehending of them. And with the wand, he relaxes them
quha returnis to the Kingis obedience fra the horn, and receivis them to the
Kingis peace, As I have said already in an uther place. Likewaies all
schireffs, stewarts, and baillies sall cause the maires, serjands and
officiars, have ane signet conteinand the 1. letter of their name, quhairwith
all letters, and precepts extant be them, and indorsations thereof, salbe
marked and stamped. Ja. 5. p. 6. c. 74. The Schirefs serjand should have for his
fee of ilk amerciament or unlaw of court, an colpindach, or threttie pennies.
leg. Malc. Mack. c. 1. Schireffs court.


It is lesum and necessar to the Schireff and his deputes, to halde schireffe
courts, for execution of his office. Quhilks courts ilk Schireffe be the auld
law of this realm, is oblished to halde after the space of ilk forty days.
lib. 4. cap. Statutum. 19. ass. reg. Da. c. ad summonitiones. 19. And now all
Schireffes, Stewartes, and Baillies should hald three head courts in the eire,
be themselves in proper person. Except they have just and lauchfull excuses of
seiknes, or of the Kingis service. And all barrones and free halders, quha aw
suit and presence in the saides courts, sall compeire personally. And the
absentes should be amerciat, and all they quha aw bot suit allanerlie, sall send
their suittoures, honest and qualified men, Suit and presence.
able to decide onie actioun or cause. And all they quha cummis to the Court,
sall remain until the samin be ended. And sall pass upon inquestes and
assizes, and assist the Schireffe doing their office, and service, conform to
their infestmentes. Ja. 5. p. 6. c. 71. The Schireffe in his court sall keipe
and observe sik form and ordour of process, as is used before the Lords of
Council, and Session. And he should set his Court peremptourlie upon fifteen
days, and all precepts direct be him to summond and warn the parties, should be
execute upon fifteen days. Iam. 1. par. 9. cap. 130. Iam. 5. par. 6. cap. 72.
And gif the indwellers within the Schireff-dom and royalty thereof, compeiris
nocht in sufficient number, or sendis nocht their attournayes, to pass upon
serving of in-queists or retoures, swa that thereby the Schireff-court is
weak, and nocht weill stuffed. The Schireffe may warn the gentlemen of the
regalitie, to compeire and enforce his Court, but prejudice of their regalitie.
Iam. 1. par. 9. cap. 130. Item, all Barrones, Knights, free-halders, and
stewardes of Bischoppes, of Abbotes, and of Earls, should be present at the
Schireff-court, under the pain of the Kingis un-lawe. Lib. 4. c. statutum 19.
Ass. reg. Da. c. ad summonitiones 19. All the saidis persons and uthers, quha
comes to the court, sulde come in sober and quiet manner, with als money
persons, as they daily sustain in house-halde and family: and beand come to
their ludgeing, they sulde wear na weapones, but their knife, and gif any of
them dreadis bodily harm of ane uther: the schireffe should grant him
law-burrowes. Ia, 2. p. 14. c. 83, and it is leasum to the schiref to charge
all persons to cum to his court in sober manner, and gif they refuse to skaill
their gadderinges, and convocation, he may stay or continue the court: and the
persons disobedient, sal be punished be warding of their persons be the space
of ane eire: and be payment of the expensis and damnage sustained be the
party, throw delaie of justice. Ia. 3. p. 14: c. 104, And albeit all
friehalders and uthers persons should cum to court in quiet manner,, as said is.
Nevertheles it is leasum to the schireffe, stewart bailly, and uthers the
kings officiars, to ride with greater number, for execution of justice, The
unlaw of court.
and forth setting of the Kingis authority. Ia. 5. p. 4. c. 27. The unlaw of
the Schireffe in his court, should not exceed the sum of 16, schillinges, and
to his clerk 2. schillinges, and to his serjand an colpindach, or 30. pennies,
leg. Malc. Mack. c. 2.

Jurisdiction. The Schireff hes na jurisdiction outwith his awin territory.
The jurisdiction of the Schireffe consistis and standis generally in diverse
and sindrie points. Bot first of all it is to wit, that the schireffe his
depute, and serjand, hes na jurisdiction or power outwith the bounds of his
awin schireffdome, to sumund or attache any person, or to poynd or take ane
destres of onie man's gudes and gear: for they should make faith that they sall
faithfully serve the King, within their awin Schireffedom, and sal nocht
trouble or molest onie person within the samin, against law and reason. Ass.
reg. Da. c. nullus. 13. quo attach. c. nullus. 57. Swa it is manifest, that the
Schireff hes only jurisdiction, within his awin Schireffedome. The Schireff
should cause the laws be proclaimed and observed.
Within the quhilk, he and his deputes should cause the laws and acts of
Parliament to be published, red, and proclaimed in his courts, and to be
keiped and observed be all our Sovereign Lords lieges, alsweil in the courts
of all Prelates, Earls, Barrones, and uthers haveand power to hald court, as in
his awin schireffe court, and should give to them the copy of the laws, that na
man pretend justly ignorance thereof. Stat. 2. Rob. c. Robertus 28. And
siklike in all burrowes of this realm, the schireff sall cause 12. leil and
honest men of the burgh, swear and make faith, that they sall cause the Kingis
laws be keiped and observed. Stat. Alex. c. Item in omni. 25. and to the
effect the samin may be the better done be him, the acts of Parliament being
registrat, should be delivered be the Clerk of the Register to him: quhilk he
sall cause be proclaimed oppenlie, in chief place of the schireffdome, and
should give copies of them to prelates, barrones, and burrows within his
schireffdome upon the expenses of the asker, and should cause all indwellers
within his schireffdome both to land and to burgh, to keipe and observe the
said laws and statutes, under the pain of deprivation of his office Ia, 1. p.
3. c. 67. Ia. 2. pr 14. c. 90. The Schireff should be present in all courts.
And likewaies to the effect the schireff should see justice lauchfullie done and
ministered: he should be present in all courts of Bishops, Abbots, Earls,
Barrones, and friehalders to quho^ it is not leasum to hald their courts,
except the schireff or his deputes be present, or summoned to that effect, li.
4. c. die lunae. 14. Stat. Alex. assisa. 10. Ass. reg. Da, c. 1. And siklike na
barrone may hald court of battle, water, or jron, except the schiref or his
deputes be present to see justice done. Stat. Alex. c. praeterea. 28. vid.
duellum. vid, mahamium, And mairover the schireff and all uther judges within
the schireffedome, The Schireff should repair to the King.
should repair and cum to the King, the first night he cummis within the
schireffdome, to answer to all complaints maid against him, anent the nocht
keiping and observation of the laws: and sal nocht depart, nor pass away
without license asked and obtained, under the pain and unlaw of aucht kye,
Ass. reg. Da. c. statutum. 20, quo attach. c. Statutum. 80. And also sall nocht
pass away fra the King, except he have with him the Acts of Parliament, and
his instructiones given to him in writ Ass. reg. Da. ex libro Sconensi. He should
not execute or obey unlauchfull commandes.
Last concerning the execution and observation of the laws, the schireffe, nor
na uther officiar of the law, sall onie ways obey, or execute onie command
direct to them be the King, under the great seal, privy seal, or signet,
repugnant or contrarious to law or reasson. Bot gif onie sik precept be
presented to them, they sall receive the samin reverentlie, write upon the back
thereof, and remit the samin again. Rob. 2. 1372. And of his reign, the first
eire,

The schireffe should nocht only make the publication of the laws, and cause the
samin to be kept and observed: Bot also should concur and assist with uthers to
do the samin, sik as the justice generale, chalmerlane, and auditors of our
Sovereign Lords Checker.

The Schireffe at command of the justice general, should summound certain
persons to burgh and to land, to give up dittay, to the justice Clearkes, The
Schireffs office in the justice air.
and should be present in proper person at the justice air with the verification
of the saides summonds. He should sustain and pay the expenses of the justice
clearkes, in the time of the taking up of the dittay. Quhilk should be allowed to
him in his comptes, he should (conform to the justice precept direct to him)
summond all Bishops, Abbotes, Earls, Barrones, Freehalders, and al uthers quha
aucht presence in the justice air, and are immediate vassals to the K. to
compeir in the justice court, to fortify and assist the justice. Likewaies he
should summound all persons indyted of new, and of aulde, al pledges oblished
for the entry of onie man in the air, all persons quha will persew, or
defend, in the said court, to compeir, do, and fulfill that quhilk accordis
of the Law. He sulde be present in the court, with sufficient testimony of
the execution of of the said summondes. And sulde make provisione for the
justice and his Clerks, quhilk sulde be allowed to him in his first count in
the Checker. He should take up sik sums of money and gif need beis poynd
therefore as the justice modifies to be paid be them quha are amerciat, or
cummis in will. vid. Iter,

Mairover gif there be onie persons, quhom the Crowner may nocht, nor dare
nocht arreist: He sall deliver their names to the schireffe, quha salbe becum
borgh and cautioner to enter and present them in the justice air. Or sall
pass, or send sufficient number of men, to fortify the Crowner, making the
arriestmente, and bringing the persoun arriested to the Schireffe to be kept
be him. Quhilk gif the Schireffe failies to do, he sal pay ten pound to the
King. James. 3. par. 14. Cap. 99. Because the schireffe should keip the persons
arristed be the Crowner, and enter them to the justice air, gif there be na
Castle perteining to the King within the schireffdome, quhairin they may be
kept James. 5. p. 3. Cap. 5.

Mairover, the schireffe or his deputes should pass, or send with the Crowner,
and visie the gudes, perteining to all persons convict in the justice air,
and deliver to the Crowner sa meikle thereof, as he should have be the law, and
inbring the remnant to the Thesaurar. James. 3. par. 14. Cap. ^02. And the last
day of the air, the schireff should thoill ane assise anent the using and
execution of his office. James. 3. par. 14, Cap. 102. Finally the schireffe or
his deputes be their Clerk, should inbring to the thesaurar, all extractes of
the justice air, and sums of money contained thereintill: quhilk gif he
failies to do, na allowance salbe granted to him in the Checker of his comptes,
albeit he have the Kingis letter in the contrare, granted to him in (...)
favors. Ass. reg. Da. ex libro Sconensi.

Quhen the chalmerlaine is to hald his air, within (...) burgh, the schireffe
be vertew of the Chalmerlaines precept direct to him; (...) ^ch and arreist
without delaie, under sure pledges and cautioners, Chalmerlaine air.
al (...) quhais names the Provest and Baillies of the burgh sall give to him
in writ; To compeire before the chalmerlaine, or his deputes, day, place and
time of the air, to answer to sik things as sall be laid to their charge. At
the quhilk court, and air, the schireff and his deputes should be present,
bringand with them the said precept and verification, or testimony of the
execution thereof. Iter. camer. c. 2.

All schireffs should be examined eirelie in ilk checker, how they have kieped
the acts of Parliament, and how they have punished the transgressoures thereof.
For in the Checker, the schiref, Checker.
or ane sufficient depute for him, haveand sufficient power, should compeire and
swear thereanent, in animam eius: Under the pain of ten pound, and tinsall of
his office at the Kingis will. Ass. reg. Da. ex libro Sconensi. In the quhilk
Checker, the schireffe should make count, and full paymente, aeque with the
Rolls, sa far as he hes intrometted, or micht intromet with the Kingis
property or casualities, sik as escheits and wards, under the pain of
warding of his person. James. 5. par. 7. Cap. 96. James. 6. par. 11, Cap. 74.
And should bring with him, his court buikes, with the count of escheits, and
unlawes, intrometted with be him, togidder with the registers of hornings
registrate be him in his buikes, and of all saisinges. James. 6. par. 12. Cap.
124. And should find cautioners, burges men within Edinburgh, acted in the buikes
of Council, that he sall eirlie make count in the Checquer, and payment of all
things intrometted with be him. Ia. 6. p. 11. c. 80. James. 6 par. 14. Cap.
230. And gif he be found restand at the fute of his count onie sums of
silver, to the King or his Thesaurar: it is leasum to the Thesaurar, as he
pleasis, to poynd the Schireffe and his deputes, or the party to quhome
saising is given, for the saides sums, conform to the buike of responde. Ia
6. p. 11. c. 73.

The jurisdiction and office of the schireff, The Schireffs jurisdiction in
civil matters.
consists alswa in particular civil actions and pleyes, and decision theirof
in his Court, and likewaies in execution of decreitis given be civil judges,
sik as the Lords of Council, and session. The schireff and his deputes is
judge competente to their pleyes and actiones after following. That is, the
pley or mute of barrones betuixt baron and barron. The mute of ane reasonable
Terce perteining to women as lauchfull wives, be reason of the decease of their
husbands, complaints tuiching the breaking of appoyntments, aggre ances, and
end of pleyes made in court, and not keiped. lib. 1. c. 4. c. contingit. 31.
lib. 2. c, dos. 19. Mutes and pleyes of natives, that is of bonds, and
servandes fugitive fra their awin masters: making of Homage: Receaving of
relives: alswa actiones and pleyes of debt auchtand be an to ane uther, may be
followed before the schireff, with uther actiones of wrang and unlaw. lib. 1.
c. 4, lib. 2. c. consequenter. 13. The brieve of richt, and free tenements,
should be determined before the schireff, in the second instance, quhair as
complaint is maid, that the court of barrones hes done wrang thereanent, be
reason wranges done in the barron court, war remeded in the schiref court, be
the auld law of this Realm. lib. 1. c. placita. 6. lib. 3. c. solent. 17, c.
ad vicecomites. 17. Bot be the law and practick now used and observed, the
Lords of Council and session are only judges competent both in the first
instance, and second, to all actiones and matters tuiching fee and heritage.
Siklike all pleyes tuiching Meithes and Marches of lands, betuixt nightbour and
nightbour, should be decided and declared be ane assise before the schireff, lib.
2. c. vlt. Molestations and cognitions
Conform to the quhilk all actiones of molestation, in trowblance of the
possession of property, and commontie should be decided be the schiref of the
schire, or uther ordinar judge, quhair the lands lies, be the determination of
an assise, of the best and worthiest of the cuntrie, least suspect, and that
best knawis the verity. Ia. 6. p 11 c. 42. The schireff is judge competent to
the remooving of tennents fra lands, conform to the warning maid against them
to that effect, Removing.
Mar. p. 6. c. 39. The schireff is judge to the brieve of inquest, quhair be
ane desiris to be served, and retoured narrest and lauchfull air to his
predicessour. lib. 3. c. Generalia. 25. quo. attach. c. De brevibus. 31. Ia. 1.
p. 9. c. 127. Brieve of inqueist.
Quhilk brieve should be served in plain court, be the may worthy of the
schireffdome, summound and called upon the premonition of 15. days. Stat. Rob.
3. c. 1. Vid. breve de morte antecessoris. And na commission for serving of the
said brieve, or uthers should be granted to onie person, Commissions.
in prejudice of the schireff, Stewart, or baillie, until he be first warned
to hear and see the samin given, or else to allege ane reasonable cause, quhy
the samin should nocht be granted. James. 5. par. 6. Cap. 82. And incase any sik
brieve sal happen to be served and retoured before onie judge, commissionar;
the precept of saising should be direct forth of the Chancellarie, to the
Schireffe, as is before said, verbo. breve de morte antecessoris. For
generally all precepts of saising forth of the Chancellarie upon retoures
should be direct to the Schireffe, Saisinges upon precepts of the Chancellarie.
and uther judges ordinar, with the clause, Capiendo securitatem. Iam. 6. p.
12. c. 124. And all saisings passing upon sik precepts should be given be them,
their deputes and Clerks. Mar. p. 6. c. 34. Quhairof they should write the day
and eir of the giving of ilk saising; and bring the samin, togidder with all
uther saisinges, given be private Noatars eirly, to the checker. Ia. 4. p. 6.
c. 89. Ma. p. 6. c. 47. I. 6. p. 11. c. 65.

Ejectiones and spuilie.
Sik-like actiones of ejection and spuile, perteinis to the Schireffe, and his
jurisdiction. And therefore, gif any man is wrangouslie ejected forth of his
land, or violently spuilied of his guds and gear: The Schireffe should take
cognition there-anent. And the ejection or spuiliie beand proven, sall cause
him quha is ejected or spuilied, to be restored to his awin lands, gudes and
gear, with the profits thereof, and damnage and skaith sustained be the
party. Ass. Reg. Da. c. stat. 31 Specially gif the persons quha ar ejected
and spuilied be religious men, clerks, widows, aged persons, or sik uthers
quha be the law, ar excused fra singular battle. Ass. Reg. Da. c. Stat. Alex.
c. 5. stat. To. Br. 3. c. 6.

(...)

Ejectiones.
And in ejecti^^^ ^^^en any man is ejected forth of his lands, fee, or hereta^^
(...) Schireffe at command of the Lords of Session, sall f^ (...) gar restore
the ground, without prejudice of any party, and ^^^ognosce the lands in the
Kings hands, until they be lowsed be the King. And in the mean time,
inquisition is taken be the Schireffe, quha was lauchfull possessour of the
lands: And the samin beand retoured to the King, the lands ar letten to
borghe to the said person. I. 2. p. 14. c. 62 And generally, the Schireffe
should arreist, and put in the Kingis ward, all maisterfull and wrangeous
occupiers or uther mennis lands, and sall cause the ground to be maid void of
them and their gudes Ia. 2. p. 14. c. 78.

Spuilie.
Concerning spuilie, the Schireffe should compel spuiliers, and their receipters
(the spuilie being proven) to restore their gudes spuilied, and charge them to
answer therefore, as law will. And in-case they disobey, he should denunce them
rebels, and put them to the Kingis horn. Quhairin, gif he be negligent or
partial, he salbe punished as the principal spuilier. Iam. 2. parlia. 5. cap.
10. The like restitution should be maid be the Lords of regalities, quhilk gif
they do not; the Schireffe should cause the samin be done within the regalitie.
Jam. 2. p. 5. c. 11. Last of all, actiones of recent spuilie, may be persewed
before the Lords, or the Schireffe, within xv. days nixt after the committing
of the spuilie. Iam. 4. p. 6. c. 65.

Execution of decreetes.
Execution not only of decreetes of ejection and spuilie, as said is, bot also
of all uther decreetes perteinis to the Schireffe, be reason of his office and
jurisdiction. For ane decree beand given against any man; letters are direct
to the Schireff of the Schire, steward, or Baillies to burgh, or to land,
chargeing them to put the said decreete to execution: quhilk should be done be
ilk ane of them, within their awin jurisdiction, and should receive for their
office and fee xij. d. for ilk li. recovered or contained in the decree, to be
taken of him, against quhom the decreit is given. And gif the Schireffe or
uther officiar failies to do the same, he sal tine his office for iij. eirs,
gif it be heretable: and perpetually, gif he hes it in life-rent, or for ane
certain time; and sal pay the principal sum recovered, to the party, with
the coasts and expenses sustained be him. I. 4, p. 3. c. 30. Ia. 4. p. 6. c.
67. Likewaies, all sentences and decreetes given be the Lords of the session
should be execute be the Schireffe of the Schire, or his deputes, quhair the
party dwellis, against quhom the decreete is given, Or else be Herauldes,
pursevantes, or Maisers: And for execution thereof, nane sall take mair nor is
prescribed be the act of Parliament foresaid; except be liberality of the
party, under the pain of deprivation of their office. Ia. 5. p. 5. c. 58.

For the better and mair reddie execution of decreetes: It is leasum to the
schireff, Foynding.
to poynd the gudes and gear perteining to the debtour, be the brieve of
distres: quhilk brieve perteinis to the Schireffs jurisdiction. lib. 1. c.
Placitum. 7. Quha should cause execute the form of poynding, and taking of
distres. Quoniam attach. c. de brevibus, 31. Bot the Schireff or uther judge
may not poynd any man, or take ane distres, bot within his awin jurisdiction
allanerly; And gif he dois in the contrair, it is plain riefe or spuilie.
stat. Rob. 3. c. Item stat. 13. And it is not leasum to the Schireffe, or any
uther judge, within his awin jurisdiction, to poynd oxen, horse, or uther guds
perteining to the pleuch, or that labouris the ground, the time of the
laboring thereof; gif there be uther streinieable gudes, quhilk may be
poynded. And gif any man will take ane poynd within the Schireffdom, he sall cum
to the Schireffe or his deputes, and desire him to concur and assist with him
thereintill. And thereafter the Schireffe, or his deputes, sall pass with him
to the house of the debtour, fra quhome the poynd should be taken. And gif the
debtour confessis the debt, and prievis payment thereof to be maid be him, or
be uthers in his name: Na poynd should be taken. And gif any is taken, the samin
should be delivered again; utherwaies, gif he grantis the debt, and proovis it
not paid: The Schireff should take the poynd, and cause the creditor be paid.
And gif the debtor denyis the debt, the poynd sall not be taken fra him, except
it be manifest, that the debt is auchtand to the creditor; because na distres
or poynd should be taken bot for debt confessed or proven. li. 4. c. Si quis
names. 30. And gif the debtor hes na moveable gudes, or hes not sameikle within
the Schire, as is equivalent to the debt recovered against him. And gif it
happenis that he have some moveable gudes within ane uther Schireffdome; The
Schireff of the uther Schire, within the quhilk the said movable guds lyis,
sall cause the same to be poynded and comprised, and the creditor to be paid.
And failieng of moveable guds, the schireff sal cause the lands and immovable
guds perteining to the debtour, to be comprised conform to the act of
Parliament, and cause the samin to he sauld and annalied, to the avail of the
debt, and the creditour. Ia. 2. p. 5. c. 36.

Diverse and sindrie criminal actiones perteinis and belangis to the Schireffe,
and his jurisdiction, quhairofsome ar capital; Criminal causes perteining to
the Schireff.
uthers ar pecuniall, as after followis. And first generally the Schireffe may
follow and persew al trespassoures, in the Kings name, and cause his Maires and
serjandes arriest them; albeit na party persewer compeir, or assist. Ia. 1. p.
13. c. 139. Like as the Thesaurar, and advocat, may persew slauchter, and uther
crimes, albeit the parties keipe silence, or uther-waies privatlie agree. Ia.
6. p. 11. c. 76. And swa quhen any complaint is maid, be any person to the
justice General, or to the Schireffe, or to any uther officiar of law within
burgh, or without the samin. The Schireffe, or uther judge, sall summond both
the parties. And gif the deed be done be Chaudmelle, the party sall persew,
as effeiris of the law. Bot gif it be done be fore-thoucht-fellonie, the
committer thereof, salbe accused of the breaking of the Kings peace: He sall
satisfy the party, and be imprisoned in the kingis prison. Because his life
and gudes ar in the Kingis will. I. 1. p. 3. c, 51. And gif any trespassor be
fugitive for any crime, the schireff should persew and follow him: And ilk
Gentleman, not followand the schowte, or out-horne, sal pay xl. s. And ilk
eaman xx. s. to the king. I. 1. p. 6. c. 9. 8.

The Schireffe, Crowner, or Provest within Burgh, should cause bury him quha is
murdered. Leg. Mal. Make. c. 1. Murder. Witchcraft.


The Scheriffe should punish Witches, Sorcerers, Necromancers, and them quha
seekis help, response, or consultation of them, unto the death, alsweill the
abuser, as the seeker of the response, or consultation. Mar. p. 8. c. 78.

The Schireffe, and uther ordinar judges, should search, take, and apprehend, all
them quha not being lauchfullie admitted, Mess.
dois minister the Sacraments, sayis Mess, or hearis the samin, to be brocht
to the King to be punished conform to the Law. Ia. 6. p. 1. c. 5.

The Schireffe should take strait inquisition, of them quha strikis false, False
cuinie
or forbidden cuinie, and should cause them to be broucht to the King, to be
punished to the death. Ia. 3. p. 3. c. 18.

The Schireff beand certified of slauchter, Slauchter.
committed within his Schireffedome, and royalty thereof, he sall incontinent
raise and follow the slayer, with sound of horn, and convocation of the Kingis
lieges. And gif he beis apprehended with reid hand, justice sall be done within
that Sun. And gif he be taken and apprehended without reid hand, He salbe
put in prison, and law salbe done upon him, within 40. days. And gif he
escaipis, or flies forth of the Schireffedome, the Schireffe sall certify the
nixt Schireffe thereof; quha sall persew and follow the slayer in manner
foresaid. And consequently, ilk Schireffe sall certify uther, until the
trespassour be put forth of the Realm, or else brocht to justice: The like
certification should be maid be the Schireffe, to the Lord of regalitie, quha
should persew the malefactoures, as the Schireffe should do. Iam. 1. p. 6. ca. 89.
Iam. 3. par. 5. c. 35. Iam. 4. par. 3. c. 28. Quhen the committer of slauchter,
cummis to the Girth: The Schireffe should advertise the Master of the Girthe,
and cause the slayer be put to the knawledge of ane Assise, quhidder the
slauchter committed be him, was done upon suddaintie, or be
fore-thoucht-fellonie. And gif it be found suddaintie, he salbe restored to the
liberty of the Girth, and Sanctuary. And gif it be found
fore-thoucht-fellonie, he salbe punished to the death. Ia. 3. p. 5. c. 35. Ia.
5. p. 4. c. 22.

The Schireffe should not only punish commiters of slauchter, as said is;
Law-borrowes.
bot also should after his power, stay, and stop the committing thereof: And
therefore, quhen any man her doubt of his life, either be any deed, menacing,
or violent presumption; and verifies the samin be his aith, or uther probation,
And for that cause, askis law-sovertie to be given to him be the Schireffe,
that he salbe harmeles and skaithles of him, of quhom he dreadis the bodielie
harm. The schireffe should grant his petition; and gif he refusis the same, he
sal pay 40. pound to the King, and assyith the party. I. 1. p. 9. c. 129. Ia.
2. p. 6. c. 13. Ia. 2. p. 14. c. 83. And gif the law-borrowes happenis to be
broken, the pain thereof, should be paid to the Schireffe, for the quhilk he
salbe comptable in the Checker. Ia. 3. p. 1. c. 5.

It is leasum to the Schireffe and his deputes, Thieft.
to persew any person for theift; Albeit na party concur and inform him
there-anent. Quoniam attach. c. vbi aliquis. 25. As likewaies, he is judge
competent to thieft and slauchter, quhen any person compeiris and insistis with
him, in the persute. Bot gif the said crimes be followed be way of dittay: the
justice general is judge thereto. lib. 1. c. 2. And quhen any thief is
condemned before the Schireffe, and execute for thieft: All the moveable guds,
quhilk perteine to him, should justly perteine to the Schireffe. lib. 2. c.
Forisfactum. 55. de Iudic. c. Praeterea. 148. Bot gif any man findis in any
town, his awin silver stolen fra him; It is not leasum to him to
intromet-there-with: Bot he should put and leave the samin, in the keiping and
custody of honest men of the town, and sall declare the samin to the
Schireffe, quha sall compel the Provest or ruler of the town, and three men
with him, to make faith, that he knawis na-thing of that thieft; And thereafter
the compleiner proovand the silver to be his awin, should receive the samin to be
used be him, as his awin proper gear. Lib. 4. c. Si quis. 21. stat. Alex. c.
Assisa. 20 All thieves should be punished to the death. And it is not leasum to
the Schireffe, to sell any thief, or to fine with him for thieft done, or to
be done, under the pain of life and gudes. Ia. 1. p. 13. c. 135.

All Sorners, taken and apprehended, should be delivered to the Schireff, Sorners.
that justice micht be done upon them, as thieves and rievers Ia: 2. p. 11.
cap. 45. Ia. 3. p. 10. ca. 77. The Schireffe should arriest and challenge, all
sorners, quha lyis and sojournis upon the Kings lieges, and compel them to
assyith the King, and the party compleinande. And gif na party compleinis, he
sall inquire at the head court, anent sik trespassoures. And as he any findis,
should punish them. I. 1. p. 1. c. 7. And mairover, the Schireffe and all uther
officiares, alsweill to Burgh, as to land, sall punish sorners, over-lyars,
maisterfull Beggars, fuilles, bairdes, vagaboundes, put them in ward, and
banish them the Cuntrie. Jam. 2. Parli. 6. Cap. 22. And all oppressoures,
strange vagaboundes, beggars wandering athort the realm, upon pretense that they
are Schipbroken, or banished for slauchter, or uther odious crimes; And
dissimulat thieves, and abusers, caled Egyptians. Ia. 6. p. 12. c. 124.

Sick-like the Schireffe should arreist all idle-men, and put them in sure
firmance, Idle-men
until it be knawin, quhairon they live, and take caution of them: that the
inhabitants of the cuntrie, sal be harmless and skaithlesse of them: And
that they sall get masters, or past to crafts within forty days; quhairin
gif they failie; the Schireffe should inprison them, until they be punished at
the Kingis will. Ia. 1. p. 3. c. 66. Mair-over, the Schireffe should compel
idle-men, to pass and labor for wages within Schippes, maid and prepared for
fishing, of great and small fish, under the pain of banishment forth of the
Schireffedome; quhairin gif the Schireffe failies, he sall pay twenty pound to
the King, in the Checker eirlie. Ia. 4. p. 4. c. 49.

Beggars
All they quha ar suffered to beg a landwart, should have ane certain takin given
to them be the Schireffe. Ia. 1, p. 1. c. 25. Under the pain of burning on the
check, and banishment off the cuntrie of the beggars: and of ane unlaw of
fifty shillinges to the King, to be paid be the Schireffe, in-case he failie
in keiping of the premises. Ia. 1. p. 2. c, 42. And mair-over, the Schireffe,
Provest, and Baillies within Burrowes of royalty and regalitie, sall pay ane
mark for ilk beggar that beis found beggand except he be cruiked, seek, or
weak. Ia. 4. p. 6. c. 70.

And mair-over, the Schireffe should suffer na beggar to beg within any Parochin,
bot only them quha ar borne within the samin. For ilk beggar should be sustained
within his awin Parochin, and should have the mark thereof. Iam. 5. parlia. 4.
cap. 21. And for punishment of strange idle beggars; all Schireffes and uther
judges should make prisones, stocks, and irons within Burghes,
throw-faire-townes, and at all Paroch Kirkes. Ia. 6 p. 12. c. 147. And should
punish beggars, conform to the act maid be King James the Sext. Ia. 6. p. 6.
c. 74.

Tuilies and breakers of the Kingis peace.
To the jurisdiction of the Schireffe, perteinis to cognosce and decide anent
strife, spulies, straikes, wounds, and breaking of the Kings peace. Lib. 1. c.
2. And the Schireffe should take inquisition anent the breaking of the Kings
protection, and compel the breakers thereof to pay ten punds to the King, and
and assyith the party. Ia. 1. p. 11. c. 134

The Schireffe should destroy veschelles, creilles, and uther ingines, quhilk
stoppis Smoltes to pas to the sea I. 2. p. 14. c. 87. I. 3. p. 5. c. 37. Cruves
and fishing.
He should cause the measure and quantity of the cruves and aires to be keiped
in waters, quhair the sea flowis and ebbis: To the effect the fry of the fish,
may ascend and descend; and should likewaies give up dittay to the justice, in
his air, upon slayers of Salmond in forbidden time. stat. Alex. cap. haec est
Assisa. 27. Leg. Burg. c. haec est Assisa 113 Stat. Rob. 2. Br. cap. Item
ordinatum. 12. The Schireff should destroy, cast down, and hald down, all cruves
within his bounds, under the pain of xx. pund to be paid to the King. Ia. 4.
pa. 2. c. 15. Mar. p. 8. c. 68. For the quhilk cause, special commission is
granted to him. Ia. 6. p. 6. c. 89. Ia. 6. p. 7. c. 111. He should execute the
acts maid anent herring and quhite-fish, and uptake the escheit of the
contraveeners thereof, and make count in the Checker, Ia. 6. p. 6. c. 86.

Hunting of the Wolf.
The Schireffes should hunte and slay the Woolfe, and her Quhelpes, three times in
the eir; and all the indwellers of the Schire, should rise with him, under the
pain of ane Wedder. Ia. 2. p. 14. c. 88.

Archerie
The Schireffe should cause bow-markes to be maid for Archerie, in ilk paroch,
under the pain of forty shillinges, to be uptaken be him to the Kingis use.
Ia. 4. p. 3. c. 32.

Schutting with firewarke.
The Schireffe should punish all them quha shuttis at Dear, Rae, or uther wild
beasts, or wild fowls, with Culveringes, Pistolettes, or Gunnes. Ma. p, 4.
c. 9. Nocht only the Schireffe, bot all judges Ordinar should accuse at
particular dietes, all them quha schuttis with Culvering, Croce-bow, at Dae,
Rae, Heart, Hind, Cunning, Dowe, Herron, or foul of riefe. Ia. 6. p. 1. c. 16.
p. 7. c. 123.

The Schireffe, and all uther officiares, both to burgh and to land, at ilk
Court, Forestallers
sall inquire quhat persons byis victual, and haldis it to ane dearth; And
declare their names to the King, that they may be punished as ockerers, and the
victual escheit. Iam. 2. p. 6, c. 23.

Mair-over, the Schireffe should escheit all gudes quhilkis ar forstalled, coft,
or arled be forstallers, and in-bring the two part thereof to the Kingis use;
And the third part to himself. Ia. 5. p. c. 4. 20.

And sik-like the Schireffe should punish, be confiscation of all their moveable
gudes, Cattle.
all them quha transportis Nolt, Scheipe, or uther Cattle forth of the realm.
Ia. 6. p. 7. c. 124. Ia. 6. p. 12. c. 149.

Policy.
The Schireffe should punish destroyers of planting of woods, Forrestes,
orchardes, broom, breakers of Dow-cattes, cunningaires, parkes, stankes,
airdes, slayers of Hairs, makers of Mure-burne in for-bidden time, and uther
destroyers of haning and policy. Ia. 6. p. 6. c. 84. And likewaies, should
in-bring to the Kingis use, the pains of them quha plantis nocht wooddes,
makis not hedges and hainings. Ia. 5. p. 4. c. 9.

The unlaw of forty shilling, should be taken up be the Schireffe, fra players
at the fute-ball, Fute-ball
In-case the Lord of the land, pretermit to do the samin. Ia. 1 p. 1. c. 17.

Caution found be the wardatar and uthers
Quhen any lands fallis, be reason of ward in the Kingis hands, or of any
uther superior; Or quhen to Burgh or to lands, lands ar given in con-junctsee,
or life-rent: The Schireffe or the Baillies, sal cause the wardatar find
caution not to destroy the bigginges, or uther policy: And that he sall leave
the samin, als good as he fand them; And that he sall sustain the air, not
haveand sufficient blench, or few-ferme lands. Ia. 4. p. 3. c. 25. And gif the
Schireffe, or uther judge be negligent, in requiring caution, being required
thereto, be the heretoure, or his friends: He sal refound and pay to the
heretour of the lands, at his perfect age, all damnage and skaith sustained
throw his negligence. Ia. 5. p. 4. c. 14.

Claithing
The Schireffe should take inquisition of them quha wearis Claith of gold, silver,
velvet, or silks, contrair the acts of parliament, and send them to the King,
to be punished. Ia. 3. p. 6. c. 45. Ia. 6. p. 7. c. 113.

All they quha usis excess or superfluity in banquettes, Banquets.
contair the tenor of the act of Parliament, should be punished be the
Schireffe, and uther judges, within the Royalitie and regalitie. Ia. 6. p. 7.
c. 118. And siklike, the Schireffe should send to the Thesaurar, the names of all
persons quha breakis and contraveenis the act of Parliament, maid anent the
ordering of ilk mannis house, and quantity of meat and dishes, prescrived to
ilk man of all estaites, that they may be accused and punished therefore. Mar.
par. 5. c. 26. The Provest and Baillies within Burgh, should cause Hostellares
take reasonable price for ane mannis dinner and supper, effeirand to the prices
of victualles. And should also set down reasonable prices upon ilk mannis wark,
and should deliver the samin to the Schireffe, Craftesmen.
that he may cause the samin price be keiped to Landwart. Mar. p. 5. c. 22.
Mair-over, the Schireffe should punish the Barronne, quha examinis, nor prices
nocht the wark-man-ship of ilk craft, within his Barronnie, with the pain and
unlaw of ten pounds. Ia. 1. p. 7. c. 102.

The Schireffe should send or bring all Notars, quha ar Temporal men, within the
bounds of his office, and present them to the Lords of Council, to be
examined be them, quhidder or nocht they be worthy or qualified for the office
of the Notarie. Mar. p. 5. c. 24. And the Schireffe with sik persons, as the
King pleasis to adjoyne to him, should call all Notars before him and examine
them. Ia. 5. p. 6. c. 76.

The Schireffe should up-take and inbring all taxationes, Taxation.
and make count and payment thereof. Ia. 4. p. 2. c. 9.

The Schireffe, with the Barronne, or Lord of the land. Weaponshawing.
should see and provide, that ilk man be armed according to his estaite and
rent: And sall cause weapon-shawinges to be maid eirlie, after the Octaves of
Pasche. Stat. To. 2. Br. c. Ordinatum. 27. Or at the least four times in the
eir. Ia. 1. p. 2. c. 44. I. 4. p. 3. c. 31. Or upon Thursday in the Whitsunday
oulk Ia 4. p. 6 c. 75. Or twice in the eir throw all the Realm, in the Months
of Junij and October, or any uther day, as sall please the Schireffe, steward,
or Baillie. Ia 5. p. 6. c. 85.

The Schireff should execut the act of Parliament, Victual
anent the keiping or threshing out of victualles, and cause the samin to be
keiped and obeyed under the pain of tinsell of his office, in-during the
Kingis will. Iam. 2. par, 9. cap. 37.

The Schireffe and Chalmerlaine, sall cause all mettes and measures to be
keiped, used and observed, Mettes and measures.
conform to the tenor of the acts of Parliament, as they will answer to our
Sovereign Lord. Ia. 3. p. 4. c. 22.

The Schireffe and his deputes should escheitte and intromet with all horse
perteining to Earls, Lords, Barronnes, and utheris, Horse
halden at hard meat, langer nor the time prescrived in the act of
Parliament. Of the quhilk escheit, the ane half perteinis to the King, and the
uther half to the Schireffe. Ia. 6. p. 11. c. 56.

The Schireffe at command and direction of the Thesaurar, should take up,
Escheites
and intromet with the escheit guds and gear perteining to rebels Ia. 6. p.
6. c. 75.

Diverse and sindrie persons are disobedient to the Kingis Laws, both civil
and criminal, Excommunicate persons.
and also refusis to obey and fulfill lauchful decreites given and pronunced
against them, be judges Ecclesiastical, civil and criminal: For the quhilk
cause, some ar excomunicat and cursed, uthers ar denunced rebels, and put to
the horn. And therefore the Schireffe (to quhome perteinis the execution of
the Kingis Laws and decreetes) should take and apprehend all cursed and
excommunicate persons, at the desire of the Bishope, or his Official, and put
them in prison, until they satisfy God, and the Kirk. Stat. 2. Rob. Br. cap.
Rex tali. 31. Specially them quha hes remained under the censure of
Excomunication, be the space of forty days. Quoniam attach. c. Rex tali. 76
stat Rob. 3. c. Item 7. To the quhilk effect, letters of caption being direct
to the Schireffe, he should execute the samin against all cursed persons. And
gif they be fugitive, their gudes and lands (gif they any have) salbe
comprised, for satisfaction of the party. And gif they have nane, they salbe
denunced rebels. Ia. 2. p. 5. c. 12.

All Schireffes, Stewardes, Baillies, and uther officiares, Rebels.
both to Burgh and to land, should search, seek, and apprehend all rebels
beand at the horn, and bring them to our Sovereign Lordis justice, to be
justified, conform to their demerites; Under the pain of tinsell of their
office, for three eires, gif it be heretable; And in all time cumming, gif it
be Temporal. And mair-over, to be accused for their negligence in the justice
aires, or at particular diettes, as it sall please the King. Ia. 5. p. 7. c.
97. Mair-over, the Schireffe, and all the saidis judges, alsweill within
regalitie, as royalty, should search, seek, follow, persew, apprehend, and
commit to ward, and present to justice, all declaired traitures and rebels,
contemnandlie remainand at the horn un-relaxed; and should do justice upon them,
gif they have commission to that effect. And gif the saidis rebels be
fugitive, the Schireffe and uther judges foresaidis, should make denunciation
thereof to the Schireffes, and judges Ordinar, of the four halfes about; and
require them to use the like diligence, under the pain to the quhilk the
traitoures and rebels ar subjects, or hes incurred. Iam. 6, p. 12 c. 124. And
further, the Schireffe should incurreand fortify uther officiares, to take up the
escheite of rebels, and should make convocation of the Kingis lieges to that
effect Ia, 6. p. 6. c. 74.

Mair-over, all letters of horning, with the indorsation thereof, should be
registrat be the Schireffes Clerk, within fifteen days, Ratification of
letters of horning.
after the denuntiation; And being marked and subscrived be him, should be
delivered to the party. And sik-like, all relaxationes should be registrat in
the Schireffis buikes, within fifteen days afer the publication thereof. Iam.
6. pa. 6. cap. 75 Iam. 6. par. 8. cap. 142. And ilk Schireffe should cause
proclaim the names of the rebels, at the market croce of the head burgh,
upon market days, preceding the three head courts, and affix ane Catalogue
conteinand their names upon the market croce, and in the Tolbuith: And send ane
uther roll thereof to the Thesaurar, conteinand the names and causes, for the
quhilk they were denunced. Ia. 6. p. 6 c. 74.

Of inhibitions and interdictiones.
Last of all, to the effect, that they quha are in Bona fide, be nocht deceived
in bying of lands or gudes, fra them quha ar interdited or inhibit, For
eschewing of sik fraud, the Schireff, Tanquam bonus Praetor, should cause all
inhibitiones and interdictiones, with the executiones thereof, to be registrate
in his buikes, be his Clerk, within forty days, after the publication of
the samin. Ia. 6. p. 7. c, 118.

QUHAT Is the jurisdiction and office of ane Schireff, may be easelie knawin be
the laws and constitutiones abone written; Of the pains and punishment of
Schireffs.
quhairof sindrie conteinis certain special pains to be enjoined to him, for
his malice or negligence. And now, I thoucht good to declare, certain general
penalties, prescribed be the laws of this realm. And first, the Chancellar,
Justice, Chalmerlaine, Schireffe, nor nane of their deputes or substitutes,
sall sustain or maintain pleyes, quarrels, or actiones; nor sall not take
lands, or uther budde or reward, from the party, for hinderance or delay of
Justice. And gif any sall happen to be convict thereof; he sall be punished at
the Kingis will, and sall tine and forefalt his office, enduring his lifetime.
Stat. 2. Rob. Br. c. Dominus Rex. 22.

Secondly, in the time of King David the Second: Because the haill cummunitie
and inhabitants of the Realm, Schireffs may be punished at the Kings will,
and deprived.
compleined heavelie upon Schireffes, Maires, Serjandes, and utheris the Kingis
ministers of the Law: It is statute and ordained, that incontinent before the
end of the Parliament: The justice General, with the Chalmerlane, should call,
and conveene before them, and the inhabitants of ilk Schireffedome, all and
sindrie the Schireffes, and uther Officiares, alsweill heretable, as Temporal,
and deputes: And tax and modifie the damnage and skaith done be them to the
King and his lieges, to ane certain sum: Quhilk taxation being maid, the
Schireffe and uther Officiares, should be put to the knawledge of ane good and
sufficient assise; And being found culpable, and convict, they should incontinent
be put in the Kingis prison, until he, with advise of his Council, declare
his will. And mair-over, all the saidis Schireffs and uther Officiares, either
heretable, or temporal, being filed and convict, should forefalt, and tine their
office, enduring their lifetime. Da. 2. In his Parliament halden at Perth, 18.
Feb. 1369. And of his reign. The Schireff may be removed be the justice, and
punished be the three estaites.
40. eire.

Thirdly, the justice General, in his justice air. sall challenge and
accuse, the Schireffes, and uther the Kingis officiares; and take cognition how
they have used and exerced their offices. And gif any of them be found
culpable or faulty: The justice sall remoove him fra his office, until the
nixt Parliament; And sall put ane uther in his place, to use the office in the
mean time. And mair-over, the justice sall take sufficient sovertie of him,
under certain pains, that he sall compeir in the nixt Parliament to underly
the determination and punishment to be enjoined to him be the Parliament, for
his fault; And he sall no ways be restored to his office; bot gif the three
estaites think the samin expedient. Stat. Rob. Br. 3. Ex libro Sconensi.

Schireffs heretable and Temporal.
Fourthlie, gif the Schireffe, or any uther officiar of law, be lauchfully
proven, or notourlie knawin faultise, or negligent in the execution of his
office perteining to him in fee and heretage: He sall tine the samin, and all
the profits thereof, for ane eir and day, and salbe punished in his person
and gudes at the Kingis will, after the quality of the trespass. And gif his
office is Temporal, he sall tine the samin, for all the times he hes it: And
uther-waies salbe punished, as said is. Ia. 2. p. 14. c. 77.

Fiftlie, gif the Schireffe, or any judge Ordinar, will not execute his office,
and minister justice; he salbe punished, and put fra his office, for ane
certain time, after the discretion of the King, and the Council, and punished
at the Kingis will, and pay the expenses to the party compleinand. And gif he
be found partial or culpable, in the administration of justice; And is
Schireffe in fee and heritage, he sall tine his office for three eires. And gif
he be Temporal, havand his office for ane certain time, he sall be put fra
the samin perpetually: Pay the expenses to the party offended, and punished
in his person, at the Kingis will. Iam. 3 p. 5. c. 26. Tinsell of honor and
fame


Sextlie, all Schireffes, and uther judges, alswell Spiritual as Temporal,
within regalitie and royalty, sall do true and equal justice to all the Kingis
lieges, without any partial counsel, or taking of buddes, under the pain of
tinsell of their honor, fame, and dignity. Iam. 5. par. 7. cap. 104.

Extract of process.
Gif any party compleinis upon the Schireffe, that he hes done to him wrang, in
giving or pronouncing any sentence or decreete against him; And desiris the
samin to be extracted and delivered to him, upon his expenses: The Schireffe
should give and deliver the process, led and deduced before him, to the party,
upon his expenses: And should take four pennies for ilk act allanerlie. Ia. 4.
p. 6. c. 67. At the least, he should extract process, decreetes, give saisinges
and retoures, at reasonable prices. Ia. 6. p, 12. c. 124.

PARAINESIS AD IUDICES.
OMnis qui judicare debet, Stateram in manu teneat: Nam aequalia and sine
personarum exceptione esse debent judicia. Nihil iniquius quam munera capere in
judiciis: Quia munera excaecant corda prudentium, and subvertunt verba
justorum. Qua enim Bilance judicabitis, eadem judicabimini. Quapropter, tu
judex, timeas Deum judicem; ne forte eo judicante, damneris. Stat. Wilhel Cap.
27. Proinde sis Deum honorans and timens: Sapiens and in scientia potens:
Veritatem sequens and amans: Avaritias odiens and detestans. de Maritag. c. 2.
Cave justitiam subvertas odio, per quod inventa aliqua malitiosa cautela,
contra partem tibi exosam, reddis judicium indirectum: Vel cupiditate, dum
corruptus muneribus, malitiose judicabis: Vel timore, dum metu potentioris,
vere judicare non audes: Vel amore, dum causa amicitiae defendis amicum, and
supprimis inimicum. de Maritag. c. 4. Facias igitur justitiam aequaliter, tam
pauperibus, quam divitibus. Stot. 2. Rob. Br. Cap. 2. Quia omnes judices and
magnates, qui plus favent his, quam illis in judicio, aut malefactores ullo
modo manu-tenent, sunt falsi, and perjurati contra Deum, Regem and populum
regni. leg. Mal. Make. c. ult. in fine.



SCOTIA, Sume-time signifies that part of Scotland, quhilk is on the North part
of the water of Forth. Ass. reg. David. c. statuit. 21. And is opponed to
Lodoneium; quhilk now we call Loudiane. For King David the First, in the third
eir of his reign, Anno Domini 1126. Be his Charter maid, Omnibus Scottis and
Anglis, tam in Scotiae quam in Lodoneio constitutis, gave and disponed to S.
Cuthbert and his Monks in Durham (Dunelmensi Ecclesiae) The lands of
Collinghame, Lummesden, Reningtoun, Eiton, Fissewik, Auld-Cambus, SWintoun,
Prendre-geist, and uthers lyand in Lodoneio, quhilk now lyis in the Mers, and
Schireffdome of Berwick. And in the acts of Parliament, justices general ar
ordained to be, ane, or two, on the South side of the water of Forth: And ane
or two, on the North side thereof. Ia. 2, p. 14. ca. 97. Quhilk agries with the
act maid be King James the Second par. 3. c. 5. Quhair It is statute, that the
justice on the South side of the Scottish sea, set their justice aires, and
halde them twice in the eir. And also on the North side of the Scottish sea, as
auld use and custom is. And in the laws of Malcome Mac-kenneth. ca. 4. Mare
Scotiae, is taken for the water of Forth.

SECTATOR, Ane soytor in court, quhais qualities and office. vid. verb. Sok.
SEK Of wool, and fuiring of gudes be the sek, serplath, and tun. vid.
Serplath. SERIANTERIAE, Sergenteriae. Lib. 2. c. Dicitur autem. 72. In the
quhilk place, pro Serianterijs, mendote legitur, Suggestoribus. Serianteria a
seriando, as ministerium a ministro, or servitium a servo; Signifies an manner
of halding of lands, specially in the laws of England, quhair Grande
seriantye, is quhen an man haldis his lands of the King: For the quhilk he should
pass with him in his hoist, or to bear his banner with him in his wars; Or
to lead his hoist or army. And hereto belangis ward, marriage, and relieve,
quhilk is ane may special Knichts service. petitseriantye, is quhen ane
haldis his lands of the King; yielding to him ane knife or buckler, ane
scheife of arrows, ane bow, or uther sik service conform to his infestment:
Quhair-unto na-waies belangis ward, marriage, or relieve; quhilk we may call,
blench-ferme, or alba firma. Read the statute, maid be King Edward the First,
King of England. 18. eire of his reign, anent wards and relieves. SERIANT,
Sergeant, ane French word. For like as messengers, cummis fra the French word
Messiers Swa Sergeant likewaies cummis fra Sergent, Quae est vox composita, de
Serrer, quod est includere, and gent, quod pro gente, plebe, vel populo
usurpatur. Itaque Seriandus dicitur qui jussu magistratus, quemlibet de
populoreum criminis, in carcerem conjicit, seu includit: That is, he quha at
command of the Magistrate, inclusis, or lockis in prison, guilty persons
delated, or suspect of any crime. Seriandus curiae or serviens curiae, the
Seriante of the court, officiar, executor of letters or summondes, quha be the
interpretoures of the civil law, is called, Nuntius. vid. Recordum. SERPLATH.
Jam. 1. p. 2. c. 38. Iam. 2. p. 14. c. 68.. Conteinis fourscore stanes. For
the Lords of Council, in Anno, 1527. decerned four serplaithes of packed
wool, to contain sexteene scors stanes of wool. Be the trafficque of
merchandes now used. Three manners of furing of gudes
The merchandes usis to pay frauchte for their gudes to Flanders, be the Sek:
To France, Spain, and England, be the Tun: And to Danskine, and the Easter
Seas, be the serplath.

As I understande, ane Serplaith of gudes, is only counted betuixt merchand
and skippers, for furing of gudes to the Easter Seas, and frathine hame to this
realm. 1 Serplaith.
Swa that for every Serplaith of gudes, fured, or promised to be fured
Eastward; the skipper is oblished to fuir hame to this realm, two last of
gudes: And this Serplaith of gudes is of na greater quantity, nor the sek of
gudes to Flanders.

And ilk Sek, be the act of Parliament, Ia. 6. p. 7. cap. 108 Should contain
twenty four stane of wol: And be the daily calculation of merchands, forty
Trois stane. 2 The Sek. Troisstane
Ilk Trois stane, conteinis sexteene pound Trois. And ilk pound weicht thereof,
conteines sexteene ounce Trois.

The sek of wool, is commounlie set be the Skippers, to ane Tune: Ilk Tun
conteinis, Sek of wool
Sex hundredth pound Trois weicht. Ilk hundredth weicht conteines five score
pound weicht; Tun. Hundredth weicht.
quhilk is sex stane, and ane quarter Trois.

The wool, quhen it is bocht be merchandes, is bocht be the Trone stone, Trone
stane
quhilk conteinis commounlie, xix. pound and ane half Trois: Always
concerning the sek of wool; I find na solid or constant weicht thereof: For
some seckes will be mair, and some will be less nor forty Trois stane; Bot
communlie the sek of wool, conteinis forty Trois stane, as said is.

Ane Last of guds fured hame, conteinis commonly twelve Barrelles. And the
auld form of furing of gudes, fra Danskene to this Realm, was for every
serplaith, 3 Furing of gudes be the Last Barrel
as it is it, two Last. Bot for this Last, the Skippers fuiris hame, fourteen
barrelles, Ilk Barrel being of weicht, ane schip pound. And of licht gudes,
sik as lint and hempt, there is fured for the serplath, two last.

Ilk Last is two packs: And ilk pakis als great als half ane sek of wool
Skins, Pack.
and conteinis in weicht threttie sex Sprusse stanes.

Ilk Sprusse stane, conteinis twenty aucht pound Trois weicht.

Sprusse stane.
Swa the last exactlie weyed, will contain of our Trois weicht, sex score sex
stanes. And for ane last of walx, that is fured hame be strangers, fourteen
schip pound. Last of walx
And be Scottish skippers, twelve schip pound. Also, of Tar, pick, and siklike
wares, twelve great barrelles for the last, and fourteen small Barelles. Of
tar Pick. Great and little barrelles.
Their great barrelles, ar called Hamburgh trees, and ar in greatness, nocht
unlike to our Salmond trees, and sulde contain fourteine Gallounes: and the
small barrelles, ar some what greater, nor our herring trees.

Ry meill.
Likewaies of Rye meill, some times twenty four barrelles ar fured for the
Last, specially be strangers: and be our awin Skippers, auchteene barrelles
for the Last thereof. And ane Last of Rye, Rye.
is some-time auchtene Bolles, and sometimes nine-teene bolles in measure.

Item, ten seckes of wool, makis ane Last of wool.

Likewaies, ten hides makis ane daiker, and twenty daiker, Daiker.
makis an last: Twelve dowzane of gloves, or Ledder points, makis ane gross:
And ane great gross, conteines twelve single gross. Gross.


Ten stane of brass, makis ane Barrel.

Sex Barrelles of English drinking Bear, makis ane Tun. Barrel of Brass.
Last of Salmond.


Twelve Barrelles of Salmonde, are bocht be the merchandes, for the Last: Bot
in furing of them over the Sea, the skippers countis only nine barrelles for
the Last.

And likewaies the Sek, albeit it be counted in Flanders to twelve Barrelles;
it twelve of their barrelles, Flanders Barrel.
conteinis sexteene commoun Barrelles.

The Fidder of lead, conteinis near by sexscore and aucht stane.

Ane schip pound, conteinis sexteene stanes and ane half, Fidder of load
Schippe pound
of Scottish Trois weicht.

Sexscore of skins, is reckoned to the hundredth.

As likewaies, sex-score elnes of woollen claith is counted for ane hundredth
Ia. 6. p. 7. c. 108. Quhilk is conform to the auld use, observed in the days
of King David the Second; as is manifest be the custom count, maid be the
Customer of the Burgh of Striviling, the eir of God, ane thousand, three
hundredth, sextie aucht eires.

Weichtes and measures in Orknay. THe malt, meill, and bear, are delivered in
Orknay, be wecht in this manner. Imprimis 24. marks makis an setting. Item 6.
settings makis an meall. Item 24. meals makis ane Last. Item of meille and
malt called Coist ane last makis an Scottish chalder: Item ane Last and ane
half of bear conteinis 36. meals: 36. meals makis ane chalder. Item the
butter is delivered in barrelles, quhair the quantity is great, bot quhair the
quantity is small, it is delivered in marks, and lesh pounds. That is to say,
xxiiij. marks, makis ane setting, as said is, and 6. settings makes ane lesh
pound, Item, ane stane and two pound Scottish, makis ane lesh pound. Item 15.
lesh pounds makis ane barrel. Item, 12. barrells makis an Last. Item the flesh
is delivered be apprising. viz. 10. meals makis ane sufficient Cow, and an
sufficient Ox. Also ane gild Ox is apprised to 15. meals, and ane wedder is
four meals. Item an Gouse is two meals. Item an Capon, is half ane Gouse,
viz. ane meal.

SERVICIVM Militare, Knichtes service, and specially concernis ward and
relieve. Vide Serianteria. Vide Hawbert. Vide ward. SERVIENS Curiae, seriandus
curiae. Leg. Malc. Make. cap. 3. Ane scriand, or officiar of Court, the
executour of summoundes, quha summondis and attachis any person to compeare in
ane court, to answer to ane uther, conform to law and reason. Molinaeus in
stilo supr. cur. par. 1. c. 20. Quha is called serviens, because he should swear
to serve leallelie and trewlie the King, in execution of his office. Quon.
attach. c. Nullus 57. SETTER-DAYIS slop. stat. Alex. cap. haec Assisa. 27. Leg.
Burg. cap. haec est Assisa. 113. Jam. 1. Parlia. 1. 26. Maij. cap. 11. Iam. 4.
Parlia 2. cap. 15. quhilk statute maid, as is alleged be King Alexander, is
ascrived to King David, be King James the Fourth, in the place foresaid: The
Setterdayis slop, is ane space of time, within the quhilk it is nocht leasum to
take Salmonde fish; that is, fra the time of Even-sang after noone on
Setterday, until the rising of the Sun on Mononday. stat. 2. Rob. cap. Item
ordinatum. 12. stat. 1. Rob. Br. cap. 8. Leg. Forest. cap. Omnes aquae, 85.
Iter. Camer. c. calumniabuntur. 16. SIMINELLUS, Leg. Burg. c. 122. From the
Latin Word, Similia, quhilk signifies the best and smallest part of the
Quheate, or flower, quhite bread, or maine bread: In the quhilk signification
in the Dutche toungue, it is commounlie called Semmell. SOK, Lib. 1, c. 3. Ane
auld word used in Chartoures and infestmentes, quhilk in sindrie auld buikes
conteinand the municipall laws of this realm, is called secta de hominibus
suis, in curia, secundum consuetudinem Regni. Swa after my opinion, he quha is
infest with Sok (quhilk now we call Soyt, from the French word Suite. h. e.
sequela) hes power and liberty to hald courts within his awin Barronie or
lands: In the quhilks courts, homines sui, or his vassalles should give foyt,
and send for them, ane quha is called Soytor, or Sectator, a sequendo; Because
he should follow the court, in the quhilk he should compeare. Sectator.
This office was very profitable, for furthering of justice. And first, he
quha is oblished to give Soyte in the Court of his Over-lorde, should do the
samin, conform to the tenor of his infestment, and na utherwaies. Leg.
Forest. c. nullus 68. ca. Si haereditas. 69. And gif he aucht three Soytes be
his infestment: he sall compeare bot at three head Courts in the eire, iij.
Soytes.
without Summondes or warning. Mod. ten. cur. c. 1. c. 31. Na judge aucht of
law, or of reason, to accept any man in court as Soytour. Soytore should be
qualified
Bot gif he can make sufficient and lauchfull report, of process, doomes,
judgment, and in lauchfull form, give and pronunce doom of Mutes, and
pleyes in Court, followed and defended before him in court. Mod ten. cur. cap.
38. Quon. attach. c. Nullus sectator. 20. And ilk Soytour before he be admitted
be the Baillie, or judge, should be examined in three courts gif he can make
records of the courts, and give sufficiently ane ward, or ane doom of
wards or doomes; asked in the court or not. And then quhen he is be his
fellows admitted, he may may not afterward for weakness of knawledge be
rejected. Quoniam. attach. nullus. 20.

Ane Soytour, is oblished to make faith, that he sall leallelie, and trewlie
make record of Court (that is of the claim, The aith of an Soyture
libell and process) and sal pronounce lauchful and true sentence, according to
the knawledge given to him be God: And sall after his understanding, leallelie
and trewlie serve, enduring the time of his office. Stat. Gild. c. 50. The
court beand fensed, The Soytour unlawis the absentis.
the Serjand thereof sall call the soytes, and defalt the absentes, that are
nocht lauchfullie essoinied: And gar ane Soytour of the court, deem them in
ane un-law, with the consent of his fellows and Collieges. Mod. ten. cur. c.
1. Be the auld law of this Realm, and acts of Parliament. Iam. 4. p. 6. c.
95. Doomes and decreetes given and pronunced be Soytoures, in ane inferior
court, was falsified and reduced in ane superior court; as the process of
brieves wrangeouslie deduced in barron court, was falsified in ane Schireffe
court, and doomes given in the Schireff court; Falsing of doomes.
was falsified in the justice court. Lib. 2. c. Dos duobus. 19. And last of
all, doomes pronunced in the justice Court, was falsified in Parliament, before
the Lords, called Auditores querelarum, in this manner contained in the
register. 7. October. 1476. Datum fuit judicium infra-scriptum, per os
Alexandri Dempster judiciarij Parliamenti, in praesentia Serenissimi Principis
Iacobi tertii. S. D. N. Regis, cum corona in capite suo and sceptro in manu,
sedent. in Cathedra Iusticiae Parliamenti, sub hac forma: The Lords chosen be
the three Estaites of this present Parliament, upon discussing of the doomes,
deliveris and declaris, that the doom given in the justice air of Edinburgh,
the xij. of Iulij last bypast, be the mouth of Andrew Blackfurd soytour, for
the Lands of N. for John N. and Ionet N. his spouse, and again called be David
Balfoure of Caraldstoun, fore-speaker for Archebald N. was evil given, and
weill again said: For diverse reasones schawen and understand to the saidis
Lords: And therefore ilk soytour of the said doom, and their lords, ilk man
be himself, is in ane ammerciament of the court of Parliamente, sik as
effeiris to be taken in the justice air; and in ane unlaw of the said justice
air for them; And in ane unlaw of Parliament amangst them all, sik as effeiris
of Law; and this I give for doom. Swa it is manifest, that in all courts
inferior to the Parliament, the soytoures pronunced the doom. And gif the
doom given be them in ane Barronne court, was falsified in the Schireffe
court: All the soytoures paid bot ane unlaw. Bot gif the doom given be them
in the Schireffe court, was falsified in the justice court, ilk soytour paid
ane unlaw of ten pounds, of the quhilk diversity, the reason is contained in.
Quoniam attach. c. quilibet. 7.

SOKMANRIA, Or Socage, Is ane kind of halding of Lands, quhen any man is
infest freely, without any service, ward, relieve, or marriage, and payis to
his Master sik dewtie, as is called, petit seriantie: Or quhen ane haldis his
Lands in name of Burgage, or in Libera Eleemosyna. de Maritag. Cap. 1.
Soccomannus, is called ane vassal, or Freehalder, Soccomannus
quha haldis his Lands in manner fore-saide: or in blench-ferme, sive nomine
albae firmae: Et opponitur militi, qui tenet per servitium militare: That is,
be service of ward and relieve. Lib. 2. Cap. Si quis plures. 30. Cap. Et
haeredes. 41. And in Magna Carta of England. Anno. 51. Henr. 3. cap. 27.
Mention is maid of sindrie forms of halding. Soccage.
Viz. Free-ferme, burgage, soccage, and Knicht-service. Read the statute maid
be Edward the First, King of England, the xviij. eire of his reign. Utheris
alleagis that Socagium, cummis fra Socco, sive Aratro, affirming that Socage,
is properly, quhen the tennent is bound and oblished, to cum with his pleuch
to teill and labor ane part of the Lordis lands. Concerning tenures, and
diverse halding of lands, read the treatise written be Littleton.
STALLANGIATORES, A stallo, Creamers, or Foreign merchandes, quha within Burgh,
in the time of Fair or market, payis certain dewtie for their stall or
stand, in the quhilk place they sell their merchandice: For it is ordained,
that ilk stranger sall either agree with the Provest of the Burgh, in the best
form as he may: or else ilk market day, sall pay to him ane halfe-pennie.
Leg. Burg. cap. Quilibet. 39. And in the auld form of customs, It is called
the stallange of the mercate. And Leg. Burg. Mercenarius. 40. It is called
Stallum, or Botha in Foro. STINGISDINT, Leg. Burg. c. Sciendum est. 9. Ane dint
or straike with ane sting or Batton: In Latin, Fustigatio. STERLINGUS, Est
genus ponderis, ane kind of weicht containing threttie two corns, or grains
of Quheate, Vt in Assisa Reg. Da. de ponderibus and mensuris. And in the Cannon
law, mention is maid of five shillinges sterling, and of ane mark sterling. c.
3. de Arbitris. c. Constituit. 12 de procuratoribus. And the sterling penny is
swa called; because it weyis sa money grains, as I have sindrie times proven be
experience. And be the Law of England, the penny, quhilk is called the
sterling, round, and without clipping, weyis threttie two grains of Quheat,
without tailles, quhairof twenty makis ane ounce; and twelve ounces makis ane
pund; and aucht pound, makis ane galloune of wine; and aucht gallounes, makis
ane buschell of London. quhilk is the aucht part of ane quarter. Anno 17.
Edward. 2. c. 10. The quhilk cunie, was meikle used within this realm; as is
maniefest be auld Charters and evidentes. For the sexteenth day of August, Ane
charter containing an reversion, and sterling money.
the eire of God, 1395. Walterus Senesculli, Dominus de Ralston, Vicecomes de
Perth, impignoravit, Necnon nomine pignoris dedit, and concessit Nobili and
potenti Du. Dom. Roberto, Comiti de Fife and Menteith, totam et integram
Baroniam suam de N. producentis marcis sterlingorum monete Scotiae, ipsi
pereundem Comitem mutuatis, and prae manibus plenarie persolutis. Tenent. and
habent. ipsi Comiti, and haeredibus suis, de Domino Rege etc. Quousq. dictus
Walterus Senescalli, aut haeredes sui, praefato Domino Comiti, vel suis
haeredibus, ducentas mercas sterlingorum monetae Scotiae vno die, inter solis
ortum and occasum, in Ecclesia Parochiali, de N. persolverit. vel persolverint.
Et praeterea dictus Valterus omnes firmas, reditus, co^moditates, and proficua,
de dicta Baronia, medio tempore provenient. dedit and concessit, prose and
haeredibus suis, praedicto domino Comiti, and haeredibus suis, prosuo consilio
bono, ipsi impenso, and impendendo. Faciendo inde annuatim, praedictus Comes
and haeredes sui, Domino Regi servitia debita and consueta.

The quhilk Charter conteinis the reversion, and also ane donation of the
profits of the lands, quhilkis were wad-set, conform to the practicque used
and observed unto the time of King James the Third, of good memory. vid.
Regres.

SUBVASSORES, Subvaluassores, base halders, or inferioure halders, specially,
they quha haldis their Lands of Knichtes. leg. Malc. Make, c. 4. Quoniam
attachiamenta cap. Si aliquis 49. As. Reg. David: c. Statuit. 8. Quhair it is
ordained, that ilk person, quha is accused criminallie, sall be judged be his
Peer, or Superioure in estate and dignity.
T.
TAYNT, vide Attaynt. TENEMENTUM, Is commonly taken for the property of onie
lands, Or immovable gudes within Burgh, or without the samin. Lib. 2. cap.
Dos duobus 19, capit. Fieri autem. 67. Liberum tenementum. And the superior
sulde not have the Ward of the tenement perteining to his vassal being Minor:
Nor can crave na service nor relieve fra him, being Minor or Major, except he
first receive his homage. Lib. 2. cap. Praedictis. 60. In the quhilk
signification, it is commounlie used in the Laws of England. TERRAE
Dominicales, Ane word commounlie used in Charters and infestments, quhilkis ar
called ane Maines, or demaine lands labored and occupied be the Lord, and
proprietar of the samin: from the French word, Domaine, Domanium, or Demanium:
Quhilk word properly signifies the Kingis Lands perteining to him in
property. Domanium.
Quia domanium definitur illud quod nominatim consecratum est, unitum et
incorporatum Regiae Coronae, ut scribit Chopinus de domanio Franciae. Tit. 2.
per l. Si quando 3. C, de bon. vacant. Lib. 10. Et Matthaeus de afflictis in
Constitut. Siciliae. Lib. 1. Tit. de locatione demanij 82. quhilk may be
called, Bonae incorporatae, et in corpus fisci redacta. THANUS, is ane name of
dignity, and appearis to be equal with the Son of ane Earl. For the Cro of
the ane, and the uther is alike. Lib. 4. c. Si quis calumnietur. 28. statuit.
64. And Thanus was ane Freehalder, halding his lands of the King. Quoniam
attach. c Recordatio. 63. Ass. reg. Da. c. Recordatio. 17. stat. Alex. c.
Recordatio. 26. And gif ane man not taken with the fange, is accused of thieft,
and na sufficient probation is deduced against him; he should purge him be the
aith of twenty seven men, or of three Thanes. Lib. 4. c. Si quis calumnietur.
28. Thanagium Regis, signifies ane certain part of the Kingis lands or
property, quhairof the rule and government perteinis to him: quha therefore is
called Thanus. For Domania Regis, et Thanagia Regis idem significant. Ass. reg.
Da. c. statuit Dominus 38. It is ane Dutch word, for teiner signifies ane
servand, and teinen to serve: And Thane is likewise ane servant, and unter
Thane ane inferior servand or subject. Vid. Leg. Britonum verbo Thanus. THEME
lib. 1. c. 3. is power to have servandes and slaves, quhilk are called nativi,
bondi, villani, and all Barronnes infest with Theme, hes the same power: For
unto them all their bondmen, their bairnes, gudes and gear properly
perteinis, swa that they may dispone there-upon at their pleasure. lib. 2. c.
Consequenter 13. cum seqq. And in sum aulde authentic buikes it is written,
Theme est potestas habendi nativos, ita quod generationes Villanorum vestrorum,
cum eorum catallis, ubicunque inveniantur, ad vos pertineant. Theme cummis fra
than, id est, servus, and therefore sum times signifies the bondmen and
slaves, conform to an aulde statute, and law. De curia de Theme. Quod si quis
teneat curiam de Theme, et illa querela in illa curia movetur, ad quem theme
vocantur; Curia de Them. id est, de nativis, seu Servis.
non debet illa curia elongari, sed ibidem determinari, et omnes Themi ibi
compareant. Quhilk is understand of the questioun of liberty, quhen it is in
doubt, quhidder onie person is ane bondman, or freeman: Quhilk kind of
process should not be delaied, bot summarlie decided. Quhairof their is two
kinds: for either ane free man is alleged to be ane servand and slave, or ane
quha is in servitude, desiris to be maid free, and put to liberty. dict. Cap.
13. Cap. 14. THIFT-BOTE, vide Bote. TIMBRELLUM, Tumbrellum, ane kind of
torment; as stocks, or jogges, quhair-with crafts-men, sik as browsters ar
punished. Leg. Burg. cap. Si aliquis 21. Quhair it is called, Castigatorium.
TOLL Lib. 1. Cap. 3. Custom, from the Greek word of the samin signification
Telos, He quha is infest with Toll, is custom free, and payis na custom;
Quhilk is maniefest be sindrie auld Buikes, quhairin it is written. Toll. h. e.
Quod vos and homines vestri, de toto homagio vestro sint quieti de omnibus
mercantiis, and de tolneto de omnibus rebus emptis and venditis.

Mair-over, all Earls, Barronnes, Knichts, vassalles, life-renters,
Freehalders, and all quha hes lands Nomine eleemosynae, should be quite and
free, fra paymente of Toll and custom within Burgh; in bying meat and Claith,
and uther necessair things to their awin proper use. Bot gif any of them be
commoun merchandes, they should pay tholl and custom; Albeit they have als
great liberty, as Barronnes. De Judic. cap. 3. Leg. Forest. cap. cap.
Comites. 13. And in the auld Britton Laws of King Edward, It is written.
Thoill, quod nos dicimus Tholoneum, est quod ita infeodatus, habeat libertatem
emendi and vendendi in terra sua.

TORRALIUM, Thoralium, a torrendo, is called ane Kill, quhair corns ar dried.
Leg. Burg. c. Si quis. 53. De combustione domus aut torralii, of the burning of
the house or Kill. Gif ane servand burn rakleslie thy house, Kill; or
neichtboures houses adjacent: He should not be punished, bot tinis his service:
Bot gif any man hiris ane Kill, and it burn, he sall pay bot the hire. Bot
gif he borrowis it, and it burn; he sall pay the valor of it, to the party
skaithed, vide Iam. 1. Parlia. 4. Cap. 71. Cum seqq.

TORT, Et non reason, un-reason, wrang, and unlaw, Stat. 2. Rob. Br. c. Item
quod nulla. 17. Tort in the French tongue, is wrang or injury: Unlaw cummis fra
on, Unlaw.
Privativa particula apud nos and Germanos, eodem modo quo In, apud Latinos,
and law, or lauch, id est lex: Quasi sine lege, vel contra legem, vel quod non
jure fit. Ius Normand. Lib. 12. cap. 1. Actiones of wrange and unlaw, appearis
to be civil actiones, and ar opponed to Actiones criminal, touching life and
lim. Stat. Alex. cap. Si quis 9. Cum seqq. Leg. Mal. Make. c. 4. TOSCHEODERACHE,
ane office or jurisdiction, not unlike to an Baillierie, specially in the Isles
and Hielandes. For 9. Mart. 1554. Neill Mack-neill, disponed and annalied to
James Mack-Oneill, the Lands of Gya, and utheris with the Toschodairach of
Kintyre. Some alleagis to be ane office pertaining to execution of summonds.
Lib. 1. cum autem. 8. Quon. attach. c: Si aliquis 49. Sik as ane quha
summondis, attachis, or arreistis ane uther, to compeir before any judge. Stat.
Dav: c: 6. Uthers understands the same to be ane Crowner. Lib. 4. c. Raptus 9.
Last. sum understandis it to be ane searchour, and taker of thieves, and
limmers: For King Evenus did statute, that in sindrie Schireffdoms, there should
be sindrie searchours of thieves, reivers, and of them that lyis in wait in the
hie-streetes, and commoun passages. Hector Bcetius, Lib. 2. Lib. 10. Aberrans
(inquit) Pecus, aut Domino furum judagatori (Tochederauch vulgus appellat) aut
Sacerdoti reddito: Latrunculatores.
quod si triduum apud te retinueris, furti reus esto: In the Civil Law they
are called, Latrunculatores. Leg. Solemus. 61: ff: de Iudic. TIMBRIA Pellium,
leg: Burg: cap: Capitulum. 138. Ane Timmer of skins: That is, swa money as is
inclused within two broddes of Timmer, quhilk commounlie conteinis forty
skins: In the quhilk manner, merchands usis to bring hame Martrik, Sable, and
uther coastlie skins and furringes. TIMBRELLUS, Dicitur parvis Cetus, ane
little Quhaill. Le. Forest. c: Si quis cetum. 17. de Iudic. c: 27. TINNELLUS,
De Iudic. c: 27: Leg: Forest. c. Si quis Cetum. 17. The sea-marke, uther-waies
in English Tyde-mouth. That is, the farrest part, quhair the sea tide flowis.
Littus.
Littus quo scilicet fluxus hybernus maris maximus excurrit, hoc est,
quantumcunque mare aliquo tempore plus extenditur in hyeme vel aestate, tantum
est littus ejus.. Flumina. Et ibi Gl: Instit. de rer. divis. TRAISTIS. Jam. 3:
par: 14: c: 99. Signifies ane roll, or Catalogue, conteinand the particular
dittay, taken up upon malefactoures, quhilk with the portuous is delivered be
the justice Clerk, to the Crowner, to the effect the persons, quhais names
are contained in the portuous, may be attached, conform to the dittay,
contained in the traistis. For like as the portuous comprehendis the names of
the persons indicted; swa the traistis conteinis the kinds of dittay, given up
upon them, quhilk is swa called, because it is committed to the traist, faith,
and credit of the Clerks and Crowner; quha gif they be trusty, and
faithful, should nocht reveal, deleete, change, or alter the samin. Jam. 2. p.
6. c. 28. TRIBULA, Leb. Burg. cap. Sihomo 16. Ane Flaile quhair-with corn is
threshen, A terendo, quod frumentum terat. Like as Tribulus is called ane
thrissell, and Tribulum ane Pestell, quhair-with spices, or any uther thing is
brayed in ane mortar: Barbare magis quam Latin, secundum usitatum versum a
pueris in scholis decantatum: Tribulus thressill, la staill, lum quoque
pestell. TUERNAY, Quid sit, valde ambigo, and hic aliorum avide expecto
judicium. In the Burrow laws. Cap. Quilibet. 34. Si uxor alicujus fuerit
calumniata de aliquo, in placitis Burgorum utitur Tuernay: That is, as in the
auld English buik, the husband may do richt for his wife, in courts of Burgh.
Et de judic. cap. cum quando. 28. Si quis fuerit implacitatus coram justitiario
domini regis, vel alio ballivo, si dominus ejus, vel ejus Ballivus venerit and
allegaverit pro ipso in debita hora, potest recuperare curiam domini sui. Et si
per negligentiam suam responderit and dixerit tuentynay de omnibus sibi
oppositis plane respondebit, and sic amittit curiam Domini sui. In quibusdam
libris legitur Twentynay. Tuentynay.
Itaque conjicio esse antiquum verbum forense, quo reus utens, intelligitur
approbasse judicem, adeo ut eum postea declinare non possit.
V.
VADIUM, Vadimonium, from ane auld word veddum, used in the Britton Laws: In
Latin, Pignus, in French, Gage, quhilk we call ane wedde. Immobile vadium.
Immobile vadium, signifies immovable gudes, sik as lands annalied and wadset
under reversion: The profits quhairof, computantur in sortem, That is, ar
compted and reckoned within the stok. Swa that the samin being paid in sik
quantity as extendis, and is equivalent to the quantity of the stock, and
principal sum: Thereby the principal sum, is esteemed, as compted and
paid, quhilk is called Mortuum vadium. Bot now the contrair is may
commounlie used in the practicque of wadsettes and alienation of lands under
reversion. And be the aulde law of this Realm, is called ocker and usurie and
it be the samin, was permitted and tolerated. Lib. 3. c. 6. Quhidder the
commoun form of wad-setting of lands now used under reversion, is leasum or
unleasum. vid: Ias. in Le cunctos populos. C. de summa Trinitate. Et Ches: in
Consuetud: Burgund: Rub: 5:. 1. 2. In auld times, I find that quhen lands war
wad-set, nomine pignoris, or ad immobile vadium; The profits and rentes
thereof were given and disponed be the annalier, to the buyer, for some
certain reasonable causes; sik as, pro consilio, vel auxilio impenso, vel
impendendo; to the effect, that as the buyer bruikis the lands, ex
dispositione legis, swa he micht have richt to the profits thereof, Ex pacto
and conventione hominis. vid. Reversion. vid. Sterlingus. vid. Mort-gage.
VADIARE duellum: lib: 4: c: 2: A vadii datione, to enact battle, as in the
English laws, be giving of pledges, both be the persewer and defendar,
before the justice and his deputes. The persewer is said, vadiare duellum:
Quhen after leave asked and obtained from the King; he offeris to prove in
plain field, al to be true, quhilk he affirmis, and to that effect, offeris
ane wad or pledge: And the defendar is understand to vadiare duellum, quhen he
denyis all quhilk is spoken be the persewer, and affirmis the samin to be
false and untrew; and thereto offeris his body to fight with him; and ane
wadde or pledge to that effect. de judic. c. 61. c. 86. Molinaeus. still. cur.
Par. part. 1. c. 16. Et author tractatus de Corona, Appellatus (inquit)
defendet latrocinium, feloniam, and totum factum per patriam, vel per corpus
suum, secundum electionem suam, prout curia consideraverit, aut vardaverit. Si
autem elegerit se defendere per corpus suum: vadieturinter eos duellum. Et
appellatus det Vadium defendendi, and appellans det vadium disrationandi. Bot
Philippus Pulcher, King of France, discharged all singular combattes, and all
finding of pledges there-anent. Molinaeus. D. part. 1. c. 10. de duello, in
this realm, the appealer and defender castis their glooves till uther; quhilk
representis the finding of the pledge. VAGABUND, is called properly, ane quha
hes na certain dwelling place. Guido Papae quest. 202. Per Gl. 1. and Bart.
l.. 1. Praetor. ff. de damno infecto. Quhilk is very specially declared in
the act of Parliament. Ia. 6 p. 6. 20. October. c. 74. VARDA, ane French word
Guard, custody or keiping: For we use the letter W. quhair the French men usis
the letter G. As wardaine, for Gardaine, Warderob, for Garderobe: Warrenne for
Garrenne. And the ward custody, and keiping of the air, haldand his lands
be service of ward and relieve, perteinis to his immediate superior, quhilk
is conform to the Laws of Normandy. Lib. 5. c 10. Quhair-anent their rules
after following, should be observed, and worthy to be noted. The ward perteinis
to the superior.
The ward and custody of lands, halden be service of ward and relieve,
perteining to ane air, being Minor, and of less age; aucht, and should perteine
to the Over-lord and superior of the saidis lands, quha within the time of of
the ward, may present Ecclesiastical persons to Kirkes vaikand: should sustain
honestly the air: and should nocht only pay the debtes, auchtand be the
defunct: Bot also ask and crave all debts auchtand to the defunct, or to the
air, and persew and defend all actiones competent to him: Bot he may nocht
destroy nor annalie any part of the lands. Lib. 2. cap. Plenam 42. c.
Restituerit. 44. vid. Relevium. vid. Hawbert. The keiping of the bairnes,
perteinis to the mother.


Touching the custody and keiping of the person of the air ofward lands; or of
any uther lands, or quhatsumever maill or femaill, gotten or borne in
lauchfull marriage; the samin perteinis to the mother, after the decease of the
father, until the bairne be of the age of seven eires compleit, conform to
the commoun practicque of this realm, and the civil law. L. 1. and Tot. Tit.
ff. ubi Pupil. educar. debeat.

For be the Law of this realm, grounded upon the Climacterick eires of
Septenarius and Ternarius: That is, of seven and three eires; Three kinds of
age.
there is three kinds of age. The first is of seven eires, during the quhilk
time the bairnes ar in custody of their parents. The second is, of fourteen
eires, within the quhilk it is not leasum to marie. The third is, of twenty
ane eires; after the quhilk time, ane air may enter to his lands, annalie and
dispone the samin, as he pleasis. And before the quhilk time na person may be
indicted to the justice air, or accused of life and lim. Leg. Forest. cap. Nota
quod. 15.

The keiping of the air, being Minor, haldand Lands of the King, The keiping
of the air, perteinis to the King.
perteinis to him allanerlie, albeit the said air have uther superioures of
uther ward lands, elder and prior in time to the King: Quia rex nullum potest
habere parem, multo minus superiorem in suo regno. Bor gif ane air haldis
lands, nomine Burgagij of the King: And uther lands nomine wardae and relevij,
of aneuther superior, prior, or posterior to the King; the custody and
keiping of the said air, perteinis not to the King, bot to the said superior:
Quia ratione Burgagii Dominus Rex non praesertur alijs Dominis capitalibus in
custodia. Lib. 2. c. Notandum. 45.

After the outrunning of the seven eires, The keiping of the air, perteinis
to his superior.
and the air beand of that age, haldand lands of ward of ane superior, and
having na lands be reason of ward of the King: The superior should be
preferred, anent the keeping of the person of the air, to the mother,
gud-schir, tutour, ea, to the King himself, and all uther persons. The
saxteenth of Julij, Ane thousand, five hundredth, threttie two. Penult. Julij.
ane thousand five hundredth, threttie two eirs. The Abbot of Abirbrothok,
contrair Marioun Forbes. Twenty aucht of Julij, Ane thousand, five hundredth
twenty nine eirs. James Sandielandes of Calder, contrair, Edward Sinelar.

The custody and keeping of the person of ane air, The eldest superior is
preferred to all uthers.
haveand lands halden of diverse superioures, be ward and relieve, perteinis
to the eldest superior, to quhome the first homage was made: Or of quhome he
hes the eldest and first infestment, or form of halding. For al-be-it ilke ane
of the superioures hes the ward of the Lands halden of himself: it
concerning the keiping of the person of the air, the principal and eldest
superior, is preferred to all utheris, Lib. 2. c. Restituere. 44.

The keiping of the air havand lands blenche, or in few-ferme, and also ward
lands, perteinis to the superior, be reason of the ward, and not to the
tutour, havand intromission with his blenche, or fewlands. The superior is
preferred to the tutor.
28. Ianuar. Patrick Hepburne, contrair Elizabeth Ker.

Gif the superior, havand the richt and title to the ward and marriage of ane
air; disponis the ward to ane donatar, and the marriage to ant uther: The
donatar, to the marriage allanerlie, The keiping of the air, followis the richt
of the marriage.
should be preferred in keiping of the person of the said Minor, to the uther
donatar of the ward, and all uthers: Quia jus maritagij est personale and
sequitur personam. The keiping of the air, should never be committed to him, quha
may claim or claimis any richt of his lands and heretage: Or may immediately
succeed after him thereto. The keiping of the air, should not be given to hi
appearand air. The end of the ward.
Lib. 2. c. haeredes. 47. Hac enim ratione illi posset praeberi occasio
captandae mortis ipsius haeredis, quod est periculosum and impium. Be the Laws
of this realm, the air mail, and all his lands halden ward, ar within ward and
keiping of his superior, until he be of the age, of xxj. eiris. And the
airefemall, until she be of the age of xiiij. eirs. M. p. 3. c. 5. lib. 2. c.
39. de. iudic. c. 64. c. 121. Because the lands perteining to the air mail,
ar subject to the King, or uther superior be service; quhilk the Minor, be
reason of his les age and outh-head, cannot do. And therefore the King or
superior, wantand the service, hes recours to the land: that he may be served
be the profits thereof, takin up to his awin use; or be any person to quhome
he pleasis to dispone the samin, until his vassal be of perfect age, and able
to serve. And the air femail is in the ward and keiping of her superior,
until sche be fourteen eires of age, as said is. for suppose ane woman of
twelve eiris of age, be the civil Law may marie ane husband; it be the Law
of this realm, she may nocht marie, until she be fourteen eires compleit. At
the quhilk time, sche may lauchfully marie, with consent of her superior. Lib.
2. cap. Mulier 48. cap. in Custodiis. 90. And therefore sche being subject to
her husband; It is not reason sche should be also subject to the ward of her
superior; and consequently under two wards, and two sindrie several powers.
Mair-over, sche being married, with consent of her Over-lord; her husband may
do sik service, as should be done to him be the possessour of the lands: quhilk
is conform to that quhilk is written be Doct. Thomas Smith, of the commoun
weil of England. Lib. 3. c. 5. c. 8.

VARDA Curiae, quoniam attach, c. ubi aliqua 10. c. in omni. 18. c. nullus 20.
The interloquutor or decree of the court: Curia dicitur vardare, considerare,
pronunciare, in this form. The Court counseled, and advised, And I. N.
Soytour of it, be their informationes says, that this Court counselles and I.
award, that N. is in ane default for his absence this day. The like form is
used in the daily practicque, quhen the judge or clerk, be the mouth of the
officiar or dempster decernis and adjudgis onie person to be in ane unlaw, for
absence or any uther cause. and. lib. 2. c. that quhilk is called veredictum
assisae, Veredictum.
in the samin place, in libro Carbreith, is called the waird, veredite, or
deliverance of the assise. VARENNA, ane French word, ane Garene; That is ane
place quhilk is dyked and enclosed for beasts, cunnings or uthers, quo.
attach. Cap. 29. Mod. Ten. cur. Cap. 21. In latin Paradisus. And the keiper of
ane cunningair or cunnings, is called an Garenter. infeodatus in liberam
varennam, is nocht meikle different from infestment, in liberam forestam. The
quhilk kind of infestment of auld is given to the Lord of Rosling his
predicessoures, Paradisus.
of the barronie of Pechtland. WARE, wair of the sea, ane word used in sindrie
infestmentes, in latin alga maris. As in the latin proverb, abiecta vilior
alga. He quha is infest therewith, may stop and make impediment to all uther
persons, als-weil within the flood mark, as without the samin, to gather
wair, for mucking and guding of their lands. Or to gather wilkes, Cockles,
Lempets, Mussels, sandeiles, small fish, or bait, upon the sand or craiges,
foreanent his lands. 24. Maij. 1549. The town of Carrail, contrar Grissell
Meldrum. Utherwaies gif any person be nocht infest with sik privilege, he may
na ways forbid, trouble or molest the King, or onie of his lieges to do the
premises: Or to win stains, quarrel, or to exerce onie uther industry to
their awin profit and commodity, within the flood mark of the sea, quia usus
maris est communis omnium. 29. Iulij. 1500. The King contrar the lord of
Seafeild. Varech.
Ware cummis fra an auld French word va^rech used in the laws of Normandy.
lib. c. vlt. Quhilk signifies onie gudes or gear, casten out be the sea to the
land, quhilk properly we call the wrak of the sea. VASSALLUS quaesi bassallus,
inferior socius. From the French Bas. as plus Bas, in latin inferior. And the
Dutch word Gesel, in latin socius. For the vassal is inferior to his
master, because he should serve and reverence him. And it he is in ane manner
companion to him, because ilk ane of them is mutuallie oblished til uthers.
vid. affidatio and Cuia. lib. 1. de feud. writes that leudes leodes, fideles,
homines nostri, feudatarij, ministeriales, beneficiarii, benficiati, vassalli,
almost signifies ane thing: And vassallus, in Latin is cliens. Because sik
relation is betuixt dominus and vassalus, as is betuixt patronus and cliens.
Molinaeus in still. cur. p. c. 16. page 48. Albeit Cuiacius affirmis the samin
to be money wayis different. And ane bas infestment is quhen the vassal
annalies his lands, halden of himself and his aires, quhilk is ane inferior,
private or subalterne infestmente. In the laws of the fewes vassallus is
called fidelis, quia fidelitatem jurat, he should swear to be faithful and true
to his master. Amanges vassalles, the first place of dignity is given to them
quha are Duces, Marchiones, Comites, and are called Capitanei Regni. The second
is granted to barrons and uthers of like rank and estaite. And are called
valvasores maiores. The third of them, quha ar called gentilmen, or Nobles,
haldand of barrons, quha likewise may have under them vassalles, also
gentilmen: For ane gentilman may halde of ane uther. Valvassores minores
valvassini milites. subvassores
And sik vassalles haldand in chief of barrones, ar called Valvassores
minores. And they quha haldis their lands of them, are called vassalli,
valvassini seu minimi valvasores. lib. 1. de. feud. Tit. de natura feudi.. 1.
Bot in the laws of this Realm, they quha haldis of Barrones are called
milites, and they quha haldis of them, are called subvassores. vid.
Amerciamentum, vid. Baro, and Jacob. Cuiacium. lib. 2. de. feud. Tit. de
nominibus vassallorum. WAIFE beast, pecus vel animal aberrans, quhilk wanders
and wavers without ane knawen master, quhilk being found be onie man, within
his awin bounds, he should cause the samin to be proclaimed, diverse and sindrie
times upon market days, at the paroche Kirk, and within the Schireffedome:
Utherwaies gif he deteinis the samin, he may be accused for thieft therefore.
And it is leasum to the awner of the beast, to repeat and challenge the samin
within eir and day. quon. attach. c. eschetae. 30. vid. Toscheoderach. In the
laws of France, it is called espave, quo significatur omne illud quod oberrat,
Chess. in consuet. Burgu^d. Rubric, 1.. 1. verb. Espanes. In latin res pro
derelicto habita. l. falsus 44. ff, de furt. Espanes.
WECHTES, measures and diverse kinds thereof. vid. Serplaith. Read likewaies
assisam regis David, De ponderibus and mensuris. Ia. 1. p, 4. c. 68. 69. 70.
Ia. 1. p. 3. c. 57. 58. Ia. 6. p. 11. c. vlt. VENYSOUN, ane word used in
infestmentes, a venando seu venatione, and likewaies commonly used in the
laws of England, and signifies license and power to hunt, take, and slay, of
the Kingis venison within his Parkes, and Forests. Quhilk utherwaies is nocht
leasum, bot is sharply punished with ane grievous fine, or be banishment or
prison. leg. forest. c. 91. Quhilk is conform to the laws of England. Anno.
9. Henr. 2. c. 10. Bot be the disposition of the Forest laws, it is leasum to
ane Earl, Bishop, or Barrone, cummand or returnand, throw the Kings Forest,
at his command, to take ane, or two beasts, be the sight of the forresster,
gif he be present: and utherwaies he sall blow ane horn, that he appear nocht
to take the samin thiefteouslie. lego. frest. c. 90. VERD, vert, from the
latin viride: ane word used in Charters and infestmentes, Grenehue.
and also in the English laws quhair it is called Grenehue, and signifies
power to cut green trees or wood. And being committed be them quha hes nocht
power to do the samine, is punished be the foresters, or vierders, quha are
called Viridarij, Viridarij
in the Laws of Normandy and England. Be the auld law of this Realm all
forrestes commonly perteined to the King: and the right of Forestarie, was
given and disponed in their words, in liberam forestam. as is exponed in the
word Foresta. And ane of the privileges or liberties, that is potestas
secandi, license to hew or cut green wood, was granted be the King be
infestement, and disposition conteinand Verd. Quhilk liberty the King may
grante within his haill forest, or onie part thereof, to onie person for
fuel, or fire, bigging, or for onie uther particular use. quhilk person may
nocht abuse the said forest or wood, after his awin appetite and will, bot at
the sight and discretion of the forrester, and uther officiares; or according
to the form and manner set down, and limitate in his infestemente and gift, as
writis, John Pappon. lib. 4. Tit. 3:

Secondly, this word verd, may be taken for power and license of pasturage
within the Kings forest, granted to him quha is infest therewith quhilk in the
English laws is called, the commoun of Herbage, and of uther things in the
Kings forest, perteining to them quha are accustumate to have the samin:
Cart. de. Forest. c. 1. Mag. Cart. anno. 9. Henr. 3. c. 8. and juistiment,
herbage, agistamentum and herbagium. In latin, jus pascendi pecoris, is quhair
an tenent hes right given to him of the feiding, grassing, or pastouring of his
cattle within ane park or onie uther ground enclosed.

VEREDICTUM assisae. vid. Proporcitas, vid. Varda. VERGELT, an Saxon or Dutch
word, from ver, id est vir vel homo, and Gelt, pecunia sive compensatio, as
vergelt furis is 30. kye. and ane quoyach. lib 4. c. de unoquoque. 17. Or 33.
kye. Stat. Alex. c. de. unoquoque 34. VILLENAGIUM, a villano, sklaverie or
servitude. lib. 2. c. Consequenter. 13. vid. Bondagium. VISNETUM, from the
French word voisin, nichtbour, quasi voisinetum or Vicinetum, from vicinus, ane
quha dwellis near unto ane uther, or in the four halfes about, from the
quhilk cummis the French word, used in the English laws vicinage, and in the
laws of this Realm, assisa de vicineto, is ane assise of nichtbours, or of
the four halfes about, vid. assisa. WHITSONDAYES set. Ia. 2. p. 14. c. Or
Whitsondayes making. Ia. 2. In the samin par. c. 90. Utherwaies called
Whitsondayes styles. Quhilkis were certain constitutions and statutes quhilkis
freehalders, both spiritual and temporal, and specially conventes of
Abbayes, and religious places, maid betwixt them and their tennentes before
Whitsundaie, forservice to be done to them, and better laboring of their
lands, and payment of their dewtie. UNLAW. vid. Amerciamentum. vid. Tort.
UNCTUM Porcorum, swines seame or fatnes. leg. burg. c. siquis scienter 71. Ab
ungendo, because it is profitable for unctiones and smeering. VOTH signifies
out-lawrie, utlagium. And in our auld Scottish language ane vothman, is ane
outlaw, or ane fugitive fra the laws. Mairover vouth, signifies, persued,
calling, or accusation, from voucher, id est vocare, used in the auld French
and English laws. WRANG and unlaw. vid. Tort. To deny wrang and unlaw, is
quhill the defender denies that quhilk is objected to him, or quhairof he is
accused, and it confesses that he hes done utherwaies then he aucht to do, and
swa hes not done his deuty for the quhilk he is reddie to make amends and
satisfy the party offended. leg. Burg. Cap. 101. WREK, of the sea, ane word
specified in the laws and sindrie infestmentes, quhilk signifies power,
liberty, and prerogative competent to the King, or to onie person, to quhome
the samin is granted be him be infestement, or onie uther disposition, to
intromet and uptake sik gudes and gear, as ar schipbroken, or fallis to him be
escheite of the sea. Quhilk liberty is als competent and profitable to him
quha is infest with wrek, as it micht be to the King himself gevar thereof,
quia wracta pertinens ad dominum regem et wracta competens vassallo, ex
donatione regis pari jure aestimantur. leg. forest, c, inter antiqua. 56. And
in the laws of England anno. 3. Edwa. 1. c. 4. concerning wrek of the sea: it
is statute that quhair an man, an dog, or an cat, escapes quick out of the
schip, that sik ship or barg, nor na thing within her, salbe adjudged wrek, bot
the gudes salbe saved, and keiped be the sicht of the Schireffe, coroner, or
the Kings baillie, and delivered into the hands of sik, as are of the town,
quhair the gudes were fund, swa that gif onie crave the gudes within ane eir
and ane day, after pruife, that they ware his awin, they sallbe restored to him
without delaie. And utherwaies they sall remain to the King. And the
schireffes, coroners, and baillies of the town, intromettoures therewith, salbe
answerable therefore to the Kings officiares, and quhair wrek belanges to an
uther then to the king, he sall have it in manner above expremed. And quhasoever
dois utherwaies, and is attaynt, or convict thereof, he salbe imprisoned, and
pay ane fine arbitrall to the King, and the damnage to the party. Siklike be
the laws of England, the King should have the wrek or escheit of the sea,
throwout the Realm, Whailes, and great sturgeons taken in the sea, or
els-quhair within the Realm. Except in certain places privileged be the
King. anno. 17. Edward. 2. c. 11.

UTLAGIUM, vel vtlagatium, outlawrie, rebellion, disobedience to the laws,
banishment, or forefaltour. Ia. 2. p. 6. c. 30. For gif the King restores ex
gratia, an man that is outlawed, or foresalted, he thereby recovers nocht his
lands, bot be the good will of his overlord, quia forisfactum, et utlagationem:
D. Rex damnatis solet remittere: nec tamen aliena Jura quaerit nec potest
infringere. lib. 2. c. forisfactum. 55. de judicib. c. si per legem. 149.
Y
YBURPANANSECA, it appears to be like that, quhilk is called the law of
Birdingsek, for in sum auld authentic buiks it is written. lib. 4. c. 14.
yburpananseca. h. e De furto vituli vel arietis, vel quantum cibi quis portare
potest super dorsum curia nonest tenenda. Sum affirmis in the Gascoin language,
Pana, to signify furari, to steill, and panadour, to be ane thief. and it
appears weill, Seca, signifies anseck, In latin saeccus, quhilk word is
commonly used in all tunges and languages amangs all people and nationes.

ARDE. Ia. I. p. 7. c. 99. Is an kind of measure commonly used in England
nocht meikle different from our elne, ane airde of land virgata terrae, in the
Britton laws, is ane measure of land quhilk in diverse places is diverse,
sumtimes of 20 aikers, sumtimes of 24. and sumtimes of 30. aikers. ELDE, ane
gift or donation. vid. Herreelde. EMSEL, of ane Castle, the custody, and
keeping of ane Castle. leg. bur. c. 3. For eme, in our auld language, is to
observe and keep, as quhen in time of singular battle, they quha stands by,
and behaldis, ar commanded to keep, and eme the time of the derenie, their
weapons fra the hands of the appealer and defendour: In lib. feud, it is
called feodum Guardiae, for Guardia, in latin custodia, and Guardiani custodes
to quhome Castelles and territories of lands ar committed in keeping, quhome
we call wairdanis, as writes, the interpretoures of the fewes, and specially,
Zasius de feudis. par. 12. Nu. 7. And in this Realm lands annuall-rents, or
duties, given for the keeping of Castelles, are called castelvardis.
FINIS.
ANE ADMONITION TO THE reader tuiching the buikes contenand the laws of this
Realm, and abbreviationes used in the treatise preceiding.
I Have aledged in this little treatise, the first word with the number of the
Chaptour of ilk buike of the auld laws of this Realm, written before King
James the First, of good memory. Because there is great diversity anent the
number of the chaptoures. Swa that thereby, there can be na sure or certain
allegation. Bot gif the number failie, the 1. and capital word, will be ane
sure guide and convoy to the richt place alleged.

Leg. Mal. Mack. leges. Malcolmi Mackenneth. The laws made be King Malcolme
the second of that name, very good and profitable, bot few in number.

Lib. 1. Lib. 2. Lib. 3. Lib. 4. The first, second, third and fourth buikes of
Regiam maiestatem, maid be King David the first. Swa called and entitled, from
the first word of the beginning thereof, to the imitation of the four buiks
of the Institutions, of the civil laws; quhilk begins Imperatoriam majestatem.

Quo. attach. quoniam attachiamenta, swa called, fra the first word thereof.
Conteines the Barron laws, and from the Barron court, written in the time of
the said King David the first.

Mod. ten. cur. bar. modus tenendi curias baronum, an buik written in Scottish
language, quhilk is not of great antiquity as may be knawn be the still, and
language thereof, and is not contained in the auld buikes may worthy of
faith and credit, always it is an interpretation of the buike quoniam
attatchiamenta, maid be sum man quha hes eiked and augmented sindry things
proffitable, for understanding of the form of process used, in auld times.

Leg. Burg. leges Burgorum; The laws of Burrowes, maid in the time of the said
King David the first, be relation and information of certain learned men,
quhome he send to uther cuntries to learn and report to him the laws, and
ordinances thereof, quhilk was done be them within the space of two eires or
thereby, as is plain and manifest be auld authenik buikes. And it is probable
that he hes used the like form and proceeding in making and furth-setting of
the remanent his laws.

Stat. Wilh. statuta Wilhelmi Regis; Statutes, and laws, maid be King William.

Stat. Alex. statuta Alexandri, Satutes and laws maid be King Alexander the
second of that name, son to King Williame.

Stat. 1. Rob. Br. statuta prima Roberti Bruyse.

Stat. 2. Rob. Br. statuta secunda Roberti Bruyse. Quhilk statutes and laws
maid be him are co-incident, and for the may part conteinis the like, or
samin laws.

Ass. Reg. Da. Assisa regis David: Laws maid be King David the Bruyse, called
King David the Second: And in some buikes ar called, statuta David Regis.

Stat. Rob. 3. statuta Roberti Tertij: Statutes maid be King Robert the Third,
Father to King James the First, quhilk as it remainis in the Register of this
Realm.

Leg. Forest. Leges Forestarum: The Laws of Forestes, quhairof the author is
not known to me.

Iter Camer. Iter camerarij: the Chalmerlain air: Quhilk (as some alleagis) was
written and put in form, in the time of King James the Third: Albeit the samin
Courts, were frequent, and meikle used money eires before him.

De maritag. De maritagio. Ane little treatise, written be some private man,
and is na ways authentic. It is so called, because the beginning thereof is.
De marito.

Stat. Gild. Statuta Gildae, Certain ordinances and constitutiones, touching
Burgesses, gild-brether, maid and constitute be Robert Durhame, Maire of
Berwick, Simon Marschel and uthers wise men, inhabitants of the said Burgh.

Leg. port. leges portuum, an treatise collected and written be sum particular
person, quhilk is nocht authentic, and conteinis ane brief sum and
abridgement of the auld laws, and is swa called, because it conteinis the
ordinances anent the customs of ships passand forth of this Realm, or
arrivand to the samin, laidned with merchandice, and the form of customs,
both out-ward and in-ward.

De judic. De judicibus; Ane lang and large Rapsodie, collected forth of all
buikes conteinand the civil law of this Realm. It is nocht authentic, bot
it very proffitable for exposition of sindrie places of the Principal and
authentic buikes. It is swa called be reason the beginning theirof is, De
judice eligendo.

The Acts of Parliament of King James the first, and his successors are
alleged be the name of the King or Queen, author thereof. As Ia. for James,
Mar. for Marie. p. for Parliament, and mairover be the number of the Parliament
and chaptour.

Decreites given be the Lords of the Session and Council, are alleged be
the day, month, and eire of God, in the quhilk they are pronounced, and
sumtime be the names of the persewer and defender.

Quhair onie thing is written in the exposition of ane word, quhilk may serve
for the declaration of ane uther, for eschewing of unproffitable repetition, I
remitte ow from the word to ane uther, be vid. For vide. and swa see and read
the exposition of the ane and the uther: for thereby e salbe mair largely
instructed.

FINIS.

